It’s hardly a shock Clemson has qualified for, and will be favored in, the ACC Championship Game next week. The Tigers (11-0, 8-0) were picked to do just that at conference media days in July.

NEXT GAME What: No. 1 Clemson (11-0) at South Carolina (3-8) When: Saturday, noon Where: Williams-Brice Stadium, Columbia TV: ESPN Line: Clemson by 17

But the No. 1 ranking? Cemented in the College Football Playoff conversation? That all probably arrived a year ahead of schedule.

“Not a lot of people thought we would be where we are,” head coach Dabo Swinney said. “We don’t have a single offensive lineman starting for us that started last year. Five new starters, including a true freshman at left tackle. We haven’t had Mike Williams all year, the best receiver in this league.

“Then on the defensive side, 10 of those guys from last year’s (top-ranked) defense went on to the NFL, and you lose (nickelback) Korrin Wiggins on top of it. So, not a lot of expectations from outside people with this team, but this team has been hungry from Day 1.”

Quarterback Deshaun Watson has lived up to his preseason hype as a true sophomore, putting himself in the Heisman Trophy conversation. Clemson’s leading rusher (Wayne Gallman) and receiver (Artavis Scott) are also sophomores, while freshmen like left tackle Mitch Hyatt and receivers Hunter Renfrow and Deon Cain have also stood out.

Meanwhile, longtime backups are now excelling on defense, like linebacker B.J. Goodson, defensive end Kevin Dodd and cornerback Cordrea Tankersley. Throw in an entirely new set of special teamers led by freshman walk-on kicker Greg Huegel and junior punter Andy Teasdall, and it wasn’t exactly a recipe for championship contention.

Clemson has played 28 freshmen this year and starts just five seniors.

“There’s been this enthusiasm and hunger to go with experience,” Swinney said, “and we’ve had the right type of leadership to help pull it all together week to week.”

All sold out

Speaking of the ACC Championship, organizers for the Dec. 5 game at Charlotte’s Bank of America Stadium probably could not have crafted a more desirable matchup with ticket sales in mind.

The ACC announced this week the championship game is sold out for the first time since Clemson faced Virginia Tech in 2011. Florida State-Virginia Tech in 2010 also sold out.

Clemson and UNC are two of the larger fan bases located near Charlotte.

“We look forward to having a full house in Charlotte for this year’s ACC Football Championship game, and we appreciate our partnership with the entire city,” ACC Commissioner John Swofford said in a statement. “Our event continues to gain excellent momentum in Bank of America Stadium and it’s a win-win that Charlotte and the ACC Football Championship are becoming synonymous.”

Charleston tribute

The Clemson and South Carolina bands will play a halftime tribute Saturday at Williams-Brice Stadium to honor the fatal shootings at Charleston’s Emanuel AME Church last June.

“The reason we’re doing this is to commemorate the tragedy in Charleston that occurred this year, and to pay tribute to the victims, and to offer hope for our state,” Clemson Tiger Band director Mark Spede said in a YouTube statement. “What better way to demonstrate unity in our state than by having these two great bands join forces?”

Spede pointed out many band members at both schools went to high school together and attend the same band competitions.

“We just happen to root for different football teams,” Spede said. “But we do share the common bond of music and the healing it can provide.”

Both teams’ helmets have been affixed with a special “Emanuel 9” sticker all season.