Wrestling with civic values, religious belief

Photo: Carol Kaliff, ST Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Buy photo FORUM ON FAITH: Rev. Laura Westby, now interim pastor of the First Congregational Church of Bethel. Monday, March 8, 2010. FORUM ON FAITH: Rev. Laura Westby, now interim pastor of the First Congregational Church of Bethel. Monday, March 8, 2010. Photo: Carol Kaliff, ST Buy this photo Wrestling with civic values, religious belief 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

As a pastor, I am sometimes asked whether a person's religion should influence their actions as a citizen.

Aren't matters of church and state supposed to be separate? How does the freedom of religion guaranteed in our Bill of Rights enter into the discussion?

And what should a person of faith do when a matter of public policy violates a matter of religious belief?

These are among the questions people in my denomination, the United Church of Christ, have been wrestling with -- especially in light of recent decisions by the United States Supreme Court.

The history of the UCC and predecessor denominations is full of examples of faithful involvement in civic life. The Congregational churches established by the Pilgrims and other spiritual reformers laid the groundwork for the founding of almost every town in our state.

From their earliest days, our congregations employed democratic principles -- each church is self-governing and calls its own ministers.

Taking a public stand against injustice has been an integral part of our history. Our Congregational ancestors were among the first tea party patriots whose protest sparked our country's first act of civil disobedience.

In 1700, the Rev. Samuel Sewall wrote the first anti-slavery tract. We ordained the first African-American pastor in 1785, the first female pastor in 1853 and the first openly gay pastor in 1972.

When Southern television stations imposed a news blackout on the growing civil rights movement, Martin Luther King Jr. asked the UCC for help. UCC national staff organized churches and won a federal court ruling that the airwaves are public, not private property.

Members of the United Church of Christ, and many other faith communities, take seriously Jesus' example of faithful involvement in civic life. Jesus ministered to individuals in need, but he also worked to change the structures that caused or deepened those needs.

He challenged religious and political leaders to use their power justly. He modeled a way of life in community that stood in stark contrast to the corrupt and self-serving lifestyle of many of those in power.

When asked whether a person of faith should pay taxes, Jesus demonstrated his ability to both unsettle and challenge. He said "Give to Caesar (whose image was on the coin used to pay the tax) what belongs to Caesar. Give to God what belongs to God."

It seems on the face of it to answer the question, recognizing that we may, in fact, owe the rulers of this world some things -- like taxes.

On the other hand, it is hard to imagine Jesus saying anything other than that everything belongs to God, so we should avoid pledging allegiance to anything material or temporary.

Our modern separation of church and state -- which the words "Give to Caesar what belongs to Caesar. Give to God what belongs to God" are often employed to support -- is just that, modern.

The idea of two separate areas of life would be foreign to Jesus and people of his time. It was not clear even to our forbearers, who sought for a time to make Congregationalism the state religion and who were required to petition the Connecticut General Assembly for permission to establish a church.

We have been, and will continue to be, a church that strives to balance religious freedom and civic engagement, holding them in dynamic tension when need be.

What is more difficult is how to manage situations in which two or more of our cherished beliefs come into conflict. The recent decision to allow some for-profit entities to opt out of portions of the Affordable Care Act on religious grounds is, I believe, one such example.

What do we do when the freedom of religious expression of one group puts the well-being of another, often less powerful, group at risk?

Universal health care and reproductive rights are among the important causes the UCC has championed, especially with regard to the way those issues impact the poor and the marginalized.

How will we continue to advocate for these important values AND uphold the fundamental right to practice our religion without undue burden being placed upon us by our government?

The answer to this question is far from simple. I am grateful to be part of a faith tradition that supports wrestling with these questions. I am proud to be part of a tradition that urges us to engage in civic life while at the same offering us ultimate allegiance to God alone.

I am glad that the UCC makes room for the continuing inspiration of the still-speaking God.

The Rev. Laura Westby is interim minister at First Congregational Church of Bethel, 46 Main St., Bethel, CT 06801. She can be reached at 203-743-1877 or fccbpastor@firstchurchbethel.org.