Premiums will increase less than insurers wanted in 2016 for health plans sold on the Affordable Care Act's Pennsylvania marketplace, but the requested increases could come in later years, the Pennsylvania Insurance Department announced last week.

The department released information about 2016 rates for individual and small business plans in advance of the Nov. 1 start of open enrollment for the plans. The department asked six insurers that requested increases of more than 25 percent to phase in the increases over several years, according to a news release from the department.

"We are working to guarantee that Pennsylvanians can continue to shop for their best coverage options in a competitive insurance marketplace while still paying reasonable prices," Gov. Tom Wolf said in the release.

Highmark Inc., the state's largest insurer, had requested increases of 23 to 39 percent, saying the costs of treatment for new policyholders far exceeded what the company collected in premiums, a result of sicker-than-expected enrollees.

Only two plans — HM Health Insurance Co. and Keystone Health Plan West — will increase premiums by more than 25 percent next year, Pennsylvania Insurance Department spokesman Ronald Ruman said.

Of the 19 companies selling individual health insurance plans on the state's Affordable Care Act marketplace next year, seven are increasing premiums by more than 10 percent, according to the release. All 23 companies that sell plans to businesses with fewer than 50 employees are increasing premiums by less than 10 percent, according to the release.

For 2015, the average monthly premium is $222 for Pennsylvania's lowest-cost "silver" plan, one of the most popular plans sold on the marketplace. Plans are classified as bronze, silver, gold and platinum according to the level of benefits they offer; bronze plans are the cheapest and platinum the most expensive.

Open enrollment runs from Nov. 1 to Jan. 31. Consumers may buy plans using the website healthcare.gov