4340927

Fifty years ago this month, Ronald Reagan burst onto the national political stage for the first time with a televised speech in support of Barry Goldwater’s presidential campaign.

“A Time for Choosing” was the title of Reagan’s talk, and even though it failed to save Goldwater from a landslide defeat, it must be regarded as one of the most successful political speeches of the 20th century. This is because it clarified the grounds on which the eventual Reagan Revolution would be won. Reagan framed the choice as:

“Whether we believe in our capacity for self-government or whether we abandon the American revolution and confess that a little intellectual elite in a far-distant capital can plan our lives for us better than we can plan them ourselves.”

Fifty years later, this choice remains at the center of our political debates. Our debt crisis has grown worse. The regulatory state has returned to high tide after ebbing temporarily under Reagan.

Where friends of limited government can take heart is that, today, there is a stronger voice than ever for Reagan’s style of principled-but-inclusive, libertarian-tinged conservatism. I refer to not just the presidential hopefuls who, thanks to their tea party cred, seem to most excite the base. But also the think tanks, litigation centers, and grassroots organizations that focus on winning long-term victories for our freedoms.

Look at the Goldwater Institute’s work to upend the education establishment through Education Savings Accounts that create competition in education services by empowering parents instead of bureaucrats.

Or how Illinois Policy Institute changed the terms of debate in that deep blue state, and ultimately defeated a movement to amend the Illinois Constitution and replace the state’s flat income tax with a progressive rate structure. Now, over the next five years alone, nearly $30 billion will stay in the hands of Illinois’ families and businesses instead of going to politicians in Springfield.

Or the success of Foundation for Government Accountability – working with its allies in several states to stop the Medicaid expansion provisions in Obamacare. This is a major win for taxpayers, keeping millions of able-bodied Americans from becoming dependent on government for their health insurance.

At the Atlas Network, we talk of the challenges embraced by these groups as some of “Today’s Berlin Walls.” The three organizations above are among the eight finalists for our 2014 Templeton Freedom Award, the biggest prize for honoring excellence by free-market think tanks.

The Berlin Wall seemed like a permanent barrier to freedom when Ronald Reagan said, “Mr. Gorbachev, tear down this wall.” But less than three years later, it was gone.