Currently, there could be as many as 200,000 military veterans who have been affected by this gun ban. It’s time to do something about it.

Advertisement - story continues below

We recently celebrated Independence Day. From that initial struggle against the British to the present day, we have honored our military veterans for their courageous sacrifice in helping keep us free.

Sadly, many of these veterans have recently seen their courage “rewarded” with a gun ban. And this concerns all gun owners, because what is happening to our veterans through the Veteran’s Administration can happen to you someday through ObamaCare.

But the problem with military veterans is not new. For nearly twenty years, Gun Owners of America has been keeping you informed about the anti-gun atrocities being performed by the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) and the Justice Department against law-abiding veterans.

Advertisement – story continues below

The idea was first hatched during the Bill Clinton administration. And it works like this:

When a veteran, as a result of a traumatic experience abroad, seeks disability benefits and/or counseling, the VA moves to appoint a guardian to manage that veteran’s financial affairs.

Under illegitimate Bill Clinton interpretations by the ATF, this “inability to handle his (or her) financial affairs” would make the veteran “mentally defective” under 18 U.S.C. 922 (g) (4), and hence legally barred from owning a gun or ammunition.

Advertisement – story continues below

Unfortunately, another so-called pro-gun group worked with anti-gun Senator Chuck Schumer in 2007 and 2008 to pass the Veterans Disarmament Act, which codified these unlawful actions into statutory law.

WND.com reported recently that people who live with veterans are now being ordered not to possess a gun. And get this: some veterans are being told they can “buy back” their gun rights by forgoing their VA benefits!

One veteran, who is an attorney and who has studied this problem closely, said: “this is illegal and is called extortion.”

Currently, there could be as many as 200,000 military veterans who have been affected by this gun ban. It’s time to do something about it.

Advertisement – story continues below

For specific action steps you can take to help our veterans get their guns back, visit: GunOwners.org

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.