WASHINGTON, D.C. – Beyond the heated rhetoric in the debate over whether to defund Planned Parenthood in Ohio, a few realities tend to get lost.

For one, Planned Parenthood says it won't turn away patients or close its doors if Ohio lawmakers follow through with their plan to strip the organization of $1.3 million in yearly federal grants, even though the cuts will be a setback. For another, the defunding won't reduce abortions, because federal law bars Planned Parenthood from using government money to subsidize nearly all abortions.

Here's a closer look at more of the facts behind the debate.

Why lawmakers want to defund

When Congress refused to eliminate federal funding for Planned Parenthood, abortion foes -- enraged by secretly recorded videos that suggested the organization profited from fetal tissue donation -- asked state governments to do it instead.

In Ohio, the Republican-controlled legislature is weighing measures to block local Planned Parenthood affiliates from getting roughly $1.3 million in yearly federal grants to curb violence against women, test people for HIV/AIDS and sexually transmitted infections, conduct breast and cervical cancer screenings, and educate adolescents on preventing pregnancies and venereal diseases. States including Texas, Utah, Alabama, New Hampshire, Arkansas and Louisiana have passed their own defunding efforts.

Even though federal law bars taxpayer money from being used for abortions, groups like the National Right to Life Committee say zeroing out Planned Parenthood's taxpayer funds will "push the snout of this abortion mega-marketer out of the U.S. Treasury feeding trough." Anti-abortion groups want to redirect the money to health care providers that don't perform abortions.

At an Ohio Senate hearing last month, Ohio Right to Life Executive Director Stephanie Ranade Krider accused Planned Parenthood of profiting from abortions, and argued it should be defunded to keep government funds from underwriting such a practice.

"It is the public policy of the state of Ohio to prefer childbirth over abortion," she said. "Ohio Right to Life asks that the state of Ohio honor this policy and leave the abortion business once and for all."

"Whether you call yourself pro-life or pro-choice, I think most people have an issue with taxpayer dollars going to an organization that seeks to profit off of the harvest of body parts from the unborn," added the bill's sponsor, Senate President Keith Faber, a Celina Republican.

Planned Parenthood denies it profits from fetal tissue donations, and says the videos released by the anti-abortion Center for Medical Progress were heavily edited and are misleading.

Three of Planned Parenthood's 28 Ohio facilities perform abortions, and none have fetal tissue donation programs like the clinics targeted in the controversial videos.

Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio CEO Stephanie Kight contends the drive to defund her organization is more "about stigmatizing Planned Parenthood and abortion" than it is about money.

"The money at stake has nothing to do with abortion," Kight said. "As a matter of fact, one could argue that by eliminating sex education and reducing access to contraception, you run the risk of increasing women's need for abortion."

In the 2015 fiscal year, Planned Parenthood of Greater Ohio and Planned Parenthood of Southwest Ohio say they used the federal grants at issue to: Provide 47,137 sexually transmitted infection tests



Provide 142 breast and cervical cancer screening tests



Provide 3,620 HIV tests



Serve 2,780 individuals through the state infant mortality reduction program



Served 500 individuals through Violence Against Women Act education and prevention programs.



Provided 623 youths in the juvenile and foster care system with 18 hours each of educational services on healthy relationships, financial literacy, career success and comprehensive sexuality education. (Source: Planned Parenthood)

The impact on Planned Parenthood and its patients

Kight says the proposed $1.3 million cut would be a "big blow" to her organization, particularly "the men and women who turn to us every day" for health care. She said her group is by far the state's largest reproductive health care provider, seeing about 70,000 patients each year and enrolling another 40,000 in educational programs.

Planned Parenthood won't turn away patients if it loses the grants, Kight said, but would have to find other ways to pay for services, like charging client fees or using philanthropic dollars.

"Planned Parenthood is deeply committed to giving patients the care they need," Kight said. "We would figure out a way to cover the cost, but everything has its limits."

Tax documents filed by Kight's group and its largest affiliate - Planned Parenthood of Southwest Ohio – indicate their yearly combined budget exceeds $26 million.

Kight said her group is treating more Medicaid patients after enrollment in the program grew under the Affordable Care Act, but those cases don't boost revenue because of Medicaid's poor reimbursement rate. Increased numbers of patients who are privately insured because of the Affordable Care Act have been more of a boost for Planned Parenthood's bottom line, said Kight, though she didn't quantify the increase.

"At the end of the day, we are still a nonprofit," she said. "If there is a year when you have revenue in excess of expenses, you reinvest that in your mission by putting money in the endowment, so you'll be stronger for lean years."

What other providers say

Advocates for the cuts are circulating a list of health care providers that they say could provide the services at issue instead of Planned Parenthood. Northeast Ohio organizations on the list contacted by cleveland.com said that they might be able to take over some functions, although many of them oppose diminishing access to any source of patient care.

"Having worked with vulnerable, hard to reach populations, specifically immigrants and refugees who are often limited English proficient and face cultural barriers, I think it's extremely critical that we do not close any doors in terms of access," said Michael Byun, CEO of Asian Services in Action, whose Cleveland health center holds several state and federal grants to aid domestic violence and sexual assault victims.

Byun said Planned Parenthood serves its own specific, vulnerable population, and Ohio's legislature should bear that in mind as it considers whether to defund the group.

Free Medical Clinic of Greater Cleveland Executive Director Danny Williams said his organization - which provides cancer screenings, family planning education, and testing for HIV/AIDS and other sexually transmitted infections – could fill in some gaps. But the fact that other organizations can conduct similar tests shouldn't be used to eliminate funding for a service provider, Williams said.

"The key for a lot of these kinds of services is that you want people to go to a place where they feel comfortable and will be candid with providers about their needs," Williams said. "To take away a trusted source for many women is bad policy."

Lorain County Health & Dentistry CEO Stephanie Weirsma says her organization's five sites provide contraceptive and family planning services, do breast and cervical cancer screenings, test for sexually transmitted infections, and would have capacity to pick up extra patients if Planned Parenthood cuts back.

But State Rep. Dan Ramos, a Democrat who represents Lorain, says that shouldn't have to happen. He said Planned Parenthood's Lorain office – which is on the ground floor of a building whose other floors house a women's shelter – provides services that would be difficult to replace elsewhere.

He said Planned Parenthood was awarded the grants by showing it could help "more patients with less money than anyone else, at the high quality standards required by the law."

"If Planned Parenthood can serve 10 people with that amount, and another organization serves five people, that means less people are getting care," said Ramos. "It would not be a good idea to take money away from an organization that can do the most with the least and give it to someone that would do less with the same amount of money."

What happens next

The Ohio Senate adopted Faber's bill last month, and Ohio's House of Representatives is conducting its own hearings on a similar bill. It will vote on the legislation on Tuesday, said a spokesman for Ohio House Speaker Cliff Rosenberger, a Republican from Clarksville.

If the cuts go through, Kight said her organization is likely to mount a legal challenge, as Planned Parenthood affiliates in other states have done. She said Ohio's other health care providers aren't as well equipped as her group to provide services covered by the grants, which is why her organization received them.

Ohio Right to Life's Krider disagrees.

"To claim that Planned Parenthood is a woman's only option for health care is to severely limit her choices to a narrow set of services and advance the political and financial interests of Planned Parenthood alone."