Three lawsuits filed this month allege that Centegra Health System illegally fired employees to save money on health care benefits for workers.

The lawsuits allege that in 2012 and 2013, Crystal Lake-based Centegra fired two registered nurses and a certified nursing assistant because they or a spouse were undergoing expensive medical treatments and costing the company too much money.

In each instance, the employee worked for Centegra for at least six years and had begun to use health benefits for expensive issues ranging from a spouse's heart condition to carpal tunnel syndrome. Each employee was terminated for failing “to live by Centegra values” in 2012 or 2013, according to the suits, filed Sept. 10 in federal court in Chicago.

The complaints allege that the firings followed an effort to cut costs that started in 2012 when Centegra began working with an accountable-care network called Quality Health Solutions, now Integrated Health Network of Wisconsin.

“They saw (the high costs) and they started terminating employees under false pretenses,” said Joshua Karmel, one of the lawyers representing the former employees. “We believe the cuts were illegal.”

CENTEGRA WILL 'AGGRESSIVELY DEFEND' ITSELF

Mr. Karmel said disciplining or firing employees based on “values” leaves much discretion to the employer and can be used as a catch-all reason to fire workers.

Centegra denied the allegations.

“We expect and encourage (employees) to utilize” benefits, Bernadette Szczepanski, Centegra vice president of human resources development, said in a statement. “Centegra intends to aggressively defend such lawsuits.”

While noting that the company doesn't comment on the details of pending litigation, Ms. Szczepanski said: “Centegra expects the highest standards from its associates and staff. This sometimes results in associates leaving Centegra.”

Integrated Health Network of Wisconsin — which is mentioned in the suits but doesn't have a claim against it — doesn't make employment decisions at member hospitals, Kathy Allen, vice president of marketing and communications, wrote in an email.

“We never get involved in employment decisions made by any of our members,” Ms. Allen wrote. “Beyond that, it would be inappropriate for us to comment on pending litigation that doesn't involve us.”

Centegra has acute care hospitals in McHenry and Woodstock and a behavioral health hospital in Woodstock. It also recently received state approval to issue up to $133 million in debt to build a hospital in Huntley. The health system reported $404 million in revenue for fiscal year 2012.

The lawsuits don't say how much money the medical treatments were costing. And Centegra declined to comment on its costs or cost-cutting measures. Employee use of health care benefits is protected under the Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974, according to the suits.

PLAINTIFFS ARE ALL WOMEN

The former employees suing Centegra are all women in their 50s and 60s who had been employed between six and 13 years. Each began to have costly medical claims as early as 2009. And all were terminated for failing "to live by Centegra values," according to the lawsuits.

Janet Cherette, a 63-year-old registered nurse, underwent hand surgery in 2009. Three years later she received treatment for a work-related shoulder and neck injury and was ordered by her doctor to reduce work hours from 12 hours per day to six to eight hours, which Centegra declined to accommodate. In more than 10 years at Centegra she had never been disciplined for work performance issues, but in 2012 she was disciplined twice and was fired in August of that year, according to the suit.

Daun DePaul, a 60-year-old certified nursing assistant, began working at Centegra in 2007. In 2012, DePaul's husband was hospitalized four times to treat a heart condition and in July of that year underwent heart surgery, according to the complaint.

Around the time her husband was hospitalized, Centegra began to discipline DePaul for minor infractions. The complaint alleges that other employees were not disciplined for similar infractions. DePaul was terminated in September 2012, according to the complaint.

Laura Wolf, 54, was hired in 2002 as a registered nurse. Between 2009 and 2012 she underwent four surgical procedures and was scheduled for eye surgery in July 2013. She was terminated June 17, the suit says.

In each instance the former employees are seeking reinstatement or lost salary and employment benefits in addition to attorneys' fees.