DeKALB – KishHealth System will purchase the DeKalb Clinic in Sycamore within the first few months of 2015, officials from both health care facilities announced Tuesday.

When the deal closes, the DeKalb Clinic will become one of seven primary care facilities under the KishHealth System Physician Group, KishHealth System President and CEO Kevin Poorten and DeKalb Clinic Chairman Dr. Roger Haab said.

Poorten said the factors driving the deal included the need to improve quality and efficiency of health care services while working under the guidelines of the Affordable Care Act. Adding the DeKalb Clinic, a large multispecialty facility, will strengthen local health care and ensure the clinic can continue to thrive, they said.

“Primary care plays a really strong role in improving the overall health of the population we serve,” Poorten said. “So it was very important for the health system to have a stronger and stronger primary care base as part of our network.”

The physician group arm of the KishHealth System will triple in size with the DeKalb Clinic acquisition. The physician group has 10 employed physicians and three mid-level practitioners while the DeKalb Clinic has 20 employed physicians and 10 who have contracts with the clinic. The plan, Poorten said, is for most of these physicians to become KishHealth System employees.

Although they offer some duplicate services such as urology and mammography, both health care officials said they do not expect any changes in services after the purchase.

“This is simply an extension of the hospital's ancillary network or service network,” Haab said. “So it's one more place to offer the same services we do now. The fact that we have the facilities to do that, it makes it a little easier.”

After about three years of discussion, officials from both health care facilities signed a nonbinding letter of intent last week, telling employees about the pending purchase Thursday.

Poorten would not disclose the financial details of the purchase, but said it did not require approval from the Illinois Health Facilities and Services Review Board. State law requires board approval of health care acquisition deals of $12 million or more.

In addition to 20 employed physicians and 10 contract physicians, the DeKalb Clinic employs 125 people. About 16,000 patients visit the clinic annually, Haab said, adding they account for half of Kishwaukee Hospital's admissions, Poorten said.

Neither official said layoffs or cuts are imminent, although the next several months will include a thorough evaluation of the clinic's services and operations, things such as personnel or patient information reporting systems.