Topics: Democrats, Economic Recession, Elizabeth Warren, financial corruption, Gender, gender norms, GOP, Poverty, Republicans, Sexism, unconscious bias, Wall Street, War on Poverty, Warren Buffett, Politics News

Warren Buffett thinks Elizabeth Warren should be “less angry” in her approach to politics. “I think that she would do better if she was less angry and demonized less,” the Berkshire Hathaway CEO said Monday, according to a report from Business Insider. “I believe in ‘hate the sin but love the sinner.’ And I’m not sure that I’ve fully convinced Elizabeth Warren that that’s the way to go.

“I think the whole nature of governing — particularly when you’ve got a divided government like we have now — is that you end up with bills that each side doesn’t like but they like it better than doing nothing,” he continued. “I mean, that’s the way that government has to function. And it does not help when you demonize … the people you’re talking to.”

Buffett has written extensively about how the Wild West-nature of our financial system and our tax code has produced unprecedented economic inequality while lining the pockets of rich men like himself. This is why he’s the left’s very favorite billionaire. His beef isn’t with the substance of Warren’s politics, it’s with her tone.

The problem for Buffett is that Warren sometimes gets mad when she talks about a system that manufactures poverty. She is also quite direct when holding regulators and her fellow lawmakers to account for propping up that system.

Now I don’t think it’s controversial to point out that Buffett’s comment — effectively telling Warren to smile more when critiquing a violently inequitable system — is sexist. And it’s not going to blow anyone’s mind to point out that his comment can be sexist even if he didn’t mean it that way. That’s how unconscious bias works. We think we’re speaking neutrally, but we’re actually enforcing incredibly narrow and punitive norms.

This isn’t unique to billionaires on morning news shows, obviously. A recent report on performance reviews for nearly 250 tech company employees found that women are much more likely to receive critical feedback than men — even in positive reviews.

Here’s how Kieran Snyder described what she found in her research:

Words like bossy, abrasive, strident, and aggressive are used to describe women’s behaviors when they lead; words like emotional and irrational describe their behaviors when they object. All of these words show up at least twice in the women’s review text I reviewed, some much more often. Abrasive alone is used 17 times to describe 13 different women. Among these words, only aggressive shows up in men’s reviews at all. It shows up three times, twice with an exhortation to be more of it.