Connecticut hospitals, including Yale-New Haven and Hartford, are facing unprecedented challenges as they continue to deliver high-quality care to the patients they serve. In the post-Affordable Care Act world and facing new reimbursement challenges, Connecticut hospitals are now being asked to do more with less. In addition, recent challenges such as shortages of critical drugs and dramatic price spikes for other common generic drugs are forcing hospitals to find innovative solutions to urgent supply chain challenges.

According to the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), quality control problems at drug manufacturing facilities, other disruptions to manufacturing, the sudden surge in demand for certain drugs, and barriers to getting new suppliers on line to meet that demand have given rise to shortages for certain prescription drugs, many of which, such as saline solution, Connecticut hospitals rely on to operate. Despite a decline in new drug shortages, existing and ongoing prescription drug shortages continue to be a public health crisis and jeopardize patient access to essential medications.

Healthcare group purchasing organizations (GPOs) — who help find and purchase products for virtually every Connecticut hospital and many of the state’s nursing homes, surgery centers, and clinics — are working closely with hospitals, physicians, manufacturers, distributors, and government agencies to ensure that hospitals and patients have access to the life-saving drugs they need.

Connecticut hospitals and their GPO partners are taking a number of innovative approaches to reduce the impact of drug shortages. Hospitals and GPOs track data on existing and potential drug shortages and strategize when there is the potential for supply chain disruption. When shortages arise, GPOs work with hospitals and healthcare providers to source and safely migrate to alternative products and manufacturers.

Advertisement

Hospitals contract with GPOs to help provide the best products at the best value, and suppliers enter that same voluntary contract because GPOs provide critical value and market exposure to manufacturers. To help lessen hospital exposure to drug shortages, GPOs evaluate manufacturer reliability when sourcing and awarding contracts, and help providers establish best-practice purchasing procedures. GPOs work with suppliers to communicate provider needs in advance, so that manufacturers can plan their production capacity and avoid shortage situations. In addition, in shortage situations, GPOs help guarantee purchase volume and profit margin for suppliers to ensure they have incentive to continue producing supply.

Shortage situations and a lack of robust competition in the market for some products have allowed opportunistic drug manufacturers to hike prices for certain common generic drugs that are long since off-patent. Recent news headlines have been dominated by drug manufacturers who have hiked prices of generic drugs by hundreds or even thousands of percent simply because they could. Significant spikes have occurred for products where there are two or fewer manufacturers in the market, and where a lack of competition among manufacturers allows high prices to go largely unchecked.

GPOs have a unique line of sight into the healthcare supply chain and the causes of generic drug price spikes and we have been working with government and industry to pursue solutions to increase competition in the market. For example, HSCA recently urged Congress to give FDA the authority to expedite review of new drug applications for drugs where there are only one or two manufacturers in the market, or where there has already been a price spike. This increase in competition would help drive down costs for hospitals, taxpayers and the healthcare system overall.

We applaud Senator Richard Blumenthal for his leadership addressing critical healthcare issues such as drug shortages and generic drug price spikes. We urge Congress to support hospitals such as Yale-New Haven and Hartford, as well as the patients they serve, by finding common-sense solutions to help increase competition and keep costs in check in the generic drug market.

Todd Ebert, R.Ph., is the president and CEO of the Healthcare Supply Chain Association (HSCA).