(Photo: SPECIAL TO THE CITIZEN-TIMES)

In his 1891 painting, “The Doctor,” Sir Samuel Luke Fildes, depicts an elderly physician sitting by the bed of an obviously sick child. A look of concern and worry can be seen in his face. On a table by the bed there is a bottle, probably drawn into the painting to offer some medicinal measure of hope. What one sees in the doctor’s posture and the anxious parents in the background is a picture of waiting. They wait, in hope, that the child will be lifted from the darkness of the illness that surrounds him to the light of a bountiful life.

A hope, that with the limited medical resources of 1891, was likely not to be realized.

Now, however, we should no longer be sitting, waiting for hope to arrive and miraculously lift all our children into a future filled with golden opportunity.

It begins by owning the opportunity and the responsibility that comes from paying attention to the basic needs of all our children No child should ever go to bed hungry. No child should be subjected to the ridicule and shame of abuse. No child should be sick or injured and have no access to immediate and affordable health care. No child should have to face the cold of winter or the heat of summer and have no bed of its own to shelter it at night. No child should lack opportunity of education and self-fulfillment because of his or her skin color. No child should be fearful of the police because of his or her skin color or country of origin. No child should have to face the violence of weapons that, instead of keeping them safe, permanently destroy their future.

These critical needs of millions of our children are not just social or economic issues, and they are not unknown to us in Buncombe County.

One out of every five children that live among us does so in poverty. More than half of all children in Buncombe County and Asheville City schools are on free or reduced lunch programs, and there has been an increase of over 120 more children who are homeless compared to a year ago. Adding to these numbers are the more than 4,000 cases of abuse or neglect reported to the Department of Social Services at the last report.

No, these are not just social, economic or even humanitarian issues. They are matters of justice. Justice that calls for action, especially from those of us who through our years of living have gained experience, wisdom and a passion to know what is right. And we can act. By raising our voices we can affect policy and shed light on the needs of those who live in the shadows. With our collective voices we can call on good people to rally in support of all the children whose silent cries for help can now be heard.

In a season of the year when many faithful around the world are gathered to celebrate the birth of a child, we elders, gathering here in Western North Carolina and across the state, fierce for justice, claim the need to act so that all newborn babies will have hope for a life of warmth and acceptance and inherit their rightful place in a just society.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1BczbcF