Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

VANCOUVER, British Columbia (AP) — Although they’re not yet 30 years old, Jodie Taylor and Steph Houghton have already seen a revolution in English women’s soccer during their careers.

A sport once overlooked and underfunded in its football-mad nation has seized the spotlight this month, breaking barriers and toppling bastions of inveterate sexism with every World Cup victory. The Lionesses reached a new summit Saturday with a gritty 2-1 quarterfinal win over Canada, knocking out the hosts and advancing to the semifinals against Japan on Wednesday in Edmonton, Alberta.

Amid the hugs and celebration at BC Place, Houghton spared a thought for the brilliant boost they’re getting back home in the sport’s motherland.

“We always said that we had one aim when we came (to Canada),” the England captain said. “It was to inspire a nation, and if the mums and dads have let their young girls watch the game late (Saturday) in England, I think hopefully we’ve got a lot of young girls playing football at an early age, and in the next few years we have a stronger English national team.”

England already is guaranteed its most successful Women’s World Cup. The Lionesses began in Canada with a 1-0 loss to France, but have racked up four consecutive 2-1 victories since, beating Mexico, Colombia, Norway and the hosts.

One game after they confidently rallied from behind to beat Norway, they hung on through 75 tense minutes against Canada after taking an early lead in a raucous stadium ardently hoping for a collapse.

Since their only World Cup victory in 1966, the English men have made a tradition of disastrous performances on international stages, capped by their worst-ever World Cup showing in Brazil last year.

These Lionesses haven’t bowed to the weight of history.

“We’ve got such a good team, such a strong squad,” said Taylor, who scored England’s first goal. “We’re not just 11 or 12 players. I just want us to keep on and continue this journey.”

Taylor started out playing against boys in England as a kid. She debuted for women’s club team Tranmere Rovers at 15, something that would be nearly impossible today in the tiered levels of women’s soccer.

“There’s not many people under the age of 17″ playing at the top level in England, she said. “If you’re 17 or 18 in the league (now), you’re doing really well. It’s kind of amazing to see the progress the league has made.”