April 21/22

400 block Long Gulch —- The reporting party reported that someone had shot his mailbox.

1200 block Pennsylvania — The reporting party reported his neighbor shot at his tire. David Malone, 50, was taken into custody and a search warrant was issued. A rifle was found at the home.

U.S. 50/Dozier —- A deputy was out with a male. His vehicle broke down and he had cut part of his thumb off. A deputy stayed on scene until Cañon City Police Department and medical personnel were on scene.

800 block North Orchard —- The reporting party reported seeing a male and female party with a Boxer walking down the road while screaming and hitting each other. Deputies ended up at the home of female subject, who refused to let them into the home to search for the male party.

3500 block L Path, Cotopaxi —- The reporting party reported hearing shots fired near her home. A deputy made contact with different parties who heard the shots as well but said there were less shots than what the reporting party reported. No contact was made with whoever was firing their weapons.

600 block McDonald Loop, Cotopaxi —- The reporting party reported someone stole her dogs and is holding them hostage for ransom. A deputy spoke with the party. Animal control is aware and will follow up later this week.

900 block Alabama Street —- The reporting party reported someone had struck her vehicle and left the scene. A deputy responded but was called away before the Colorado State Patrol could arrive.

Advertisement

402 Broadway Street, Penrose —- The reporting party reported that an intoxicated person had struck several vehicles after leaving the bar after being denied service. Deputies contacted the one hit vehicle's registered owner to gather information for report. Investigation led to a possible suspect.

800 block Della Vista Lane—- A deputy stopped to investigate a large fire behind a residence. The residents were having a bonfire. The parties were advised of burning regulations and agreed to put the fire out for tonight.

U.S. 50, Penrose —- A Colorado Department of Corrections sergeant reported that one of his officers had reported rolling his vehicle somewhere in the Penrose area. The captain and emergency medical services were en route when Colorado State Patrol advised PCSO had located the accident scene in their county. Fremont units stood down.

April 22/23

1000 block 38th Trail, Cotopaxi —- The reporting party called in and said he had a male party and a female party staying at his residence and now he is missing his chainsaw and approximately $300 in cash.

23 Rockrimmon Road, Williamsburg —- The reporting party called in and said his wife had fallen down and is not breathing. A deputy and medical personnel were notified. The female party was deceased upon arrival. The coroner was contacted.

UPS, Penrose —- The reporting party called in and said a package containing a handgun was stolen from the facility. A deputy responded and information was gathered for a report.

1200 block West Second Street, Florence —- The reporting party called in and said three of her cars were broken into and there is some change missing out of the vehicles. Information was gathered for a report.

800 block 11th Trail, Cotopaxi —- The reporting party called in and said he sells puppies online and received a fraudulent check for one of the dogs.

1300 block West Third Street, Florence —- The reporting party called in and said someone came onto his property and used the hot tub, stole towels and damaged property. Information was gathered for a report.

400 block Fourth Avenue —- The reporting party called to report that she backed into a mailbox and knocked it from the cement foundation. Colorado State Patrol responded and took the scene.

U.S. 50, just east of MM 237, Coaldale —- The reporting party reported that a vehicle went off the road and was stuck in a fence. Colorado State Patrol arrived and took the scene.

Desert Reef Hot Springs, Florence —- The reporting party reported finding possible contraband at this location.

300 block Lincoln Avenue —- The reporting party reported that someone had broken into his home and taken a laptop and some change. A burglary report was taken.

1200 block West Third Street, Florence —- The reporting party reported that three of his vehicles had been rummaged through. Information was collected for a report on criminal trespass.

1200 block Lawrence —- The reporting party reported receiving a phone call stating that he had excessive tickets. He later called and said that this was his grandson playing a prank on him.

County Road 143, MM 2.75 —- The reporting party reported finding a large black bag full of bones. Deputies responded and determined that the bones were that of a dog.