<p>A still image of Laura Weintraub's latest YouTube video about the dangers of sharing the road with bicyclists.</p>

By Cindy Von Quednow of the Ventura County Star

A Calabasas woman whose video joking about running over bicyclists led to her resignation as a Santa Paula Police volunteer has made another video where she explains the difficulties of sharing the road with motorists.

The original video, which was posted last month on Laura Weintraub's YouTube page, ends with an electronically altered image of a car striking bicyclists.

"I had no idea this was going to happen," Weintraub says in her new video. She apparently received thousands of phone calls, emails and even death threats in the weeks after the first video was posted.

She later explained in an apology on her Facebook page that the video was meant to be satirical and she had no intention of offending or upsetting anyone. She ultimately resigned from her post as a Santa Paula Police Department reserve officer, a move Police Chief Steve McLean said was the right thing to do. McLean called the original video "stupid and an enormous lapse of judgment."

McLean said the department had moved on from the incident and while he had heard Weintraub had made a new video, he had not seen it.

Weintraub said the flurry of comments on the video made her realize the "real and life-endangering" issues bicyclists face while sharing the road with motorists.

For her new video, Weintraub reached out to two avid cyclists and accompanied them on a bike ride in the highly congested areas of the San Fernando Valley and Santa Monica.

"I wanted to see what it was like for them," Weintraub said in an interview Thursday.

"I really think every driver should spend some time on a bike, because your perspective changes immediately."

Ted Rogers, author of the blog Biking in L.A., explains in the video that his "head exploded" and he was "livid" when he encountered Weintraub's video.

Weintraub, 35, admitted she was "terrified" to reach out to Rogers because he had criticized her video, but she said her time with him and another bicyclist made her realize why her video had created such outrage.

Weintraub, who hadn't been on a bike since she was a teenager, said she had never had so much fun and been so terrified as when she was sharing the road with motorists.

"People honking at us even though we were doing everything right," she said. "It started to make me mad."