EAST LANSING -- While President Barack Obama was making his way into Michigan State University's Equine Performance Center to sign the long-awaited Farm Bill, a group of protesters staged a rally against Obamacare

"The President's trying to change the subject," Scott Hagerstrom, State Director of Americans for Prosperity-Michigan.

The group has been vocal about their opposition to the law that President Obama has called the "signature achievement" of his presidency.

"The White House kept saying Obamacare would produce more jobs in this country and kept citing the Congressional Budget Office numbers," he continued. "But the CBO came out and said that there would be 2.3 million fewer jobs."

The group of between 15 and 20 protesters stood in subzero wind chills and held up signs saying such things as "Obama doesn't care" "Liar in chief" and "Lie of the year."

Hagerstrom said that the Farm Bill was just another extension of the president's "failed policies"

"This farm bill continues reckless spending and debt accumulation by our federal government and that's the wrong way to go," Hagerstrom said. "Between the Farm Bill and Obamacare, this is the wrong way to go."

The group also held up signs calling Congressman Gary Peters a "liar" for his support of Obamacare. Peters, a Democrat, and Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, are the presumptive nominees for retiring U.S. Sen. Carl Levin's seat.

"We're surprised that [Peters] is here with the president, continuing to repeat the 'lie of the year,'" Hagerstrom said while holding up a sign with the Twitter hashtag #LOTY. "He is showing his support for these policies that are costing us jobs."

The group also singled out Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mark Schauer for his support. AFP claims that 225,000 Michigan residents have lost their insurance due to the Affordable Care Act which took effect last October.

Schauer has repeatedly defended his vote on Obamacare. He argued that it was already helping young people, such as MSU students, who can stay on their parent's health care plan through age 26.

"I know Republicans like to make issues of all of these things," Schauer, a former Congressman, said. "My concern, and my concern on everything in Congress, was making sure that people had a health care safety net there for their family when they needed it."



MLive reporter Jonathan Oosting contributed to this report.

Follow Jay Scott Smith on Twitter: @JayScottSmith. Email him at JSmith44@mlive.com. Follow MLive Lansing on Facebook and Twitter.