Bristol-Myers Squibb Co. raised its 2015 guidance as the pharmaceutical company reported that third-quarter revenue rose 3.8% on continued growth for its Opdivo cancer treatment and other key drugs.

Bristol-Myers said its revenue increased to $4.07 billion from $3.92 billion a year earlier, above expectations of analysts polled by Thomson Reuters for $3.86 billion. Excluding currency effects, the growth was 11%.

Per-share earnings, excluding certain items, also beat expectations.

For the year, Bristol-Myers raised its per-share earnings estimate to $1.85 to $1.90 on revenue of $16 billion to $16.4 billion, from its previously increased estimate for per-share profit of $1.70 to $1.80 and revenue of $15.5 billion to $15.9 billion.

Bristol-Myers has gained attention as a leader in developing drugs that enlist the power of the immune system against cancer. The company's Opdivo, also known as nivolumab, was first approved for sale in December for advanced melanoma and in March was approved for an advanced form of lung cancer known as squamous nonsmall cell lung cancer. More recently, in October, Opdivo received broader U.S. approval to treat nonsquamous nonsmall cell lung cancer.

Analysts expect Opdivo will amass billions of dollars in yearly sales, as its launch progresses and use broadens to other cancers.

During September, Opdivo also received breakthrough-therapy designation as a potential treatment for advanced or metastatic kidney cancer.

Bristol-Myer's immunotherapy that combines Opdivo with its older skin-cancer immunotherapy drug Yervoy also recently won FDA approval to treat advanced melanoma, a deadly form of skin cancer.

During the latest period, Opdivo contributed sales of $305 million in its third quarter on the market, compared with $122 million during the previous quarter. A year earlier Bristol-Myers posted Opdivo sales of $1 million through its partnership with Ono Pharmaceutical Co. in Japan.

Sales of Yervoy, another skin-cancer immunotherapy drug declined again in the latest quarter, dropping 31% to $240 million--partly because of Opdivo's growth in skin cancer in the U.S. Bristol's Yervoy was the first immunotherapy approved, in 2011.

Overall, Bristol-Myers reported a profit of $706 million, or 42 cents a share, down from $721 million, or 43 cents a share, a year earlier. Excluding one-time items, per-share earnings fell to 39 cents from 45 cents. Analysts expected per-share profit of 35 cents.

Gross margin fell to 73% from 74.3%.

Sales of drugs in its Hepatitis C franchise soared to $402 million from $49 million, with a contribution from domestic sales of $111 million in the latest period. Sales of anticlotting drug Eliquis more than doubled to $466 million.

In addition to clinical trials of the immunotherapies to treat other cancers, Bristol-Myers also has continued to expand its pipeline through deals, including its acquisition of immunotherapy drug developer Flexus and licensing of gene-therapy cardiovascular programs from uniQure. In late August, Bristol-Myers reached a pact for the exclusive right to buy privately held immunotherapy company Promedior Inc. and its experimental fibrosis treatment, in a deal potentially valued at as much as $1.25 billion.

Write to Tess Stynes at tess.stynes@wsj.com

Subscribe to WSJ: http://online.wsj.com?mod=djnwires

More from MarketWatch