Duey Stroebel (upper left), Joe Leibham (upper right), Tom Denow (lower left) and Glenn Grothman, the four Republican candidates for the Sixth Congressional District. Stroebel has reported a large fund-raising edge with less than three weeks to go before the primary. Credit: Submitted and Journal Sentinel files

SHARE Election 2014

Visit our election section for complete coverage of the 2014 spring and fall elections.

By of the

Madison — State Rep. Duey Stroebel pumped $350,000 of his own money into his congressional campaign over 23 days in July, giving him a big fundraising advantage over his two closest Republican rivals.

In all, the Ozaukee County Republican has lent his campaign just short of $692,000 since getting into the race. That has meant he has had more than twice as much money available as state Sens. Glenn Grothman of Campbellsport and Joe Leibham of Sheboygan.

The three are running in the Aug. 12 GOP primary for the 6th Congressional District in east-central Wisconsin. Longtime U.S. Rep. Tom Petri, a Fond du Lac Republican, dropped out of the race after Grothman announced he was seeking the seat.

Tom Denow, an Algoma retiree, also is making a longshot bid for the seat as a Republican. He has greatly lagged behind the others in fundraising.

In reports filed late Thursday, Stroebel, of the Town of Cedarburg, showed he had taken in $362,800 from July 1 to July 23 — $12,800 from contributors, the rest from himself. He had $262,720 in his campaign account as of July 23, leaving him with the most money of any of the candidates.

During that period, Grothman received $188,328, including $90,000 he lent his campaign. He had $159,621 on hand as of July 23.

Leibham raised the least — $76,595 — but all of it came from donors. He had $171,364 on hand.

Stroebel has used his financial advantage to run TV ads characterizing himself as an outsider. In one recent spot by Stroebel this week, a narrator asked, "If career politicians Glenn Grothman and Joe Leibham are willing to compromise on conservative principles in Madison, what will they compromise on in Washington?"

In a Thursday debate moderated by conservative Green Bay radio talk show host Jerry Bader, the four GOP candidates sought to distinguish themselves from Petri, who has served in Congress for three decades.

"If I get compared to Tom Petri in two years, I'd be insulted," Grothman said.

Stroebel labeled Grothman a career politician and said Wisconsin was better served by people like U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, an Oshkosh Republican who wasn't involved in politics until he was elected in 2010.

"Duey is just lying," Grothman responded. "There may be some legislators in Madison who've been there too long. I'm not burned out."

Meanwhile, Stroebel recently released policy positions dubbed the "Stroebel Strategy" that he argues spell out where he stands in more detail than his opponents. The positions he takes include a balanced-budget amendment, additional spending limits, a permanent ban on earmarks, raising the Social Security retirement age for those not already at or near that mark, and adopting many of the entitlement changes supported by U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan, a Janesville Republican.

Grothman also has posted an issues page on his website touting his tax-cutting zeal and other conservative positions, such as his opposition to abortion.

"When I get to Congress, I'll cut welfare benefits, say no junk food for food stamps, and cut overly generous tax credits that go to low-income housing developers," Grothman said on his website in a swipe at Stroebel, who has been involved in subsidized deals for housing for seniors during his real estate career.

Grothman sits on the board of the Wisconsin Housing and Economic Development Authority, which awards those federal tax credits.

In a statement, Leibham said he has been clear that his top priorities are repealing the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, stopping illegal immigration and making the federal government fiscally responsible.

The winner of the GOP primary will face Winnebago County Executive Mark Harris, a Democrat, in the Nov. 4 general election. He raised $22,220 in the latest period and had $42,428 on hand as of July 23.

The district has a heavy Republican tilt.

Jason Stein of the Journal Sentinel staff contributed to this report.