Alec Macfarlane

An overwhelming majority of the most successful European exits in the past decade were from primary buyouts, fueling concern that the increasing wave of secondary deals will significantly reduce future returns.

This is one of the findings of a study by Private Equity News into the best buyouts of the past 10 years, based on nominations from the industry and PEN’s own research, and measured by cash multiples generated on exit. In many cases, the study used financial information not previously made public.

Just one in five of the best buyouts examined were bought from other private equity firms. The remaining businesses were carved out from corporates, taken private, sourced from founding families or taken from other primary sources of deal flow.

Rhonda Ryan, a partner and head of Emea investments at Altius Associates, said she was concerned about the current level of secondary buyouts.

She said: “I like to see where the value-add is coming from. I like to see that people are buying smartly and if they can demonstrate that with a secondary transaction, that’s great. But I think it’s harder to demonstrate than if it is a primary transaction.

“If you take a corporate carve-out, for example, there’s a lot more heavy lifting to do and therefore you would expect a better price coming out of it and you’d expect a better return.”

Among the most successful exits where new information was disclosed is the 2006 deal where Triton Partners, a private equity firm focused on Northern Europe, bought distressed logistics automation company Dematic from German conglomerate Siemens. The sale of the business to AEA Investors and Teachers’ Private Capital in 2012 reaped a 36.5 times multiple and 73% internal rate of return, according to people familiar with the matter.

Others include Danish firm Axcel’s 2008 buyout of Pandora from its two founders. An initial public offering of the Danish jeweler just two years later and Axcel’s gradual exit from the business has yielded a 40 times multiple and an internal rate of return of 290% so far, another person said.

Oliver Gottschalg, a professor at HEC Paris and founder of Peracs Analytics, said that while the average returns from secondary buyouts were lower, there were some benefits to secondary deals.

He said: “On the flip side, the previous private equity owner has probably fixed [the company] up enough so you’re not likely going to find yourself with something where you’ve been completely misled and it falls into pieces – so you also don’t get the extreme negative outcomes.”

Read the full list of the top performing European buyouts exited in the last 10 years here.

Write to alec.macfarlane@wsj.com; follow him on Twitter @alecmac11