Editor:



The May 7th Verde Independent article, about how Keep Sedona Beautiful (KSB) has gone "under the radar" and has reinvented itself as Save Our Ancient Redrocks (SOAR), convinced me that MONARCHISTS (rhymes with anarchists) are still actively trying to undermine the right of Americans to be FREE.



Monarchists are people who bow to a king, to obtain a favored status, to receive special benefits. They existed in 1776 and still exist today. Only today, they disguise themselves as "environmentalists", which they think empowers them, in their infinite wisdom, to make our decisions for us. The U.S. Constitution, however, is founded on limited government and the VOTE of the people.



[That these Monarchists changed their name from KSB to SOAR is like putting lipstick on a pig.



They're just hiding behind a different name. I guess KSB got tired of embarrassing itself and its members. Apparently shameless, they are not seeking forgiveness, only more stealth.]



It's revealing that KSB/SOAR "began quietly" and returned to "quiet research." Obviously, it's because they can't win a debate in a public forum.



They lost in a 6-to-1 vote of the Sedona City Council, the very council that STARTED all this insanity about a national monument.



The creation of a Verde Valley National Monument is UNCONSTITUTIONAL because it relies on The American Antiquities Act of 1906, which (some claim) allows the President of the United States, with a single stroke of his "magic pen", to put an area, 1/8th the size of Rhode Island, under Federal control.



DOES SIZE MATTER? The proposed Grand Canyon Watershed National Monument would steal 1.7 million acres of sovereign Arizona land ... which is 2½ times the size of Rhode Island! Just think.



Obama could proclaim his entire home state of Hawaii as a national monument and continue to live like a king!



With the Antiquities Act, there's NO VOTE of either citizens or their representatives. It is simply ONE-MAN-RULE, dictatorship, monarchy, despotism, tyranny!



The KSB/SOAR crowd will claim that the Antiquities Act is LEGAL. I agree! Just as slavery was "legal" at one time in America's history. [But it doesn't take a legal scholar to realize that there are corrupt members of every branch of government, including the Judicial branch.]



Bottom-line: if ONLY Barack Obama's signature is required to turn the Verde Valley into a Federally regulated territory, then that is, BY DEFINITION, One-Man-Rule. This is NOT even debatable, except when talking with lunatics who are incapable of entering into a rational debate.



If you think ObamaCare has been a nightmare [... totally controlling all your health decisions ]... just think about how a Federally controlled national monument would control your water rights!



So, I've formed an environmental group, Keep Sedona Clean (KSC). Our motto is "Clean streets AND clean politics". KSC has no membership dues, no non-profit status, no secret handshakes, no political favors.



[KSC's current project is to attend meetings of the "non-profit environmental" groups, listed on the Sedona Verde Valley Red Rock National Monument (SVVRRNM) website (alias KSB), ... and, if they even exist, convince them NOT to support One-Man-Rule politics.]



David Reyburn



Sedona