Michael Dearing, founder of Harrison Metal: Both time and cash are precious, but a little thinking time will make your dollars work harder. Here are four things that should happen before you spend $1 on hiring, ads, public relations, visual design or collateral:

Positioning. If you can state clearly who your product is for, the need it meets and the value it provides, you’ll increase the return on investment. Nail the basics of positioning by filling in the following:

[Product name] is for [target user] who needs to [problem to be solved] and feel [feelings] while they do it. [Product name] is based on the [adjective] idea that [unique insight] . It will win because [reasons].

Now this isn’t a customer-facing tagline at all. It’s an internal tool to focus product and marketing strategy. Companies with clear positioning statements spend smarter, nail their messaging more often and take less time and cash to accumulate happy customers. Positioning statements also get teams aligned and working in the same direction, further saving time and cash. You will want a positioning statement before you spend cash. (And relax; you can iterate this over time. It’s a prototype.)

Drake Equation. Frank Drake was the radio-astronomer who, in 1961, came up with the famous equation for estimating the number of detectable, intelligent civilizations in the Milky Way. You should have your own version of the Drake Equation that describes how all the people in the world will narrow down to the ones who actually use your product again and again. Estimating the number of people in your total audience, the percentage who will hear your message, the fraction of those who will show interest, what share of those actually buy and how long the loyal ones stay with you is a remarkably powerful tool for management. In the early days, it is a statement of your vision for the future — even if you don’t have any idea of the actual numbers. Once you have experience in the market, it becomes a general management tool for measuring and improving performance. A Drake Equation for your business offers some structure for what is likely to be a messy, uncertain search for success.

Analytic indoor plumbing. You don’t need to invest in the Toto Washlet S350 of analytics infrastructure. But you do need basic tools to gather and analyze data. If your business is online, this can be as simple as properly provisioning Google Analytics or Mixpanel. If your business is offline, make sure you have ways to count traffic, conversions and repeats. If you do not have these data — and it’s shocking how many companies are in this boat — you cannot make informed judgments about time or cash investments. The most common reason people do not opt for analytic indoor plumbing: “We’re moving too fast,” or, “We’re just so scrappy.” These nonsense excuses are based on the assumption that analytic indoor plumbing is expensive and hard to set up. That’s as untrue about business analytics as it is about toilets.

Key results targets. Once you have the first three steps done, the next one is a breeze. The best management teams operate with some form of management by objectives. In startups, a common form of this is “Objectives and Key Results,” or OKRs, a tool advocated by Andy Grove in his classic book, High Output Management. Stating the objective (desired, big-picture outcome) of the marketing effort and the key results expected (time-bound, ambitious measures of progress toward the objective) aligns the team and fosters learning. And the OKRs can easily fall right out of your Drake Equation and your dashboard of basic analytics. So if it takes more than ten minutes to do this, something is wrong.

Spending time before you spend cash is like bathing and brushing your teeth: not really optional. And these steps are not only compatible with moving fast and being creative, they make speed and innovation more likely. In today’s environment of easy capital, it’s tempting to skip the fundamentals of positioning and analytics. But whether you are a founder or a founder’s colleague, you are past winging it on your own. Other people’s time, talent and money are in your hands.

Mr. Dearing is founder of Harrison Metal, a Palo Alto-based investor in early stage technology companies.

Follow @mcgd



Follow @WSJstartup