By Carolee Belkin Walker

Especially in the spring, it can feel as if it’s a balancing act to train for upcoming races. Yet for runners, the idea of balance could not be more critical, because running is, after all, an actual balancing act.

“When you run, you never have both feet on the ground at the same time,” said Ian Hankins, head men’s cross-country and track and field coach at the Catholic University of America. “Everything needs to line up at the center of your body so you don’t fall over. When your core and posterior chain are aligned and you’re not tipping forward or leaning back, as a runner, you are more efficient and use less energy.”

In addition to coaching his athletes through such running warm-ups as A-skips and carioca, or grapevine — drills that teach the body how to run in the correct way — Hankins incorporates Olympic lifts to strengthen core muscles.

“Most distance runners don’t think about the importance of weight training to strengthen the core and upper body for the purpose of running more efficiently,” Hankins said. “You need to have strong upper-body muscles to balance and hold the body in the proper position over a long period of time and during high intensity.”

Runners who have an impaired sense of balance are at an increased risk of injury by tripping and falling, said physical therapist Kevin McGuinness, who practices at Washington Orthopaedics & Sports Medicine. Imbalances also cause overuse injuries when certain muscles are forced to overcompensate for others.

He noted that we derive our sense of balance from information collected by the muscular skeletal system, the visual system and the vestibular system inside the inner ear. All these tell the body where it is in space and how fast our limbs are moving.

Oftentimes, motor control coordination gets lost in the mix, McGuinness said. Runners have been known to focus on nutrition, mileage and strength, which are all important, but at the expense of balance training.

So how do we know if we’re off balance when we run?

Elite runner Tina Muir, who holds a half-marathon personal record of 1:13 and a marathon personal record of 2:41, found herself dealing with one injury after another, including hamstring strain, plantar fasciitis and calf strain, before she and her coach took a hard look at her running form.

“Looking at photos of myself, I could tell I was wasting energy,” Muir said. “My upper body was moving side to side instead of forward, so most of my energy was pushing sideways instead of ahead.”

Age can also be a factor affecting sense of balance, McGuinness said. Age-related changes to the visual and the vestibular system, in addition to muscle weakness and stiffness as we get older, can affect the brain’s ability to make these kinds of adjustments as we run or, in some instances, walk, he said.

“Balance, like anything else, requires practice,” McGuinness said. “The good news is you can train the balance system by incorporating exercises that physically coordinate what the limbs are doing.”