FBI Snitch Tweets Regretful Messages After Betraying His Hacker Friends

Steve Ambrose

A hacker known as “5hm00p,” after admitting to being an FBI informant, went on a Twitter tiradedirected at the agency lamenting his involvement in betraying some of his fellow hackers, Motherboard reported Nov. 23.

5hm00p, a member of at the hacker group Rustle League, explains in a tweet Nov. 20 that almost two years ago the FBI approached him and led him to believe he was going to be raided if he did not cooperate in a terror investigation. “Congratulations,” he wrote. “You got it. Congratulations, you got what you wanted on my friend @_DillonC all because you thought he was with some bullshit terrorist group.”

Apparently, 5hm00p is the primary provider for his family. After the FBI threatened to put him in prison–which would have removed the main source of income for his family–he decided to comply. (RELATED: Hacking Group ‘Crackas With Attitude’ Allegedly Exploits FBI Deputy Director’s Emails)

“AND THEN MAKE ME DROP A DIME AND MAKE ME FUCKING WEAR A FUCKING DEVICE WHILE IM WITH @_DillonC and @meepkittyfuck,” he writes.

“I sold out my boy and Meep like a dumbass and I’m owning up to it. I’m sorry to you all that I wasn’t honest with this shit. I couldn’t fucking take the guilt anymore,” he continues. (RELATED: Swimsuit Model Blackmailed By Hackers: ‘We’ll Leak Your Personal Photos’)

@_DillonC released a statement Nov. 22 on the revelations from 5hm00p.

I considered you like my own family as you said you did me. But if that’s the case, what made you decide to go against your loyalty and values and try to entrap me, and others that you considered close? As you know – when someone who is family is being accused for something they didn’t do, no matter what you do, you _NEVER_ go against them…What it comes down to is you had a choice, and not only did you screw me, you screwed 3 of the most closest people to you.

In addition to the guilt of just turning on some of his fellow hacktivists, 5hm00p is also feeling anguish due to his involvement in the death of another hacker named Junaid “TriCk” Hussain.

“…I WAS HELPING YOU NEUTRALIZE JUNAID AS WE ORIGINALLY AGREED? I STILL HAVE THAT OVER MY CONSCIOUS. I fucking helped you MURDER him. Do you know how I feel now when I sleep at night,” he wrote.

According to Motherboard, Hussain was killed in a Syrian drone strike on Aug. 24. He initially joined Islamic State in 2013 and became the leader of the Islamic State hacking division. Hussain, before becoming radicalized, was familiar with 5hm00p from his days as a member of the Team Poison hackers.

“I lost a lot of good friendships and my fucking honor. I’m so embarrassed to show my face in public now because of this,” 5hm00p writes.

A representative from the FBI confirmed to Motherboard that 5hm00p did help federal agencies find Hussain.

Follow Steve Ambrose on Twitter

Click here for reuse options! Copyright 2015 Daily Caller News Foundation

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@dailycallernewsfoundation.org.