Buy Photo Republican presidential candidate and businessman Donald Trump addresses questions of religion and his recent comments about Mexico during the Family Leadership Summit on Saturday, July 18, 2015, at Stephens Auditorium in Ames, Iowa. (Photo: Bryon Houlgrave/The Register)Buy Photo

The tally of those vying to be president of the United States has reached 21, with 16 of them Republicans. So, why did we single out one candidate who we believe should drop out of the race? Why him, and why did we take that position now?

Those questions have been asked, in various forms, since The Des Moines Register published an editorial Monday evening saying Donald Trump needs to exit the race. Our editorial board — comprised of President and Publisher David Chivers, Opinion Editor Lynn Hicks, Editorial Writers Andie Dominick, Clark Kauffman and Rox Laird, and me — made the decision on the heels of Trump’s appearance at the Family Leadership Summit in Ames.

That’s where he insulted Sen. John McCain’s war record. But it was more than that. Just last month, he drew criticism for his comments on Mexico and illegal immigrants.

Our reasoning can be summed up perfectly in one sentence from the editorial: “By using his considerable wealth, his celebrity status, and his mouth to draw attention to himself, rather than to raise awareness of the issues facing America, he has coarsened our political dialogue and cheapened the electoral process.”

It’s hard enough to have serious debate when the field is this crowded, without one candidate commanding attention with outlandish statements and rhetoric.

It’s time for serious conversations about serious issues facing America. Iowans want to talk about college affordability, the growing opportunity gap, terrorist threats, immigration reform and a host of other concerns close to home and overseas.

Thus far in the race, Trump does not appear serious about having those conversations by providing solutions and his vision.

Predictably, we’ve gotten reaction from Trump supporters and detractors, and Trump himself. Not surprisingly, he attacked the Register for our position, as well as our news reporting on his campaign.

We clearly stand by our editorial. We also stand by our reporting. We have covered his campaign fairly and accurately, even before his announcement for the presidency, and will continue to do so. Our editorial position has no bearing on our news reporting; our news reporters and editors aren’t aware of our editorial board’s decisions until an editorial is ready for publication.

Our formal endorsement of candidates in the Democratic and Republican caucuses won’t come until late January. We’re watching all of the candidates closely. The Register has endorsed Democrats and has endorsed Republicans in presidential elections in the past. Our compass is guided by which candidate we believe is the right person to lead this country.

To get there, we need to have less vitriol and more thoughtful debate focused on issues that Americans truly care about.

Amalie Nash is the executive editor and vice president for news and engagement at The Des Moines Register. Reach her at anash@registermedia.com or 515-284-8551. Follow her on Twitter @AmalieNash

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1MIo5Cj