Nancy Pelosi memorably said of the Affordable Care Act in 2010, "But we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of controversy." (AP Photo/Susan Walsh)

The Obama administration recently boasted that the Affordable Care Act has extended coverage to as many as 20 million more Americans through its expanded Medicaid program and subsidized health insurance programs. It has come, however, at substantial public and private costs.

And a series of recent developments could mean deep trouble for the ACA, also known as Obamacare, suggesting that it may not be able to survive without a congressional bailout, which it is unlikely to receive.

If a court ruling issued last week stands, Congress must authorize funds now provided only by the administration to compensate insurance companies for absorbing some costs for customers.

On May 12, Federal District Judge Rosemary Collyer handed the Republican House of Representatives a precedent-setting victory when she ruled that the Obama administration was making illegal payments to insurance companies because the payments had not been authorized by Congress as required by law and the Constitution.

The judge stayed her order, based on a suit filed by the House under former Speaker John Boehner. So her ruling may be appealed by the administration, which quixotically argued that it should be allowed to make the payments because the failure of Congress to authorize the payments was just another example of the “inartful drafting” of the ACA when it passed Congress in 2010.

By that admission, the administration agrees with the view of then-Speaker Nancy Pelosi, who couldn’t explain exactly what was in the bill, which was approved without a single Republican vote in Congress.

“But we have to pass the bill so that you can find out what is in it, away from the fog of the controversy,” Rep. Pelosi infamously — and revealingly — told a National Association of Counties legislative conference on March 9, 2010.

Congress now also must authorize payments to fully reimburse insurance companies for losses incurred when they accept customers with prior conditions and high health care costs, as they are required to do by the ACA.

A major insurer, Highmark, has just sued the government for its failure to make the promised payments for accepting risky customers. Without these payments, insurers must raise premiums for the policies they issue, or withdraw from some markets, or both.

There are many reports around the nation of insurers raising prices and dropping coverage. If the two payment issues mentioned above are not soon resolved, this trend is likely to accelerate.

That would lead to even higher premiums for the insured, a probable rise in the number of uninsured, and an increase in the number of insured who have serious health problems, in a repetitive pattern known as an insurance “death spiral.”

This is a far cry from the promises made by President Barack Obama and other advocates of what continues to be touted as the signature domestic achievement of his administration.

Hillary Clinton, for example, called the ACA “one of the greatest accomplishments of President Obama [and] of the Democratic party” during the Jan. 17 presidential debate in Charleston.

However, the Congressional Budget Office recently reported that the federal government will spend roughly $660 billion in health care subsidies for people under 65 and another $692 billion on Medicare in 2016 alone. The national defense budget will be about $600 billion, less than either of these health accounts, and federal health care spending will roughly double over the next decade, while total national health care spending will rise as a portion of the gross domestic product from about 17.5 percent to about 20 percent.

Health care costs continue to rise faster than income for most Americans.

The Obama administration and its congressional allies chose a highly partisan approach to increase the federal role in health care through the ACA.

That was the wrong prescription, as becomes ever more evident in its application.