Local tax service agents are deep in the heart of taxes with the April 15 tax deadline less than two weeks away.

Though the tax season is coming to an end, tax preparers said business is picking up with last minute tax filers. Many said taxpayers should keep in mind the new tax rules relating to the Affordable Care Act and shared other tips to help taxpayers filing before the deadline.

Michael Medina, Angela Hightower Tax office manager, said it’s a trend each year to have business bustling at the beginning of tax season with people wanting their returns early, and people rushing in toward the end of the season to file their taxes.

“We do see a group of people that will wait,” Medina said. “There are some people that don’t want to give the IRS any money before they have to. They prefer to wait until the very end so they can hold onto their money as long as possible.”

Chris Vega, Liberty Tax Lubbock office manager, said with many people filing toward the end of the tax season the time it takes do a return is lengthy.

“In the later part of the tax season it usually takes an hour to an hour and a half to actually do one return because of the complexity of the return,” he said.

Vega said taxpayers should be as prepared as possible when the visit with their tax preparer and be patient.

“Try to make sure you have everything together,” he said. “It just helps a lot of tax places when you have everything organized. Organization is very key, especially this late in the season. Be extremely kind to your preparer because it does take them a while to get through a lot of the information.”

The tax preparers said there are many tax credits and deductions they will make clients aware of. Medina said the top three that people tend to miss when filling are the retirement savings contribution credit, the educational credit and the childcare credit.

“The retirement savings contribution credit is if you’re putting money into your retirement either through work — you’re eligible to receive a credit,” Medina said. “If you were in post-secondary school a lot of people aren’t aware the credits you can receive on that. Childcare is another big one. If you paid for your child to go to day-care you can deduct some of that on your taxes.”

Vega said the best tip he can give taxpayers is to keep records of spending.

“A lot of advice that I usually give is keep records and logs of everything that you spend personally and for an out-of-pocket expense, say for work, because a lot of that stuff does help as a deduction,” he said. “A lot of people aren’t aware of that.”

Dustin Nixon, Lubbock Tax Services owner, said one change in this year’s tax season is the Affordable Care Act.

“The biggest thing is the Affordable Care Act that went into effect this year,” he said. “The Obamacare has been a little shocking (for clients). You have some people come in and that’s all they were worried about and you have some people come in and they have no clue what you’re talking about.”

This is the first tax season, since the Affordable Care Act passed five years ago, where taxpayers may have to pay a penalty for not having health insurance or may have to pay back part of a subsidy to offset the cost of monthly insurance premiums.

Vega said the Affordable Care Act has caused some confusion for taxpayers this tax season.

“Some people aren’t aware that they were enrolled or weren’t enrolled or anything like that,” Vega said. “We’ve had quite a few of the older generation that weren’t aware of someone enrolling them into health care. We’ve had to go back in and make some changes. It’s been a little bit of a hassle.”

Medina said taxpayers should research the exemptions from the Affordable Care Act before paying the penalty. For 2014, the penalty is the greater of $95 or 1 percent of income.

“There’s so many exemptions out there that they’re not aware that they can take,” Medina said. “So before they pay the penalty make sure that they aren’t covered by one of those exemptions.”

denise.marquez@lubbockonline.com

• 766-8754

Follow Denise on Twitter @DMarquezAJ