Topics: amc, don draper, john slattery, Jon Hamm, Mad Men, matthew weiner, TV, Entertainment News

The final “Mad Men” season premieres April 5, and it’s been a long and exciting road to get to where we are today. Weiner sat on the script for five years before it got any attention, and few could have predicted what it would become: A cultural sensation that would turn AMC into a cable juggernaut and launch the little-known cast of Jon Hamm, Christina Hendricks, January Jones, Vincent Kartheiser, Elisabeth Moss and John Slattery into Hollywood megastardom. The Hollywood Reporter has a great oral history with Weiner and the cast and crew up today — it’s worth checking out in full, but here are some of the most interesting tidbits:

Weiner’s agents told him not to go to AMC:

He remembers them saying something to the effect of “You’re going to be coming off ‘The Sopranos.’ I know you love this project, but don’t go [to AMC]. It’s really low status, no money, and even if they do it, they’ve never made a show before, and you don’t want to be their first one.”

They didn’t all audition for the parts they got:

January Jones read for Peggy twice before Matthew Weiner suggested her for Betty — even though there were no scenes written for the character yet, and it was unclear how the part would develop. Meanwhile, John Slattery originally read for Don. “Matt Weiner claims I was in a bad mood the whole [pilot]. I had a couple of scenes, but I wasn’t as emotionally invested as some of the people because there wasn’t that much of Roger in evidence yet. Being a selfish actor, I didn’t necessarily see the full potential in the beginning.”

Spinoffs were discussed in the early days:

In early negotiations with AMC, the network asked for a spinoff, although Weiner wasn’t comfortable with committing to one. One idea was a contemporary spinoff, probably following Sally, another was a Peggy spinoff, while a third involved a character going off to L.A. (which, as you know, sort of ended up happening).

Betty wasn’t always going to be so involved:

Weiner received early pushback for his focus on Betty. As he put it: “They were really annoyed that I was paying attention to [Betty]. I wanted to branch the show out, and I felt that if Don was cheating on this woman, that was the story. They just wanted it to be a formula in the office.” (Jones, meanwhile, says she was shielded from all the “We don’t care about Betty” stuff).