This image released by AMC shows Bob Odenkirk in a scene from the final season of "Breaking Bad." (Ursula Coyote/AP Photo/AMC)

ALBUQUERQUE, N.M. — Walter White's lawyer is returning to Albuquerque.

AMC announced this week that the “Breaking Bad” spinoff, “Better Call Saul,” will premiere in November 2014, but no specific date has been released.

The series will follow sleazy attorney Saul Goodman, played by Bob Odenkirk, as he defends drug lords, criminals and those allegedly injured in minor traffic accidents.

The network has already created a website for the fiction lawyer, with Saul Goodman's signature videos boasting how he can get anyone out of legal trouble. The website includes “testimonies” from a drug dealer and prostitute who tell potential clients how he got them out of jail.

“Breaking Bad,” which ended last year and was filmed in Albuquerque, followed former high school teacher Walter White, played by Bryan Cranston. White produced methamphetamine with a former student, Jesse Pinkman, played by Aaron Paul.

Odenkirk played their attorney who came up with money laundering schemes from his Albuquerque shopping mall office.

AMC has given few details on the upcoming spinoff nor have show creators said how much of it would be filmed in Albuquerque.

But the fictional website shows “Breaking Bad” characters bragging in video on the streets of Albuquerque about how the convincing lawyer was able to pull them out of jail

Advertisement

For example, one such testimony comes from Badger, a methamphetamine dealer on “Breaking Bad” played by Matt Jones, who tells viewers that Goodman got him out of legal trouble after undercover officers arrested him for selling drugs — a reference to an episode of “Breaking Bad.”

“And then, bam! Saul Goodman shows up,” Jones says in the video. “He's like, get out of here cop, because of the Constitution.”

Within two days, Jones said he was back on the street and “burning one with my homies.”

The website also includes fictional advertisements from “Breaking Bad” businesses like Los Pollos Hermanos, a chicken restaurant used as a front for drug lord Gus Fring, played by Giancarlo Esposito.