WASHINGTON — As President Obama visits Dallas today and urges Gov. Perry to participate in the federal government’s Medicaid expansion, experts say that expansion may swell the rolls of another big federal program– food stamps.

Expanding Medicaid could increase the number of food stamp recipients by up to 5 percent, said Greg Mills, a fellow at the Urban Institute, a progressive think tank that researches poverty issues.

The Institute is conducting a study on the issue at the request of the Obama administration. While 5 percent seems like a small number, the program’s size means the increase would have a “substantial financial effect,” Mills told Politico.

Medicaid pays for health care for low income people. Because many states, including Texas, use Medicaid enrollment information as one way to determine eligibility for food aid, expanding the health care program could also increase the number of people receiving food stamps.

New recipients would be those who are already qualified for the food stamps but who are not yet enrolled in the program. The increase could mean millions in new government spending, experts say.

Perry has refused federal funds for the Medicaid expansion, a key part of Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Texas is one of 25 states not participating.

As many as 1.5 million uninsured Texans could be covered by Medicaid if the program expanded in the state. Some of these new enrollees who are not already receiving food stamps would presumably enroll in that program as well.

Linking different kinds of government aid such as Medicaid and food stamps is controversial. A Republican bill cutting $39 billion from food stamps would do so in part by reforming the practice. Congress is currently debating the legislation in conference committee as part of the farm bill.

Those pushing for reforms to the way federal aid is bundled, such as Rep. Randy Neugebauer of Lubbock, say current policies encourage dependence on government programs. Advocates of the practice, however, say it’s a more efficient way of delivering services people need.