CLEVELAND, Ohio-- Spending on charity care, research, education and other programs that benefit the community held steady last year at University Hospitals, at a total of $273 million.

According to numbers released by the health system Wednesday, UH provided a total of $127 million in uncompensated care to the region's neediest patients in the form of charity care and Medicaid shortfalls.

That total fell from $143 million the previous year due to a drop in Medicaid shortfalls, the unreimbursed amount spent to provide care for patients enrolled in the federal government's health insurance program for the poor.

That drop in spending was thanks in part to one of the early changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act, said Heidi Gartland, UH's vice president of government relations. That change-- reimbursement rates for primary care physicians providing care to Medicaid patients were increased to that allowed for Medicare patients-- was instituted January 1st of last year.

"It was a pretty significant benefiical policy change," she said, amounting to a roughly 28 percent increase in payment rates in Ohio.

Unfortunately, the rate increase will end in 2015 because there has been no move to continue it, primarily for political reasons, Gartland said.

"The Affordable Care Act only had it in for two years," she said, and the hope was that it would be such a popular increase that Congress would come back and continue it. "With the political changes we've seen there was really no willingness to go in and make any changes to the Affordable Care Act."

Gartland expects that UH's Medicaid shortfall spending will rebound in next year's report.

"We've known for decades that primary care physicians have been underpaid in a significant way, which as we know is one of the reasons that having insurance as a Medicaid patient doesn't always guarantee fabulous access to be able to get an appointment with a physician," she said. "That's going to continue to be one of the things that we're going to grapple with."

UH's free or charity care increased 11 percent last year to $59 million, up from $53 million in 2012 and $47.1 million in 2011.

"You take care of whoever comes to you, and as it relates to patients who have no other way to pay for their care, UH has always been there for its patients," Gartland said.

She expects that UH's spending on charity care may decrease next year due to higher enrollment in the healthcare marketplace, but overall spending on uncompensated care may not change all that much as Medicaid shortfalls increase.

"It'll be interesting to see what happens for 2014 and how [ACA enrollment] changes the landscape," Gartland said.

UH's total spending on community benefits of $273 million was flat from 2012, and up 2 percent from $267 million in 2011. The health system's net community benefit, calculated by subtracting the value of externally sponsored funding such as research grants, was $240 million. In May, the health system reported a 3.5 percent increase in revenue from operations, to $2.3 billion, from $2.2 billion in 2012.

Community benefit totals also include research ($58 million), staff education and training ($53 million) and other community outreach programs ($46 million).