Anthem Blue Cross and Memorial Care Medical Foundation have entered a new financial partnership to offer coordinated treatment for Orange County PPO patients with chronic diseases.

Through the so-called accountable care organization, Blue Cross will give Memorial Care additional compensation if patient costs drop while quality of care improves. In addition to that incentive, Memorial Care will receive additional funding to cover the costs of overseeing patient care with the help of nurses, social workers, nutritionists and pharmacists.

Accountable care organizations were first introduced by Medicare as part of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare. The Orange County partnership is the 14th that Blue Cross has created in California since 2011.

Participating patients will have their care overseen by a primary care physician, with help from a broader team. A nurse may call to remind patients about their medications. A pharmacist might discover that a patient’s ongoing medication is incompatible with anesthesia for an upcoming surgery and call for a change.

“The traditional fee-for-service model is paying for volume: The more things you do as a physician, the more you get paid,” said Dr. Mark Schafer, chief executive of Memorial Care Medical Foundation. “As in this model, we’re moving toward paying for value. We’re not paid so much on what we do but on our results. We have quality measures that we’re held accountable for.”

Roughly 13,000 Anthem PPO patients in Orange County and Long Beach who already see a Memorial Care doctor will be eligible to participate in the voluntary program. Schafer said recruitment will particularly focus on the more than 3,000 patients who have two or more chronic diseases such as cancer, heart failure, diabetes and asthma.

Economists have said the success of ACOs depends on effective communication, avoiding unnecessary or duplicate tests and a focus on prevention and monitoring those with chronic diseases.

Blue Cross’ ACO results elsewhere include a 35 percent increase in the number of mammograms performed and a 44 percent increase in the appropriate prescribing of antibiotics for bronchitis.

“We’ve seen some good results on the quality side,” said Dr. Michael Belman, medical director for Anthem Blue Cross. “As far as the savings, we’re relatively early on in the process. We have a couple now that are already showing evidence of a reduction off the trend.”

Other ACOs in Orange County focus on Medicare patients or HMO patients. Memorial Care and Blue Cross said the program is the first in Orange County for PPO patients, who are free to see specialists without a referral from their primary care doctor.

That freedom of choice has historically made communication and coordination more difficult than for HMO patients.

“In the general PPO world, care is often fragmented,” Belman said. “You see the physician of your choice and they may or may not be communicating. If they’re not, things fall through the cracks.”

If ACO members go to doctors or hospitals outside of Memorial Care, Belman said Blue Cross will inform Memorial.

Belman said the insurer’s other ACOs have already provided tangible benefits to patients.

In one case, after a cardiology patient missed a doctor’s appointment, a nurse attended the next meeting and determined that the patient lacked transportation for appointments and to pick up prescriptions. The nurse was able to coordinate community resources to cover the patient’s transportation.

Memorial Care Medical Foundation includes Memorial Care Medical Group and Greater Newport Physicians. Potential participants will be receiving letters from Memorial Care, and in some case phone calls, inviting them to participate.

Contact the writer: 714-796-3686 or cperkes@ocregister.com