By of the

The exact figure is not known, but a reasonable estimate has 158,000 people in Wisconsin gaining health insurance since January 2014 when coverage was expanded through the Affordable Care Act.

That's based on a recent analysis by the University of Wisconsin Population Health Institute.

The analysis shows the state's progress in expanding coverage, said Donna Friedsam, director of health policy programs at the agency.

However, it also is just a start.

"We have to remember we have more work to do," she said.

An estimated 450,000 adults in the state were uninsured in 2013.

Gov. Scott Walker set a goal of reducing the number of people in the state without health insurance by 224,580 — though the governor, an opponent of the Affordable Care Act, has said that he would call on Congress to repeal the law if elected president.

UW Population Health Institute analysis could provide only rough estimates on how many have gained insurance coverage. A better gauge will not be available until the U.S. Bureau of Census releases its estimates.

Those figures, too, will be estimates. The uninsured rate has always varied based on the specific survey.

That said, a survey released this month as part of the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index estimated the uninsured rate among adults in Wisconsin fell to 5.6% in the first half of this year from 11.7% in 2013.

The uninsured rate nationwide declined from 17.3% in 2013 to 11.7% in the first half of 2015, according to Gallop.

Separately, the National Center for Health Statistics estimated this month that 15 million have gained insurance coverage since 2013.

The UW Population Health Institute found that the uninsured rate in the state declined by 19% to 38%, depending on the survey or study.

The range stems from estimates on the percentage of people who previously were uninsured and who now are getting coverage through the marketplaces set up through the Affordable Care Act.

The estimate that 158,000 people gained coverage is based on:

■A net increase of 53,791 people covered by BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program.

■The estimate that 57% of the people who bought health insurance on the marketplaces previously were uninsured.

This much is known:

■ 183,155 people in Wisconsin signed up for coverage through a private health plan sold on the marketplaces and paid the first month's premium.

■ 90.7% of the people who have gotten coverage were eligible for subsidized coverage compared with 85% nationally.

■ The average federal subsidy was $317 per month, reducing the premium by an average of 72%.

■ 82% of Wisconsin residents who enrolled in health plans sold on the marketplace in 2014 re-enrolled for coverage in 2015.

"We have made significant progress in reaching people who need coverage, and this shows people want coverage," Friedsam said.

The Affordable Care Act was designed to expand coverage in two ways. People with incomes above 138% of the federal poverty level — $16,242 for an individual this year — were eligible for subsidies to buy private health plans sold on state or federal marketplaces. People with incomes below 138% of the federal poverty level would be covered by Medicaid programs.

Wisconsin took a different approach.

The Walker administration expanded eligibility for BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program, to include adults who did not have dependent children and who had incomes below 100% of the federal poverty level, or $11,770 for an individual. Adults with incomes above the threshold are eligible for subsidized health plans sold on the marketplaces set up through the law.

Under the state's approach:

■ 128,324 adults as of June had gained coverage through BadgerCare Plus. (The state previously covered some adults who did not have dependent children.)

■ 61,932 adults with incomes above the poverty threshold who previously were eligible for BadgerCare Plus lost coverage through the program.

In all, including the month-to-month fluctuations, enrollment in BadgerCare Plus increased by a total of 53,791 people from September 2013 to June 2015.

Most of the people who gained coverage through subsidized plans sold on the marketplace or through the expanded eligibility for BadgerCare Plus would not have health insurance otherwise, Friedsam said.

People will have better access to care as a result, Friedsam said, and doctors, hospitals and other health care providers will have less bad debt.

"That's all good and very important," she said.

People also will have more financial security.

"Financial security is a very important aspect of health insurance coverage," Friedsam said.

The analysis also shows that the state did relatively well in enrolling people in coverage.

Regional coalitions have worked with the Department of Health Services to help people sign up for coverage. The coalitions included health systems, community health centers, advocacy groups and insurance agents and brokers.

The uninsured rate in some rural counties — such as Juneau, Lincoln, Forest, Sawyer, and Dodge — nonetheless increased because the number of people who lost coverage through BadgerCare Plus were not offset by those buying subsidized plans on the marketplaces.

The UW Population Health Institute did its analysis partly to identify areas where more work needs to be done to enroll people in coverage. That work is already beginning.

The third enrollment period for health plans sold on the marketplaces will begin Nov. 1, and the regional coalitions have begun holding training sessions, said Joy Tapper, executive director of the Milwaukee Health Care Partnership, a coalition that includes the health systems in Milwaukee County.