HERE’S A LOOK AT THE DAY AHEAD

OBAMA ADMINISTRATION: President Barack Obama welcomes the Wounded Warrior Ride cyclers to the White House at 11:35 a.m. Vice President Joe Biden delivers remarks at 3:15 p.m. at the White House’s “Champions of Change” event recognizing 10 students for “their leadership in mobilizing others to change the culture around sexual assault and dating violence.” Mr. Biden holds a bilateral meeting with Prime Minister Edi Rama of Albania at 11:50 a.m. and a meeting with European Commission President Jean-Claude Juncker at 5:30 p.m. Secretary of State John Kerry delivers remarks at a Global Connect Initiative event during the IMF/World Bank meetings in Washington, D.C., at 11 a.m. and at Miami Dade Honors College’s medallion ceremony at the Miami Freedom Tower at 7 p.m.

ELECTION 2016: GOP front-runner Donald Trump holds a rally in Patchogue, N.Y., at 5 p.m., and attends the New York State Republican gala in New York City at 6:30 p.m. Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Sen. Ted Cruz will also attend the gala. Mr. Kasich holds a town-hall event in Jericho, N.Y., at noon. Democratic candidates Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders face off in a debate. CNN and NY1 will carry the debate from 9 p.m. to 11 p.m. Mr. Sanders also speaks at the National Action Network convention in New York City at 12:15 p.m.

ECONOMIC INDICATORS: The Labor Department releases weekly jobless claims and the consumer price index for March at 8:30 a.m.

CONGRESS: The Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committee examines U.S. biodefense at 10 a.m. The Senate meets at 9:30 a.m. to resume consideration of H.R.636, the legislative vehicle for Federal Aviation Administration reauthorization. The House meets at noon to consider H.R.3791, to raise the consolidated assets threshold under the small bank holding company policy statement, and H.R.3340, the “Financial Stability Oversight Council Reform Act.”

TOP STORIES FROM WSJ’S CAPITAL JOURNAL

SANDERS MAKES BOLD—AND RISKY—MOVES BEFORE NEW YORK PRIMARY: Sen. Bernie Sanders is taking some of the boldest and potentially riskiest steps of his campaign ahead of the crucial New York primary, hoping to raise his profile and undercut Hillary Clinton’s support among voters who are a key part of the Democratic electorate. After his debate with the Democratic presidential front-runner on Thursday, Mr. Sanders will leave the U.S. to appear at an academic conference at the Vatican devoted to themes of economic and social justice. Both issues are at the core of Mr. Sanders’s message. But some Democrats are baffled as to why he would drop off the campaign trail for two days before the April 19 primary, where more delegates are at stake than in any other state save California.

Nancy Kaszerman/Zuma Press

“My advice to Bernie would be: ‘Don’t go to the other side of the Hudson River. Stay here where you belong,’ “said Hank Sheinkopf, a New York-based Democratic strategist not aligned with either candidate. Leading up to the primary, Mr. Sanders has also escalated criticism of both Mrs. Clinton and her husband, former President Bill Clinton, who remains a popular figure in the party. Only 9% of Democrats said they viewed Mr. Clinton negatively in a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll in February. Peter Nicholas reports.

Plus: Seeking to press her case to Latino voters, Mrs. Clinton said Wednesday she would create a national Office of Immigrant Affairs that would coordinate government policy on the issue if she reaches the White House … Mrs. Clinton vowed Wednesday not to forget the African-American voters who are giving huge support to her campaign … Campaigning in New York City in advance of the Empire State’s April 19 primary, Mr. Sanders and Mrs. Clinton greeted striking Verizon Communications workers and rolled out key union endorsements, hoping to mobilize supporters in the organized labor movement.

LAURA MECKLER: RACIAL ISSUES TAKE CENTER STAGE IN DEMOCRATIC CONTEST

NEW YORK—The Democratic presidential contest is once again all about race, as Bernie Sanders tries anew to make inroads with African-American voters who have propelled rival Hillary Clinton to a strong lead in the delegate count. Read Laura Meckler’s full post in Washington Wire.

WSJ STORIES YOU SHOULDN’T MISS

TOM WILLIAMS/CQ-ROLL CALL/GETTY IMAGES

WHERE TRUMP RESONATES, HE IS EMBRACED DOWN-BALLOT: Two years ago, a little-known Republican town supervisor almost unseated Democratic Rep. Louise Slaughter, one of the lions of the New York congressional delegation, in the closest race she has faced since her first election to the House three decades ago. This year, the same GOP challenger, Mark Assini, thinks he may be able to win, even though Democratic turnout tends to be higher in a presidential-election year. His weapon, he believes, is Donald Trump, who has been drawing thousands of supporters across western New York, an economically distressed area that finds the GOP presidential front-runner’s brand of populism appealing. Some Republican leaders have been anxious, and some Democrats gleeful, about the down-ballot effects of a Trump nomination, given the real-estate developer’s high unfavorability ratings among many groups of voters. But in the white, working-class districts such as those that are typical in western New York, there is a different story, which even some Democrats acknowledge. Siobhan Hughes reports.

Plus: Mr. Trump hired Republican strategist Rick Wiley as national political director, signaling a continued effort by his presidential campaign to beef up a lean staff with more seasoned GOP operatives … Ted Cruz is ramping up his attacks against New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio ahead of next week’s New York primary.

REGULATORS PROPOSE BANNING THERANOS FOUNDER FOR AT LEAST TWO YEARS: Federal health regulators have proposed banning Theranos Inc. founder Elizabeth Holmes from the blood-testing business for at least two years after concluding that the company failed to fix what regulators have called major problems at its laboratory in California. In a letter dated March 18, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services said it plans to revoke the California lab’s federal license and prohibit its owners, including Ms. Holmes and Theranos’s president, Sunny Balwani, from owning or running any other lab for at least two years. That would include the company’s only other lab, located in Arizona. The two labs generate most of Theranos’s revenue and are at the core of its strategy to revolutionize the blood-testing industry with new technology, user-friendliness and quick results. John Carreyrou and Christopher Weaver report.

SENATORS PROPOSE ENCRYPTION RULES: Two key lawmakers Wednesday circulated a proposal that would require companies to unlock encrypted technology when served with a court order, a notable change in the law that could escalate the clash between Silicon Valley and Washington. Senate Intelligence Committee Chairman Richard Burr (R., N.C.) and the panel’s vice chairman, Sen. Dianne Feinstein (D., Calif.), are seeking input on proposed legislation that attempts to address one of the thorniest security issues vexing policy makers—how to deal with the use of technology that cannot be read for law enforcement or national security purposes. The 10-page “discussion draft” would require firms, when served with a court order, to provide “such information or data” or “provide technical assistance as is necessary to obtain such information or data” when the government is seeking to obtain encrypted material. Damian Paletta reports.

Plus: What might make Congress revamp the U.S. tax code? Try picking a date – Dec. 31, 2019 — when the code turns into a pumpkin, says Rep. Bob Goodlatte (R., Va.) … The White House campaign to persuade Senate Republicans to go through the process of confirming Supreme Court nominee Merrick Garland this year isn’t changing any minds … A furious lobbying battle over bipartisan legislation to tackle Puerto Rico’s debt crisis produced an odd scene at a congressional hearing Wednesday when one of the bill’s leading critics was a no-show.

ALSO IN THE NEWS

U.S. companies such as Twitter, Facebook and YouTube, joined by online hackers and similarly minded groups, have for months aggressively battled the spread of Islamic State material online. Accounts and posts that would have stayed alive for weeks now sometimes last as little as a few hours. Islamic State supporters, particularly on Twitter, have responded to the crackdown by opening accounts almost as quickly as gatekeepers delete them.

Russian warplanes buzzed a U.S. Navy destroyer in the Baltic Sea this week, a sign of potentially rising tensions.

The 26-state challenge to the Obama administration’s immigration policy, scheduled for Supreme Court argument next Monday comes wrapped in rhetoric about the separation of powers and brims with implications for the November elections.

New York City’s biggest public employee pension fund is poised to vote Thursday to begin pulling its investments from hedge funds, the latest move by a large pension plan to scrap an investment path that once promised big returns.

Coal’s slow collapse pushed the largest U.S. miner to declare bankruptcy Wednesday, marking the end of an era for big publicly traded companies that have fueled American industry for more than a century.

Verizon was hit by a strike by nearly 40,000 union employees after 10 months of tense contract talks.

The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Wednesday that enough evidence has accumulated for it to conclude that the Zika virus can cause birth defects in the infants of women who are infected during pregnancy.

J.P. Morgan Chase delivered a reassuring report on the state of U.S. consumers and corporations Wednesday, raising hopes that strength in the economy will help banks offset weakness in their Wall Street trading businesses. Citigroup was the only bank whose “living will” plan wasn’t rejected by either the Fed or the FDIC, while Wells Fargo drew a rebuke.

Islamic State identified what it said were the main organizers and the bomb maker behind the attacks in Paris and Brussels and put out a hit list for more than a dozen prominent moderate Muslims in the West.

Talks aimed at ending Syria’s five-year war resumed in Geneva, as the government in Damascus held parliamentary elections that the opposition and Western governments said were illegitimate and undermined the negotiations.

As North Korea faces new international sanctions in response to its nuclear test and long-range rocket launch this year, its leadership is also grappling with the growing spread of potentially destabilizing information about life beyond its borders and its government.

SEIB VIDEO: MAPPING PAUL RYAN’S PATH FORWARD

House Speaker Paul Ryan has said he won’t seek the presidency. WSJ’s Jerry Seib explains what the future holds for his political ambitions.

WHAT WE’RE READING AROUND THE WEB

Writing in Huffington Post, Bill Schneider says one of Hillary Clinton’s problems is that “she has become the candidate of the status quo. A lot of voters, including a lot of Democratic voters, are not satisfied with the status quo. In this month’s McClatchy-Marist poll, two thirds of Americans — and half of Democrats — say things in the country are going in the wrong direction.”

Nate Silver of 538 handicaps Donald Trump’s chances of getting enough delegates to win the Republican nomination before the party’s convention, and concludes his chances turn on the outcome of California’s award-by-congressional-district primary.

National Journal’s Josh Kraushaar says Hillary Clinton will have a problem in November: “She’s be­ing soundly re­jec­ted by mil­len­ni­als, a core ele­ment of Barack Obama’s co­ali­tion, while gen­er­at­ing only mid­dling en­thu­si­asm from His­pan­ics and Afric­an-Amer­ic­ans.”

In the WSJ’s Think Tank, Drew Altman writes that House Speaker Paul Ryan’s decision not to accept the Republican Party’s presidential nomination and stay in the House may have an impact in health-care policy: “The next big debate might not be about Republican proposals to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act. It might focus more on the future of the two largest public health-care programs, Medicare and Medicaid.”

MILESTONE

$425 billion: Total spending on prescription drugs in the U.S. increased 12.2% to nearly $425 billion in 2015.

FEEDBACK: The Capital Journal Daybreak newsletter is The Wall Street Journal’s morning rundown of the biggest news stories and exclusive features from Washington on politics, policy, financial regulation, defense and more.

Send your tips, feedback and suggestions for recommended reading to editor Kate Milani at kate.milani@wsj.com.