JOLIET, Ill. — When the green flag drops on the opening round of the NASCAR playoffs, Jamie McMurray and Paul Menard will be racing for a Chase for the Sprint Cup championship for the first time in their careers.

Unlike the other 14 drivers in the Chase, they have no experience in racing for the title. They don’t know which strategies will get them through to the second round and haven’t seen firsthand how the intensity will pick up starting Sunday at Chicagoland Speedway.

It may not be the worst thing.

“I’ve never been in this position before, so I’m just taking it like I take every week,” said Menard. “I feel good about how we’re approaching it. We’re just going to put our heads down and go as far in this deal as we can.”

The elimination format was implemented last year, and drivers used varying approaches to navigate their way through the three rounds that lead to the finale at Homestead-Miami Speedway. A win in any of the first three segments guarantees a driver a spot in the next round; four drivers are eliminated every three races.

Consistency can push a driver into the final round, as Ryan Newman proved last year by using solid finishes in a winless season to have a shot at the title.

Both McMurray and Menard are winless this year, and both used consistency to make it into the 16-driver field. McMurray thinks that will be good enough to get him out of the first round, which is made up of Chicago, New Hampshire and Dover.

“When I look at our strategy going in, we would love to win the first round. But mostly, we don’t want a bad race,” McMurray said. “I don’t know if anyone selected (Newman) for getting to the final round. If we can do what he did, getting to Homestead would be a realistic goal.”

McMurray and Menard have to pick up their performance, though, to make it through the first three weeks.

McMurray has just two top-five finishes this year, has led only 14 laps and only has seven top-10 finishes. Menard also has two top-five finishes, but only four top-10s and has led just one lap. His average finish is 16.7 through the first 26 races.