Three generations of the Smith family enjoy the late Karol Smith's photographs at The Royal Gorge Regional Museum & History Center's 'In Focus' exhibit reception Friday. ( Christy Steadman / Daily Record )

Karol Smith (Courtesy of Larry Smith)

According to his family, the late Karol Smith's most famous work was when he was a film commissioner, but his grandson said the only movie he got personal credit for was the 1991 Western film, "Conagher."

The Royal Gorge Regional Museum & History Center hosted their "In Focus" reception Friday night, and three generations of Smiths were able to attend to see their relative's work as one of the featured local photographers the museum is highlighting.

According to museum archivist/curator Lisa Studts, Karol Smith learned photography during his time in WWII. She said he has many photos in the national archives, and Larry Smith, Karol's son, said he has a picture, untitled but dubbed, "Lone soldier with flag," in The Museum of Fine Arts in Houston from his time in the war.

Locally, Studts said Karol's topics included everything from local events, such as the Blossom festivals and parades to Buckskin Joe.

"He'd get out and hang on the rocks to take pictures of the Gorge," said Larry. "It'd scare me to death."

Studts said Karol heavily "promoted this area for movie production." She said he would capture still photos and submit them to film companies for ideas "to come and shoot movies."

"He was the first ever film commissioner," Larry said. "He worked to promote the state. Film companies didn't leave a mess, but left a lot of money."

According to the museum's archives, Karol promoted the local area for "Women of San Quentin," "Scarecrow" (1973), "Blood on the Mountain," plus hundreds of others for the state of Colorado, including a special for the legendary singer/songwriter Bob Dylan.

Advertisement

Karol's grandson, Shaun, who brought his wife, Tammy, and their two children, Haylee, 11, and David, 13, said he used to go "on long trips with him to take pictures."

"We used to go everywhere!" he said. "I don't think there's a part in Colorado I haven't been to."

Larry said Karol also worked as a freelance photographer for the Daily Record and The Denver Post "for a long time."

Lone soldier with flag. (/ courtesy of Larry Smith)

"He knew everybody," he said, and added when he was a young boy, sitting in his father's office once, Karol referred to Steven Spielberg on a first-name-basis during a phone conversation.

Studts said the museum has a "huge collection" of Karol's work — more than 8,500 negatives that have been scanned and digitized — but they also have information on other local photographers. She said they decided to "use this opportunity to also highlight others."

Studts said there are 15 or 16 photographers featured, and Nard Claar, of Colorado Springs, loaned his father's classic camera collection to the museum for display purposes.

Kris and Barbara Dittmar also have a personal collection of cameras on display that the public is encouraged to handle and play with. The oldest in his collection dates 1946, and Dittmar said they have older cameras at home, but they are "too fragile to display."

The reception was one night only, but the "In Focus" exhibit will be at the museum for "at least a year," Studts said.

Entry to the museum is free and open to the public. Business hours are 10 a.m. to 4 p.m. Wednesday to Saturday.