Topics: Antonin Scalia, judicial activism, judicial branch, Judiciary, libertarians, Rand Paul, Roe v. Wade, Segregation, Supreme Court, The Right, Politics News

During the 1960s it was an article of faith on the right that the Supreme Court was out of control. Opinions going back to segregation in the 1950s and subsequent federal involvement in enforcing those rulings had convinced staunch segregationists that the court was a menace to society and they breathed new life into the old confederate rationalization for the civil war: States’ Rights. If you happened to drive through the southern states during that period you’d commonly come upon signs like this one:

The campaign to impeach the Chief Justice was originally proposed by the John Birch Society which believed that laws and constitutional interpretations promoting racial equality were a Communist plot and therefore the judges who enabled it were Communist sympathizers. Indeed, the first calls for Justice Warren’s impeachment said that explicitly:

As time went on and the rights revolution expanded in the 1970s, the right wing loathing for the Supreme Court reached a fever pitch. As this article by Randall Balmer explained, once mainstream society began to get queasy about unabashed racism, the conservative movement came upon a new pitch to their followers: abortion. In 1979, six years after Roe vs Wade, they amped up their criticism of the Supreme Court on this new basis, ushering in 30 more years of shrill denunciations of “judicial activism.”

The term became a code word for “liberal” in political campaigns as Republicans (and some of the old conservative lions of the Democratic Party before they all retired out) were called upon to make promises that they would not nominate or approve of any judicial activists for the federal bench. Politicians like President George Bush the First made speeches fulminating about it:

“The judges ought not to take the place of the legislative branch of government …I believe in strict constructionists.”

“Strict constructionist” was held to be the preferred philosophy on the right which basically limits a judge’s discretion to interpret the law in any way that it has not been interpreted before. (The sub-category of “originalist”, flamboyantly represented by Justice Antonin Scalia, says judges must inhabit the minds of the 18th century framers and interpret the laws as they would have in their own time, which is truly daft.) But in the mouth of a late 20th century Republican politician, “strict constructionist” and “judicial activist” were dog-whistles to the racist base which first came to loathe the Supreme Court for ruling that little African American children deserved to go to the same school as any other American and set in motion a series of legal challenges that ended the centuries old system of Jim Crow.

In more recent years it was just a rallying cry for general loathing of the courts which conservatives believed were constantly forcing white people to do things they didn’t want to do. The Christian Right was particularly active politically and their long-standing gripes about prayer in school and abortion were particularly motivating.

Back in 2002, Phyllis Schlafly’s Eagle Forum sent out this warning declaring that the judicial activism was “the biggest issue of the 2002 election.” Think about that. It was one year after 9/11 and Schlafly didn’t miss a beat. By 2005, at the height of their power controlling both houses of congress and the White House, conservative legal scholars held a meeting in Washington at which Tom Delay, then the powerful House majority whip declared:

“The sanctity of the Constitution is under assault from many different directions. “The branch of government charged with maintaining the sanctity of the Constitution no longer feels bound by the constraints of that same Constitution. The courts today recognize no limits on their authority. They legislate with reckless abandon. They overturn the will of the people as expressed through their legislative representatives. What we’re left with is an imperial judiciary that knows no bounds to its power or its tenure. This is a recipe for tyranny!”

He then brought the crowd full circle to be met with energetic applause from the room full of conservative lawyers:

“America’s founders believed that impeachment could be an effective way to keep the judiciary within its proper bounds. When judges exercise power not delegated to them by the Constitution, I think impeachment is a very proper tool.”