WASHINGTON, D.C. -- The chairman of the Fulton Republican Committee in Oswego County said Thursday he's dropping his support for U.S. Rep. John Katko because the freshman congressman has abandoned Tea Party and conservative supporters.

What pushed party chairman Marc Holliday to reach that conclusion?

Holliday cites the early voting patterns of Katko, R-Camillus, who has demonstrated an independent streak and willingness to depart from the party line.

Here's a look at three votes that Holliday views as evidence of Katko abandoning his base:

Rolling back President Obama's immigration policies

After only two weeks in office, Katko broke ranks with House Republicans on Jan. 14 and voted against a GOP amendment to block Obama's executive actions on immigration.

Katko was among 26 Republicans to vote against the amendment, which narrowly passed 218-209. All 183 Democrats voted to oppose the measures with the 26 Republicans.

Katko said he disagreed with the president's unilateral action to stop deporting illegal immigrants brought into the United States as young children. But he said, "I also disagree with members of my party who wish to retroactively punish those who have already come forward under the protection granted by the president."

Repealing Obamacare

Katko stood out from his GOP colleagues on Feb. 3 when he was among only three House Republicans who refused to support a bill to repeal the Affordable Care Act. The bill passed 239-186.

Katko said he split with Republicans on the vote in order to fulfill his campaign promise to repeal the healthcare law only if the GOP offered a viable alternative.

Opposing the Republican budget plan

Katko was among 17 Republicans on Wednesday night to vote against the party's budget plan for fiscal 2016. The legislation passed 228-199.

Katko said the GOP budget would be bad for New York families, and shift costs for Medicaid and other programs to the states. The congressman said he does not want to add a burden on New York taxpayers, while doing little to address long-term federal spending.

Contact Mark Weiner anytime: Email | Twitter | Facebook | 571-970-3751