Discount grocery store under construction in north Loveland

An architectural rendering shows what the front of the new Esh's Discount Groceries in north Loveland will look like when complete in the spring. The store at 375 W. 71st St. is just west of Serious Texas Bar-B-Q. ( Courtesy of Hauser Architects / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Reuben Esh, owner of Esh's Discount Groceries, poses Wednesday for a portrait at the store's new location at 375 W. 71st St. in north Loveland. Esh hopes to open in the spring of 2016. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Reuben Esh says spending $2.5 million on a new Loveland building for his discount grocery store won't hurt his ability to offer rock-bottom prices.

After almost 14 years in business in a cramped store just west of Loveland, Esh's Discount Groceries will move next spring into a 33,000-square-foot building with retail, warehouse and office space.

Site-preparation work started in August or September, Esh said, and the walls of the steel building at 375 W. 71st St. started going up a couple of weeks ago. Depending on the weather, he estimated that he could open in May.

Customers drawn by grocery prices at least 50 percent lower than retail learned to love the quirks of the store at 4221 W. Eisenhower Blvd., maneuvering for limited parking spaces, rubbing elbows with neighbors in narrow aisles and waiting in long checkout lines.

"My goal is to have the No. 1 customer service in Loveland ... and we feel limited right now with what we have over there," Esh said. "It's so crowded, and there has been some frustration with the long lines and parking."

Esh, who also has discount markets in Dacono and Evans, said he eventually wants to consolidate all his stores into the new Loveland location. Lease rates are high and interest rates are low, he said, so owning his building could save him money.

"We're looking forward to continuing our low prices and maybe even cutting them more," he said.

But even after he opens the new store in north Loveland, he said he might keep the west-Loveland location open to see how sales go there. His father, John Esh, owns the building.

Advertisement

The new building will have almost 15,000 square feet each of warehouse and retail space, enabling Esh to triple his sales space and possibly move out of a leased warehouse in east Loveland.

Features of the new store will include:

• A larger deli section, with sandwiches for sale.

• More cooler and freezer space.

• Six or more cash registers, as opposed to three now.

• 115 parking spaces, rather than 40 now.

• Three loading docks.

Ward Construction employee Kenny Tollefson removes snow so he can backfill a wall at the future site of Esh's Discount Groceries on Wednesday. (Trevor L. Davis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

• Five to seven offices on-site. Esh said the store now has an office that doubles as a break room, and he also has offices at the warehouse and at his home.

• Longer hours, possibly 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. Monday through Saturday.

Esh's Discount Groceries keeps its prices down by selling food that is nearing its expiration date, products that didn't sell at other stores and items that might have been in a carton or crate that was damaged.

"Some of our products will even be outdated, but we sort through everything and make sure it's healthy to eat," said Esh, who added that it's legal to sell food past its expiration date — except baby food.

Esh said some of his loyal customers travel great distances — from Cheyenne, Granby and Steamboat Springs, as well as Fort Collins and Windsor.

"The reason I chose this location (at Loveland's northern border) is because we're between Fort Collins and Loveland," he said. "I think this will really draw the Fort Collins crowd."

The current store's location outside Loveland city limits means that customers aren't paying the city sales tax. Figuring the city would want to help Esh build in town so it could capture that revenue, he requested a deferment of $200,000 in city fees, to be paid back through the collection of sales taxes over 18 months.

In the midst of the controversy over a similar arrangement granting the Sprouts developers a $2.2 million incentive, the City Council said no. Instead, Esh's was given up to $200,000 in fee deferments that he has to pay back himself over five years, plus a waiver of up to $50,000 in building material use taxes.

"I am thankful for what the city did," Esh said, emphasizing that he has no hard feelings.

"I'm just happy to be here," he said. "We're excited about the location, big time."

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.