Buy Photo Miles Conner, 5, passes a miniature marshmallow to Zephyr Sohi, 5, during the annual Clarksville Parks Department Gobbler Games at Clarksville Middle School on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey, special to The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Wielding a small frozen turkey, Kirsten Monroe, 9, found her mark and took careful aim before stepping out and hurling the icy missile across the floor where it collided with 10 plastic bowling pins.

Turkey Bowling was just one of the competitions at the Gobbler Games, the Clarksville Parks Department’s annual event held Saturday at Clarksville Middle School.

As some kids worked on their turkey tossing skills, others made their wobbly way across the floor with a balloon clenched between their knees and an egg balanced on a spoon in their hand attempting to earn the fastest time.

Five seasonally-themed competitions were held by age group before the final mass mini-marshmallow relay in which everyone formed two lines and raced to transfer the marshmallows from one end of the line to the other using plastic spoons.

“It’s a lot of fun for the kids,” said Amanda Monroe of Jeffersonville. She brought her daughter, Kirsten, and son, Caden, 6, for the first time. “I’d do the turkey bowling. It looks like a lot of fun.”

More than 50 kids competed in the annual Gobbler Games, all vying for one of the 10 large frozen turkeys awarded as prizes. One bird went to the winner in each age group, from ages 5 through 12, and a random drawing awarded two.

“It’s a really popular event,” said Ken Conklin, director of marketing and programs for the parks department. “This is our biggest turnout yet.”

The turkeys each year are purchased by the Optimist Club of Clarksville, which also provided some volunteers to run the games for the event.

Beverly Knight brought her grandchildren, Nicholas Gaither, 7, Ashwin Sohi, 7, and Zephyr Sohi, 5. “We’ve been coming to parks department activities all year,” she said. “You couldn’t ask for a better program. That people that run it are just fabulous.”

For more information on upcoming parks department events, including Saturday children’s activities starting in January, visit www.clarksvilleparks.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1HeKVnk