For the first time, the Obama administration has deployed an important new power it has under the Affordable Care Act: proposing to pay doctors and hospitals based on the quality of care they provide, regardless of whether they want to be paid that way.

It introduced two such programs this week. One would require all hospitals in 75 metropolitan areas to accept a flat fee for the costs associated with a hip or knee replacement — including the costs of surgery, medications, the joint implant and rehabilitation. And if the quality of the care is not judged to be good, Medicare will take back some of the money it paid. Another program would increase or decrease payments to home health agencies in nine states, depending on how they perform on certain quality measurements.

The Department of Health and Human Services always had the authority to change the amounts it paid for certain services, but before Obamacare, it needed Congress to pass legislation to change the way it paid for them. The agency is asking for public comment on the proposals.

These changes will allow the administration to reshape the Medicare program. The new payment rules, while guided by existing evidence, are still experimental — and are likely to anger Obamacare critics and members of Congress who would prefer to see major changes to Medicare enacted through legislation.

The proposal “does raise the question of how much legislative authority can be ceded,” Joseph Antos, a scholar at the conservative think tank the American Enterprise Institute, said in an email.

Photo

There will most likely be other such programs activated before President Obama leaves office. The administration has pledged that a majority of medical payments will include some measure of “value” by 2018.

The Affordable Care Act set up a new office called the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation. Its mandate was to test new ways of paying for medical care that would improve quality and lower costs. Since the health care law passed, the innovation center has begun dozens of voluntary pilot programs, encouraging interested medical providers to test the new payment types.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But the law also said that if it finds programs that the Medicare actuary said passed those tests, it could make the changes a permanent part of how Medicare pays for care.

Medicare has been testing similar programs for the last few years among hospitals and home health agencies that chose to sign up. What’s new about these proposed programs is that providers can’t choose whether to participate. Every hospital in the selected markets, which include New York and Miami, will be paid the new way for knee and hip replacements if the surgery proposal is finalized. Every home health agency in the nine selected states will be paid the new way for its services if that proposal goes into effect.

Joshua Seidman, a senior vice president at the consulting firm Avalere Health, said he’s been waiting for the administration to start using its power to reshape how Medicare pays doctors, hospitals and other medical services.

“How are they going to expand these programs and scale them? That’s the question now,” he said. “It’s obviously got huge potential to shape how future payment is made.”