Click To View Gallery

Critical Access Hospitals (CAHs) provide essential medical services to rural communities that otherwise would have little or no access to care. They’re part of a special class of Medicare hospital that, according to a 1997 law, must be at least 35 miles from any other hospital (or 15 miles in mountainous terrain), have 25 or fewer beds, offer a maximum stay of 96 hours, and have a 24-hour emergency room.

Without the program’s cost-based reimbursements, many of these hospitals wouldn’t be able to sustain operations. They’re simply too remote, and their populations too small, to function with standard Medicaid and Medicare reimbursements. They don’t benefit from the economies of scale that their urban counterparts do, their patient counts are lower, and their operational costs are higher by proportion.

To make matters worse, recent changes in healthcare have hit CAHs hard, creating pressure to reduce inpatient stays and drive patients toward less costly (and less profitable) outpatient care. The decision by 23 states not to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act has strained the budgets of small hospitals in those states.

Furthermore, with the 2013 recommendation by the Office of the Inspector General that program requirements for CAHs be tightened, the designation that helps ensure the survival of these hospitals is under threat. Some experts now predict that 20 percent of these hospitals will close by the year 2020.

Because of these tough economic realities, it’s crucial that CAHs improve their efficiency and find better ways to serve their communities. Now more than ever, the financial health of CAHs and the health of the populations they serve depend on facility design that maximizes operational efficiency and reins in costs.



Maximizing staff efficiency with smart adjacencies

Payroll typically accounts for 50 percent or more of hospital budgets, so efficient use of staff time is a critical component of a CAH’s finances. Efficiency can be improved through designs that create smart adjacencies and shared nurses’ stations, which allow nurses to oversee multiple departments during less busy times.

“One reason we designed our new facility the way we did is to optimize staffing,” says Julie Slagle, head of nursing at Sidney Regional Medical Center in Sidney, Neb.

Sidney is a town of 7,000 in the Nebraska panhandle, about three hours from Denver. A 25-bed replacement hospital is currently under construction there, the design of which will greatly increase efficiency and quality of care.

“The facility we’re in now is older and over the years has had a lot of departments added onto it. What ends up happening is, it becomes a lot of long hallways, a lot of walking space, and a lot of inefficiencies,” Slagle says.

“Let’s say I’m a nurse. A patient is being admitted, and I need to take him for an X-ray, labs, and then to his room. Right now, I’m going to have to walk down two hallways to get to admissions, get the patient, take the elevator down a floor, walk down the hallway to the lab, then back to the elevator, go up, and then walk directly back to the area above the lab, which is radiology, for an X-ray. Then it’s another 150 feet down a hallway to his room.”

The new design for Sidney places the nurses’ station at a critical node in the hospital’s circulation, giving nurses quick access to the inpatient, emergency, surgery, lab, pharmacy, radiology, and labor and delivery departments. “Everything’s right there,” Slagle says.

This increased efficiency is allowing Sidney to grow. “We’re actually not cutting [full-time equivalents]. At the same time that we’re building this facility for efficiencies, we’re also building staff,” she says. “As our services grow, our utilization of services grows.”

In the next year, Sidney will add two physicians, two physician assistants, and a full-time surgeon.

And because of how the design anticipates growth, any future expansions to Sidney will be completed without adding more hallways.