For those of you calling for Bob Stoops to be replaced as head coach of the University of Oklahoma, then it’s really time for you to sit back and take a deep breath. And then go ahead and take another deep breath, because overreactions do nothing but cause trouble.

After the Sooners’ Red River Rivalry loss to Texas on Saturday, our News 9 social media accounts were flooded with steaming hot OU fans that were in shock after the debacle they’d just witnessed.

“Bob Stoops once again can't get the job done against a lesser team. Welcome to another 3 to 4 loss season” said William Marsh on the comment section of the post-game recap.

Marsh was just one of many frustrated fans. Michael F Kirk got straight to the point in his assessment of the OU loss.

“Stoops reign has been over for years, time for a new head coach. This is a blow out noone was expecting.. First time i didnt bet on the game and thank god i didnt.”

It’s important to remember these comments came immediately after the OU loss, and the wounds were still fresh, but firing Stoops definitely isn’t the fix to Oklahoma’s current problem.

The Sooners were beat on Saturday because they were outplayed, but let me remind you that Bob Stoops didn’t play a single snap. I know the coach is responsible for getting his guys ready to play, but one could argue that if Alex Ross doesn’t fumble a first quarter kick return, than the entire trajectory of the game could’ve been different. And if you’re pointing the finger at Stoops, then you should be shining a spotlight at the OU offensive line.

No team I ever played on needed coaches to get us fired up to play Texas. At some point the responsibility lies w/in the team & leaders. #OU — Dean Blevins (@DeanBlevins) October 12, 2015

We could talk “what ifs” all day, so let’s go ahead and look at the facts.

Stoops is the winningest coach in Oklahoma history with a 172-45 overall record, and has won more games in his first 16 years than any other coach at the collegiate level. He’s led OU to the second highest winning percentage of any Power Five program since 1999.

“Big Game Bob” has won eight Big 12 championships, more than twice as many as any other school, and he didn’t get that nickname for nothing. Stoops has led OU to more wins against AP Top 25 teams than any other Big 12 team over the last five years (15-11). Oh, and did I mention he’s talked the talk and walked the walk against SEC opponents?

Also, elite coaches come at a premium these days, and they definitely don’t grow on trees. Legendary programs such as USC, Texas, Nebraska and Florida have had trouble finding a coach that can set the ship straight and bring their program back to prominence.

It’s okay to be upset about a loss, especially to a rival, but it’s important to sit back and look at the big picture before fans overreact and wish for something that could hurt the program even more.