Moody's latest negative analysis about the effects of the Obamacare rollout comes three weeks after the company changed its outlook for health insurers from "stable" to "negative." The agency said ongoing implementation of the Affordable Care Act provisions was continuing to create uncertainty in the industry.

"Everything we've seen and heard so far continues our negative outlook," Zaharuk told CNBC in an interview Thursday. "There's nothing to contradict what came out before."

(Read more: Obamacare delay: Small employers get reprieve)

Last week, the Obama administration proposed tougher reviews for insurers looking to sell Obamacare plans on HealthCare.gov, the federally run insurance exchange that offers coverage in 36 states.

Those reviews would compel insurers to list the medical providers in their plans' networks, with the implication being that federal regulators could reject the plans for not having enough providers, or the right mix of providers in the plans.

The majority of Obamacare policies are so-called narrow network plans, containing fewer providers on average than coverage plans sold to employees of large companies or outside the Obamacare exchanges. The narrower networks are credited with holding down premium costs, but have been criticized for limiting provider choices to consumers.

"In our view, forcing insurers to expand their networks will result in higher premiums that will further discourage enrollment by the younger and healthier population," Zaharuk wrote in Moody's analysis. "If the trend were to continue, these products would eventually become unsustainable."

Robert Zirkelbach, a spokesman for the industry lobbying group America's Health Insurance Plans, said, "It is important to ensure patients can continue to benefit from the high-value provider networks health plans have established, which are helping to improve quality and mitigate cost increases for consumers as the new health care reforms are taking effect."

(Read more: Doctors fear 'crushing' costs from code switch)



Moody's in December had said the decision by the administration to allow people covered by non-ACA-compliant plans to keep them through the end of 2014 would have "a negative effect on the risk profile of the exchange pool as healthier, younger members took advantage of this waiver."

That's because those younger adults may have otherwise bought coverage in Obamacare plans sold on the exchanges, which would have made those plans' risk pools more stable, and less likely to lose money for insurers compelled to pay out more in benefits than they took in in premiums.