This week, the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee Chairman Darrell Issa apologized to Rep. Elijah Cummings, his committee’s ranking Democratic member, for cutting off his microphone at the end of a hearing.

The abrupt microphone shutdown drew predictable news coverage, as did the call from the Congressional Black Caucus for Issa’s removal from the Oversight Committee.

Issa is not going to anywhere and everyone knows that. But how long will Issa continue to investigate the IRS? Or Benghazi? Or Fast and Furious?

The best guess is that the expiration date is December at the earliest (after the 2014 mid-terms) and perhaps well into the 2016 election cycle.

For argument’s sake, let’s assume the legitimacy of the probes. Fact-finding takes time, but Issa has given no indication that he’s ready to move on or has found anything that hasn’t been previously reported. The longer these “investigations” linger and Issa comes back with very little, Republicans run the risk of drowning out their other messages about economy, tax reform or the even the impact of the Affordable Care Act. At least those things are worth debating.

Our editorial board has just come off grueling weeks of candidate interviews. My eyes glazed over when politicians running for offices that aren’t anywhere near the Congress launched into an IRS, Benghazi, or Fast and Furious response to unrelated questions. But I know where they found the playbook for those responses.

I can accept a Congress that stalemates over policy, or in the belief that something wrong has occurred, holds hearings in a reasonable time frame and then moves on. Either you have the goods or you don’t. And when you don’t you have to admit it. Anything less is an abuse of authority and a waste of taxpayer dollars.

Issa continues to make a mockery of the investigatory process with a large dose of disrespect. When a ranking congressman disrespects another by shutting down a mike, one has to ask just how much more poison can be dropped into the well?

These probes continue to rally the most conservative wings of the GOP, but to what practical end? If elections are won in the middle, then Issa is contributing nothing toward attracting middle-ground voters, including at least some minority voters. And, if local candidates mimic the dysfunction of Issa’s probes, then states and districts that could trend purple will trend purple if the Democratic candidate can walk and chew gum at the same time.



Follow @JimMitchell18