“The CDPHP Service Center in Latham is the latest in a series of moves that will bring us one step closer to the community,” said Dr. John Bennett, president and CEO, CDPHP.

CDPHP is pleased to announce the opening of the all new CDPHP Service Center – Latham, a health plan resource center conveniently located inside the Capital Region Health Park at 711 Troy-Schenectady Road.

The Center, which is open Monday-Friday from 9 am to 5 pm, provides on-site answers to health care questions and assistance navigating the Affordable Care Act and the NY State of Health website.

Visitors can meet face-to-face with a CDPHP representative, order new ID cards, ask questions about their benefits, find a doctor, schedule an appointment, and purchase health care coverage.

“As we enter a new era in health care reform, it is essential to provide the community with access to the tools, information, and resources they need to make the most informed health care decisions. The CDPHP Service Center in Latham is the latest in a series of moves that will bring us one step closer to the community,” said Dr. John Bennett, president and CEO, CDPHP.

For added convenience, the Center will offer free Internet access to visitors who would like to view their CDPHP benefits and complete a personal health assessment (PHA).

“Community Care Physicians is happy to have CDPHP’s Service Center in our Latham location for the added convenience of our patients. Our patients now have direct access to insurance information and provider groups in the same location which further simplifies health issues. We look forward to increased collaboration between insurance services and healthcare delivery systems,” said Dr. Shirish Parikh, Chairman, CEO, Founder of Community Care Physicians, P.C., the largest independent multispecialty medical group in the Capital Region.

CDPHP has a long history of working closely with local health care providers to support the community’s health and wellness needs. The health plan recently partnered with Community Care Physicians to offer free or low-cost access to state-of-the-art fitness centers within three Community Care practices. In October 2013, CDPHP collaborated with Capital District YMCA and Hannaford Supermarkets to open the Healthy Living Center, an innovative health and wellness facility conveniently located inside the Hannaford Supermarket on Central Avenue in Albany, NY.

About CDPHP®

Established in 1984, CDPHP is a physician-founded, member-focused and community-based not-for-profit health plan that offers high-quality affordable health insurance plans to members in 24 counties throughout New York. CDPHP is also on Facebook, Twitter, LinkedIn and Pinterest.