Numerous preventive services are covered at low or no cost under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), but is birth control free with Obamacare?

In most cases, birth control pills and devices are free, along with several other services exclusively for women. The ACA made many screenings and preventive services available with no cost-sharing, meaning that they’re free, as long as you pay your monthly health insurance premiums. But don’t assume everything is automatically covered. Read on to learn what you should investigate before going in for care and prescriptions.

Which birth control is covered under Obamacare?

Birth control methods approved by the Food and Drug Administration are largely covered with no cost-sharing. This includes most oral contraceptives (birth control pills), intra-uterine devices (IUDs), injections, diaphragms, vaginal rings and emergency contraceptive pills.

It’s important to note that you could be charged if you elect a brand-name contraceptive when a generic version is available. If you have a legitimate medical reason for needing the brand-name pill over the generic, you may be able to work with your doctor in getting a waiver from your insurance carrier, allowing you to receive the more expensive birth control without charge.

Some health insurance companies are more restrictive than others when it comes to determining which contraceptives to cover. Though they are required to cover several different classifications of contraceptives, they can group these offerings and only offer one from each group. For example, your health insurance carrier may require you to pay for a vaginal ring if it covers other contraceptives considered “hormonal methods.” Again, by working with your physician, you may be able to have these costs waived if covered alternatives wouldn’t be medically appropriate.



Your health insurance must be ACA-compliant. Some health insurance plans are “grandfathered,” that is, they were in existence before March 23, 2010 and are therefore exempt from the rules set forth by the Affordable Care Act. If your health insurance is a grandfathered plan, you may be subject to cost-sharing copays and out-of-pocket expenses not seen in newer ACA plans.

Services and prescriptions must come through in-network providers. Your health insurance will cover your preventive care and contraceptives at no cost to you only if your medical provider is in-network. If you go out of the carrier’s network of doctors, you could find yourself owing more out-of-pocket.

Some employer-based coverage is exempt from providing free contraception. If you work for a religious organization, your insurance may not cover birth control pills and other forms of contraceptives. This exemption can also apply to religious hospitals and colleges that object to providing such coverage.

Other free well-woman care

In addition to contraceptives, health insurance plans must cover a wide array of preventive services exclusively for women. These include but aren’t limited to:

Annual well-woman visits

Mammograms

Cancer screenings, including genetic tests for high-risk patients

Screenings for sexually transmitted infections

Domestic violence screenings and counseling

Breastfeeding support

Osteoporosis screening for women over age 60

The value of free contraceptives and preventive care

The number of privately insured women who received free birth control pills rose from 15% in fall 2012 to 67% in spring 2014, marking the effects of the ACA goal to ensure women receive contraception at no cost. The new study from Guttmacher Institute indicates the number of women benefiting from free birth control will increase further in 2015.

A NerdWallet analysis earlier this year found the benefits of receiving free preventive care to be extremely valuable to women. Comparing what an uninsured woman would pay out-of-pocket for yearly preventive care to what a woman would receive through her ACA-compliant health insurance, NerdWallet found the average insurance premiums to be a money-saver, without taking into account additional doctor’s visits and health care expenses.

Through the ACA, preventive care including contraceptives is free for women. Knowing your health insurance plan, understanding the network it covers and learning about your birth control options can ensure you receive the care you need with no cost-sharing.

[4 in 5 medical bills contain errors. We help you catch them. Sign up here for a free consultation with a medical billing expert.]

Doctor with an IUD photo via Shutterstock.