Charity care is a service North Carolina’s nonprofit hospitals provide in return for tax exemptions, but charity care amounts to just 3 percent of the hospitals’ expenses.

And, in the Tar Heel State, low Medicaid reimbursements are less of a problem than they are elsewhere, largely because of how hospitals contribute to the way the state funds its portion of the program.

But expanding Medicaid could make it more of a problem, even in North Carolina.

Based on a Watchdog.org review of 2012-13 IRS filings from 38 nonprofit North Carolina Hospital Association members, the cost of charity care for the poor averaged 3 percent of expenses for the hospitals and hospital networks.

The 38 nonprofits receive tax-exempt status with the understanding that a certain portion of the work they do will be uncompensated care — which comes in the form of charity care, underpayments from the Medicaid program, and bad debt from billed patients who never pay.

In many states, charity care is typically the smallest portion of hospitals’ uncompensated care costs. In North Carolina, the nonprofit NCHA members reported unreimbursed Medicaid expenses averaging 2.5 percent of total expenses.

However, a large portion of the Medicaid payments North Carolina hospitals receive come from the hospitals themselves. Hospitals in the state pay a provider fee that supplements the state and federal tax dollars used to fund the Medicaid program.

Bad debt was a much greater share of hospitals’ costs, averaging 8.4 percent of total expenses for the nonprofits.

While 15 of the 38 hospitals and hospital networks reported expenses exceeding their revenue, the sum of their revenue exceeded the sum of their expenses by $524 million.

Duke University Health System had revenue less expenses — what a for-profit business would report as profit — of $295 million, with 3.5 percent of expenses from charity care, 2.9 percent from unreimbursed Medicaid, and 1 percent from bad debt.

Greenville-based Vidant Medical Center reported $91 million in revenue less expenses, charity care equal to 3.6 percent of costs, bad debt equal to 2.8 percent of costs, and no unreimbursed Medicaid expenses.

Six of the nonprofits reported more than $25 million each in revenue less expenses. Raleigh-based WakeMed, with a net loss of $41 million, was the only one of the 38 nonprofits with a loss exceeding $25 million.

To shift more of the costs of caring for the poor to federal taxpayers, NCHA has asked state lawmakers to implement the 2010 federal health law’s optional Medicaid expansion.

NCHA failed to respond to a request for comment.

Katherine Restrepo, health and human services policy analyst for North Carolina’s free-market John Locke Foundation, expressed skepticism about putting more North Carolinians on Medicaid.

“Expanding Medicaid may reduce uncompensated care for hospitals, but under-compensated care will become a larger issue in the long-term, since Medicaid pays so far below market rates and doesn’t cover the actual cost of care delivered,” Restrepo told Watchdog.org.

She explained that the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act’s emphasis on insurance mandates and Medicaid expansion to increase insurance coverage has done little to address health care costs.

“Policymakers needs to think less on how best to distribute insurance cards,” Restrepo said, “and more on how health care can be more affordable for more people — whether someone has insurance or not.”

“Affordable health care and a strong dosage of price transparency will make health insurance less expensive, will reduce the heavy dependence on subsidized insurance, and will help tackle the indigent care/uncompensated care cost problem,” she added.

The following table includes uncompensated care data for the 38 nonprofit NCHA members whose latest IRS Form 990 filings are available at GuideStar.org. All figures are for the nonprofits’ 2012 tax years ending at varying dates in calendar year 2013, with the exception of Novant Health.

Novant Health data are from tax year (and calendar year) 2013.