Republican presidential nominee Mitt Romney and President Obama discuss a point during the second presidential debate in Hempstead, N.Y., in October 2012. (Mike Segar/Reuters)

President Obama likes to remind people that he has run his last campaign, but he can’t resist an occasional dig at the man he beat in 2012.

“My opponent in that last election pledged that he could bring down the unemployment rate to 6 percent by 2016,” Obama said on a recent trip to Cleveland, before delivering the punch line: “It’s 5.5 now.”

Mitt Romney is almost entirely out of politics, but that didn’t stop him from second-guessing the president just hours before Obama’s prime-time address on the Islamic State last fall. Obama’s foreign policy, he said on Fox News, had “put us in a place of danger unlike anything we knew.”

In the 2 1 / 2 years since the former rivals had lunch at the White House after Obama’s reelection win, they have had no direct communication, and aides to both insist they’ve moved on from a campaign that was notable for the level of hostility and personal attacks it provoked. But the residue of their antipathy remains apparent in their verbal shadowboxing and their determination to keep on keeping score.

On Friday, Obama made his first appearance in Utah since taking office, speaking on the economy in Salt Lake City, not far from where Romney, the former Massachusetts governor, and his wife, Ann, built a retirement home in Holladay. Romney has deep ties to the area as a member of the Mormon Church and as the former head of the Salt Lake Organizing Committee for the 2002 Winter Olympics.

Obama’s ties are not so deep. Utah is the 49th state he will have visited as president — with just South Dakota remaining — and there may be a good reason that he hasn’t been in a hurry to get there: The deep-red Beehive State gave Romney his largest margin of victory over Obama in 2012, 73 percent to 25 percent.

Obama was greeted at the airport by Sens. Orrin G. Hatch and Mike Lee, both Republicans, along with Utah Gov. Gary R. Herbert (R). But Romney, who associates said was in town, was notably absent. The White House had not invited him to attend; administration aides said the stop in Utah had nothing to do with Obama’s former challenger.

But Obama’s latest stop in a national tour to highlight differences with Republicans and more forcefully claim credit for the nation’s economic gains nonetheless irritated former Romney aides.

“I don’t like refighting old wars . . . but it’s also important to set the record straight,” said Eric Fehrnstrom, Romney’s campaign strategist, when asked about Obama’s boasts about the falling unemployment rate. “Mitt Romney said during the campaign that the economy goes through up-and-down cycles and that it would eventually come back as it always does. His criticism of President Obama’s policies is they had unnecessarily prolonged the recession.”

Fehrnstrom added that considering the high number of “marginally attached workers” still in the workforce, “this is not the time for self-satisfaction or victory laps.”

Obama associates countered that the president has no personal ill will toward Romney and professed bewilderment at suggestions that he is rubbing it in.

“I sure don’t sense such antipathy on the President’s part,” David Axelrod, Obama’s former senior adviser, wrote in an e-mail.

It was Axelrod, however, whose memoir “Believer: My Forty Years in Politics” set off the latest round of bitter recriminations between the two camps last month. The book recounted Romney’s concession phone call to Obama on Nov. 6, 2012, which left the president “slightly irritated.”

After their brief talk, Obama purportedly told his advisers that Romney had said: “You really did a great job of getting the vote out in places like Cleveland and Milwaukee.” Obama continued: “In other words, black people. That’s what he thinks this was all about.”

The anecdote outraged Romney’s former campaign aides, who have called it a fabrication. One former Romney associate, in an interview this week, called Obama “petty” and suggested the sports-loving president had watched too many trash-talking athletes on ESPN.

Axelrod defended his account of the election-night call and ascribed no ill intent to Romney or Obama.

Obama’s comment “was a spontaneous reaction to a conversation between two guys who had just run against each other and saw the campaign and results through distinctly different prisms,” Axelrod wrote in the e-mail. “I didn’t get the sense then that Gov. Romney was being ungracious, nor do I think Obama read him that way.”

During a news conference a week after the election, Obama told reporters that he agreed with some of Romney’s ideas and might look for ways to work with him. But after their lunch at the White House two weeks later, there was no serious consideration of any kind of “team of rivals” approach that Obama seemed to embrace in his first term with Democratic primary challenger-turned-Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton.

In January 2014, appearing on comedian Jimmy Fallon’s late-night show, Romney said he told Obama during their lunch that he wanted him to succeed and encouraged him “to think about what makes America a unique nation, what led us to be greatest nation in the history of the earth.”

But, Romney added, “I’ve been disappointed, truthfully. The centerpiece of his first four years, Obamacare, has not gone off terribly well, and our reputation around the world has not been enhanced like I’d hoped.”

By the beginning of 2015, it was Obama’s turn to throw a verbal dart. Romney was considering another White House bid and had begun to talk about combating poverty — an effort, perhaps, to atone for his infamous comment in 2012 that 47 percent of the nation did not pay income taxes and would never vote for him.

Appearing at the House Democrats’ retreat in January, Obama mockingly noted that Romney was “suddenly deeply concerned about poverty.”

Obama added: “That’s great. Let’s do something about it.”

Romney, who ultimately chose not to run, replied on Twitter: “Mr. Obama, wonder why my concern about poverty? The record number of poor in your term, and your record of failure to remedy.”

White House officials declined to comment for this story.

In recent weeks, Obama has appeared more emboldened. During remarks on the fifth anniversary of the Affordable Care Act last week, Obama suggested that Republicans had not offered an alternative to his landmark health-care plan because he had borrowed many of the principles from the very rivals who had criticized him.

A similar law was “deployed by a guy named Mitt Romney in Massachusetts to great effect,” Obama said, adding sarcastically: “If they want to take credit for this law, they can. I’m happy to share it.”

That same night, Romney appeared on Fallon’s show again and, in a skit with the host, got in his own licks in a humorous way. He mused about a litany of global crises — turmoil in the Middle East, immigration in the United States and the breakup of the boy band One Direction — and concluded they all had something in common.

“Thanks, Obama,” Romney quipped.