After the rehearsal, the two actors and their director were describing with abandon the characters of Greg Pierce's "Slowgirl" and the nature of the play, as if the water in the tub suddenly had been allowed to drain after a long, warm steeping.

If you go WHAT: "Slowgirl" by Greg Pierce WHEN: Oct. 31-Nov. 22 WHERE: Pure Theatre, 477 King St., Charleston COST: $30 general admission MORE INFO: http://puretheatre.org; (843) 723-4444; info@puretheatre.org

"She's so normal but has so much more to learn," said Sullivan Hamilton, a 20-year-old actress who plays 17-year-old Becky in the Pure Theatre production.

"They seem so different, but what they're dealing with is the same: guilt, disappointment," added Laurens Wilson, who plays Uncle Sterling. "It's a simmering pot."

"It's an interesting look at the reality of American youth and how unbelievably perilous it is for all of them," said Sharon Graci, co-founder of Pure and the show's director.

The production was in that penultimate phase of rehearsals, when lines and blocking are mostly learned, but the edges are still rough and the pacing isn't quite established.

With 11 days to go, and a couple of dress rehearsals scheduled, the cast and crew were feeling pretty good and starting to get excited.

The play is about a high school student who escapes to Costa Rica after a horrible accident and stays a few days with her uncle who, years before, made his own escape. Together in the jungle, their individual traumas become impossible to avoid.

Pure Theatre is presenting the play Oct. 31-Nov. 22 on its stage at 477 King St.

The playwright will visit Charleston during opening weekend. A reception will follow Friday's performance, and Pierce will discuss his work with Pure Theatre co-founder Rodney Lee Rogers on Saturday after the show.

Sense of place

"Slowgirl" is what's called a two-hander in the trade, a play starring just two characters.

"Two-handers are tricky," Pierce said in a telephone interview. "You're just really stuck with changing the dynamics with these people." They must establish a rhythm and mood, they must pull the audience in and make it care about what's happening, they must push the action along with no help from others. The actors can't hide behind on-stage bustle or others' lines; they are totally exposed.

Pierce was inspired to write the play while working at a writers' retreat in Costa Rica a few years ago. Locations often provide the initial creative impetus, he said.

He was collaborating with Stephen Earnhart on an adaptation of the "Wind-Up Bird Chronicle," a multimedia dramatization of Haruki Murakami's novel, and making enough progress to afford himself a few strolls through the landscape.

"It was totally inspiring," he said. Trees. Animals. Sounds. Atmosphere. "I just kept asking myself, 'What could take place here?' " And then he thought: "What am I doing here? I don't know how to dress properly, my phone doesn't work ..."

So he came up with the character of Becky, who finds herself in a strange land reunited with an uncle she hasn't seen for years, wondering what to do, what to say.

So the writing of the play started with characters, not plot, Pierce explained. Taking his cue from one of his role models, Harold Pinter, he just started to write and let the interaction between the characters guide him. Something would happen, and then Pierce would ask himself: What happens as a consequence, and what happens after that?

"So I had Becky go up to her uncle sleeping in the hammock," he said. "He responds, she responds. Almost the whole play was written like that."

He wrote and wrote, almost a rambling dialogue full of interaction. The plot eventually became apparent, emerging from this dynamic between uncle and niece, and Pierce started to whittle it down, removing the excess material, until the shape of the blade became clear.

What he ended up with is the "slow reveal."

"I do love character development," Pierce said. "I have a hard time watching TV, it literally moves too fast for me. I'm trying to read Proust right now. I do like slower stuff."

A teen's burden

"Slowgirl" was the inaugural production at Lincoln Center's Claire Tow Theatre in 2012. Directed by Anne Kauffman and starring Zeljiko Ivanek and Sarah Steele, it received very good notices.

Last year, "The Landing" was produced at New York's Vineyard Theatre. Pierce wrote the book and lyrics in collaboration with his mentor John Kander, an elder statesman of musical theater and the man responsible for "Chicago" and "Cabaret." Kander had read some of Pierce's short stories and wanted to do something small-scale and intimate.

The new work, a trilogy of small-scale mini-musicals addressing issues of youth and age, starred Pierce's uncle David Hyde Pierce and again captured the imagination of critics.

Now he's working on another musical with Kander called "Kid Victory," which is about a boy from Kansas (where Kander grew up) who returns home to his very religious community after having vanished for a year. "He's entirely different. He's changed a lot. His parents realize the circumstances are very disturbing, and they'd rather not know." The boy makes friends with Emily, another misfit in town.

Lincoln Center has commissioned a second play from Pierce. So has a couple of other theaters, he said.

In "Slowgirl," audiences will recognize not just typical teenage deportment and turns of phrase but a certain familiar mindset and approach to life, Graci said.

There's no malice, only bad judgment, she said, and parents who see the show surely will be prompted to ask of the character Becky what they often have asked their own children: "What the hell were you thinking?"

"(Becky) is following the crowd then paying for it by not being able to speak up," Hamilton said. Becky thinks: What's the worst thing that can happen? And then the worst thing does happen.

Graci said she is fascinated by the play's characterization of middle-class American adolescence, the burden of its privilege. For her, this is a subtext of "Slowgirl."

Wilson, 48, said he likes the awkwardness between the two characters, the clumsy dance between generations, both of which share the same floor with the same central point that they strive to avoid even as they waltz closer and closer to it.

There's a lot going on in this two-hander.

"It's really difficult in its simplicity," Wilson said.

Reach Adam Parker at 937-5902. Follow him at www.facebook.com/aparkerwriter.