In a 4-minute-to-read format, Integrity Data breaks down IRS rules for Affordable Care Act reporting so employers can prepare confidently for the first ACA filing season. At this late stage in the year, employers must find what they need soon enough to get ready ASAP. Affordable Care Act compliance is serious business.

Integrity Data, a payroll and human resources software company that has developed Affordable Care Act (ACA) reporting systems, announces publication of an e-book for U.S. businesses that have yet to prepare for the inaugural filing season of ACA returns.

“The new forms that some employees must have in their hands at the same time they get their W-2s are the most detailed returns ever required. Yet many employers who must produce these forms and then file copies with the IRS, still don’t know their first deadline is February 1. Nor what to do for it,” says Helen Karakoudas, ACA Education Director at Integrity Data. "In plain English that's a 4-minute read, we break down the rules and how to avoid missteps."

The publication is titled "Affordable Care Act: Employer Essentials for IRS Reporting."

To simplify Affordable Care Act compliance, Integrity Data covers in seven quick-to-follow pages what needs to be done, the possible challenges, and how significant the financial consequences can be for not complying with federal requirements to report – in monthly detail – what, if any, health insurance a business offers. Information is presented in a range of engaging ways, including links that lead to such extras as a quiz, cartoons and a decision-tree flowchart.

Among Integrity Data’s affiliates, the presentation – and its timing – are much appreciated.

“The No. 1 question we get from our clients now is ‘Do we have to do anything around the ACA?’ This e-book is a great, easy-to-understand resource for us to turn to. When we have a client who can’t focus on one thing for more than a few seconds, we direct them to the link for the flowchart. Guaranteed to get their attention long enough to answer ‘What do I need to do to be compliant?’” said Donna Krizik Parsons, Director of Marketing at Crestwood Associates, a firm in Mount Prospect, Ill. that ranks among the top 100 resellers of accounting software in 2015.

“At this late stage in the year, employers must find what they need soon enough to get ready ASAP. Affordable Care Act compliance is serious business. With this resource, businesses get guidance from subject matter experts who followed ACA employer must-knows from the get-go,” said Dennis L. Day, a CPA in Birmingham, Ala. whose business consulting and software implementation firm is DLD Business Solutions.

"Affordable Care Act: Employer Essentials for IRS Reporting" is available on Integrity Data's site as a complimentary download.

ABOUT INTEGRITY DATA

Integrity Data is a longstanding leader in development of software that improves business processes centered on payroll and human resources data. Headquartered in Lincoln, Ill., and founded in 1996, Integrity Data serves over 7,500 organizations worldwide. Integrity Data’s leadership in technology for Affordable Care Act reporting compliance includes being the first software company to meet the IRS testing requirements for electronic filing of ACA returns by employers.

Corporate Headquarters

Integrity Data

125 N. Kickapoo

Lincoln, IL 62656

http://www.integrity-data.com

info(at)integrity-data(dot)com

888.786.6162