We must become engaged "digital citizens" to stop cyber fights before they turn violent.

Second grade students sit at computers as they participated in the Kids Vote at Pena Elementary, Thursday, Nov. 1, 2012 in Brownville, Texas. Studies show that youth are increasingly at risk of volatile cyber interactions that can end in real-time fighting. (Photo: Brad Doherty, AP)

Fourteen-year-old Kierra'onna Rice was shot and killed last month in Alabama. But the fight that led to her death didn't start on the playground; it started on the Internet. Tragically, Kierr'onna and other girls had been warring publicly on Facebook for more than three weeks, attracting the attention of others, before the fight escalated from virtual to violent.

Last year, a war of words between a Brooklyn gang and a 14-year-old shooter ended in a hail of bullets aboard a city bus, leaving a 39-year-old passenger dead. The teens involved belonged to rival crews that had also reportedly been threatening each other on Facebook for months.

Sadly, these were far from isolated incidents. Every day, youth across America are posting inflammatory, hateful and otherwise disturbing content online. These posts are often followed by acts of real-world violence.

Violent conflict between young people is by no means a new thing. But fights that used to start on street corners and in school hallways have now moved to the Internet, in front of a much larger audience. And those online fights are becoming more common. In 2011, just 15% of teens reported being targeted online, according to a Pew research poll. Last year, the number had increased to 65%.

Experts agree the danger is growing. Jody Weis, a former FBI agent and former Chicago Police Department superintendent estimated two-thirds of school-related violence starts on social media. NYPD Assistant Commissioner Kevin O'Connor warned that "because of social media, every kid is affected by this issue."

"There's kids dying over this stuff every day," O'Connor said. "Over nothing."

In response, cities across the country now dedicate officers solely to monitoring social media for signs of potential violence. Facebook also recently updated its Community Standards, acknowledging increased concerns about the consequences of threatening posts and pledging to remove them. But enforcing that policy would take an extreme effort by Facebook — one we are unlikely to see, and certainly have not so far.

So this dangerous behavior on social media will continue. But the fact that so much violence is being telegraphed online poses an opportunity for prevention. The vicious posts that result in beatings and shootings are often public, and offer an unprecedented chance for effective interventions that will save lives.

Research shows that effective in-person approaches to combat violence can be adapted for use over social media platforms. So once troubling behavior is identified, anti-violence interventions can be employed by trained community members to deescalate these conflicts as they happen, and prevent future altercations.

Engaged citizens are also typically better choices than law enforcement to resolve conflict between members of their own community since they are more likely to share social and cultural backgrounds. Additionally, they may know the people involved in the conflict and its context, and therefore be a more respected voice. All we have to do is give them the tools to intervene effectively.

That is why, working with researchers at NYU Steinhardt, the Citizens Crime Commission will launch a pilot program later this year, which will train community members as "E-Responders" in order to assess and address dangerous social media content. The program —which will be launched with community-based anti-violence organizations — will also teach these E-Responders how to intervene when they see behavior likely to result in imminent violence.

We can't stop there. Improved reporting systems, such as adding social media complaints to 911 systems and other information lines, and training to identify troubling behavior would greatly increase the likelihood that warnings are reported expeditiously and addressed effectively by authorities.

Finally, in today's digital age, it is necessary to generally promote the idea of digital citizenship and help the public better understand their critical role in identifying and responding to troubling social media behavior. Perhaps most importantly, we must learn not to engage in negative behavior ourselves.

As social media posts increasingly precede real-world violence, we must adapt the "see something, say something" mentality to cover the virtual world, encourage Americans to become better digital citizens, and attend to troubled individuals before they harm themselves or others.

Richard Aborn is the president of the Citizens Crime Commission of New York City.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors.To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1D6GaaP