Buy Photo Nashville skyline (Photo: Larry McCormack /The Tennessean)Buy Photo

We've got about three months until Nashvillians go to the poll and make a choice on who they want to succeed Karl Dean as mayor.

These next three months will feel like the last 30 seconds of a close college basketball game. Fouls, timeouts, refs going to the monitor and clock stoppages will make us antsy for Aug. 6 to come quicker. The candidates will likely feel the same way, given the intense schedule they have kept during the last three months.

While no candidate can win the election in these early months, recent campaign polling data seems to indicate that some settling out and stratification of candidates has occurred.

The seven major candidates — Metro Council member and businesswoman Megan Barry, attorney Charles Robert Bone, businessman David Fox, businessman Bill Freeman, Criminal Court Clerk and former Metro Council member Howard Gentry, LEAD schools founder Jeremy Kane, and businesswoman Linda Eskind Rebrovick — have maintained an incredibly busy schedule of appearances, forums and "debates," most of which have been well-attended.

And several candidates have amplified those appearances with some "get to know me" advertising. I'd love to hear what you think about them.

So as we get ready to start the serious time in this election, what do we "know?"

First, likely voters are following the news about the mayor's race, with about 60 percent knowing one or more the candidates.

Voters do not seem to be looking for a mayor who preaches change — a blinding glimpse of the obvious there. Seven of 10 likely Nashville voters think Metro is moving in the right direction. And most are more concerned about sustaining the economic growth trends than they are about anything else, including education (only four percent of voters in one poll say that improving public schools is the top issue for the next mayor).

However, there is a niggling concern that our city's economy is growing too fast and making living here less affordable.

It should be no surprise that Gentry and Barry remain the best known candidates in the race. Both have built solid bases of support that make them early favorites to challenge for an anticipated runoff.

I was surprised that half of voters know Freeman and nearly half know Bone, while Fox, Rebrovick and Kane hover just below the level of four of every 10 voters knowing their names.

But while voters generally know who is the race, they remain, as we would expect, very undecided, with about a third of voters having no current preference.

Gentry, who won an unopposed election as Criminal Court Clerk in 2012, seems to have the strongest base of support. One poll apparently shows him with "strong" support from 11 percent of voters. Barry and Freeman each seem to have a solid backing from 4 percent of voters, while Bone, Fox, Kane and Rebrovick appear to currently have solid bases of 1 percent.

Reflecting that support, my read of recent polls that I have seen is that if the election were held today, Barry and Freeman would be neck and neck to join Gentry in a runoff, with Bone not too far behind them.

These polls are just a snapshot in time, of course, and things are going to begin changing quickly in response to what campaigns are learning from their polling and begin investing all that money they are raising and are lending to themselves.

At least three campaigns are ramping up their media spending: Freeman's team is reported to be buying about 1,000 ratings points a week, Rebrovick about 400 and Bone about 300.

I would expect their spending to push the other campaigns to respond.

I still don't think the race really starts until after Memorial Day weekend, but a lot of jockeying will happen during May to improve the starting positions.

While most of the focus on mayoral forums has been on their positions on a range of issues, I think that most voters are more curious about what kind of leader each candidate would make.

Nashville has been lucky to have three consecutive "good" mayors whose leadership styles seemed to have served us well.

I hope we can figure out what kind of leaders these candidates might be in the next several months.

I was struck by an interview on leadership with Jack Welch, former CEO of GE, by Daniel Roth of LinkedIn. It seems apropos of the qualities we need in our next mayor.

"Leadership today is all about two words: It's all about truth and trust," Welch said. "You've got to have their back when they didn't hit it out of the park, you've got have their back when they hit it out of the park.

"When they trust you, you'll get truth. And if you get truth, you get speed. If you get speed, you're going to act. That's how it works."

Mayors Phil Bredesen, Bill Purcell and Karl Dean seem to be good examples of that kind of leadership.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1GtJD3b