Forget the fact that congressional Republicans and President Barack Obama can’t come to terms on a budget. The GOP can barely agree with itself on the issue.

The dividing matter? Defense spending.

Yes, allocating Pentagon monies is incredibly important. Considering the multiple military conflicts currently raging across the world that impact the United States, it’s paramount that the Defense Department has the resources it needs to function as best it can.

But how much defense spending is enough? How much money does the Pentagon actually need? Some GOP House Budget Committee members seem to think the sky should be the limit.

Rolling into Thursday, this cadre of lawmakers had successfully spoiled a budgetary Kumbaya moment between fiscal conservatives and their intraparty hawkish counterparts.

They easily agreed on repealing the Affordable Care Act. They agreed on Medicaid and Medicare cuts. They agreed to decrease discretionary spending. What they struggled to see eye to eye on, though, was how many tanks to build.

Interestingly, the defense hawks would like to give the Pentagon a larger bankroll than even it thinks it needs—one report shows the originally proposed House budget allocates a whopping $39 billion more to defense beyond what the Pentagon says is requires for overseas military operations.

That’s amazing.

If the Pentagon says, "Hey, we’re cool. Keep the money," we should definitely take them up on the suggestion. The Defense Department uses arguably the worst accounting practices of all governmental agencies. That’s saying something.

You don’t have to take my word for it. Here’s former Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel’s take: "The Department of Defense is the only federal agency that has not produced audit-ready financial statements, which are required by law. That's unacceptable."

And it’s not just financial records they have trouble keeping up with—they often lose track of military wares. At this very moment, some $500 million of military aid is MIA in Yemen, an American ally turned failed state. This stash includes over a million rounds of ammunition, 160 Humvees, four helicopters, four drones, three planes and two patrol boats.

Ever thought of staging a coup? Well, just head over to Yemen for an armory scavenger hunt. You just might be in luck.

Now, don’t hear this wrong. I’m 100 percent in favor of having a balanced budget within the next 10 years, as the House plan aims to do. Our reckless spending has got to be reined in. Also, America must stand ready to combat evil in this world when no other salient option remains.

However, while making widespread cuts across the budget, the sacred cow of military spending should not be granted exemption. Dollar amounts need not be increased. Rather, accountability measures should.

Late yesterday morning, the House Budget Committee finally voted (along party lines) to pass an amended budget, which satisfied defense hawks by dedicating an extra $90 billion into an overseas war fund.

Congressman Matt Salmon (R-AZ) said Thursday that although Republicans had recently suffered some embarrassing episodes, not passing a budget "would be the granddaddy of them all." It looks like the GOP will dodge a pie-in-the-face moment this go-round, but only by throwing over $100 billion more at a department this year that doesn’t really know what it did with the $495 billion it requested last year.

I wonder how many schools we could build with that.

David Allen Martin is a civic engagement advocate who teaches United States history at the University of Tennessee at Chattanooga. You can follow him on Twitter. The opinions expressed in this column belong solely to the author, not Nooga.com or its employees.

Updated @ 9 a.m. on 3/20/15 to correct a typographical error.