Larry Gatlin sings for Fox News (screen grab)

Country music singer Larry Gatlin on Wednesday told the hosts of Fox & Friends that he was prepared to physically assault a Democratic lawmaker who had insulted the state of Texas.

During a heated discussion on the House Rules Committee hearing on Monday about why the Affordable Care Act had not been fully implemented in some states, Rep. Alcee Hastings (D-FL) called Texas a “crazy state.”

“I don’t know about in your state, which I think is a crazy state to begin with — and I mean that just as I said it,” Hastings said, adding that he would not live in Texas “for all the tea in China.”

Gatlin, who is a conservative activist and a Texas native, was invited to come on Fox News on Wednesday to share a song in response to Hastings.

“The eyes of Texas are upon you / Better not come near,” Gatlin sang. “The eyes of Texas are upon you / I think you’d best steer clear.”

“You said things about my Texas that just were not kind / And if I get a chance, I’ll open up cowboy boot shop in your behind.”

“Larry, that’s hilarious!” Fox News host Steve Doocy replied, laughing uncontrollably, and adding that Hastings had once been ranked number one in nepotism because he employed family members.

“Nepotism, you folks in Alcee’s district go look that up,” Gatlin replied. “You talk about low-information voters, they elected this man to be their congressman. They elected Debbie Waterfowl what’s-her-name…”

“Wait a minute,” Doocy said. “Wasserman Schultz.”

“I think they elected her twice,” Gatlin continued. “So of course, me saying this will automatically brand me a racist. After all, a racist is anyone who is winning an argument with a Democrat or a liberal.”

The country singer argued that Democrats could not be upset about states rejecting the Affordable Care Act because the GOP had won more governor’s races and legislatures in the last election.

“What part about getting your butt kicked in the November elections do y’all not understand?” Gatlin asked. “That’s the bad part. But what part of getting your butt kicked if you come to Texas and talk bad about us, you better start understand that too, Alcee. It’s not going to be pretty.”

Watch the video below from Fox News’ Fox & Friends, broadcast Feb. 4, 2015.