The race to succeed President Barack Obama gets fully underway in 2015, a silent primary before the real ones are held. Already, likely candidates are planning book releases, reaching out to donors and booking travel to the early states.

But if the last weeks of 2014 were any indication, Obama has no intention of merely limping through his final two years, even though he faces a Republican-controlled Congress. And many of the issues he and GOP leaders must grapple with this year could affect the presidential race.

Story Continued Below

Obamacare remains vulnerable to unraveling, from both the judicial and legislative branches. NSA surveillance, immigration and Iran will all get moments on the front burner in the coming months. Some issues are sure to divide what looks to be a large and unwieldy 2016 Republican field. Others could provide a means to attack the likely Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton.

( On POLITICO Magazine: 10 global elections to watch in 2015)

As far as when Clinton will announce her 2016 candidacy? That’s still a mystery. Regardless, there are plenty of other key dates to watch for in 2015. Here’s a sampling:

Jan. 13 — The book tours begin

Marco Rubio’s book, “American Dreams: Restoring Economic Opportunity for Everyone,” comes out on the second Tuesday of January, the first in a slew of tomes being peddled by potential presidential candidates.

Such books, which tend to be anodyne at best, are a handy way for hopefuls to introduce themselves to activists on their own terms, give an excuse for travel to early primary states, generate media and make cash.

Rubio must decide whether to run for reelection to the Senate or for president; he’s said he won’t do both. What reception the 43-year-old Floridian gets will offer a window into his viability in a national race.

Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee’s latest book, “God, Guns, Grits, and Gravy,” comes out the Tuesday after Rubio’s. The 2008 Iowa caucus winner, a favorite of social conservatives, is looking at a 2016 run. He announced Saturday he’s leaving his Fox News show, and aides have even scoped out Little Rock office space. But many GOP insiders think he’s bluffing, as he did in 2012, to get more attention for his TV show and book launch. Watch for Huckabee to sound serious on the book tour; the key is whether he pursues more early-state travel afterward.

( Also on POLITICO: GOP searches for elusive Obamacare fix)

Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Texas) will release a still-untitled book on May 12, and Sen. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) plans to release his book (“Taking a Stand: Moving Beyond Partisan Politics to Unite America”) on June 2, which is around when he’s said he’ll make a formal announcement. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, also a Republican, is working on an e-book to come out early in the year, theoretically to lay out a rationale for his candidacy.

Jan. 20 — The State of the Union

Obama delivers his penultimate State of the Union address at 9 p.m. Eastern. He’ll outline areas where he might be able to reach agreement with Republicans, but he’s also likely to sound more liberated than in recent years, when he was determined to protect red-state Democrats. Last year, Obama stressed his willingness to use his executive authority when Congress does not take action.

As Obama heads into the twilight of his presidency, the State of the Union becomes less relevant. The more interesting speeches are likely to take place in state capitals, where several Republican governors considering presidential runs are getting sworn in or delivering State of the State addresses.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker’s is Monday, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich’s is Jan. 12. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie will deliver his State of the State in mid-January, outlining what he might be able to get through a Democratic legislature.

Feb. 24 — Chicago mayor’s race

Rahm Emanuel, the former White House chief of staff, must get at least 50 percent of the vote to avoid an April 7 runoff in the race to lead the Windy City. The incumbent’s most formidable challenger, the president of the city’s teachers union, decided not to run after being diagnosed with a brain tumor last fall.

Emanuel has a major fundraising advantage from his years as a Democratic fixer, but a Chicago Tribune poll last summer put his approval rating at 35 percent. He faces spirited attacks for being cozy with Wall Street, shuttering almost 50 schools as part of a restructuring, presiding during a spike in violent crime and scaling back public-employee retirement benefits.

Because there’s no clear alternative to Emanuel, the February election is a referendum on his performance. He’s running TV ads promoting his accomplishments and reassuring voters that he’s rooting out endemic corruption.

He will probably prevail in the end, but it could require a boost from Obama. There are a few challengers who could split the vote and force a runoff.

Feb. 25-28 — CPAC

The Conservative Political Action Conference is the year’s first truly national cattle call for would-be 2016 Republican candidates. Thousands of activists descend on the Gaylord convention center just outside D.C. for three days of speeches.

The conference’s closely watched straw poll shows who is up and who is down at a time when the GOP lacks a clear front-runner. Paul won the past two years, a barometer of the base’s mood, with Cruz coming in second in 2014. Mitt Romney won four straw polls during his runs for president, but libertarian stalwart Ron Paul (Rand’s father) won in 2010 and 2011.

Christie was not invited two years ago because of perceived apostasy, including embracing Obama during Superstorm Sandy, but the New Jersey leader gave a well-received speech last year and will likely speak again in 2015.

Feb. 27 — Immigration fight

Conservatives are still hopping mad over Obama’s executive action protecting millions of undocumented immigrants from deportation. In February, they’ll get a shot at weakening the president’s hand.

The spending bill that passed during the lame duck session funds every part of the federal government through the end of September, except for the Department of Homeland Security, which includes key immigration agencies as well as the Secret Service and the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

Republicans agreed to extend DHS funding at current levels through the end of February as a compromise. They didn’t want to shut down the government and figured they’d have a stronger hand once the GOP controlled both chambers of Congress. This means that a funding bill for homeland security must pass in February, setting up a showdown over Obama’s immigration order.

Republicans running for president will need to take a hard line, but Democrats are eager to use the funding fight to bolster their standing with Hispanics. Watch Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid in particular: the Democrat is up for reelection in Nevada in 2016, and he’ll need solid Hispanic turnout.

Sen. Marco Rubio is one of several prospective 2016 candidates who plans on releasing a book and touring the country on a promotion tour.

Spring surprise — New York special

Special elections always get outsize media attention, mainly because not much else is going. But the race for outgoing GOP Rep. Michael Grimm’s seat will be supercharged because it’ll likely be the year’s first special election, it’s inside the country’s largest media market, and it comes against a backdrop of racial unrest.

Grimm is quitting his Staten Island-based seat after pleading guilty to a felony tax charge. New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo has not yet picked a date for the vote, but it should be in the spring.

Party bosses get to pick their nominees, but Empire State specials are notoriously wild because third-party candidates can become spoilers. Democrats won upstate special elections in conservative districts the past few years when they capitalized on GOP divisions or turned the race into a referendum on some national issue.

This election seems destined to become a racially charged referendum on police tactics. The GOP front-runner is Daniel Donovan, the prosecutor who oversaw a grand jury investigation that declined to file charges against police caught on camera choking Eric Garner, a black man who kept saying he couldn’t breathe and later died.

The killings of two New York police officers last month have only added to the tensions. Whites make up more than 70 percent of Grimm’s district, and it is home to many police officers, but the nonindictment was controversial even among Republicans.

March 19 — Hillary’s last paid speech

One of 2015’s biggest questions is when Hillary Clinton will formally announce she’s running for president.

The former secretary of state has committed to delivering the keynote address on March 19 at a conference organized by the New York and New Jersey chapter of the American Camp Association.

She could always cancel this engagement, or she might also choose to roll out her candidacy soon after this. Many on her team believe the Democrat erred during her last run by announcing too early, in January 2007.

Clinton is also giving paid speeches in Silicon Valley and Canada in late February, earning as much as $300,000 a pop , sums that have already opened her up to criticism.

April 6 — Opening Day in D.C.

The Washington Nationals’ first home game of the new season is against the New York Mets at 4:05 p.m. on this day. It’s an unofficial holiday in the Capitol, and many POLITICOs will go off the grid for the afternoon. So we’d be grateful if the people we write about don’t use this as an opportunity for a news dump.

June 1 — Surveillance powers expire

Without congressional action, the National Security Agency will lose legal authority for the bulk collection of American phone records and other intelligence-gathering powers that the administration says are crucial to stop terrorist attacks.

Section 215 of the PATRIOT Act established the NSA’s authority to collect business records and is set to expire because of a sunset provision included in the law. Leaks by Edward Snowden revealed the extent to which this statute is used to get call records from phone companies. A compromise bill last month, which would have narrowed the scope of information that can be collected but allowed it to continue, failed narrowly.

The issue creates unusual coalitions among civil libertarians on the left and right. On the Republican side, Rubio is a staunch supporter of NSA eavesdropping in the name of national security. Cruz and Rand Paul both speak out against it; Cruz voted for the USA Freedom Act in December because it restricted some of the activity, but Paul opposed it because he said it extends too much that’s wrong with the PATRIOT Act.

Something is likely to pass because incoming Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell supports the administration on NSA surveillance. But the Republican base is divided, and the issue is dicey because most politicians want to at least nod to American fears about government surveillance.

Mid-to-late June — Obamacare decision

The Supreme Court will decide whether the Affordable Care Act gives millions of people a federal subsidy to buy health insurance.

Plaintiffs in the case argue that the subsidies can be given only to those people who live in states that have created their own health exchanges, which would mean that residents of more than 30 states do not qualify.

The court will hear oral arguments in March and likely hand down a decision near the end of its term in June. At least four justices agreed to review whether an appeals court was right to uphold the subsidies, not a good sign for the Obama administration.

Chief Justice John Roberts infuriated conservatives when he upheld the health law’s individual mandate three years ago; if he rules against the subsidies in the closely divided court this time, Obamacare could be dealt a devastating blow, as millions of Americans may no longer be able to afford their current health plans.

Chicago Mayor Rahm Emanuel could face a runoff if multiple challengers force the electorate to split the vote.

June 30 — Iran deal deadline

In a recent interview, Obama would not rule out that the United States might someday have an embassy in Tehran, drawing predictable grumbling from conservatives who believe that the president is naive.

In any case, such diplomatic ties are even less realistic if the U.S. fails to strike a deal with the Islamic Republic on its nuclear program. A successful agreement, on the other hand, would be something Obama could point to as an achievement, while also giving the GOP some 2016 ammunition against Democrats — in particular Clinton, a former secretary of state.

A preliminary accord — to get the Iranians to halt their nuclear program in exchange for the easing of economic sanctions — was extended to June 30. Low-level talks between the P5+1 — the United States, France, Germany, Russia, China and Britain — are set to resume Jan. 15 in Geneva.

The Iranians demand that the West lift all of its sanctions at once. Agreeing to that, even as part of a grand bargain, would cause big headaches for Obama with pro-Israel groups as well as many Republicans.

August — Ames Straw Poll

Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad has said he’d like to do away with the summer straw poll, which tends to benefit right-wing alternatives to the establishment favorite.

In 2011, for instance, Michele Bachmann won the poll, prompting Tim Pawlenty to drop out. Bachmann’s collapse began the very next day, and Pawlenty might have emerged as a more serious Romney alternative if he’d avoided Ames in the first place.

But the carnival-like event, which is held in a college town, is a big fundraiser for the state party, and Iowans like it because campaigns pay to bus them in for a day of fun, including free food and music.

The Iowa GOP central committee will meet Jan. 10 to vote on what the Ames gathering should look like and whether it should include a straw poll. Prominent Republicans, like Rep. Steve King, are pushing hard to make the 2015 version just as big as 2011’s.

Sept. 16 — First Republican debate?

The Ronald Reagan Presidential Foundation announced, before the midterm elections, that it wants to host the first debate on Sept. 16 of this year. The first debate last time was May 2, 2011 — so this would start the debate season more than four months later.

The Republican National Committee has put in place strict new rules to limit the number of debates and force mainstream media hosts to include conservative moderators. An RNC panel is due to announce more details at its winter meeting this month in San Diego.

The Reagan debate is not yet officially sanctioned, and candidates who participate in non-RNC debates will not be allowed into the ones sponsored by the party. But no one says “no” to Nancy Reagan, especially the RNC. So it seems likely that this will kick things off.

Sept. 30 — A funding deadline looms

Congress must pass appropriations bills by the end of September. No one wants another government shutdown, but brinkmanship seems inevitable between the Republican Congress and the Democratic president, especially over the fate of the Affordable Care Act.

With the primaries in full swing, it’s easy to see Cruz, Paul or Rubio using this moment to take a stand.

Cruz became a national figure in 2013 when his push to defund Obamacare led to a government shutdown. On the other hand, McConnell, the incoming Senate leader of the GOP, will be looking to protect the seven Republican Senate incumbents up for reelection in 2016 in states that Obama carried twice.

The GOP will probably try to defund the health law in the spring budget process because budgets cannot be filibustered and thus need only 51 votes. But Obama would veto any budget that rolls back his signature achievement. The real test, then, will come in late September when Republicans have their truest chance to block money for implementing the law.

Oct. 15 — Fundraising reports

This is one of the most important days of the year for White House hopefuls.

The candidates’ third-quarter fundraising hauls will be closely scrutinized and offer a window into how viable they are ahead of the first primaries. The quarter ends Sept. 30, and the campaigns have until Oct. 15 to roll out their numbers.

Whoever emerges as the left’s main alternative to Clinton will need to put up a big haul to be taken seriously. The results could also show whether someone is catching fire with rich progressives in Hollywood and New York.

On the Republican side, assuming Bush is in, the question will be who can compete with him financially. Christie should be able to raise a lot of money; he has big problems if he cannot. If someone like Paul can post hauls on par with the other big-name contenders, he’s truly in contention for the nomination and set to exceed his father’s 2012 performance.

Nov. 3 — Kentucky governor’s race

There are three Southern governors races in this off year. Republicans will very likely hold Louisiana and Mississippi. The question is whether they can pick up Kentucky.

Outgoing Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear, a Blue Dog who is strongly supportive of the Affordable Care Act, remains popular. Attorney General Jack Conway, who lost to Rand Paul in 2010’s Senate race, is likely to be the Democratic nominee for governor, while Agriculture Commissioner James Comer is the likely Republican nominee. Both, though, could face primaries.

If Comer beats Conway, it will signal that Democrats cannot compete in the South as long as Obama is president. And it would highlight how unrealistic the idea is that Hillary Clinton could truly expand the map in 2016. If Conway wins, however, he will become a national star and help show Democrats a path forward in the South.