U.S. Rep. Mark Meadows (Photo: Special to the Citizen-Times, Special to the Citizen-Times)

Since the disastrous October 2013 roll out of the Affordable Care Act (ACA)—Obamacare—the numerous flaws in the President’s signature health care law have impacted Americans across the nation. From millions losing their health plans, to being unable to continue seeing their doctors, to skyrocketing premiums, millions of families have been directly harmed by the law.

Student workers may soon become the latest victims of the President’s unworkable healthcare law. Many college students have turned to on-campus employment to offset rising tuition costs. But because of the Employer Mandate provision in Obamacare, those opportunities will soon vanish.

Soon, under the Employer Mandate, colleges and universities will be required to begin providing health insurance for student employees who work more than 30 hours a week for 3 months or more, including summer breaks. Because of this, many colleges will be forced to cut student work hours and some jobs all together.

During the 2013-2014 school year, the average cost of tuition at a private college was $30,094, $22,203 for out-of-state tuition, and $8,893 for in state tuition. Students need every opportunity possible to pay for the high cost of their education. Being forced to rack up massive debt and then face one of the worst job markets in history for young workers should not be the only option.

Student loan debt in the country currently sits at $1.08 trillion—surpassing credit card debt and auto loan debt combined. Students nationwide are struggling to afford college, and Obamacare is about to make it even less affordable for many.

In July, I introduced the Student Worker Exemption Act, H.R. 5262, a bill which would exempt student workers from the costly Employer Mandate. The bill will prevent colleges and universities from having to cut student work hours under the ACA and will ensure students won’t lose jobs or have hours reduced.

Without the Student Worker Exemption Act, hundreds of thousands of student workers across the nation will feel the pain of the President’s healthcare law. I worked closely with university representatives in my home state of North Carolina to craft this legislation. It’s been endorsed by Tom Ross, the President of the University of North Carolina (UNC) system and David Belcher, Chancellor of Western Carolina University.

In the UNC system alone there are 3,900 students workers who would fall under the Employer Mandate, costing the universities about $21 million.

The problems associated with Obamacare are vast and wide-ranging. Replacing it with a market-based solution that allows for consumer choice and doesn’t pass off costs onto the younger generation is desperately needed. At a time when Democrats control the Senate and the White House, full repeal isn’t feasible. In the meantime, this bipartisan bill will help protect students, from Obamacare, which has been long on promises and short on execution.

Meadows, R-Glenville, represents NC’s 11th Congressional District. Reps. Charles Boustany (R-LA), Howard Coble (R-NC), Renee Ellmers (R-NC), Richard Hudson (R-NC), Luke Messer (R-IN), Mike McIntyre (D-NC), Patrick Murphy (D-FL), Robert Pittenger (R-NC), and Todd Rokita (R-IN) joined Rep. Meadows as original cosponsors of the bill.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1oZwsRH