By Rev. Matt Lacey

I want you to imagine someone of my size (130lbs, decent shape, but short and somewhat uncoordinated) trying to gain rushing yards against the University of Alabama defensive line. I wouldn't stand a chance.

The chronically homeless face a daily struggle similar to my feeble attempts to gain rushing yards. There are proper avenues, organizations, funds, and programs in place, and theoretically they provide a way out of homelessness, but to someone who doesn't know the system, and maybe has a limited education, it is extremely hard to navigate.

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Rev. Matt Lacey is senior pastor of the Church of the Reconciler United Methodist Church.

Many people carry preconceptions about the poor: they are lazy, take advantage of the goodwill that people show them, or have no personal initiative. And if we give them a chance to better their situation, and they fail, then they don't deserve a second chance.

Each and everyday, my staff and I at Church of the Reconciler see the faces and hear the stories of people who find themselves in situations of poverty. And like most stereotypes, the prejudices that we place on the poor simply aren't true. Many of the individuals we see want help to better themselves, to be free from addiction, and want a good paying job they can pour their sweat and blood into.

The failure of the government, agencies, and organizations to reduce chronic homelessness has less to do with the poor themselves and more with the convoluted and confusing systems we have created for them to find their way through.

Health care is always a challenge (remember several years ago, Cooper Green Mercy Hospital ended their in-patient care and Gov. Bentley refuses to expand Medicaid, which would offer health coverage to many more under the Affordable Care Act) and if you are a person suffering with mental illness (and chances are, if you aren't affected by one, and then find yourself on the street, you will develop one eventually) you have extremely limited options in the State of Alabama to receive treatment so that you can begin the process to get into stable housing.

Many government agencies and shelters require a State ID to utilize services for the poor, but also keep in mind the state of Alabama nearly doubled the cost for an Alabama ID last week--bringing the cost close to $40.

You don't want to be in poverty and live in Alabama. The poor in this state have found that it's incredibly hard to pull yourself up out of poverty and homelessness.

In recent years there has been more emphasis on deficit reduction and better use of resources from taxpayers. Luckily, there is an approach to reduce homelessness that would cost less than what we spend now.

It's simple: give them housing. Not after they treat their addiction, not after they find a job, not after they prove themselves "worthy" of having housing--simply house them first, and then start to work on personal issues after that.

Housing First is a tactic that many states and cities have used in recent years to reduce chronic homelessness and save taxpayer money. Salt Lake City, Utah has implemented this approach and while they used to spend more than $20,000 per person per year, the Housing First approach only costs the city $8,000 per person, and that's including case managers and much more. A Colorado study had similar findings recently as they discovered that the state spends $43,000 a year on the average homeless person but found that using the Housing First approach would cost only $17,000 (and again, that includes more than just rent and utilities).

Source: http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/09/22/home-free

The Housing First approach is a great compromise to common arguments in politics today as it would save taxpayer money as well as be a compassionate way to treat the issue of homelessness, and most importantly it's effective.

It seems now that we have a model in the Housing First approach for creating positive change and reducing chronic homelessness in the state of Alabama. Unfortunately, our leaders are more content to be poor stewards of taxpayer money and let those in poverty continue to struggle.