Lost applications, frozen computer screens and hours spent waiting on hold for help — those consumer problems made up last year's narrative about Maryland's health insurance exchange, the online marketplace launched under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Now, as state officials prepare to unveil a revamped exchange Sunday, they face a new set of challenges: They must eliminate technological problems that led the website to crash on its launch last year, restore consumer confidence in the system and — with Republicans poised to control Congress and the Maryland governor's seat — confront more questions about the future of Obamacare.

"Exchanges mostly worked poorly or not at all in the beginning," said Karen Pollitz, a Kaiser Family Foundation fellow working on the Program for the Study of Health Reform and Private Insurance. "Maryland has this totally new website now, and fingers crossed it works better. This year is really a do-over."

The stakes are high for Maryland, which had one of the worst-performing exchanges in the nation last year. Those problems led to a shake-up among exchange officials and contractors, a federal investigation and a shadow that lingered over Lt. Gov. Anthony G. Brown's failed campaign for governor.

Those working on the exchange expect a different outcome this year as they seek to re-enroll tens of thousands of Marylanders and persuade more who lack coverage through employers to buy plans over the next three months.

Maryland has this totally new website now, and fingers crossed it works better. This year is really a do-over. — Karen Pollitz, Program for the Study of Health Reform and Private Insurance

They've spent an added $41 million adopting code from the more successful Connecticut exchange for Maryland's site, which informally opens at 10 a.m. Sunday when consumers will be able to browse — but not buy — plans.

Critics and supporters alike will be closely watching the Maryland exchange to see whether it will squander the opportunity, and added funding, to insure more residents.

"It's more than it just doesn't break; it's a much more effective, helpful system," said Dr. Joshua M. Sharfstein, Maryland's health secretary and board chair of the exchange, who believes that users will share their experiences with friends and family.

However, reaching consumers might be a bigger challenge than improving the exchange's technology, according to consumer surveys and interviews with officials and experts.

National surveys of participants by personal finance publisher Bankrate.com found that 51 percent would not use the exchange again, though slightly more said their household's experience was good or they were confident the exchange would operate properly this year. About 43 percent said much higher prices were their top concern.

"Households that have already used the health exchanges are just as leery about the new enrollment season as the general public and share the concerns about higher insurance rates and glitchy websites," said Bankrate.com insurance analyst Doug Whiteman.

That is important because everyone who bought private insurance through an exchange will have to re-enroll to keep their federal subsidies in 2015, and about 85 percent of buyers nationally were subsidized, Pollitz said.

Another challenge will be reaching people who didn't engage the first go-round. Kaiser surveys found that 95 percent of the uninsured don't know open enrollment is coming.

Open enrollment begins nationally Nov. 15. After a week limited to browsing, Maryland plans to hold an enrollment fair Nov. 15 in Glen Burnie and to offer limited access through call centers, "navigator" groups contracted to assist in enrollment and health departments. On Nov. 19, the public will get full access to the website, marylandhealthconnection.gov.

The staggered launch will allow exchange officials to test the new system again once it goes live and address problems early before it is deluged with users, officials said.

Other states, including Oregon and Massachusetts, also had to dump or retool their health exchange websites last fall, and the federal marketplace, which served 36 states, faced early troubles.

But in the end, the federal exchange exceeded expectations and enrolled more than 7 million people in private insurance plans. Eight million more accessed Medicaid, the federal-state program for the poor, and millions more gained coverage on state exchanges. Surveys, including one from the independent health research group Commonwealth Fund found that the percentage of uninsured nationwide might have dropped from about 20 percent to 15 percent.

Maryland enrolled about 450,000 people, the majority through Medicaid, though it is unknown how many already had insurance. Exchange officials said that about 10,000 of the 80,000 who bought private plans stopped paying, either because they moved, got a job that offered insurance or found little value in paying a premium for insurance.

Pollitz said others who kept their coverage could be put off this year when they discover that the dominant carrier in many states raised rates and the increase might not be covered entirely by their subsidy, which is calculated using the cost of a midprice plan in each state and a person's income.

In Maryland, CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield — which insured the bulk of those who bought private plans through the exchange — raised rates up to 16 percent for 2015 while other insurers lowered rates.

"The whole evolution of the exchanges is going to continue for a couple of years," Pollitz said. "It'll be a good idea for people to check in at open enrollment and see what is the new normal."

There could be more changes as Republicans across the nation look to the courts and their own new legislative powers, though their reach isn't yet clear.

In Maryland, the health exchange and Medicaid expansion were authorized by the Democratic-controlled General Assembly, and the quasi-governmental exchange is not overseen directly by state officials. It is run by a nine-member board, with six members appointed by the governor and three from state government.