A 92-year-old man with a cache of explosives he was using to build bombs at his home in a ghost town was apparently killed when one detonated, according to the Chaffee County Sheriff’s Office.

Friends of Edwin Bartheld found his body in a crawl space of his Turret home, after they hadn’t heard from him for more than a week, a sheriff’s department release said.

One of his friends called 911 to report discovering the body shortly before 3:30 p.m. on Friday. Bartheld had apparently been dead for several days.

Investigators don’t believe that there is any danger to the public, Chaffee County sheriff’s patrol Cmdr. Derek Bos said. “We do feel there was a very specific motive; however, we don’t feel there is any threat to the public or even a targeted person.”

Initial observations suggested he died of a self-inflicted gunshot wound, but authorities changed their minds after discovering a large cache of explosive devices and chemicals commonly used for manufacturing explosives.

“We believe it was an accidental explosion that killed him” at the home near Salida, said Bos.

A widower, Bartheld lived alone. Public records show that his wife, Jean Therese Bartheld, died in 2012.

Bartheld hadn’t completed building the bombs when he died, Bos said.

“He was still in the manufacturing process, which is one reason we believe it was an accident. Had he finished the process, there would have been a bigger explosion,” Bos said.

Deputies and investigators left the home after discovering the explosives and called for the Colorado Springs Regional Explosives Unit and other hazardous materials teams.

“On Saturday, members of the bomb squad and HazMat teams located large quantities of chemicals used for manufacturing explosives, along with several homemade detonators and homemade explosives inside the house.

“The explosives were removed and safely detonated by the specialists while HazMat team members identified chemicals and mixtures to assure they were stable prior to their removal from the house,” the release said.

Turret is “kind of a resuscitated ghost town,” Bos said. “There’s quite a few people who live there. It is like most ghost towns; everything is a mining claim and they build houses on the claims.” Bos estimated that about 50 people live in the town.

The community is on Route 184, a gravel road, about 13 miles north of Salida.

Bos wouldn’t elaborate on a motive, saying that the case remains under investigation. An autopsy Monday will determine the cause of Bartheld’s death.