Senator Ted Cruz smiled while delivering remarks at Liberty University in Virginia during his announcement Monday that he is running for president.

Check out five opinions trending online, from Irrational Exuberance author Robert Shiller to a little sunshine on open records.

Ted Cruz on Obamacare? Ted Cruz told CNN’s Dana Bash that he’ll be getting health insurance through his US Senate plan now that his wife is on leave from her job at Goldman Sachs. That’s the plan better known as Obamacare, writes Erik Wemple for the Washington Post.

Advertisement

“Yes, there’s irony there, as Bash noted in her interview. Cruz’s statement means that he’ll be getting insurance through the Affordable Care Act, the same law he has committed himself to repealing.” Read more.

Threat to Israel: Writing for Fox News, columnist Cal Thomas blasts President Obama for negotiating with Iran, calling it a deadly threat to Israel.

“In his determination to strike a deal with Iran over its nuclear weapons program (which Iran has denied exists, so what is the US negotiating?), President Obama has traded history, facts, and reality for a potential deal with a regime that promotes terrorism around the world and is busy attaching Iraq to its vision of a greater Persian Empire.” Read more.

Hillary emoji: Cartoonist Barry Blitt nails it for the upcoming New Yorker cover: check out his array of Hillary Clinton emoji. Spoiler alert: no server is featured. You can find the cover here.

Robert Shiller on income inequality: Yale economist and Nobel laureate Robert Shiller talks about income inequality, bubbles, predictions, and growing up in Detroit in a wide-ranging Q&A with Matt Phillips on Quartz.com.

Advertisement

“I wrote a dissertation called Rational Expectations and the Term Structure of Interest Rates. That presented a rational expectations model, which was the fashion at the time. And then I didn’t really believe my own work. And I finally corrected myself . . .” Read more.

A little sunshine in Massachusetts: After the Boston Globe, Boston Herald, Patriot Ledger, and GateHouse Media stood together to demand action on open records, a little sunshine streamed in, writes the editorial board of the Patriot Ledger.

“In the week following an unprecedented coordinated effort by The Patriot Ledger, Enterprise, Boston Globe, Boston Herald and all of GateHouse Media Massachusetts urging the state to make public records public, we’ve witnessed a seismic shift in the attitudes of Beacon Hill power brokers,” the editors write. “While Secretary of State William Galvin’s recent rulings allowing police the discretion to decide which arrest records they will – and will not – publicly disclose precipitated the editorials, all noted Massachusetts’ public records law is one of the weakest in the nation.” Read more.