The scandal surrounding the Department of Veterans Affairs over the deaths of 40 veterans reportedly caused by delayed care and allegations that VA officials have been deceitfully concealing wait times is shameful.

As the scandal grows, lawmakers and the American Legion have rightfully called for VA Secretary Eric Shinseki’s resignation.

Arriving late for his scheduled White House remarks, President Obama, appearing detached, said he was “mad as hell” and, “If these allegations prove to be true, it is dishonorable. … If there is misconduct, it will be punished.”

If they are true? The VA itself has admitted that veterans are dying due to delayed care!

Barack Obama did not wait for an investigation before he accused white Cambridge police officers of “acting stupidly” when they arrested Obama’s belligerent friend, Henry Louis Gates.

He did not waste time pouring gasoline on the racially charged shooting death of Trayvon Martin when he said, “If I had a son, he’d look like Trayvon.”

And he did not wait to get all the facts before he commented on the Donald Sterling controversy when he called the 80-year-old Clippers owner “ignorant” and used Sterling’s remarks as an example of white racism in the U.S.

Obama has no problem coming to erroneous conclusions on racial matters that divide this nation, but he won’t do the right thing to aid our nation’s veterans. Our vets are dying, and this president is engaged in political damage control.

This is willful negligence at the highest level.

Here’s what we know so far: At least 26 Department of Veterans Affairs health-care facilities are under investigation for chronic mismanagement and for providing inadequate care. A database of paid claims by the VA since 2001 includes 167 claims in which the wording “delay in treatment” is used in the description. The VA paid out a total of $36.4 million to settle those claims, either voluntarily or as part of a court decision.

And most egregious – Phoenix VA officials have been covering up long wait times for treatment using a secret wait list.

In 2008, then-Sen. Obama blasted President George W. Bush, calling the ongoing issues with the VA facilities “an outrage, “a betrayal” and adding that we “are all dishonored.” The Bush team briefed Obama’s transition team about the problems, yet Obama expects us to believe that he’s just finding out about this. Give me a break!

To add insult to injury, Fox News reported that al-Qaida detainees in Guantanamo Bay prison receive better care than our veterans. Gitmo’s doctor-to-patient ratio is 1.5 to 1, while the VA health-care ratio is 35:1. Now that is inexcusable and dishonorable!

Barack Obama is no fan of the military. Under his watch, the military is being severely downsized. Our armed forces are being emasculated, and morale is at an all-time low.

An unprecedented number of generals and colonels who don’t like the direction Obama is taking the military in are being “purged.” So far, some 197 officers have been removed over the last five years and, according to reports, their civilian hierarchy removed many of these high-ranking officers because of minor infractions and for political reasons.

We know that this administration lies, scapegoats and obstructs to get what it wants.

When Muslim terrorists attacked a U.S. consulate in Benghazi, killing four Americans including Ambassador Christopher Stevens, this administration blamed a YouTube movie for inciting the attack to conceal Obama’s re-election campaign lie that al-Qaida was “on the run.”

Obama faked outrage and promised to investigate IRS targeting of tea-party and other conservative groups. When damaging reports came out revealing that conservative groups were, indeed, being targeted and scrutinized by IRS official Lois Lerner and others, Obama ran interference and publicly claimed there was not a “smidgen” of evidence of targeting – before the investigation concluded.

The Obamacare roll-out was an epic failure. The administration stalled, blamed the website and, when the American public’s outrage finally reached fever pitch and his friends in the mainstream media started reporting the truth, that’s when Obama pulled his head out of the sand and fired the clueless HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius.

Let’s not forget the Operation Fast and Furious gun-running scandal during which this administration was sending illegal guns to Mexico. Obama and AG Eric Holder are still refusing to cooperate with the House probe into the illegal operation that claimed the life of a U.S. border agent and contributed to hundreds of deaths in Mexico.

This administration is good at covering up, and if we don’t demand accountability for the VA scandal, it will bury this issue and desecrate the memory of our veterans by turning this into another political circus.

On Memorial Day, a time when we as a nation remember and honor those brave soldiers who have sacrificed for our national defense, we cannot tolerate dishonor being heaped upon our wounded warriors and their loves ones. VA Secretary Shinseki must go! And we must stand as one and demand that Obama be held fully accountable – this time.