Second baseman Scooter Gennett (left) and shortstop Jean Segura were out of the Milwaukee Brewers' starting lineup Sunday because both have experienced quadriceps tightness. Credit: Journal Sentinel files

SHARE Video Loading... 2014 MLB Playoff Odds An interactive visualization breaks down FanGraphs.com's playoff projections as well as projected regular season wins.

By of the

St. Louis — Baseball is a tough sport to play with nagging injuries because there are games almost every day, providing little time for recovery and/or preventive maintenance.

Second baseman Scooter Gennett and shortstop Jean Segura were out of the Milwaukee Brewers' starting lineup Sunday because both have experienced quadriceps tightness. Gennett supposedly had recovered after missing several games in July with that issue, but he suffered a recurrence Saturday night trying to beat out a double-play grounder.

Manager Ron Roenicke conceded it would be tough for those health issues to go away completely without an extended period of rest, which the Brewers can't afford with the pennant race heating up.

"It's to the point that I don't like (Gennett) out there knowing that he can't go full-out every time," Roenicke said. "He can control it a little bit running the bases. But I told him, 'You've got a ground ball you've got to go over in the hole for; you've got a pop-up behind you that is a big play. So what are you going to do? You've got to go.'

"That worries me. I don't want him going down for two weeks or whatever could happen.

"Seggy is off for the same reason. It's been bothering him for a long time. He missed a little time with it, but it hasn't gone away. It's not worse but it's not to the point where he can go full-out all the time. I'm hoping these two days (including Monday off for the team) help these guys. It is a time of the year where you have some things that seem to linger.

"I don't think we can afford to lose either one of them for an extended period of time....These guys understand where we are in the season and how important the wins are."

Gennett, who pinch hit in the ninth inning with two on and one out, and struck out against Cardinals closer Trevor Rosenthal, conceded that he's going to have to be careful and not do something silly to make the problem worse.

"It's just one of those things that obviously isn't going to really go away," he said. "It probably will eventually. I just need to watch out, how much I'm using it. I can't go out all-speed every time.

"That's usually how I play. I'm running out every ground ball no matter what the case is."

Asked if it would help to shut it down for a while, Gennett said, "I did. I took, like, five days off, and it felt good. Then it just got a little tight on me again. I think it's just one of those things where us as players learn how to play through some things.

"At the same time, if I get on and I'm the winning run and I'm at second base, I don't want to not be able to score for my team."

Cardinal killer:Elian Herrera, who started in place of Segura at shortstop, has nine hits in his last 14 at-bats against the Cardinals, and has raised his season average against St. Louis to .448 (13 for 29).

"He's normally a better left-handed hitter than right-handed, but he had the good at-bat (Saturday) right-handed," Roenicke said. "We'll see. I haven't seen enough of him at shortstop to know how good of a shortstop he is. He has played second base more than short."

Lohse rolled ankle: As it turns out, right-hander Kyle Lohse rolled an ankle backing up home plate in the second inning Saturday night during the Cardinals' five-run rally. Lohse went out and pitched a 1-2-3 third inning, surrendered a run in the fourth and then retired none of the four hitters he faced in the fifth.

Lohse matched his career high for runs allowed with nine but never mentioned the ankle as a factor.

"We found out about it before the (third) inning and he goes out and has his best inning," Roenicke said. "It's sore today. He said he was fine, so he went out for the fourth. So, I'm thinking, 'Is this affecting him? Is it not?' It's hard to know."