It’s China and an ulstrasound reveals an unborn baby girl in a family known to use abortion to make sure its offspring are male.

Into action jump workers for Womens Rights Without Frontiers, offering help to the mother so that she can carry the baby to term.

But when the baby is born, it’s a boy.

“The ultrasound was wrong,” a report from Reggie Littlejohn, of the WRWR organization, explains. “In tears, the mother thanks us for saving her son, almost lost because he was expected to be a girl.”

The report of the mistake and the miraculous results of the intervention of the international organization that fights gendercide – the decision to abort based on the sex of the unborn child – comes just as the international community recognized Friday as the International Day of the Girl Child.

A report from Littlejohn explains the trauma facing unborn baby girls.

“For most of us, hearing ‘it’s a girl’ is cause for enormous joy, happiness and celebration. But in many countries, this announcement is a death sentence. Experts estimate that up to 200 million women are missing in the world today due to gendercide, mostly in China and India.

Read the amazing and uplifting story of the man who has saved 40,000 babies and counting from certain death! Get your autographed copy of “The Pink Pagoda” today!

“This should not be a pro-choice or a pro-life issue. This is a human rights issue. Gendercide is violence against women and girls. No one supports the systematic elimination of females,” the report said.

“Or so I thought. Just last week it was reported that it is now legal to selectively abort girls in the UK,” she continued, “Where is the ‘feminist’ outcry? How does it advance women’s rights to selectively abort hundreds of millions of girls, simply because they are future women? When faced with human rights atrocities of this scale, silence is complicity.”

But she said there are all too many situations where “gendercide” isn’t a choice.

“There is a strong correlation between sex-selective abortion and coercion. Crushing social, economic, political and personal pressures in cultures with a strong son preference trample women carrying girls. Women in these cultures hardly select their daughters for abortion. They are forced,” the report said.

“In China, the birth ratio of girls to boys is the most skewed in the world: approximately 100 girls born for every 119 boys. Sons traditionally carry on the family name, work the fields, and take care of their parents in old age. A daughter joins her husband’s family at marriage. There is a saying: ‘Raising a girl is like watering someone else’s garden.’ The One Child Policy exacerbates the underlying son preference. When couples are restricted to a coercive low birth limit, women often become the focus of intense pressure by their husband and in-laws to ensure a boy.”

The result is that now, according to expert estimates, there are 37 million more males than females living in China.

That results in human trafficking and sexual slavery, the report said.

“It is a woman’s right to choose to give birth to her daughters. Together, China and India comprise one third of the world’s population. That one-third of the world’s women are deprived of their right to bear girls is the biggest women’s rights abuse on earth. This violent discrimination against women and girls deserves a passionate response from groups that stand for women’s rights, whether on the right or on the left,” the report said.

The foundation explained that it actually was a hospital administrator who alerted Women’s Rights Without Frontiers that the ultrasound had indicated the unborn baby was female.