The “Obama phone” isn’t dead in Florida, but the number of households receiving a discount or a free cell phone through the Florida Lifeline program decreased to 833,162 customers from 957,792 a year ago.

That means that one out of every 10 Florida households received either a $9.95 discount on their monthly phone bill or a free Lifeline cell phone with 250 free monthly minutes as of June 30, a Florida Public Service Commission report released Friday shows.

That amounted to $100 million in discounts and free phones for the 12 months ended June 30.

The program was not started by President Obama, and actually dates back to 1985.

Lifeline became a political issue in the 2012 election when opponents tagged it as the “Obamaphone program,” after a video featuring an Ohio supporter of Obama touting the availability of the phones for low-income residents went viral.

To see the video, go to youtube.com/watch?v=tpAOwJvTOio

All telephone customers pay for the free and discounted service through the Universal Service Fund fee on their bills.

The telecommunications providers collect the fees and turn them over to the federal government.

To read the Lifeline report, click here.

The 13 percent decrease in the number of participants from 2013-14 is attributed to subscribers failing to respond to re-certification efforts, the success of fighting fraud waste and abuse in the program, and the initiation of the National Lifeline Accountability Database.

“Participation rates continue to prove that Lifeline is an important program for Florida families,” said PSC Chairman Art Graham. “Lifeline provides the assistance many need to afford phone service, an everyday necessity to connect with family, friends, doctors, and employers. The program also promotes public safety by providing access to 911.”

Enrollment in the program in Florida peaked at 1.04 million households in 2012.

That was before a new Federal Communications Commission mandate that each customer be re-certified to determine whether he or she still qualified for benefits.

The FCC rules also limit benefits to one phone line — either mobile or land line, per eligible household.

The program has become controversial, as its cost has grown nationally from $800 million in 2005, when cellphone service was added, to more than $2 billion in 2012.

Congress enacted it in 1985, and it was expanded under President Bill Clinton in 1996.

As in past years, the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP) is the largest qualifying program for Lifeline Assistance in Florida.

In Florida, 21 telecommunication companies participate in the federal Lifeline program.

SafeLink Wireless had the most Lifeline customers in Florida in June, with more than 450,000.

In January 2015, the PSC began receiving complaints from consumers that TracFoneWireless,d/b/a SafeLink Wireless,was signing up consumers using only a veteran’s status as a qualifying Lifeline criteria, which it is not.

Further complaints and inquiries by PSC staff indicated SafeLink agents were using qualifying criteria such as being a law enforcement officer, a firefighter, a state employee, or just a resident of Florida as qualifying criteria for consumers to sign up for Lifeline, which they are not

On August 4, 2015, a conference call was held with SafeLink management to discuss this matter. SafeLink management advised the PSC staff that all agent signups in Florida had been suspended that day pending further investigation. Since that time, SafeLink fired the agent company responsible for signing up the ineligible consumers to Lifeline.

As a consolation to those veterans who have received a SafeLink phone but are ineligible,

SafeLink is allowing them to keep the handset and is providing free minutes to them

each month until the end of 2015

In addition, SafeLink self reported the agent scheme to the Federal Communications Commmission and Department of Justice in addition to reimbursing the federal universal service fund over $11 million.

Studies have found that while the program has helped low-income people, others who were not qualified received the discounts and phones, in some cases multiple phones from various companies.

To read more click here for a recent Georgetown University study on the issue.

To apply for Lifelife assistance, Florida residents can call their local phone company, the PSC at 1-800-342-3552, or the Office of Public Counsel at 1-800-540-7039 for assistance. Information is also available at www.floridapsc.com and www.floridaopc.gov/Pages/Lifeline.aspx

Every year, the PSC’s Lifeline Report is sent to the Governor and Legislature, as required by Section 364.10, Florida Statutes.