Time for a new chapter – that’s how Sean Kolmer described his decision to resign as Governor Kate Brown’s health policy advisor. He held a similar position under former Governor John Kitzhaber.

In early August, Kolmer joins the Portland office of Health Management Associates as a principal, working alongside Tina Edlund, the managing principal.

Kolmer has a fantastic background in health policy and deep experience in research and analytics, Edlund told The Lund Report.

Edlund’s also has recruited Dr, Jeanene Smith, the chief medical officer for the Oregon Health Authority who’s been involved with Oregon health reform over the past 15 years. Smith comes on board in late September.

“We’re building an incredibly strong office in Portland,” Edlund said. “We plan to add principals who bring in expertise from health plans and from private and public health care delivery systems. I look forward to the work we will get to do together, supporting health system transformation at every level, in Oregon and across the country.”

Earlier, two colleagues of Edlund from the Oregon Health Authority -- Cathy Kaufmann and Nora Leibowitz – joined as consultants.

Edlund has been one of the most high profile healthcare officials in state government, having been Governor Brown’s federal liaison for healthcare, and led the transition of the eligibility and enrolment functions for Oregon’s health insurance exchange to the federally facilitated marketplace. Following the departure of Dr. Bruce Goldberg in 2013, she stepped in as acting director of the Oregon Health Authority and was responsible for the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Oregon.

Edlund joined the state in 2006 as deputy director of the Office for Oregon Health Policy and Research and later became chief of policy for the OHA.

“It’s a real exciting opportunity, and the timing was right” she said. “I’ll be doing work around Medicaid waivers, state innovation grants in Oregon and be working around the country.” HMA has offices in 16 states and more than 140 multidisciplinary consultants coast to coast.

In Portland, HMA is building an office of 8-10 principals who will have an array of expertise relevant to health system transformation and delivery of care. “We've captured great talent from the public sector and will also be bringing in principals with health delivery, commercial market and finance expertise,” Edlund said.

HMA is an independent, national research and consulting firm specializing in publicly financed health care including policy, programs and reform. HMA provides leadership, experience and technical expertise to government agencies, public and private providers, health systems, health plans, institutional investors, foundations and associations Diane can be reached at diane@thelundreport.org