Refreshed from a 10-day holiday in Italy, Stephen Domenici returned to score the winner for the Cooma Tigers and give Canberra FC its second straight defeat.

Cooma jumps to outright second on the Canberra National Premier League table, just one point behind ladder-leading Belconnen United and with a game in hand.

The Tigers now two points clear of third-placed FC, with fourth and fifth-placed Canberra Olympic and Tuggeranong United another point further back.

On target: Stephen Domenici. Photo: Jeffrey Chan

The game at Nijong Oval on Sunday was locked at nil-all at half-time and Domenici was brought into it.

Advertisement

Goran Josifovski opened the scoring for Cooma about 10 minutes after the break, before FC striker Domenic Giampaolo was credited with the leveller, although there were suspicions it was an own goal.

It looked to be heading towards a draw until, with about five minutes left on the clock, Domenici got round the back of the FC defence down the left and found himself with just the keeper to beat.

He calmly slotted it in at the far post to give the Tigers the three points, although they finished the game with 10 men when Dejan Santrac received his second yellow card.

Cooma will be bolstered further by the return of full-back Cristobal Soza, who arrived from Chile on Thursday and will be available for selection next week against Olympic.

"Very good win. It was a very close game, very even and everyone played well," Cooma coach Gaby Wilk said.

"In the first half we missed two or three chances.

"We're coming second but still they've played one game more."

FC coach Ray Junna said it was rare for the club to lose two games in a row and said he knew that if it didn't turn it around he might be out of a job.

But he didn't think it was panic stations just yet.

"If we were losing three or four nil then we might be panicking, but we've lost by the odd goal and we haven't been at our best," Junna said.

"We know we can do better. We just need to get a bit of a mindset there.

"We've got a little bit too comfortable and complacent and other teams have come out and thrown down the gauntlet and we haven't responded."

It took an own goal by Canberra City's James Ward to give the Monaro Panthers a 1-0 win, while the FFA Centre of Excellence was too strong for Woden Valley, winning 4-2.

CANBERRA NATIONAL PREMIER LEAGUE

Monaro Panthers 1 (James Ward (og) 19’) bt Canberra City 0; Cooma Tigers 2 (Goran Josifovski, Stephen Domenici) bt Canberra FC 1 (Domenic Giampaolo); FFA COE 4 (Jamal Reiners 2, Jamie Dimitroff, Peter Kekeris) bt Woden Valley 2 (Conor Nolan, John Gibson).