The boss of failed airline Air Australia has returned to the travel sector in a senior management role despite being banned by the corporate regulator over conduct that critics claimed wreaked "havoc" in the industry.

The Australian Securities and Investments Commission last year disqualified Michael James from managing corporations for three years for failing to act with care and diligence in the lead-up to the spectacular collapse of the airline in February, 2012.

The company was $97 million in debt when it went into voluntary administration leaving creditors, investors and travellers out of pocket. Approximately $36 million was owed to ticketholders and 4000 passengers were stranded when its flights were suddenly grounded.

Mr James has returned to the industry, apparently in a management role in his wife's online discount travel company Bestjet.

Advertisement

Mr James had been using the title "commercial manager" before he was disqualified by ASIC in November. Documents seen by Fairfax Media show Mr James has continued in a similar role managing some of the financial affairs of the company, although he has since removed the title from official correspondence between Bestjet and its business partners and clients.

Bestjet declined to reveal what Mr James' position is at Bestjet, only confirming he is an employee that is not involved with the day-to-day management of the company.

Australian Federation of Travel Agents chief executive Jayson Westbury said Mr James' involvement in the company raised "serious concerns".

"The travel industry is still reeling from the significant financial losses to which there are no make-good strategies," Mr Westbury said.

"He caused so much havoc."

Bestjet said its management team was made up of Mr James' wife Rachel James, who is the owner and manager, and Scott Mayne, who is its general manager.

A statement from the company said that it complied with the Corporations Act, that it was operating profitably and it had met "all the financial criteria requirements" with the International Air Transport Association.

The company described itself as a successful start-up business with a "growing clientele".

Bestjet Travel was registered with ASIC under Mrs James' name a fortnight after the collapse of Air Australia.

An ASIC spokeswoman said in investigating a breach of a management ban, ASIC would consider evidence a person made or participated in making decisions that affect the business, if they are in a position to affect a company's financial standing and are communicating instructions or wishes outside the scope of their position in an organisation to directors.

The spokeswoman would not say if it would investigate Mr James' current position.

that's the thing that everyone can't fathom, he's got whatever he's caused so much havoc... that he's working in the travel industry... i can't understand how ppl get away with this... 36 million worth of consumer money lost

that's the thing that everyone can't fathom, he's got whatever he's caused so much havoc... that he's working in the travel industry... i can't understand how ppl get away with this... 36 million worth of consumer money lost

that's the thing that everyone can't fathom, he's got whatever he's caused so much havoc... that he's working in the travel industry... i can't understand how ppl get away with this... 36 million worth of consumer money lost

he's not involved in day to day operations.... same type of position in one document same issue is still doing it questions raised about his role in the company