Middle school students spend a day of experiencing high school band during the third annual music festival

Thompson Valley High School student Trevor Rodriques, 18, left, and Alysa Bohm, 13, a Bill Reed Middle School student, share a laugh Friday, while rehearsing during the third-annual music festival. Middle school students get a taste of what high school band is like and learn from the high school students. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Middle-schooler Justin Selbert is ready to join Thompson Valley's band after spending the day Friday at the school playing his saxophone alongside the older students.

"It's just amazing fun to do it, the people you meet and how it sounds and feels when you complete a piece," the Bill Reed Middle School eighth-grader said.

Justin, 13, was among the 117 middle- and high school students who took part in the third-annual music festival for Bill Reed and Walt Clark eighth-graders hosted by the Thompson Valley Band Boosters.

"When you move into high school, that's when you have to make choices about electives," said Jeanette Minnich, vice president of the Thompson Valley Band Boosters. "If they get in there and see how fun it is and get to play with and meet the high school musicians, then they find out how much fun it is. It makes it less intimidating to join marching band in the fall."

Approximately 60 eighth-graders spent the day at Thompson Valley High School, alternating between rehearsing as a group with the high schoolers led by band director Adam White and breaking out into sectionals to work with different instrument groups. They prepared for a performance that evening at the school, working on high school level concert music.

"We do it so that the younger students get an opportunity to play high school music, as well as work with professional players for a good chunk of the day and see what the Thompson Valley music program is all about," White said. "I hope they get excited about being in band in high school."

Advertisement

The middle- and high school students practiced the music in six sessions, half as a large group and half with their instruments, for about one hour each. The instrumental groups, led by professional musicians, were for flutes, clarinets, double reeds, trumpets, horns, saxophones, low brass and percussion instruments.

In their groups, the students worked on particular sections of the music, focusing on tone, rhythm, dynamics or the loudness of the music, and putting musicality into each piece instead of simply playing the notes on the page, White said.

"I loved the opportunity to work with a whole bunch of younger kids who are going to be my future band members," he said. "The music sounds really good. When you're playing in a group, there's definitely strength in numbers."

Flute instructor Amanda Orihuela of Denver worked with 10 flute students on issues specific to their instrument and tricks they can use to get through a passage of music, she said.

"I can tell them how to practice it," she said, explaining that if students practice on their own, they may repeat their same mistakes and not move forward.

Nick Rose, a percussion instructor from Fort Collins, worked with 15 percussion students during the instrumental groups. He gave a tour of 20 instruments, explaining the basic techniques for playing them and their roles in an ensemble. He worked with the students on keeping time with the ensemble and adding to the melody, he said.

"The better you are at percussion, the more fun it is, the more you add to the ensemble," Rose said.

The high school students also taught the younger students as they played together.

"I'm teaching them how to project their tone and also how to be sensitive with the instrument, so they can learn how to control the sound," said Zach Mast, a 10th-grader at Thompson Valley who plays the clarinet.

The younger students saw the benefits of working with their future peers.

Evan Zhou, an alto saxophone player at Walt Clark Middle School, liked being able to play with the students who he'll be playing with next year.

"I'm learning how to play music further, because it's high school music," the 14-year-old said. "You have an example of how to learn and what to do. It's a lot easier than learning it by yourself."

Bill Reed Middle School eighth-grader Alysa Bohm liked seeing the differences between playing for a middle versus a high school band.

"I think it's much more difficult and complex. Being here and having to split up in sectionals is different," the 13-year-old said. "Normally, we're the smaller band that's playing all together."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm