A candidate who was poised to win a Texas State Board of Education seat suffered an astonishing primary runoff loss Tuesday after a watchdog group exposed her Facebook posts hawking conspiracy theories.

Retired schoolteacher Mary Lou Bruner shared at least a dozen far-fetched stories to her personal Facebook page, claiming that climate change is a Communist plot, President Obama hustled as a gay prostitute in his youth and Democrats were behind John F. Kennedy’s assassination.

Mary Lou Bruner, 69, once claimed that President Obama was a gay prostitute and climate change was a Communist plot. (Mary Lou Bruner)

Mark Lane, JFK assassination conspiracy advocate, dead at 89

The 69-year-old had been expected to snag the GOP nomination in early March, when she came within two percentage points of outright victory. Following the whirlwind of controversy, she lost 40% to 59% to crowned nominee Keven Ellis on Tuesday.

“Texas escaped an education train wreck tonight,” Texas Freedom Network president Kathy Miller said in a statement as primary results trickled in.

Bruner made claims about the President's past in a June 2015 post. (Facebook)

“If Bruner had ultimately won election to the board, she would have instantly become the most embarrassingly uninformed and divisive member on a board that already too often puts politics ahead of making sure our kids get a sound education.”

Bruner (right) prays at the start of a Texas State Board of Education meeting to debate Islam and Christianity in textbooks. (Jay Janner/AP)

The left-leaning watchdog group feared Bruner would gain the power to push personal political views in textbooks and curriculum selection for the state’s K-12 students. In 2011, the Texas State Board of Education rejected proposed creationism and intelligent design materials as an alternative to evolution in science classes.

New celeb conspiracy claims Beyoncé has been cloned

She linked climate change to Karl Marx in another post. (Facebook)

In posts dating back to 2013, Bruner claimed humans lived alongside dinosaurs and added they went extinct in a Biblical flood, not due to a meteor smashing into the Yucatan Peninsula.

She also believed pre-K programs were designed to make children gay and Obamacare was implemented to reduce the nation’s population by 200 million.

Prof. who claims Newtown is hoax suing university that axed him

Bruner defended her social media activity to WFAA-TV over the weekend.

“When I wrote those things, I wasn't even intending to run for the State Board of Education,” Bruner said. “I had no idea that I would.”

With News Wire Services

nhensley@nydailynews.com