It looks like the courts may yet do what Congressional Republicans have so far been unable to – put a significant dent in the Affordable Care Act. A ruling from a district court in Oklahoma released earlier this week signaled another victory for critics of the Affordable Care Act. Although this ruling will be appealed, it’s a good reminder that even as anti-health care reform law sentiment may be cooling, challenges to its success still remain.

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

The Oklahoma case is the most recent ruling in a line of cases that have challenged the legality of the subsidies provided by the Affordable Care Act for the purchase of health insurance on the federal exchange. The judge in this case ruled that the subsidies cannot be provided to residents of states that are using the federal exchange. I wrote earlier this year about the devastating effects removing these subsidies would have on the insurance market and the overall success of the new health care law, effectively removing access to insurance from those who need it most.

A majority of the states are still relying on the federal government to operate their health insurance exchanges. A Supreme Court ruling against allowing the subsidies in those states would have far-reaching consequences. The Oklahoma ruling follows an announcement by the D.C. Circuit Court of Appeals earlier this month in the Halbig v. Burwell case that it will re-examine its earlier ruling against the subsidies and allow the case to be reheard in front of the full panel of judges in December. Another decision released by the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals in Richmond, Virginia, this past July ruled in favor of the subsidies.

[MORE: Cartoons on Obamacare]

This potentially significant court activity is coming at a time when the Affordable Care Act seems be losing its potency as an election year issue. According to the Wall Street Journal, voters no longer see the law as a “top concern,” and are instead focusing on a wide array of issues. Further, the Wall Street Journal points out that “the debate is shifting. For a long time, the issue was so politically toxic that Democrats avoided the subject. Now a handful of House and Senate candidates are promoting the law, albeit gingerly. They focus on popular provisions such as bans on insurers denying coverage to people who already are sick or charging women more than men.” If voters have moved on to other issues, the momentum for legislative changes to the health care law will begin to ebb, removing one area of potential vulnerability. However, the change in political climate will not have any impact on the legal cases against the law still making their way through the court system.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

The Oklahoma ruling may not prove to be significant. As Washington and Lee law professor Timothy Jost told Politico, “This is only a district court decision and the court stayed its effect until the government has a chance to appeal to the 10th Circuit.” Professor Jost further explained that he “would expect the Supreme Court to await a circuit split, and currently there is none with the Halbig judgment vacated.” However, the ruling does keep the legal case against a central part of the Affordable Care Act alive and thus, still bears watching.