Topics: Amy Schumer, Editor's Picks, Inside Amy Schumer, Louis CK, Saturday Night Live, Television, TV, Media News, Entertainment News

It’s been Amy Schumer’s year — a critically acclaimed comedy show, an Emmy, and a hit movie that helped debunk the myth that no one wants to watch comedies with female leads — so of course she’s hosting “Saturday Night Live” this weekend. Considering that she’s the host and star of her own sketch comedy show, this one has a good chance to be a stronger episode than those that have to work around people who aren’t comedy actors, or even actors at all.

Of course, the real question is whether or not “Saturday Night Live” can or will even bother to come close to some of the searing satire that Schumer brings to her own show, “Inside Amy Schumer.” Like most sketch comedy shows, “Inside Amy Schumer” is hit-or-miss, but when it hits, most frequently on the topic of gender relations, it’s often some of the funniest and most insightful stuff on TV.

Also now one of the most innovative. The stand-out episode of the season was an episode-long sketch that parodied the ’60s-era drama “12 Angry Men,” except instead of debating whether a defendant is guilty, the men were debating whether Amy was hot enough to be on basic cable. It really shouldn’t have worked, between the outdated reference and the fact that most sketches are too long at 5 minutes. But somehow it came together to be one of the most memorable moments in Comedy Central’s history, up there with the best “Chappelle Show” episodes and some early “South Park.”

It worked for the reason that a lot of Schumer’s best comedy bits about gender and sexism work, because Schumer really gets, and is totally unafraid of targeting, the culture of toxic masculinity. Watching the “12 Angry Men” episode, it quickly becomes apparent that the ostensible topic — Schumer’s looks — isn’t really the point of it at all. Instead, Schumer is targeting the way that men talk about women’s bodies as a way to bolster their own egos and try to impress other men. Deigning a woman “hot or not” has little to do with actual sexual attraction and everything to do with trying to make other men think of you as studly and powerful, powerful enough to wave away a woman’s body as if you’re a king on a throne, declining gifts from your simpering supplicants.

But what makes the sketch really next level is that it when it turns, it does so in a humanizing, though still hilarious way. One by one, the men start to crack, admitting in turn that they don’t actually think that Amy is some kind of hideous troll. And while none of them end up coming across as some kind of prince, it cleverly revealed the core of vulnerability and fear that often lays behind this kind of masculine bravado. Months before the #MasculinitySoFragile hashtag took off on Twitter, Schumer had created the masterpiece on the theme.