Aiming for zero waste represents a culture change

Jackie Meyer's passion for recycling means The Buff Restaurant diverts more than 95 percent of its waste from the landfill.

The bustling breakfast and lunch spot fills large dumpsters with recycling and compost every week, but gets by with just a single residential-sized container for trash.

Training for new employees includes a quiz on which items go in the compost, recycling and trash. Composting and recycling bins are integrated into the work stations so it's easy on employees. Meyer looks for compostable packaging when she makes her purchasing decisions.

"Every item that we have, there is a place for it," Meyer said. "The bottom line is being mindful."

Meyer has been passionate about recycling since she was in sixth grade, but her restaurant only started composting last year, when it moved to a new location at 2600 Canyon Boulevard. At the old location as part of the Best Western Golden Buff Lodge, Meyer wasn't allowed to compost because the hotel worried about flies and the extra truck traffic disturbing hotel guests.

The Buff sets the standard for what Boulder officials and zero waste advocates hope to see more of when the city adopts commercial recycling and composting requirements next year.

And the previous obstacles are the kinds of barriers the city wants to get businesses and property owners to overcome.

The Boulder City Council expressed support for mandatory commercial recycling, as well as composting at restaurants and grocery stores, in July, and the city convened a working group this month to help develop the parameters of the program.

The working group has met once already and will meet twice again before year's end.

Once the group settles on a set of recommendations, city officials will hold at least one public meeting, create an online forum and do targeted outreach to affected businesses before presenting an ordinance to City Council in February.

'You need to have enforcement resources'

The waste diversion rate for single-family homes is around 48 percent, said Kara Mertz, Boulder's local environmental action manager. It's 21 percent for multi-family homes and 28 percent for commercial.

"We've had voluntary programs for commercial recycling for several years, and we've kind of stalled out," Mertz said. "If you look at communities that have made more progress toward their zero waste goals, they all require it."

Dozens of communities around the country already require commercial recycling, though commercial composting is less common.

Mertz said the questions before the working group involve the kind of phase in period the city should allow, what exemptions, if any, the ordinance should include, and how enforcement should be approached.

Waitress Jessica Helt dumps recycling in the bins outside the Buff Restaurant on Wednesday. (Paul Aiken / Daily Camera)

In a survey of cities and counties with mandatory recycling prepared by Eco-Cycle, most communities offered assistance to businesses that were in violation to help them meet the requirements and never had to fine anyone.

"You need to have enforcement resources, and you need to have fines on the books, but you need a way to bring people into compliance and that's far more common than actually issuing fines," Mertz said.

Mertz said a lot of the challenges seem to involve education and processes.

In some multi-tenant commercial buildings, the owner provides a dumpster for recycling, but tenants either don't know they are there and find them too inconvenient.

Other businesses don't recycle because they haven't developed a process to sort types of waste.

60 to 65 percent diversion 'very easy' to reach

Working with employees to integrate composting and recycling into their jobs has been key to the St. Julien Hotel and Spa's success in diverting waste, said James Farrell, the hotel's sustainability director.

The St. Julien's ownership group made a commitment in 2007 to increasing landfill diversion, and the hotel's waste diversion rate is now at 80 percent.

The first step was instituting recycling, with sorting all waste behind the scenes, with the exception of a recycling bin the guest rooms.

Accounting for 40 percent of the hotel's waste stream, composting made an even bigger dent, Farrell said.

All the restaurants and caterers who use the hotel compost and recycle. Paper towels have been replaced with cloth, and conferences now only get plastic water bottles if they request them. Otherwise, guests pour water from carafes into glasses.

"There are significant gains to be had right up front," Farrell said. "You get the bins in place. It's a small change in the training process, and honestly a change in the culture, but it's very easy to get to 60 or 65 percent (diversion)."

Farrell and Meyer both said the additional cost of recycling and composting is largely balanced out by less money spent on trash service.

A representative of the Boulder Chamber of Commerce couldn't be reached before Thanksgiving, but the chamber has previously said it supports increased recycling but would rather see assistance and incentives than mandates.

The Chamber is represented on the working group.

Farrell said businesses don't need to fear recycling and composting requirements.

"Some businesses worry about the training component, but from our experience, many of our associates are already very knowledgeable, and they're excited about the change," he said. "It's not an uphill battle. And it shows them there is an environmental value system, and when people feel like they're working for an employer with values, they're a little more committed."

Erica Meltzer: 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/meltzere