Monica Lewinsky speaks out on cyber-bullying; silent on adultery, sexual predators

Back in the 1990s, Monica Lewinsky's name actually became a catchphrase. When men said, "I'd like a Lewinksy, please," they weren't referring to a kind of beer. Lewinsky shamefully had an affair with Bill Clinton, performing explicit acts in the Oval Office, underneath his desk, while he was on the phone with congressmen and foreign leaders. But the Times and the liberal media are now treating her like a returning hero. In a fawning piece entitled "Monica Lewinsky is back, but this time it's on her own terms" (which unfortunately suggests that last time she was on her back and subject to someone else's terms), the Times talks about how the great Lewinsky dispenses her oral wisdom.

Monica Lewinsky was sitting in a Manhattan auditorium last month, watching teenage girls perform a play called “Slut.” Ms. Lewinsky was in blue jeans and a blazer, her hair pulled out of her face with a small clip. She was wiping away tears. The play concluded, and Ms. Lewinsky fumbled through her purse for a tissue. A woman came and whisked her to the stage. Lewinsky even had a TED Talk. What did she talk about, you may wonder? She "issued a biting cultural critique about humiliation as commodity." She really had a TED talk! This is not tongue-in-cheek! (I suppose you have to always stipulate that where Ms. Lewinsky is concerned.) Writers always say that you should write about what you know. And Ms. Lewinsky is an expert on at least two subjects: adultery and sexual predators. She knowingly engaged in a relationship with not just a married man, but the president of the United States. That's unconscionable, even if Mr. Clinton's marriage with Mrs. Clinton is only a sham one. The other topic she could have spoken on is sexual predators. Mr. Clinton is accused of having sexually assaulted Kathleen Willey and sexually harassed Paula Jones. Liberals who constantly cry about a "war on women" were curiously silent about these accusations and still are to this day. They love Bill Clinton no matter whom he is accused of molesting. Which gets us closer to the question of why the press is fawning over Ms. Lewinsky. Part of it, I think, is a love for sexual liberation. The left believes in free love, unencumbered by marriage, and adultery in the Oval Office was a new high or low for them, depending on your point of view. But another part of it is that the left adores Bill Clinton, and Ms. Lewinsky was his aide. She serviced him differently from how his other aides did, but you could say she was his aide nonetheless. She even absorbed a sample of his DNA, so a piece of Bill Clinton will always be with her. In a small way, she is a monument to Bill Clinton, someone who forever touched her life in a highly personal way. If Barack Obama, who has exhibited a fondness for separate vacations from his wife, even taking separate jets to California at the same time he and his wife are going there, is ever found to have employed mistresses, I am sure they will become instant celebrities, too. Pedro Gonzales is the editor of Newsmachete.com, the conservative news site.