DAYTON, Ohio — In addition to spending too much, one of the biggest risks facing holiday shoppers is the security of their personal and financial information, say cybersecurity experts.

A year after a pre-Christmas data breach at Target Corp., which affected 40 million debit and credit card records, the chance of another large retailer suffering an attack is highly likely, said Chris Hart, operational risk director for Cincinnati-based First Financial Bancorp. Michaels Stores Inc., Home Depot, JPMorgan Chase & Co. and others followed in Target’s wake with their own security lapses in 2014.

Because of the magnitude of compromised data this year, the biggest concern for holiday shoppers is how their already stolen information — such as credit card numbers, user names and passwords — will be handled during the busy spending season, Hart said.

“What we’ve seen with the breaches announced by Target and Home Depot and JPMorgan Chase is that we’ve put in jeopardy millions of consumers’ personal information,” he said.

“That loss of personal information is now going to be leveraged by fraudsters who will combine different pieces of that information in opening up unauthorized lines of credit and leveraging it for highly profitable fraudulent endeavors.”

Shoppers should be on high alert for suspicious activity on their bank accounts during the weeks between the Thanksgiving and Christmas holidays.

The number of breaches tracked by the Identity Theft Resource Center, a nonprofit group that provides counseling services to identify theft victims, has risen 25 percent in 2014 from the year before. The counseling center compiles media reports and records obtained from state attorneys general and has found about 679 data breaches nationwide so far this year.

Data breaches occur when fraudsters break into computer systems to steal consumer names, payment card numbers, medical records and other information. Personal cellphones, tablets and computers infected by malware through phishing emails and other scams can also be breached, Hart said.

In fact, Hart says, the next big data breach has already happened, but the affected company just doesn’t know it yet because it can take weeks to months to detect.

Retail breaches are attention-grabbing, but according to the National Retail Federation, more breaches occur at government agencies (13 percent) and financial institutions (34 percent). The trade group says 10 percent of breaches are at retailers, and 11 percent are at hotels and restaurants.

Not all data breaches are created equal, adds Eva Velasquez, chief executive of the Identity Theft Resource Center, based in San Diego. The risk is different for each disclosure because it depends on what information has been compromised.

“When it’s a matter of simply payment card information, that is generally less difficult to remediate and does less extensive damage,” Velasquez said. “When you have a debit card compromised, there’s potential a thief could go in and clear all your accounts.”

“If there’s a breach where other sensitive, personally identifying information is compromised, like your Social Security number and date of birth, things of that nature, that can be much more devastating,” she said.

“That actually gives the thief the ability to act as you,” she said. “They can file for government benefits in your name; they can file a false tax return.”

Perhaps most troubling is that consumer data are no safer now than in past years, despite increasing reports of security failures, said James Thurston, spokesman for the Ohio Bankers League.

“Sadly it isn’t, and the reason why not is because the hackers, cybercriminals are getting more sophisticated. We’re talking about organized crime in places like Russia, China and Eastern Europe,” Thurston said.

“The retailers’ defenses have not kept pace with the sophistication of hackers,” he said.

Chelsey Levingston,

Dayton Daily News

AT A GLANCE

Here are tips to help consumers better protect their information:

Know that online shopping is riskier than brick-and-mortar sales. Online shoppers should be wary that the website they are browsing is legitimate. Today, a lot of imitation websites look like the real thing. Make sure the hardware and software being used to browse hasn’t been compromised by a virus or malware. At an online checkout, one of the things to be aware of is that the session with the retailer is secure. The way to tell is to look for “https” in the website address and look for the “s” at the end. If there’s no “s,” don’t add any personal information or credit card number through that website.

Activate online banking alerts to receive notifications of account activity.

>Especially online, pay with a prepaid card or credit card because there are more protections. With credit cards, there’s a zero liability or minimal liability for customers from fraudulent charges. Also, the Fair Credit Billing Act gives customers the right to dispute credit card charges and temporarily withhold payment while the dispute is investigated.

Review financial statements to make sure debit and credit card transactions are reconciled accurately. Shoppers are encouraged to keep receipts for all purchases, in the store and online, including order numbers and warranties. That way, when it comes time to reconcile purchases with a statement, those records are available. In previous data breaches, criminals have attempted to post a small charge to check for live accounts or to see whether a consumer is monitoring an account. Larger fraudulent charges could occur hours, weeks or months later.

Alert the bank or credit union immediately if fraudulent charges or debits are suspected.

Take advantage of free credit monitoring services if provided by affected impacted retailers. Consumers should deal directly with the retailer to avoid falling prey to phishing scams or other fake credit monitoring offers.