Pent up demand accelerates hopes

Owners' autos are aging and new tech is alluring, but sales might hit potholes

The industry sold 15.6 million vehicles in 2013, which is 1 million more than in 2012. The sales forecast for 2014 is expected to exceed 16 million vehicles, the most since 2007.

The auto industry will keep close tabs on the Chicago Auto Show, examining which vehicles attract the most, as well as the least, attention and whether consumers are in a mood to buy.

The reason for optimism is the same as in 2013: pent-up demand. The average age of vehicles on the road is 11, and consumers want and need to upgrade to higher-mileage, safer, higher-tech vehicles with the latest electronic gadgets and creature comforts. But they need economic confidence and stronger housing and job markets.

"The housing market isn't growing sharply, but it's coming back. That's still a plus," says Joe Phillippi, analyst with the AutoTrends research and consulting firm.

"Offering lots of new vehicles is another positive and always forces major sales activity," notes Karl Brauer, senior analyst for Kelley Blue Book, an online automotive research and information service. Automakers plan more than three dozen new or redesigned machines in 2014, with General Motors alone promising more than a dozen.

But potential roadblocks loom.

"The big worry is jobs and creating enough, since when you run out of jobs, you run out of customers," Phillippi says.

It's the types of jobs too.

"Higher-paying jobs (that) people need to buy a new car are difficult to find," says Art Spinella, general manager of CNW Marketing Research, which specializes in why people buy the vehicles they do.

Another concern is how the Affordable Care Act will shake out.

"If we see big increases in health care premiums, it would get ugly and come down to being able to afford a new car or health care," Phillippi says.

Looking at market segments, the minivan market is soft, with no new products, and motorists moving into crossover SUVs instead.

Also soft is the full-size sedan segment, since a host of new midsize units is arriving with expanded dimensions for added cabin and trunk space to compete against the higher-priced, lower-mileage full-size sedans.

Electrics have generated more attention than sales. Pure electrics with batteries only sold about 47,600 vehicles in 2013, while plug-ins with batteries and a small gas engine to extend range sold about 49,000. Those 96,600 vehicles combined are up 84 percent from 2012 but still a tiny fraction of total industry sales.

Analysts say electric-vehicle growth was prompted by sharply lowering prices to lure consumers, noting that EV sales rise when gas prices rise — or when EV prices fall, factors that can't be guaranteed.

In contrast, hybrid gas/electrics with unlimited range and no need to recharge batteries posted record sales of 489,413 in 2013, and 450,000 diesels were sold.