The Key to Finding Passion Later in Life

SARA LAWRENCE-LIGHTFOOT: Several of the women and men I interviewed for my book, “The Third Chapter” talk about “boundary crossing” as the source of their passion and the impetus for new learning in their retirement, as they shift the direction and focus, rituals and rhythms of their lives.

They speak about boundary crossing in many ways—crossing disciplinary boundaries, crossing the boundaries between art and science, crossing geographic and generational boundaries, crossing the boundaries of race and class, work and play.

As they navigate these borders, people begin to enlarge their repertoire, their range of choices, perspectives and frameworks—their ways of being in the world. The boundary crossing often leads to a surprising and paradoxical result. Rather than living and learning on either side of the border, people resist the either/ors and find a way to incorporate both realms. They are able to embrace both; in fact it is the synthesis and integration of the old and the new that nourishes the passion; the border crossers travel far, but never leave home.

Consider one successful 62-year-old entrepreneur I’ve spoken to at length, who jets all over the world scoring big deals.

He has always believed that despite the array of technologies he uses every day—smartphone, email, Facebook, Twitter, webinars—the best deals are made face-to-face. There is no substitute for gazing into someone’s eyes, watching someone’s body language, and feeling someone’s handshake.

But recently this entrepreneur decided to take an online university course in music theory, something he had wanted to learn since his days playing the saxophone in his high-school jazz band.

Music has always been the thing that makes him feel most alive, and he had always been curious to know the “logic and design” behind jazz music, the basic structures that allowed for improvisation. So even though he is a face-to-face kind of guy, he decided to “cross the border into cyberspace.”

Now after a high-powered meeting at the Taj Mahal in New Delhi, he finds himself racing back to his hotel room and logging on to the computer to complete a homework assignment.

Not only does the learning online require a “different kind of discipline” and a “private kind of accountability,” it also seems to combine the odd sensation of intimacy and anonymity with his long-distance professor.

In cyberspace, he experiences a new kind of creativity, a new way of learning, and renewed passion. He feels freer to ask “dumb” questions, freer to take risks, freer to fail. He says, “Cyberspace is my new frontier.” Grinning, he shifts metaphors, “I feel like a kid in a candy shop!” Work crosses over into play. The distance between New Delhi and New York City disappears into nothing.

This entrepreneur feels himself drawn back home, to the echoes from his childhood, to the music he loves that knows no geographic boundaries.

Sara Lawrence-Lightfoot is the Emily Hargroves Fisher professor of Education at Harvard University. She is a MacArthur prize winner and author of the recent book, “EXIT: The Endings that Set Us Free.” Her website iswww.saralawrencelightfoot.com.