Dean Adams sits outside his antique shop on East Washington Street in downtown Walterboro. Adams, a staunch Republican, says the party's candidates reflect his values.

Tuesday may go down as the election in which South Carolina shrugged.

Sandwiched between hotly contested U.S. Senate races in North Carolina and Georgia, the mood among South Carolinians has been mostly calm and predictable - a reflection of the state's solid status as a GOP stronghold.

But the direction of the state and the country is very much on people's minds, even if Tuesday's vote is not, according to interviews in three of the state's swing - or "purple" - counties.

From Newberry County's magnificent opera house and newly-refurbished Main Street to the Colleton County courthouse to the highways of Florence County, voters are focused on jobs as the economy continues what many hope is a slow march upward.

Gov. Nikki Haley's record on jobs has much been front and center, and many are glad that's where her focus lies, while others see the need for change in education, health care and transportation.

Haley has held a comfortable lead over Democratic contender Vincent Sheheen in the polls, but the past week has seen independent Tom Ervin throw his support behind the state senator from Camden.

Here is a snapshot of what was on voters' minds as Election Day drew near.

A sense of hope in Newberry

Larry Hensley swayed in a yellow rocking chair on a sidewalk that runs up Main Street in Whitmire, a tiny hardscrabble mill town in northern Newberry County. Hensley had the sidewalk and most of the street to himself.

Hensley, 61, was born here and remembers when Whitmire hummed with the steady thump of the cotton mills and the thousands who worked there.

He was one of them - Hensley put in 15 years at the J.P. Stevens textile mill, which shut down in the early 1990s. The plague-like forces that pushed manufacturing jobs abroad in the U.S. swept through the town again in 2009 when the town's other mill, Renfro Corp., shut down. The abandoned brick buildings and steel structures sit at the edge of town, with a "For Sale" sign in front.

But Hensley pointed to a storefront with a green canopy across the street where a friend plans to open a salon. Main Street's few buildings have also gotten fresh paint and new lights, and Hensley talked with pride how the community rallied to save its school from closure.

"This is a strong community," said Hensley, who said he will be voting for Haley.

"Nikki Haley ... she has brought jobs to South Carolina," Hensley said. "Those jobs unfortunately didn't come to this town." But he hopes they will soon.

Others in Newberry County - a county of 37,000 that leans Republican but counts several Democrats in local office - say while the economy here isn't back to where anybody wants it to be, the county's fortunes appear to be improving.

The county's growing sense of optimism for local efforts helps explain why next week's election isn't at the forefront of many people's minds, according to interviews with residents, including local officials and business owners.

Galen Roche, 30, a candidate for Whitmire Town Council, said he has not decided on all the candidates on Tuesday's ballot and said he believes Whitmire is on the upswing - even if the state fails to lure a new industry here.

"If we could get some industry in there, great," he said. "If not, we'd still be fine."

Newberry Mayor Foster Senn described the town's political mood this way: "There doesn't seem to be a big push to throw anybody out or a big push to get behind somebody and stick them in there."

The county has seen its refurbished Victorian-era opera house draw acts and plump up local businesses. A 1-cent sales tax for infrastructure has yielded projects everyone is proud of, officials said.

Dawn Graham said she hasn't had much time for politics lately. After the 28-year-old went back to school to study fashion, she opened the store Making it Personal on Newberry's Main Street.

Business is going well, and she's noticed that more in Newberry are making it a point to shop there rather than heading to Columbia or elsewhere. "We are really picking up in Newberry," she said.

Not all voters here are basing their decision on the economy, however. Sandy Woolbright of Main Street's Woolbright Florist, has seen business pick up, but she said that the state's education system hasn't advanced under Haley and is supporting Sheheen.

"I hope to see a change in the governor's mansion," she said.

'So many people could get so much more'

In Walterboro, the Colleton county seat, political activity is so slow this election season that long-shot Republican candidate for Congress Anthony Culler took to walking the streets of downtown trying to take advantage of the lull.

"No one comes here, no one campaigns here," he said as he targeted the quiet antique district at lunchtime Thursday.

Largely a political unknown, Culler shook hands and passed out business cards to anyone walking past.

"If you don't go and visit the people, what do you expect?" he added, pointing to voter apathy toward their politicians. "I wouldn't vote for them either."

He is trying to unseat 11-term incumbent 6th District Democrat U.S. Rep. Jim Clyburn.

The most visible reminders of this year's election are the many signs asking voters to support a local 1 percent sales tax increase to fund a laundry list of capital improvement projects.

Colleton County, just south and west of Charleston, has been a swing county in recent elections, but it also represents the shrinking rural sector of the state. Once known for its "Carolina Gold" rice production, the county's population has dropped steadily, going from an estimated 38,892 people in 2010, to 37,388 last year, according to census estimates.

That's a loss of more than 1,000 people in a county where jobs run scarce. Unemployment is at 7.4 percent.

The county's nearly 3 percent population decline is also the exact opposite of the 3 percent increase that the rest of South Carolina has experienced.

The majority of those who have been voting in recent years have split their tickets. Haley, for example, won here against Sheheen in 2010 by a 51-47 percent margin. But voters narrowly backed Barack Obama over Mitt Romney two years ago - by just 32 votes out of almost 17,000 cast.

Last week, voters who said they were looking forward to going to the polls on Tuesday cited several motivating factors.

"My primary reason is that I want Nikki Haley out of office," said Theresa Carey, 38, a medical biller, who traditionally votes Democratic. "I don't like the job she's done."

Carey, who recently moved to Walterboro from New Jersey to support her aging parents, points to Haley's refusal to expand Medicaid in the state under the Affordable Care Act. "This is a beautiful state and so many people could get so much more help than what is allowed here," Carey said.

Others downtown said they were more inclined to vote a straight Republican ticket. Dean Adams, 48, owns one of the local antique shops. He said he goes Republican because that party more closely reflects his values.

"I think it's generally leaning socialist, than a true democracy," he said of the country's direction.

Adams said he doesn't totally support Republican U.S. Sen. Lindsey Graham but said he will likely vote for him and will vote for U.S. Sen. Tim Scott even more enthusiastically.

"Nikki Haley? I'm in line with her," he said.

David Glover, who said he votes the person and not the party, said his mind is still not set on most of the profile races. One thing he was still evaluating is who can best deliver jobs to Colleton,

"I hate to see the young kids come up and have their dreams squashed," he said.

Pragmatism in Florence

In Lake City, there are plenty of signs for local candidates but few for anyone running in a statewide race.

Earley Singletary, 83, was born in Lake City and has never left this town of about 6,700 residents.

He still has not decided who he's voting for Tuesday, but despite his ambivalence, he said he will go the polls out of a sense of duty.

"I keep looking at TV," Singletary said. "I keep looking at the news. Some politicians we just don't need."

Singletary said he is stubborn and doesn't pick politicians because of their party but based on what he feels will be best for the community.

This is a bipartisan place. Its veteran lawmaker, Senate President Pro Tempore Hugh Leatherman, is a Republican who switched from Democrat two decades ago. The county's voters have sent both Republicans and Democrats to the House. The county's seat, Florence, has a Democratic mayor, Stephen Wukela, who won his primary race in 2008 by a single vote.

"The Pee Dee as a whole, and Florence in particular, has for a long time been disadvantage with regards to the rest of the state," Wukela said. "It always seems like the I-95 corridor is the red-headed stepchild."

Wukela said he doesn't think citizens in other areas of the country would believe that some rural parts of the Pee Dee still exist, but the region is growing. The city alone has grown 25 percent in the last 10 years, Wukela said.

The power in Columbia also shifted to the Pee Dee region during the summer; Leatherman was elected Senate President Pro Tempore in June, while Rep. Jay Lucas, of Hartsville, ascended to the Speaker of the House position after Bobby Harrell stepped down.

Its voters are also pragmatic, which is why they don't vote a straight ticket, said Ken Ard, who was elected as South Carolina's lieutenant governor in 2010 but resigned after pleading guilty to mishandling his campaign account. He currently hosts "Good Morning Pee Dee."

"I think the majority of people in the Pee Dee are rubber-hits-the-road kind of people," Ard said. "And they're more interested in somebody who can get things done, than what (party) loyalties there might be."

Florence resident Lushaun Evans said the problem is that too many politicians say they're for one cause while they're running, then change their minds once they're elected.

As a barbershop and beauty salon owner, Evans, 41, said she no longer buys the pitch that politicians of either party are for small businesses. It has been rough keeping her business afloat, and she's witnessed her neighbors close shop after shop in the downtown area as rents continue to creep up.

While creating jobs would bring more traffic to the area, too many politicians don't keep their promises, Evans said.

Plus, she said she's tired of politicians only stopping by when they're actively seeking votes.

"They act so nice when they're running and as soon as they're in the chair, they change," she said. "I just vote for the ones who are for the people."