Jean Yang, the official who oversaw the botched rollout of the revamped Massachusetts Health Connector in 2013 and its smoother revival in recent months, is stepping down as the Connector’s executive director effective Jan. 16.

Yang will be replaced on an interim basis by Maydad Cohen, who has led the rebuilding of the Connector’s website as a special adviser to Governor Deval Patrick. The administration of Governor-elect Charlie Baker is expected to search for a permanent replacement.

Advertisement

Yang, who served in the post since January 2013, said her departure from the $179,243-a-year job represented a mutual decision among herself and the staffs of Patrick and Baker.

“This is very consistent with my personal long-term trajectory,” she said, adding that she was leaving the Connector “in a solid place.”

Yang made national headlines early last year when she broke down in tears at a meeting of the Connector Board, describing the staff’s frustrations with a failed website and a pile of 50,000 health insurance applications waiting to be typed into a computer. The website had to be updated in 2013 to comply with the federal Affordable Care Act, but the software performed poorly, leaving thousands unable to sign up for coverage.

Yang and others later defended her display of emotion as evidence of how deeply she cared. And on Tuesday, her staff pointed to her personal involvement in this year’s more successful effort, saying she attended enrollment events around the state and worked one-on-one signing up consumers.

“Personally, it has been a most rewarding experience,” she said of her time at the Connector, where she served as chief financial officer before becoming executive director.

Advertisement

Speaking at a telephone press briefing, Yang said she was not sure what she would do next, because conflict-of-interest rules made it difficult to look for a job while working for the state. But she hinted she would stay in health care. “This is a very, very exciting time for health care, especially in this market,” Yang said.

Yang, who holds a master of business administration degree from Harvard Business School, had been a health care management consultant and worked at Tufts Health Plan before joining the Connector.

In a statement, Patrick praised Yang’s service, noting that more people are covered and more insurers are doing business in the state since she took over.

“I appreciate Jean’s tenacity and determination under challenging circumstances and her service to the people of the Commonwealth,” Patrick said.

Nancy Turnbull, a member of the Connector board, said in a statement that Yang provided “steady, thoughtful, and classy leadership.”

Cohen said he is not in the running to be executive director permanently and expects to leave state government when open enrollment ends Feb. 15, or soon after. He said he will continue to draw the same $127,336 salary that he was receiving as a Patrick aide before he was tapped to lead the Connector’s recovery from its disastrous 2013 rollout.

Patrick described Cohen as “diligent, methodical, and unflappable” and a “superb problem-solver.”

“And as he solves problems,” the governor said, “he sees the people behind the policies.”

Related coverage:

• Health care site has a few glitches

• Editorial: Connector glitches mar sign-up, undermine promises

• Nearly 50,000 pay for care through Health Connector

• 1 in 10 hit snag on Mass. Health Connector site

• Health Connector website sees heavy activity on first day