A tip to Tucson police proved to be legitimate when officers arrested three people suspected of multiple burglaries in the Midvale Park neighborhood.



Gabriel Ramirez, Jorge Vega, and Leslie Soto were arrested at an empty home on W Burgundy Drive, according to Tucson Police Department.



Neighbors said police cruisers filled the street corner as officers closed in on the home.



A resident, who asked to remain anonymous out of fear that her house would be targeted, said she just moved into the neighborhood a few months ago. She was under the impression that it was a safe, quiet place, but the burglaries caused her to keep her grandchildren from playing outside.



Debra Darby, who lives in the neighborhood, said she’s relieved to know that someone’s being held responsible for causing so much trouble for families. She said she’s heard complaints from people afraid to leave their homes because of multiple burglaries in the area.



Darby said she’d see the suspects lingering around homes and then notice them later in the day with power tools or other objects.



“I’ve seen them walking down the street with the TV,” she said.



Investigators are still working to recover stolen items and additional criminal charges are possible, according to a news release from TPD.



Midvale Park recently hosted a National Night Out with the Tucson Police Department. Joe Miller, head of the neighborhood association, said it’s important for the community to have a positive relationship with local law enforcement but he believes there’s more that families can do to help combat crime.



Darby admitted that she doesn’t know her neighbors as well as she did when she first moved in nearly two decades ago, but that’s no reason to ignore crime that’s so close to home.



“You still look out for your neighbor, whether you know them or not,” she said. “Even though you don’t know them you’re still going to be neighborly and watch out for them.”



Copyright 2015. Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.