Job cuts stem from outsourcing some billing operations to IKS Health, a New York City-based company

Buy Photo Scott D. Hayworth, M.D., the president and chief executive officer of the Mount Kisco Medical Group, center, chats with Ross Levy, M.D. in the dermatology department Dec. 8, 2010. (Photo: File photo by Mark Vergari/The Journal News)Buy Photo

Mount Kisco Medical Group, one of the largest physician groups in the Lower Hudson Valley, is laying off 109 employees.

The company plans to finalize the layoffs within the next 90 days. Dr. Scott Hayworth, president and CEO, said the job cuts stemmed from outsourcing some billing operations to IKS Health, a New York City-based company.

Affected employees received written notices Monday, and they will receive severance packages, including several weeks of pay and benefits, which vary based upon the amount of time with the company, according to Hayworth.

"This is a difficult day for everyone at MKMG," Hayworth wrote in an email.

The company gave technology demands as the main reason it partnered with IKS for some billing operations. It also cited government regulations, such as the Affordable Care Act, increasing the amount of effort involved in billing and other record-keeping, which has prompted many doctors and hospitals to outsource related departments.

Established in 1946, Mount Kisco Medical Group has nearly 2,700 employees total and serves more than 500,000 patients, making it among the largest independent physician groups in the Lower Hudson Valley.

The group's doctors cover 40 different health care providers in Westchester, Putnam, Dutchess and Ulster counties.

The layoffs represent about 50 percent of its in-house billing operation. The company said the initial severance package spans six weeks of pay and benefits, following the initial 90-day period that starts Monday.

Eligible employees will also receive an additional week of pay for each full year of service at the group, up to an additional six weeks. They will also receive job-placement assistance, both internally and externally, the group said.

As for the MKMG patients, all calls to the billing department will be answered by IKS Health, according to Hayworth.

IKS Health is headquartered in New York City. The company also has offices in Alabama, California and Colorado, along with locations in India, according to its website.

Twitter: @DRobinsonLoHud

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1I2jtZa