Nickel rashes can affect people of all ages and usually develop after repeated or prolonged exposure to items containing nickel.

Do you have an unexplainable rash? If so, your iPad might be the problem.

An 11-year-old boy suffered from an itchy rash, and it turns out it may be from the nickel his first generation Apple iPad contains, according to a report released Monday in the journal Pediatrics.

The boy, whose name was not released, was treated at Rady Children’s Hospital in San Diego for a rash that developed all over his body. While the boy has a history of skin issues, this particular rash wouldn’t respond to typical treatment. His skin tested positive for nickel, which was traced back to his iPad he frequently used in the past six months.

Nickel is one of the most common allergy-inducing metals and has been traced to a variety of personal electronic devices, including laptops and cellphones. While nickel rashes aren’t life-threatening, they can be very uncomfortable and require possible treatment with steroids and antibiotics if the skin eruptions become infected, said Dr. Sharon Jacob, a dermatologist at Rady Children’s Hospital. Jacob also cited national data showing that about 25 percent of children who get skin tests for allergies have nickel allergies, versus 17 percent from a decade ago.

According to the article in Pediatrics, the boy had to miss school because of his rash. He was advised to use the Smart Case, “which provides overall coverage of the iPad, as opposed to the Smart Cover, which only provides coverage of the screen.” After using the Smart Case, his rash significantly improved.

It is uncertain whether all iPad models and other Apple devices contain nickel. Other common triggers for nickel allergies include jewelry, zippers, bra hooks, belt buckles, eye glass frames, metal tools, and keys.

According to Mayo Clinic, there is no cure for nickel allergy and once you develop the allergy you will always be sensitive to the metal and should avoid contact.