UNIVERSITY HEIGHTS, Ohio –- Want to know what’s happening in your community? Well look no further, because cleveland.com has you covered.

From local government and school news, to business and community events, it’s all right here.

Here’s a look at what’s happening in University Heights.

$2.5 million gift creates business ethics chair at JCU

John Carroll University alumnus Ray Smiley and his wife, Eleanor, of Solon, have agreed to fund a $2.5 million endowed chair. The Raymond and Eleanor Smiley Chair in Business Ethics will be part of the university’s John M. and Mary Jo Boler School of Business.

“Eleanor and I hope our gift will enable the university to further attract and retain the highest quality faculty and scholars and remind the academic world what an esteemed global, ethical business program predicated on 460 years of Jesuit educational excellence should resemble,” said Smiley, who is a 1951 JCU graduate.

John Carroll is conducting a national search for the inaugural chair in business ethics.

The Smileys made the gift in support of the university’s Forever Carroll Campaign, which has raised $63 million toward its $100 million goal. Visit www.forevercarroll.org to learn more about Ray and Eleanor Smiley.

Annaul Teacher Academy set for Nov. 13

The third annual Teacher Academy will be held from 9 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Nov. 13 at Tri-C Corporate College, 4400 Richmond Road, Warrensville Heights.

The TA provides opportunities for Cleveland area educators to share their strategies with their peers. This year’s theme is “Showcasing Creativity & Results in Primary Education.” The educators will meet for a full-day program of workshops, speakers and cross-district networking. They also can choose from four topics, ranging from instructional design to inspiring students to teaching techniques, for each of the four breakout sessions.

The annual event is presented by The Literacy Cooperative in cooperation with The First Ring Superintendents’ Collaborative, John Carroll University and WVIZ/PBS Ideastream.

Library to host Affordable Care Act info session

University Heights Library will host an Affordable Care Act information session at 3 p.m. today.

The library is located at 13866 Cedar Road.

Click here to register.

Call 216-318-6284 or email reporter Chanda Neely with news tips and information about events in University Heights.

Follow me on Twitter @ChandaNeely