Story is based on a Boston firefighter who rescued a dog that slipped through the ice in Pleasure Bay

“Sylvie and Sean” is based on a January 2014 real-life rescue in Boston Harbor. Hillsborough author Cheryl Filipak obtained details about the incident from the firefighter involved in order to re-create the events of that day. (Photo: COURTESY OF TATE PUBLISHING) Story Highlights The book “Sylvie and Sean” was taken from a true story that occurred in South Boston

Cheryl donated a kidney to her youngest sister, Roxanne Weisheit of Howell

Cheryl Filipak wrote her first children’s book in order to inspire young people to look up to and perhaps become true heroes. Filipak knows a thing or two about being heroic. In 1993, she stepped up to the plate and donated a kidney to her youngest sister, Roxanne Weisheit of Howell.

“My sister was diagnosed with Lupus at the age of 15,” Filipak said. “I did research and found out that Lupus often affects the kidneys. I always said, ‘If you need a kidney, I’m yours.’ ”

Filipak now is inspiring young readers with her new children’s book, “Sylvie and Sean.” The book was taken from a true story that occurred in South Boston, in which firefighters from Ladder 19 risked their lives to save a husky who had fallen through the ice in Pleasure Bay.

“I read about it on the Internet,” she said. “It was one of the wonderful things firefighters do in the winter during tremendous ice storms. I thought to myself that it would make a great children’s book.”

According to a January 2014 story on Boston.com, firefighter Sean Coyle pulled Sylvie, a 13-year-old husky, from the icy waters of Boston Harbor after she broke away from her owner and fell through the ice. Coyle donned a special survival suit and ventured out 30- to 40-feet onto the ice in a specialized basket with a rope attached to him. Sylvie treaded water for nearly 30 minutes before Coyle was able to rescue her from the frigid water.

Filipak thought about all the lessons that kids could learn from one simple story.

“Sean could not save the dog alone,” she said. “The book teaches the importance of teamwork, perseverance and cooperation. It also gives children real heroes to look up to, not just superheroes in the movies.”

While writing the 24-page book, Filipak communicated with Coyle, trying to get a mental picture of what went on that day and what the firetruck and equipment looked like so her story would be as accurate as possible.

“I told him if I made any money from the book, I would give a donation to the firehouse,” she said. “He loved the idea.”

Filipak began working as a teacher in the Newark school system in 1994 and she now mentors teachers in the district. She is using the book, which was released this month, as a lesson for the students from preschool through first grade.

“As an educator, I love to read and write, so writing a book was a natural fit for me,” she said.

The mother of two adult children and also a singer in a Pink Floyd tribute band, Filipak has written articles throughout the years for various magazines, such as travel and Christian publications.

“I love writing, but I also love working in a school setting, so now I have the best of both worlds,” she said.

Her own heroic journey began in 1993, when she donated her kidney, knowing the odds of her sister’s survival were better if the organ came from a relative.

“We were very blessed and lucky that we both survived,” she said. “It was wonderful that I was able to save her life. The doctors who performed the transplant are my heroes.”

Filipak said she wants to write more stories for young children because that is the age where they can be influenced the most.

“We don’t know how many people we inspire when we do something good,” she said. “Reading real stories sends positive messages to children. Anyone can be a hero. You don’t have to give a kidney or risk your life. Doctors, lifeguards, even teachers are heroes. There are heroes all around us, and I have so many more stories that I want to write.”

Sylvie and Sean is available for $8.99 at Amazon.com, Barnes & Noble and Tate Publishing.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1ENUkvO