LOMA LINDA >> The newly appointed interim chief executive of Loma Linda University Medical Center said his key objective will be to “reconfigure and focus on the new paradigm created by the Affordable Care Act.”

Kerry Heinrich was appointed to the post, which also includes serving as the interim administrator of Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital, late Tuesday night.

He will assume the leadership role on July 1, as he replaces Ruthita Fike, who was the CEO for the past 10 years.

Heinrich, a Loma Linda attorney, has done legal work for the organizations that comprise Loma Linda University Health for 30 years.

Loma Linda University Health includes eight professional schools, Loma Linda University Medical Center’s six hospitals and more than 800 faculty physicians. “Loma Linda (University Health) is not operating in the red,” Heinrich said. “It is (financially) strong...there is not a single healthcare organization that doesn’t wish its bottom line was better.”

One of the more immediate issues Heinrich said he would confront was to separately license Loma Linda University Children’s Hospital, which has been operating under the license of the medical center.

The main reason for the change is the way reimbursements are handled under the Affordable Care Act, Heinrich said.

As a separately licensed organization, LLU Children’s Hospital will be able to apply for program funding specific to free-standing children’s hospitals, Heinrich said.

This would include residency programs, he said.

In the more distant future, Heinrich said he would be involved with the plans for new towers for both the children’s hospital and the main hospital.

The issue will involve “the right sizing” of LLU health facilities to account for both future growth and the Affordable Care Act.

“This is a key area of focus” for health institutions around the country, he said. In this reconfiguration and re-engineering of services, which is prompted by Affordable Care Act, the Loma Linda Health organization wants to “continue its position of leadership,” Heinrich said.

The future CEO of Loma Linda Healthcare said he is excited to be working with the SAC Health Systems, which spun off from Loma Linda University Health in order to qualify for federal programs under the Affordable Care Act.

SAC Health Systems, a safety net provider, plans a 150,000-square-foot downtown campus on 215 Freeway frontage property west of San Manuel Stadium.

Advertisement

Although legally separate, Loma Linda Health remains intertwined with SAC Health in regards to resident training and other aspects, Heinrich said.

“They are part of our core mission,” he said.