Inversion rules skip earnings stripping

With help from Toby Eckert

STRIP AWAY: Well, we thought Treasury might take aim at earnings stripping in its second round of regulations on Thursday. But no dice.

Story Continued Below

Instead, Treasury Secretary Jack Lew rolled out a set of more moderate rules to tamp down the offshore tax deals — like not allowing a U.S. company to merge with a foreign rival and then take shelter in a third country. The Obama administration also seeks to stop the foreign partner in a merger from artificially inflating its size to skirt anti-inversion rules, and to beef up the substantial business exception by forcing a new foreign parent company to be a tax resident of the country where it was created.

Our Katy O’Donnell has more: http://politico.pro/1LpfgdK

Some of the highlights — Treasury officials think the third country rule is likely to have the most teeth. And administration officials swear up and down that Pfizer’s talks with Allergan aren’t why we’re seeing the new rules now. “We’re really not focused on particular companies or particular transactions,” one Treasury official said.

Fair enough, because experts like Steve Rosenthal at the Tax Policy Center say the new rules wouldn’t be much of an impediment to a Pfizer deal. “These measures are technical changes around the edges,” Rosenthal told The Financial Times. “It’s a welcome mat for Pfizer to combine with Allergan and strip its earnings.” http://on.ft.com/1l8vdiZ

WSJ reports on a new potential wrinkle for that deal: Allergan, despite being the smaller company, might actually “buy” Pfizer, which could skirt anti-inversion rules. http://on.wsj.com/1kIA4In

AND YES, ANOTHER WEEK IS ALMOST IN THE BOOKS — and it couldn’t come sooner for those of you who maybe had one drink too many at the Tax Foundation's tax prom last night. (We’ll also take this time to say happy birthday to Morning Tax’s dad and, I guess, Joe Biden.) Let us know what’s going on. Email: bbecker@politico.com, teckert@politico.com, bfaler@politico.com and kodonnell@politico.com. Twitter: @berniebecker3, @tobyeckert, @brian_faler, @katyodonnell_ , @POLITICOPro and @Morning_Tax.

MORE, MORE, MORE ON INVERSIONS: It’s probably not a surprise, but neither Republicans nor Democrats were overly satisfied with the latest action. Democrats like Ron Wyden and Sander Levin applauded Treasury for trying to limit inversions but agreed with Lew that the situation cries for congressional action. Republicans like Orrin Hatch and Kevin Brady agreed that Congress should be the one making tax policy but also warned that the new rules could have the unintended consequence of pushing more companies offshore.

** A message from The ADvertising Coalition: Last year, advertising expenditures and sales supported by advertising accounted for $5.8 trillion — or 16 percent — of all economic activity in the U.S. Advertising also supported more than 20 million American jobs in 2014, and is projected to create 3 million more by 2019. A new study out today: http://bit.ly/1HyR39M. **

SLOW GO ON EXTENDERS TALKS: The bad news, as our Brian Faler reports, is that this year’s extenders talks aren’t exactly proceeding swiftly.

But the good news is that this is far from tax writers’ first rodeo when it comes to restoring extenders, and this year’s debate over whether to extend some of the incentives for good sounds awfully similar to the 2014 negotiations. So we’re pretty sure things can escalate quickly.

Brian writes that tax aides are getting deeper into discussion, which could lead to a bigger deal than just a two-year extension. But Levin said the current talks are “very preliminary.” And Hatch, while hoping for a deal to materialize shortly after Thanksgiving, didn’t sound overly confident about getting anything permanent: “You never know — we might be able to pull it off.” More from Brian: http://politico.pro/1SJ15G1

SANDERS ON SOCIALISM: Sen. Bernie Sanders sought to wrap democratic socialism in the cloak of FDR, in his long-awaited speech on the topic. POLITICO's Gabriel Debenedetti: “At times, the address was an echo of his stump speech, down to individual statistics on income inequality he likes to repeat at his signature mega rallies.” http://politi.co/1OhS9GH

But if you were looking for a little more detail on Sanders’ tax plan, well, you left disappointed. Sanders gave the usual spiel about corporations and the wealthy needing to pay more, the scourge of Cayman Islands tax strategies and the need for both an estate tax and Wall Street transactions tax. “Greed for the sake of greed is not something public policy should support,” Sanders said.

There was this little bit of wiggle room, however, after Hillary Clinton has been making the case that Sanders would have to raise taxes on the middle class to finance his wide range of domestic initiatives: “I believe that most Americans can pay lower taxes — if hedge fund managers who make billions manipulating the marketplace finally pay the taxes they should.” Whole speech here: http://bit.ly/1I1ZF3u

IRS NEEDS YOU: Congratulations, you. First, Time’s Person of the Year, and now an IRS deputy in the fight against identity theft.

More from Katy: “The agency launched a 'Taxes. Security. Together.' initiative, releasing a YouTube video and a fact sheet urging taxpayers to, among other things, “treat your personal information like cash, don’t leave it lying around.” http://politico.pro/1MFu8GD

IRS chief John Koskinen said the rationale for the new program is pretty simple: “The criminals are evolving, and so must we.” And one of the best ways to box out potential thieves, Koskinen added, is to make sure your personal data is secure.

HIGHWAY UPDATE: We’ve now officially got until Dec. 4 to put together a new highway bill. But Lauren Gardner over at Pro Transpo reports that Sen. Jim Inhofe, a key figure on highways, says there could be big news on that front today. Stay tuned. http://politico.pro/1Oi9grD

Lauren and Heather Caygle also write about another highway twist: New York lawmakers trying to find a ride for health benefits for 9/11 first responders on the highway bill. http://politico.pro/1l7Yt9H Lauren adds: Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, who’s urging a resolution to the lapsed program and a companion compensation fund that runs out of money next year, proposed paying for the bill this week by closing a tax loophole, according to the Poughkeepsie Journal. CBO has scored the bill as costing between $8 billion and $11 billion, and that offset has seen daylight in both a GOP tax overhaul proposal and in President Barack Obama’s budget requests. The Huffington Post reported Thursday that Senate Finance Chairman Orrin Hatch said he, too, could support the idea to pay for 9/11 health care.

CELEBRITY INTERLUDE: You might have heard that the actor Charlie Sheen announced he was HIV-positive this week, and that he went public in part to end a cycle of extortion. Robert Woods, a Forbes contributor, says Sheen and his lawyers were almost certainly thinking about taxes as well. Woods points to the recent trial of former House Speaker Dennis Hastert, among others, as he makes the following case: “Hush money — even blackmail — has probably been claimed on more tax returns than you might think. Bribes and illegal payments are nondeductible, but it’s often not so clear exactly what something is.” http://onforb.es/1I1FuCQ

TAX PROM UPDATE: The Tax Foundation went bipartisan with the honors at its 78th annual gala last night, giving distinguished service awards to both Sen. Rob Portman and Robert Stack, Treasury’s deputy assistant secretary for international tax affairs.

STATE NEWS —

GOLD(EN) STATE: Nearly 60 percent of the deals inked by the California Public Employees' Retirement System (CalPERS) with private equity firms allow the firms to reduce their tax bills, Reuters reported. CalPERS, the largest public retirement fund in the country, often agrees to waive management fees, which are subject to ordinary income tax rates. Instead, that money is treated as a “capital contribution” and taxed at lower capital gains rates. “This is basically a tax-avoidance strategy from the GPs [firms’ general partners]. … It is a controversial practice but one that does persist in the industry,” CalPERS senior staff counsel Marte Castanos told Reuters. http://reut.rs/1O6q6vC

LITTLE HOPE FOR N.J. TAX RELIEF?: New Jersey residents hoping for some property tax relief may have to wait a while. In fact, the Asbury Park Press reports, some tax increases may be in store. “During a panel discussion, [state lawmakers] agreed that New Jersey’s highest-in-the-nation property tax is a concern, but they focused much of the discussion at potentially raising a different tax. Democrats on the panel said replenishing the state’s transportation trust fund is the top issue facing the Legislature and that hiking the gasoline tax is an option to address it.” Republicans, who are the minority in the state Legislature, were frustrated. “All we’re talking about is raising taxes. But first why don’t we talk about some tax that we can lower?’’ the newspaper quoted Republican Assembly Leader Jon Bramnick saying. http://on.app.com/1kI5oqq

STICKER SHOCK: St. Louis County officials are promising to promptly refund overcharges in tax bills mailed out to a whopping 380,000 homeowners and businesses last week. The officials blamed the problem on a software glitch, the St. Louis Post-Dispatch reported. “The county said the errors resulted in average overcharges of 71 cents on road and bridge taxes, $24 for the Clayton school taxes, $133 for the Parkway school taxes and $1 for Clayton property taxes.” http://bit.ly/1Lo6BYW

QUICK LINKS

— The Justice Department announced three more settlements under its Swiss Bank Program: http://1.usa.gov/215RC1j

— Trump adviser Carl Icahn is no fan of limited government: http://cnb.cx/1NenD39

DID YOU KNOW? Charlie Sheen once owned the baseball that infamously went through Bill Buckner’s legs during the 1986 World Series.

** A message from The ADvertising Coalition: If you think the economic benefits of advertising stop at Madison Avenue, think again. Last year, the U.S. advertising industry supported 20 million jobs across the country in all economic sectors, like agriculture, manufacturing, healthcare and retail.

A new study released Monday finds that advertising activity represented $3.4 trillion, or 19 percent, of U.S. GDP, a number just short of the total GDP for Germany. The study was commissioned by The ADvertising Coalition (TAC) and spearheaded by the Association of National Advertisers (ANA), which represents more than 680 companies and 10,000 top global brands.

Companies need advertising to reach customers and stay in business, which is why this year 88 Members of Congress signed a letter to maintain the treatment of advertising as an ordinary and necessary business expense as it has been for 102 years.

Read the study and learn about the economic benefits of advertising at http://bit.ly/1HyR39M. **