The outright ban on ICD-10 coding implementation set forth in a new proposed bill introduced into the House of Representatives by Representative Ted Poe (R-TX) on April 30 has a fair amount of debate on both sides of the equation.

While coders, billers, and health insurers as well as the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) strongly believe in the importance of the ICD-10 coding implementation and transitioning by October 1, smaller healthcare providers struggling to afford the upgraded systems and overburdened by meaningful use requirements feel that the ICD-10 transition will not improve patient care but merely put more hardships on front-line providers. Essentially, some providers claim that the ICD-10 transition will benefit insurers more than patients or doctors.

“The new ICD-10 codes will not make one patient healthier,” Representative Poe explained in a public statement. “What it will do is put an unnecessary strain on the medical community who should be focused on treating patients, not implementing a whole new bureaucratic language. Instead of hiring one more doctor or nurse to help patients, medical practices are having to spend tens of thousands just to hire a specialist who understands the new codes. Big government must get out of the way and let doctors do what they were trained to do – help people.”

Nonetheless, Poe’s new bill – called Cutting Costly Codes Act of 2015 – will keep the US medical community from moving forward with international coding upgrades and require hospitals and clinics to maintain an out of date coding set. The majority of first world countries around the globe have transitioned to the ICD-10 codes years ago while the United States continued to delay the ICD-10 coding implementation for several years.

Poe is not the only politician who could have a negative impact on the ICD-10 coding implementation, as Senator Rand Paul (R-KY) also continued to mock the international coding set on May 10 in a keynote speech given at the Iowa Lincoln Day Dinner in Cedar Rapids, Iowa.

Senator Rand Paul poked fun at some new codes in ICD-10 that include animal injuries including bird-related and turtle-related injuries. Paul also gave significantly misinformed information at the dinner when he associated the ICD-10 coding implementation with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, colloquially known as Obamacare. By comparing the ICD-10 transition to partisan politics, politicians may lead the US government down the wrong path and negatively impact the healthcare system as a whole.

Other organizations like the American Medical Association (AMA) are not as downright determined to put an end to the ICD-10 coding implementation as Poe’s bill suggests. Several months ago, the AMA announced the importance of developing contingency plans for the ICD-10 transition.

After the first round of ICD-10 end-to-end testing results were released, the AMA and other physician groups were concerned about the claims acceptance rate falling from the standard 97 percent to a reported 81 percent.

“The likelihood that Medicare will reject nearly one in five of the millions of claims that go through our complex health care system each day represents an intolerable and unnecessary disruption to physician practices,” AMA President Robert M. Wah, M.D., stated in an AMA press release. “Robust contingency plans must be ready on day one of the ICD-10 switchover to save precious health care dollars and reduce unnecessary administrative tasks that take valuable time and resources away from patient care.”