Jonathan Gruber is the Massachusetts Institute of Technology economist and health care expert who has found himself in the crosshairs of the broader Obamacare debate. Gruber is a gifted academic – and a decidedly less gifted politician – who attributed the passage of the Affordable Care Act to the “stupidity” of American voters and a lack of transparency in how the bill was pitched and passed.

Gruber has not done anything wrong. He is like a doctor who tells you that you’re fat and lazy. It may be a poor choice of words, but if you are sedentary and 45 pounds overweight, he’s basically correct. And the fact that you are in such bad shape is your fault, not his.

So it is with the Affordable Care Act. Gruber offered his informed input as the Affordable Care Act was being formulated, as he did with former Gov. Mitt Romney’s state-based reform in Massachusetts. (Yes, Obamacare is fundamentally the same as Romneycare, despite Romney’s tortured protestations to the contrary during the 2012 Republican primaries.) In a democratic system, advisers are just that – advisers. President Barack Obama and the Democrats in Congress passed the Affordable Care Act, with the support of a high proportion of the electorate and without any meaningful participation from Republicans who might have made the law better. That’s where culpability lies. Nowhere else.

Still, there are many lessons to be learned from Gruber’s 15 minutes of infamy.



[READ: Jonathan Gruber Stirs Up the Obamacare Debate Again]

First, Gruber should not have called Americans stupid. We’re not. But we are unengaged, lazy and easily swayed by superficial policy discussions. The voter turnout for the midterm elections was 36 percent, a 72-year low. What more do you need to know? Isn’t that sufficient evidence to prove that most Americans cannot muster the minimal energy necessary to engage in important national decisions? Gruber’s choice of adjectives was poor, but I appreciate his point. By and large, we get the government we deserve. Right now, Congress is a pretty good fit for our uninformed electorate.

However, there is a difference between uninformed and stupid. If I were unlucky enough to be convicted of a serious crime, I would have every confidence in the wisdom of a jury of my peers. I believe that a diverse and random sample of Americans, when presented with all relevant evidence, has a deep pool of good judgment and common sense. (My one experience serving on a jury was shockingly uplifting.)

That said, I would not want to be tried before a jury of my peers whose only knowledge of my case was gleaned from cable news programs and gossip at the gym. Sadly, that is the most apt description of our current policy environment. Most voters have only the most superficial knowledge of what they need to know about a complex topic like health care. Politicians routinely exploit this knowledge gap – or even contribute to it by promising things that cannot possibly be delivered.

Second, the Democratic health care plan was born of deception – but we didn’t need Gruber to tell us that. The intellectual dishonesty began during the Democratic presidential primary, when Obama promised something that is not possible: affordable care for everyone, without any exclusion for preexisting conditions and with no insurance mandate. Think about it: If everyone gets charged the same rate for insurance regardless of their health status, the only sensible time to buy insurance would be after becoming sick or injured. (“Excuse me, could you turn off the siren for a moment, I need to call Aetna before the ambulance gets to the emergency room.”) The insurance industry would collapse if only sick people bought insurance.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on Obamacare]

As I’ve written before, politicians get away with this nonsense because we like to hear it. We are pathologically eager to hear that we can lose weight by eating ice cream and chronically disappointed when it just leads to more flab. (“What? Tax cuts increase the deficit? That’s not what George W. Bush said!”)

Third, the Republicans are supposedly aghast that the Democrats exploited voters’ superficial knowledge of health care policy to get the Affordable Care Act passed. Not since Captain Renault was “shocked, shocked!” that gambling was going at Rick’s Cafe in "Casablanca" has there been so much faux surprise and indignation.

Not only do the Republicans do the same thing, they are better at it. If you would like to be impressed and appalled at the same time, watch the "Frontline" special “The Persuaders” in which Republican pollster Frank Luntz explains how he reframed the estate tax as the “death tax” and global warming as “climate change,” thereby changing voters’ perceptions of both issues. (Luntz appears in chapter five, which can be watched online here.) Yes, language matters – like the difference between a “mandate” and a “tax.” Welcome to politics.

Fourth, the Republicans still have no alternative health care plan. They would do well to find a Gruber of their own (and perhaps provide him or her with some media training). As I’ve written before, health care is a trap waiting to happen for the Republicans, particularly for the 2016 presidential hopefuls. They will fall all over themselves promising to repeal Obamacare; the point of distinction will be what each candidate vows to do next.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Republican Party]