What does domestic violence look like on the North Shore? Same as it does everywhere else.

That message is at the forefront of a new comprehensive training initiative aimed at teaching every health care provider within NorthShore University HealthSystem's four hospitals how to identify and talk to potential victims of domestic violence.

"It doesn't matter what race, ethnicity, religion or economic status, or the neighborhood that people live in — [domestic violence] crosses all of those boundaries," said Diane Ativie, social worker and co-chair of the NorthShore University HealthSystem's Domestic Violence Committee. "You can be poor or rich — it's embarrassing. People are ashamed. They take it as, 'It's my fault. I brought this on myself.' And the perpetrator makes you feel this way."

The massive initiative is in response to an Affordable Healthcare Act mandate that requires health care providers to screen every incoming patient for domestic violence, victims of which can easily fly under the radar, according to Ativie.

Self-blame is just one of the many reasons why a victim might try to keep their abuse secret, she said. Other reasons might include fear of being physically injured, fear of losing custody of one's children or lack of access to money or shelter.

At a recent presentation for Evanston residents, titled "Don't Mind Your Own Business," the committee invited representatives from Northbrook-based Allstate to share details about the company's Purple Purse program.

"[Sometimes], it's all about financial empowerment," Ativie said. "No matter how wealthy the family is — who controls the purse? Who controls the money?"

Other community partners of the committee include the YWCA Evanston/North Shore, Between Friends and Shalva, all of which provide follow-up services for victims as well as assist in training for NorthShore staff. Social workers from both the Evanston and Glenview police departments are also on the committee, Ativie said.

"We decided to invite [these organizations] to be part of this committee because we felt that they could offer us additional resources, give us some input and educate us," she said.

NorthShore's Dr. Carol Prete, who also co-chairs the committee, said the goal is to train everyone inside the hospitals, including nurses, medical assistants, physicians, maternity ward staff, emergency room staff and even those enrolled in the NorthShore residency program.

The training, Prete said, begins with the universal questions: "Do you feel safe at home? Is there someone in your home who is making you feel unsafe?"

"We just did a big training session for all the nurses because they have the opportunity to interact with a lot of these patients, because a lot of [victims] end up in the emergency room, unfortunately," Prete said.

Emphasis is placed on recognizing the hidden signs of domestic violence, she said, like a repeat patient who complains of injuries that can't be logically explained.

But Prete said she hopes the training will help staff identify victims before their situation escalates to physical injuries, which she said is the last stage of domestic violence. The first stages focus on grooming, controlling and blaming the victim for the perpetrator's actions, she said.

"A lot of times people won't even realize that that's what's happening to them; that they're in a pattern of power and control in their personal life," Prete said.

For the victims, or survivors, who are ready to leave the situation or press charges, they are referred to the appropriate services that include crisis intervention, emergency shelter, community counseling and legal assistance.

But leaving the perpetrator is the most difficult decision, and it can be dangerous, Prete said. Although it can be frustrating, she said, sometimes the only thing a medical provider can do is offer help, be patient and keep a watchful eye. When the victim is ready to accept help, Prete said the training will go a long way in making sure medical staff responds appropriately.

"The most risky time in a domestic-violence relationship is leaving — that's when things really can escalate, and they can be dangerous, and that's when people get killed," she said. "So one of the main points that we try to get across is you have to do this in the patient's time frame. You have to help them see maybe what's happening in their lives, and then give them resources to become educated about it."

Prete said she has already heard positive feedback from nurses and other medical staff that may have hesitated to discuss domestic violence with their patients before the training simply because they didn't know what questions to ask or not to ask. But it's important that staff feels comfortable discussing the topic, Ativie said, because research shows that the hospital is the setting where most domestic violence victims can be identified.

"That's why it's so important what we do as health care providers, because we have an opportunity to intervene," Ativie said. "And if we can make that difference, we can make a real impact — not just helping the victims, but we can save people's lives, and that's the goal."

Dayna Fields is a freelance reporter for Pioneer Press.