CAPITOLA -- Aptos contractor Pete Testorff is putting the finishing touches on a $250,000 remodel for a state-of-the-art pediatric clinic to be operated by Lucile Packard Children's Hospital at Stanford.

The clinic is relocating to 824 Bay Ave. in the Crossroads Center from a shared space at the Dominican Rehabilitation Campus on Frederick Street in Santa Cruz, which planned to close for seismic safety reasons Dec. 31.

"I was honored to take it on," said Testorff, who has won awards for green building and, as a father of two children, appreciates having top-notch medical staff close by.

Stanford Children's Health Specialty Services Capitola will offer oncology, pulmonology, neurology, cardiology, infectious disease, developmental pediatrics, follow-up for high-risk infants, and a foster care health program.

Santa Cruz County children made more than 8,100 visits to Lucile Packard Children's Hospital during the most recent fiscal year, a figure Stanford spokesman Robert Dicks said he expect will increase as more providers and specialties are added.

"Our families have to travel so much," said Lori Butterworth of Jacob's Heart, a nonprofit that supports families of children with cancer. "Anything to ease that burden, I'm extremely grateful."

Capitola was "a good location for health care access between Santa Cruz and Watsonville" with "excellent access to public transportation," according to Dicks.

"We provide care regardless of a family's ability to pay," he said.

"Stanford was looking for a home in Santa Cruz County and we were lucky enough to be able to provide one," said landlord Doug Kaplan of Lomak Property.

The 45-day timetable was the project's most challenging aspect, according to Testorff, who brought employees in on weekends.

Mario Sabatino of his crew often met at 6 a.m. with Lomak's facilities chief, Buck Hudkins, to figure out how to get things done.

There were no zoning, drainage or plumbing issues because the previous tenant was an orthopedic surgeon, but the office was about 20 years old, dated in the medical world.

The design by Aaron Buehring called for removing walls for better workflow and installing fiber optic lines to accommodate a paperless medical records system. A wall of paper records had to go as did a lead wall in the old X-ray room.

The end result: Six exam rooms, cardiac imaging, a treadmill room, a telemedicine room, office and conference space.

The walls are painted periwinkle, and the waiting room features a mural of an ocean and child-size wooden chairs with ocean creature cutouts.

Testorff lined up suppliers in advance for fixtures such as fluorescent lights that would ordinarily require a six-week lead time.

"None are off-the-shelf items," he said, noting the multistep process required for the medical-grade floor which has colorful insets of sand dollars and starfish.

Testorff is working on a clinic for occupational medicine at 3601 Caldwell Drive in the Soquel Research Park.

Kaplan said he has seen a lot of changes among solo and small groups of doctors, some downsizing, some retiring, and some joining bigger practices as a result of the Affordable Care Act.

Follow Sentinel reporter Jondi Gumz at Twitter.com/jondigumz

Dominican Hospital will not close its rehab campus by Dec. 31, as announced earlier this year, EXTRA B2