Photo

GREENVILLE, S.C. — The Republican candidates debated on Saturday night as if it were one last chance to break through and take down their opponents — and for a few of them, it probably was.

The most important exchange of the evening came early in the night, when Donald J. Trump and Jeb Bush, a former governor of Florida, collided in an extended, personal clash over the Iraq war and President George W. Bush’s record on national security.

But for all of the candidates, the debate helped illustrate the broader state of the race, and each man’s approach to the final seven days before the crucial South Carolina primary on Saturday.

Bush Is Finally Going for It

After stalling and sputtering in his past confrontations with Mr. Trump, Mr. Bush came into Greenville eager for a fight. He went at Mr. Trump repeatedly, assailing him as insensitive to women and minorities, and criticizing his support for using eminent domain to annex private property. In South Carolina, a state with a large military population that backed Senator John McCain in its 2008 primary, Mr. Bush denounced Mr. Trump for having mocked Mr. McCain’s war service.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Bush expressed, more clearly than ever, his horror at Mr. Trump’s position in the race. He derided Mr. Trump as a man whose principal achievement was “building a reality show,” and reminded viewers in a tone of impatience, “We’re living in a dangerous world.”

It was the first confrontation in which Mr. Bush appeared, at moments, to have bested Mr. Trump. But it was also their last encounter before the South Carolina primary, and it may be difficult for Mr. Bush to make up for months of missed opportunities in just one night.

Photo

Trump Passes a Point of No Return

At times in the 2016 race, the Republican establishment has seemed, tentatively, to warm up to Mr. Trump, as perhaps a palatable alternative to Senator Ted Cruz of Texas.

The Greenville debate may have shattered any prospect of future accommodation: Mr. Trump declared forcefully, to a national audience, that President George W. Bush had deliberately lied to the country in order to start a war. Red-faced and shouting, Mr. Trump said President Bush was to blame for not averting the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks.

He also ridiculed Lindsey Graham, South Carolina’s senior senator, and described Planned Parenthood as a group that provides important health services to women. (He said he disapproved of its role performing abortions.)

These are extraordinarily provocative statements to make in a Republican primary here, and they would probably doom any other candidate. Mr. Trump’s supporters may not mind, but it would be difficult to overstate the extent to which traditional Republican leaders recoiled from his Saturday night rampage.

Rubio Didn’t Get Tackled Again

After a floundering debate performance in New Hampshire sent Mr. Rubio tumbling to fifth place in the state, there was no room for him to make major errors on Saturday night.

And Mr. Rubio indeed avoided any big stumbles. On the question that tripped him up badly last time around, about his readiness to serve as president, the senator cited his decision to oppose an Obama administration plan for intervention in Syria as proof of his judgment in an emergency. And with Gov. Chris Christie of New Jersey out of the race, no other candidate challenged Mr. Rubio’s governing credentials with comparable vigor.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But a steady night is different from a standout night, and Mr. Rubio did not appear to have the latter. If he is to make up ground in the polls here, he will have to do it on the stump and with paid advertising, rather than with an electrifying moment on national television.

Photo

The Cruz-Rubio Feud Is Escalating, but Does it Matter?

Mr. Cruz and Mr. Rubio have long been perceived as on a collision course: a pair of junior senators who are both potential history-making nominees, each approaching his Senate service in a starkly different way. Their deepest differences have been over immigration.

After sparring occasionally in previous debates, the two men battered each other in earnest in a series of caustic exchanges on Saturday night. Mr. Rubio repeatedly called Mr. Cruz a serial liar. Mr. Cruz repeatedly called Mr. Rubio a sleeper agent for a liberal immigration policy.

The problem for both men is that instead of dueling for first place, they are competing for second, at best, in a race still defined by Mr. Trump, and it is unclear whether either senator helped himself more than he hurt his rival.

Kasich Will Be Kasich

After coming in second in New Hampshire, the big question about Gov. John R. Kasich’s campaign was whether he could appeal to Republicans outside the moderate, independent-minded constituency he wooed persistently in New Hampshire. On Saturday, he indicated pretty strongly that he will not change his message for a larger and more conservative audience.

Mr. Kasich continued to call for a lower-key and more genial race, defended his decision to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act and said that government has a compassionate role to play in people’s lives, arguing, “Economic growth is not an end unto itself.”

Carson Acts as a Human Shield

Ben Carson’s campaign has disintegrated and he has collapsed in the polls — but he has picked up some new friends in the process. Mr. Trump and Mr. Rubio voiced indignation that supporters of Mr. Cruz had inaccurately told Iowa voters that Mr. Carson, a retired neurosurgeon, had suspended his campaign. Mr. Cruz lamented that Mr. Trump had once compared Mr. Carson to a child molester.

But if the other candidates wielded Mr. Carson as a sympathetic symbol in their skirmishes with each other, the doctor himself did nothing to stand out on the stage.

A Smaller Field, but Still Unruly

With a smaller group on the stage this time, the moderators handled the remaining candidates gently, and occasionally lingered on an individual contender to press for more specific answers. A moment of tension flared early when John Dickerson of CBS corrected an inaccurate statement by Mr. Cruz, who misstated the year Justice Anthony M. Kennedy was confirmed to the Supreme Court.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Yet, as he has done in every debate so far, Mr. Trump steamrollered over the moderators, seemingly at will, and constantly interrupted and talked over his opponents. As in each previous debate, there was no concerted effort to make him behave.