Eliot Cutler Unveils Plan To Fix Welfare In Maine

Welfare reform is perhaps the most polarizing issue in this year’s election cycle. Wednesday, Independent Eliot Cutler unveiled his plan, that his campaign calls “innovative,” aimed at fixing Maine’s welfare system. According to a release from the Cutler campaign, his plan to fix welfare is based on three broad goals:

* Making sure that people are not gaming the system, are better off when they work and are given a temporary hand-up when they need it.

* Approaching welfare reform as an opportunity to improve lives and make government work better, rather than another chance to demonize people in difficult circumstances and to divide us politically.

* Helping more Mainers become self-reliant and make state government smaller, not make welfare reform another dead-end of more spending and bloated government.

Part of that plan includes a tiered system, where benefits are lowered over time after a person gets a job instead of being cut all at once.

“The biggest problem we have in Maine is the cliff effect,” Cutler said Wednesday. “Paul LePage and I agreed about that in 2010 when we were campaigning. Paul’s had 3 1/2 years and hasn’t done a thing to fix it. We’re gonna fix that, because people need to have a bridge from welfare into work, not face a cliff that keeps them in welfare.”

Cutler’s plan also targets fraud and abuse by blocking EBT card use at prohibited places like liquor stores and strip clubs by embedding cards with microchips.

The proposal also includes a piece Cutler is calling “Giving Back to ME” that would require some former recipients with jobs to pay back a part of their income to support early childhood care. Under the plan, those who received benefits for more than 18 months and make at least three times the poverty level to pay a percentage of their taxable income back to the state for a few years to support early childhood care.

Cutler said the major roadblocks for most people looking to transition from welfare to work are transportation, childcare and healthcare. He says expanding MaineCare under the Affordable Care Act would help to alleviate one of those major obstacles. MaineCare expansion was one of the most hotly contested debates of the past legislative session and its defeat was perhaps the biggest victory for LePage and the Republicans.

Maine Republican Party Spokesman David Sorensen says Medicaid expansion is not welfare reform, but simply “more welfare.” Other than that piece, many of the ideas proposed by Cutler Wednesday are similar to those offered up by Governor LePage.

“The governor’s welfare reform plans cut across party lines,” Sorensen said. “Democrats, Republicans and Independents agree that our welfare system needs reform. Mike Michaud doesn’t. Eliot Cutler at least is saying that the governor’s ideas are good and he wants to adopt some of them. Governor LePage is already doing it.”

Cutler acknowledged that he and LePage have similar ideas on the issue of welfare reform, but Cutler says he has the people skills to get the job done.

“You know, I get along with people better than he does. And that’s a big thing,” Cutler said. “I can get a lot done that he and I agree on that he’s failed to get done. I can get it done. I’m more inventive. More innovative. And I get along with people. That’s really a key to this.”

A spokesperson for the Michaud campaign dismissed Cutler’s proposals. David Farmer , Senior Policy Advisor for the Michaud campaign said in a prepared statement:

“Governor Paul LePage has failed to fix welfare and the Department of Health and Human Services is broken. Congressman Michaud is the only candidate in the race who can bring Democrats, Republicans and Independents together for the change we need. He has an aggressive plan to eliminate waste, fraud, abuse and mismanagement at all levels while ensuring that low income families get the support they need to work their way into the middle class. Eliot Cutler brings nothing new to the conversation.”

But Cutler scoffed at the notion that Michaud is the right man for the job of reforming Maine’s welfare system which all three candidates agree needs an overhaul.

“Mike’s a very nice guy. His idea so far is to put eight new people into a new agency to supervise DHHS. Now my guess is that those jobs will go to his political cronies. That’s not a solution to any of our problems. That’s politics as usual,” Cutler said.

LePage, Cutler and Michaud will surely talk a lot about welfare reform when the debate season begins.