Are American businesses going to rely more heavily on part-time workers long after the recession has ended?

The unemployment rate has dropped sharply over the past year, but the share of Americans working part time because they can’t find full-time work remains very high by historical standards.

And while the number of these so-called involuntary part-time workers has been trending down, a few charts show why there’s considerable debate over whether the increased reliance on part-time labor is cyclical, meaning it will improve as the economy gets better, or structural, in which something else has encouraged businesses to rely more on part-time workers than before the recession.

First, data from the Labor Department shows that the decline in the number of those working part-time for economic reasons has resulted from fewer workers who are part time because of slack business conditions. Meanwhile, the level of workers who are part time because they can’t find full-time work is actually higher now than it was before the recession.

Second, the level of involuntary part-timers has declined sharply for workers in goods-producing industries such as manufacturing and construction. Industries that typically rely on a larger part-time workforce, such as the retail and hospitality sectors, have seen little improvement.

Also, the share of part-time workers who are finding full-time work one year later is low historically across both the goods-producing and the service sector, but it has shown more improvement for goods than for services, according to data compiled by the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta.

If this is a structural change, what’s behind it? One potential culprit that comes up often in this discussion is the Affordable Care Act, which requires employers with 50 or more full-time-equivalent workers to offer affordable insurance to employees working 30 or more hours a week or face fines. There have been some anecdotal reports about businesses, such as restaurants, gas stations and convenience stores, cutting their employees’ hours back to avoid those fines.

But empirical data doesn’t yet show a big increase in part-time work that could be attributed to the health care law. An analysis from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute found that while part-time work has increased this year beyond what might normally expected at this point in an economic expansion, that increase isn’t specific to part-time jobs below the 30-hour threshold that is affected by the health care law.

If businesses were cutting workers’ hours to comply with the law’s mandate, it might also result in a shorter average workweek. The data on this front is mixed. While the average workweek has declined since 2012 for the retail sector, the average workweek has increased over the past year in the leisure and hospitality sector.

Finally, if businesses had a preference for part-time workers over full-time workers, that might ultimately be reflected in wages. But wage growth for full-time workers, while weak, has outpaced that of part-time workers over the past few years, according to data from the Atlanta Fed.

Related coverage:

Post-Recession Legacy: Elevated Level of Part-Time Employment?