Mark Orlando, of Linden, and Angela Siess, of Edison, are facing drug charges after arrest at Warren shopping center

A Linden man and an Edison woman are facing heroin and morphine charges after their arrest in Warren. (Photo: ~File photo)

A Linden man was arrested after detectives saw him attempt to put a black plastic bag down his pants, but the bag fell to the ground and 50 decks of heroin came out of the bag, authorities said.

Mark Orlando, 39, was arrested Wednesday after the Somerset County Prosecutor's Office Organized Crime and Narcotics Task Force received information that he would be in possession of heroin at a Warrenville Road shopping center, Somerset County Prosecutor Geoffrey Soriano said.

Detectives set up surveillance at the shopping center about 10:30 p.m. and saw a white Cadillac driven by Angela Siess, 52, of Edison, come into the parking lot. Siess and Orlando got out of the car, with Siess going into a store while Orlando remained outside, Soriano said.

When Siess left the store, detectives approached Siess and Orlando. After the detectives identified themselves, Orlando tried to stuff the plastic bag down his pants. Detectives found 200 more decks of heroin in the bag, Soriano said.

Orlando was placed under arrest without incident. He was also found to be in possession of one Benzodiazepine pill, a tranquilizer.

Siess gave detectives voluntary consent to search her, her vehicle and purse. Soriano said detectives found nine morphine pills in an unmarked prescription bottle and two decks of heroin in another unmarked prescription bottle. Two more partially filled prescription bottles with Siess' name were also located. Siess was placed under arrest without incident.

Detectives later found that one of the prescription bottles did not contain the correct medication. The 36 pills inside the bottle were identified as Benzodiazepine, Soriano said.

Orlando was charged with possession of heroin with intent to distribute and illegal possession of Benzodiazepine.

Siess was charged with possession of heroin, possession of morphine pills and possession of Benzodiazepine.

Both defendants were lodged in the Somerset County Jail.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1MipM9o