Those are the people who have to get insurance before January 1, when their policies get cancelled. — Jim Angle (@JimAngleFox) November 6, 2013

As Fox News’ Jim Angle notes, many people with pre-existing conditions have been able to obtain health insurance through state-run high-risk pools. Some of the pools, however, are closing at the end of the year, and AP reports that it is unclear whether enrollees will be able to obtain new coverage by that date. One enrollee, Kelly Bachi of Oklahoma, is worried that she will have to discontinue her treatment for breast cancer:

“I’m scared. I’m in the middle of my cancer treatment, and if my insurance ends, I’m going to have to cancel the rest of my treatment,” said Kelly Bachi, an Oklahoma boat repair business owner who has breast cancer and is covered through a pool. Cancer treatment without insurance would cost her about $500,000, she said. Bachi has not been able to enroll via the healthcare.gov federal website, although not for lack of trying. She attempted to sign up half a dozen times and was eventually able to create an account but was later blocked from accessing the account.

How many thousands of Kelly Bachis are out there?

23,000 sickest Texas, in high risk pool, got health insurance cancellation notices recently, including me. #MyHealthPlanDied — George Conner (@Lawyergeorge) November 4, 2013

Lots of calls from people in previous high-risk pool saying their manageable plans are gone, premiums 2-4x higher. Dems in trouble 2014. — Brad Cundiff (@bradcundiff) November 1, 2013

President Obama has often talked about ensuring that Americans who have pre-existing conditions can obtain health insurance:

http://youtu.be/BppYO9n7IKE

Those words must sound a bit hollow to Kelly Bachi right now, but by focusing on people like her we’re guilty of sensationalizing the news, right Jay Carney?

By the way, high-risk pool plans tend to be quite expensive. Even so, enrollees who are able to obtain new coverage through Obamacare may find themselves paying more.

A couple with pre-existing conditions will face higher rates under Obamacare than they did in the high risk pool in N. Carolina. — Jim Angle (@JimAngleFox) November 6, 2013

Ain’t “affordable” care grand?

Related:

Despicable: WH smears cancer survivor who lost her insurance plan due to Obamacare

Flaming douche: Jay Carney dismisses story of woman losing coverage as ‘sensational’

Obamacare train wreck: Stage IV gallbladder cancer survivor can’t keep her doctors

‘Simple. Perfect. Brilliant’: @MyCancellation launches an ‘Obamacare website that works’ [pics]

Hey, know what you get to ‘keep’ with Obamacare? Cancellation notices

White House swoons over Nicholas Kristof pro-Obamacare propaganda

‘Sad ass government!’ Citizens ‘can’t afford’ raised premiums; Will ‘keep’ penalty, lose insurance

O-Scare avalanche: Escaped cancellation notice? Americans ‘keep’ doubled, tripled premiums

Obamacare train wreck: Americans tweet anger, surprise over cancellations, higher premiums

‘Affordable’ care: NC family’s health insurance premiums to skyrocket 430 percent

Obama claims insurance premiums ‘lower than the most optimistic predictions’

Flashback: Obama pledged to reduce health insurance premiums by $2,500 per family per year

Not-so-Affordable Care Act: Tweeters sickened by rising health care premiums

‘Talking about Obamacare?’ Book quotes President Obama saying he’s ‘really good at killing people