PETA has a big problem with Nebraska football player Jack Gangwish, whose name I’d make fun of but, well, my own name seems to be a cross between an unpopular Albanian folk song title and the sixth line on an eye chart.

Anyway, the whole thing is ridiculous. Raise your hand if this hasn’t happened to you:

You spot a raccoon on a lonely Nebraska back road, leap from your pickup truck and somehow manage to take a really crazy cellphone selfie of you and the raccoon, which you have wisely placed right next to your face.

By some sort of miracle, the raccoon has not bitten off your nose or scratched out one of your eyes, but as you lower your pal back to the ground he bites your leg. You react by sending the furry guy to heaven — with a gate pass from Pope Francis — by whomping the raccoon on the head with a wrench.

(I am not raising my own personal hand, but that’s because I’m currently holding a wolverine near my face and taking a selfie and, well, judging by all the growling, I think I’m going to need a really big wrench. Yeeoowww. And a nose.)

The heart-wrenching (or, in this case, head-wrenching) tale of the raccoon and the mean football player became such big news recently that even the Los Angeles Times published its own story, saying Gangwish was “trying to take a selfie with the mammal.”

Which shoots down a commonly held belief that raccoons are members of the salmon family.

“The 6-foot-2, 260-pound junior then took a wrench from his truck and killed the animal,” the Times wrote. “Now, PETA wants him punished.”

I strongly believe all stories get better when you get PETA into them. And so, from PETA president Ingrid Newkirk, in a letter to University of Nebraska athletic director Shawn Eichort: “It’s time for acts of cruelty to animals committed by players to be taken extremely seriously, and with violence in football culture now under the microscope, this is the time to address the issue.”

Ingrid was, of course, referring to that infamous moment a few months ago, caught on surveillance tape, in which, according to the National Football League, Baltimore running back Ray Rice got into an argument in a hotel elevator, threw a left hook and knocked out a North American river otter.

The story got even better when Gangwish explained to the local paper, the Lincoln Journal Star, that after the raccoon bit him he knew it would have to be tested for rabies, “so he attempted to subdue it with a wrench from his truck. The animal died, however.”

I know the feeling. Last summer a bat flew into our house and I, like Gangwish, attempted to “subdue” it. Lacking a wrench, I used a tennis racket, 15 thrown shoes, two shotguns and a metal trash can lid — not to mention the two dozen calls to 911 in which the dispatcher kept asking me to stop screaming.

And he kept calling me “ma’am.”

Contact Rich Tosches at richtosches@gmail.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.