While much of America’s economy is gaining strength, we lag badly in one important respect: the participation of women in the workforce.

Since 2000, the U.S. has lost ground in both absolute and relative terms, compared to other industrialized nations. In an Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development study reported in the New York Times this week, the U.S. now ranks near dead last compared to a group of major OECD countries, lagging all of them except Ireland.

Lack of women’s participation hurts the economy: It deprives consumers of earning and spending power, which ripples up through retailers and producers, cutting overall demand and slowing growth. And it deprives employers of valuable talent and the hard work and innovation that could drive the economy forward.



[READ: Obama Shuts Out Big Networks, Takes Questions Only from Women]

Skeptics may say that the reason women stay out of the workplace is simply because they can; with the U.S. economy growing again, perhaps families don’t need that second income, freeing women to focus on children and home. But the data simply don’t support that claim. In fact, the steepest declines in work-force participation have come among younger and less-skilled women who most need the work.

According to Francine Blau and Lawrence Kahn of Cornell University, nearly a third of the decline in women’s labor force participation results from a lack of policies that support the primary parent (almost always the mother). Since 2000, most European countries have expanded policies like parental leave, child care and protection of part-time workers. Meanwhile, the U.S. has done practically nothing in these areas.

America’s last significant family-friendly workplace policy was a 1993 bill that provided for up to 12 weeks of leave for some employees. And even though that bill provides only unpaid time off, it leaves many workers unprotected: Roughly 40 percent of U.S. workers are employed by companies with fewer than 50 employees, and these small businesses are exempt from the requirement.



[READ: Hillary Clinton Says Working Women Are Good for All Economies]

All this comes as a bit of a shock to the anti-regulatory crowd, who argue that regulations kill jobs and lack of regulations creates jobs by reducing costs on employers and giving them more flexibility. Clearly in this case, regulations have led to higher employment, and lack of regulations has been the job killer.

A solution may be on the way. Sen. Kirsten Gillibrand, D-N.Y., and Rep. Rosa DeLauro, D-Conn., introduced the Family and Medical Insurance Leave Act or the Family Act in 2013. The act provides for up to 12 weeks of paid leave, with workers receiving up to 66 percent of their regular monthly wages (but not more than $1000 per month) when they are on leave. The cost would be paid for by a newly-created fund, with employers and employees each contributing 0.2 percent of wages (20 cents out of each $100 dollars of wage). Although the bill died with the adjournment of the current Congress, it will be reintroduced in 2015.

With no progress at the federal level, some states have adopted family leave policies of their own. California started a program in 2002, which covers 55 percent of an employee’s salary up to about $1,000 per week. Each year, the plan assists about 200,000 people and, between 2012 and 2013, nearly 70 percent of them were women. The plan covers up to six weeks of leave compared to 12 weeks under Gillibrand’s proposal. It’s fully funded by employee contributions, with no cost to employers or the taxpayers at large. Several other states – New Jersey, New York, Rhode Island and Hawaii – have similar programs.



[SEE: Cartoons on Congress]

What do employers think?

Businesses in California and Rhode Island overwhelmingly report a positive or neutral effect of the family insurance plans. According to a survey conducted by the Center for Economic and Policy Research, 91 percent of employers surveyed in California said the program had a “positive effect” or “no noticeable effect” on profitability. Fraud and abuse is quite rare: 91 percent of employers said they had not seen a single instance of fraud. Employees are not objecting to the small fee they pay. Morale is up and staff turnover is down.