Holly Fisher, a conservative Christian mom from West Virginia, has been posting pictures on Twitter in order to offend liberals, but is now offended by the backlash.

Fisher recently tweeted a picture of herself in front of a Hobby Lobby store while wearing a pro-life shirt and holding a Chick-fil-A cup, noted the Daily Mail.

The mom of three posted the picture on July 1 in support of the recent U.S. Supreme Court decision that allows Hobby Lobby to deny certain types of birth control for its female employees under its health care plan.

She didn't mention that Hobby Lobby invests financially in the same birth control that it opposes for employees, but did write: "Attention Liberals: do not look at this picture. Your head will most likely explode."

On the Fourth of July, Fischer posted another picture of herself holding a Bible, an AR-15 assault weapon (the type of gun used at the Sandy Hook massacre) and an American flag.



Fischer added the caption: "Biggest complaint I'm getting about my #HobbyLobby pic is there's no gun, bible, or flag. Tried to make up for it."

In response, some Internet users compared her gun picture to a very similar photo of Sherafiyah Lewthwaite, an Al-Shabaab Islamic terrorist known as the "White Widow," holding a gun and the Quran.

In response, Fischer angrily tweeted on Monday: "My new nickname is 'American Taliban' it seems. You know how I know the lefties don't really think I'm a terrorist? They hate me."



Fischer also tweeted, "Jihad Barbie. That means they think I'm pretty, right?" and "I'm not a terrorist, but my husband has killed a few. #ftw."

Last month on her blog, Fisher claimed that Obamacare had caused her family to lose access to her baby’s pediatric cardiologist.

However, as ATTP.org points out, it was actually the choice of Fisher's insurance company Cigna to raise her family's insurance rates. Also, because "certain states and companies (West Virginia and Cigna specifically) applied for waivers that made them exempt from following the letter of the [Obamacare] law."



According to RawStory.com, Fischer appeared on Fox News today where she claimed that her Bible and the AR-15 picture represented "America’s founding principles."



“I expected less backlash with this than I did the first one because the picture is, like, America’s founding principles,” Fischer told Fox News. “That’s all that’s in the picture. And I really didn’t think it would cause the uproar that it has.”



“I know I’m not going to change any minds of liberals,” Fischer added. “And I accept that. I understand. Like, I’m not hateful with people who don’t agree with me, but I just want people to know that it’s okay. Like, you’re not alone.”

Sources: Daily Mail, RawStory.com, ATTP.org