MARK LEVIN: Lindsey Graham votes for every nominee this radical president puts forward.



Lindsey Graham--whether it's Obamacare, whether it's the outrageous immigration situation, whether it's same-sex marriage, which is a decision the states should be making--Lindsey Graham keeps telling us to move on and to move along.



When it comes to the massive national debt, Lindsey Graham supports it.



When it comes to taking the United States military and sending ground troops in every hellhole all over the Earth, Lindsey Graham supports it.



That's not conservatism, that's not being hawk, a that is utterly irresponsible and unconscionable.



Reagan is one of our greatest presidents because of both his domestic and foreign policy accomplishments.



He defeated the Soviet Union. We never invaded any country! Around the USSR, he squeezed them until they collapsed during the Bush administration. He surrounded them with our allies. He spent them into disaster. We used surrogates, we used satellite countries, and, yes, we used our military, but we didn't invade. We weren't sending American troops everywhere. As a matter of fact, off the top off my head, I believe the only place we actually invaded was Grenada.



Lindsey Graham doesn't know what the hell he's talking about! Lindsey, Lindsey--it's Mama. Come back, Lindsey!



And quite frankly I don't see a hell of a lot of distance between Lindsey Graham and Marco Rubio.



You know what's going on in Libya today? Al-Qaeda is on the run, ISIS is on the run! Egypt is being threatened. Europe is being threatened. You know what is right across from the Mediterranean Sea?



Europe, that's right, right across from Tripoli.



Lindsey Graham, John McCain, Barack Obama, Hillary Clinton, and, yes, even Marco Rubio--they have lit a light to this part of the world, they lit a match. No, I am not an isolationist, no, I am not Ron Paul, no, I am not Pat Buchanan. I am a conservative, Reaganite, strong defense hawk, but you don't intervene in every situation.



We're not out to create new societies, we're out to sustain our own society. We're out to protect our allies and our allies are out to protect us. Let's see Saturday night if there are any serious questions in this regard to Marco Rubio, or is it all going to be: "Dr. Carson, what do you about the ethics of Ted Cruz?" "Marco Rubio, what do you think about the ethics of Ted Cruz?" "Donald Trump, what do you think about it?"