Cain Brothers & Company, a New York City-based investment banking firm, will advise Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and PinnacleHealth about increased collaboration between the two health systems.

Cain Brothers, with offices in New York, Chicago and San Francisco, focuses exclusively on health care industry clients including health systems and heath insurers. Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth wouldn't say how much Cain will be paid.





Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth announced late last year they will study an expanded level of collaboration.

Thus far, executives for each have declined to speculate on the final shape of the collaboration, and whether it’s possible they will become one entity. They have said they expect to know by the end of March.

In a news release, Dr. Harold Paz, the CEO of Penn State Hershey, said: “Cain Brothers offers us considerable experience in health care strategic partnership transactions and the ability to explore many different models for expanded collaboration between our two health care enterprises.”

PinnacleHealth CEO Michael Young said in the release, “We look forward to working with Cain Brothers and Penn State Hershey to build on our existing partnerships and find new opportunities to deliver more cost effective, high quality and accessible health care services to the region … As health care evolves in central Pennsylvania and across the nation, enhanced collaborations between hospitals and health systems can help to build programs and grow services through the coordination of resources and expertise.”





Not long before the Penn State Hershey-PinnacleHealth announcement, Danville-based Geisinger Health System and Cumberland County-based Holy Spirit Health System announced they are exploring a relationship that could amount to a merger.

Good Samaritan Health System in Lebanon County also is searching for a larger partner. A wave of hospital merger and collaboration is taking place all around the country, driven by an assortment of forces including the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

Harrisburg-based PinnacleHealth, which will soon open a new hospital in Hampden Township, has $681 million in annual net patient revenue, 577 beds and 5,184 employees.

Penn State Hershey, which has a medical school and is a major destination of federal research dollars, has $982 million in annual net patient revenue, 551 beds and 9,971 employees.





Note: this story was revised to state that Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth wouldn't reveal how much Cain will be paid, and to correct the number of beds at Penn State Hershey.