On the day Dr. Mary Bassett was introduced as Bill de Blasio's health commissioner, she echoed Martin Luther King who said “Of all the forms of inequality, injustice in health care is the most shocking and inhumane.”

At once, she weaved in de Blasio's campaign theme of a New York that has left many behind and her own professional aim—pursued over three decades—of narrowing the health gap. To Bassett, the two are inexorably linked.

“Public health has at its root the quest for social justice,” she said at her introduction.

Over the next few months, Bassett, who officially takes over in February, will demonstrate how she wields the tools of government to achieve her stated aim. She declined to comment for this article and has not yet made any public declarations but a review of her past statements, public work and published journal articles provides a reasonably good assumption of the kind of health commissioner she will be.

In addition to being a medical doctor, Bassett holds a Masters of Public Health from Washington State University.

Several public health experts interviewed for this story said the key to reducing health inequality isn't about doctors or clinics, nor is it really about hospital closings, Medicaid rates or even access to care. They said it's about providing lower-income New Yorkers with the opportunity to stay healthy.

That's where Bassett, according to her own writings, believes government can have the greatest impact.

The Affordable Care Act may have increased access to health care but the disparity in the quality of care between the rich and even the middle class remains quite wide. By the time a poorer New Yorker requires medical care, the battle has already been lost.

“Poor people have less access to health care, less access to medicines, less access to everything,” said Marion Nestle, a professor of nutrition, food studies and public health at NYU. “So if your aim is to reduce health disparities between rich and poor, you have to find ways to keep the poor from getting sick in the first place. If they don't get sick, they're ahead of the game.”

One of the most pressing health problems in New York—and throughout the country—is obesity, and numerous studies demonstrate as income falls, the rate of obesity rises.

That leads to a host of medical problems including diabetes and hypertension, which has a far more adverse impact on those who don't have the time or the money to see a doctor regularly. That in turn leads to unnecessary trips to the emergency room, which is both bad for personal health and bad for controlling public health care costs.

The best way to attack that problem is to start early, said Marilyn Aguirre-Molina, a CUNY professor of public health and executive director for the CUNY Institute for Health Equity. Real early.

“We keep hearing about obesity and indeed there are many contributors but if you have an unsafe environment, the idea of children playing outside and going to a playground is not realistic,” she said.

Aguirre-Molina suggested that one of the most important moves a health commissioner could make is to ensure clean, safe playgrounds throughout the city. Bassett, who coauthored an article titled Obesity: The Public Health Challenge of Our Time, appears to agree.

“Public works don't have to be limited to highways,” Bassett wrote in 2009. “Let's rebuild derelict parks, construct protected bicycling paths and walkways, and install public drinking water fountains.”

If you had to attach a political label to Bassett's past writings and statements, you'd end up with progressive. She believes in an interventionist health department that engages the public. She has called for a universal free lunch program in public schools with simple nutritional guidelines. She has advocated for zoning rules, which will “support the establishment and retention of stores that sell fruits and vegetables in food deserts” and for “renewed attention to school fitness and public access exercise program in the parks.”

Throughout her public career she has campaigned against unhealthy foods, decrying salt, sugar, trans fats - just to name a few. At her introductory press conference, she promised to continue the fight – begun under her predecessor – to ban large sugary drinks.

Critics of the Bloomberg era often cry “nanny state,” meaning a hyperactive government that tries to protects us from ourselves. Too much sugar is bad so the government bans large sodas; trans fats are bad so restaurants can no longer cook with them.

But the nanny meme fundamentally misses the point that underlies much of Bassett's writings and public comments.

She doesn't see the government as a means to protect citizens from themselves, but as a countervailing force to corporate interests that have created an unlevel playing field where consumers are almost duped into making a series of small choices that have a large impact on public health.

“To frame chronic disease risk as a consequence of ill-conceived personal choices and inadequate medical care is a modern day version of hand washing to prevent cholera,” she wrote in 2009. “Not wrong but tragically misguided. Government at all levels should use its regulatory tools to limit tobacco use, end the glut of salty, sugary, high calorie food and increase physical activity. It should be bolder in seeking to check advertising that promotes tobacco use and consumption of high calorie and low nutrient food, especially those directed at children.”

She made a similar declaration standing next to de Blasio when she was introduced.

These views were shaped, she has said, early in her career. Some 30 years ago, she wrote, she was in Zimbabwe, watching as patients waited in line at an urban clinic. She remembers seeing mothers offering soda to their toddlers and infants. She cringed, she said, at the poor health choice these moms were making even as she fully understood the economic realities underpinning the decision. Soda was simply cheaper and easier to obtain than potable water.

That problem is no longer remote, Bassett wrote. Mothers in the United States, in New York City, now face a similar economic predicament.

“On a cost-per-calories basis, the 'best buy' too often is calorie dense and nutrient poor,” she wrote in 2012. “The food industry will continue to argue that a key problem is lack of physical exercise. Yes, many individuals do need more physical exercise, but if someone were to land on our planet from elsewhere, what this person would observe is a lot of high calorie food that is simply not nourishing.”

Malnutrition, she argues, can no longer be narrowly defined as having too few calories. It now encompasses having too many.

And this is why, she said, she believes government is vital. To protect people not from themselves – as proponents of the nanny state theory would contend—but to protect them from an industrial-food complex that leads people to make decisions that are harmful to their health even as they make a certain economic sense.

“The requirement for public health advocacy is even more apparent today, when it is what we eat, drink, and smoke, along with how we exercise and get health care, that to a great degree determines our health,” she wrote. “Today’s chronic disease burden—cardiovascular disease, cancer, and diabetes—is attributable not to bacteria but to an array of risk factors embedded in community life. People will eat, drink, and exercise in the ways available to them.”

As an example, Bassett pointed in one of her articles to data that demonstrated adult smoking rates are twice as high in East Harlem as in the adjacent—but more affluent—Upper East Side.

Aguirre-Molina said this represents another opportunity for the health department to reduce inequality. Basset's department could, in conjunction with the zoning department, work to limit the proliferation of fast food restaurants in poorer neighborhoods.

“People call them food deserts but they are really fields of fat,” she said.

Jean Weinberg, the health department's director of public affairs, said reducing inequalities requires efforts to make low-income neighborhoods healthier.

As an example, she cited smoke-free parks and playgrounds, which were put into practice during Bloomberg's term. She also offered the goal of having stores in lower income neighborhoods offer a healthier mix of foods.

"Through our district public health offices and with our 600-plus partners across the city," Weinberg said in an email, "we will intensify our efforts to talk with people in their communities about how we can help them become healthier."

Bassett, in many respects, is expected to follow the model of her predecessors Drs. Tom Frieden and Tom Farley, whose aggressive public health initiatives were often controversial but produced results that have been lauded in the public health community.

“Both pushed the envelope,” Nestle said. “You want healthy choices to be easier. You want to deal with portion size deal with taxes of unhealthy foods. You want to make nutritional foods cost less. The Health Department is often limited in what they can do and yet both of the Toms made it easier for people to live healthy lives.”

Bassett occupies a unique place in the de Blasio world. So much of the mayor's campaign was about what had gone wrong with the city under his predecessor—growing income inequality, overuse of stop-and-frisk, etc.—and his picks to lead city agencies have made explicit their desire to right those perceived wrongs, whether it is Bratton on community policing or Fariña on testing.

But Bassett's appointment is a clear signal that de Blasio was serious in his repeated commendations of Bloomberg's health policy.

De Blasio and Bassett did talk about wanting to be more responsive to the community than Bloomberg's health department was. This is a near-universal talking point among de Blasio appointees but it is also something that Bassett has written about dating back more than a decade.

In 2003, she authored a short piece for the American Journal of Public Health decrying the lack of healthy options available in Harlem. She pointed out how most of the billboards advertized either alcohol or cigarettes.

“It was not health departments, enforcement agencies, or academic institutions that publicized these sorry facts,” she wrote. “It was church leaders and community activists. Both communities and government agencies must act to promote policies that limit access to unhealthy choices and counteract tobacco marketing strategies.”

A decade later, as she stood with de Blasio she made almost the same point.

“Our most powerful tool is people – not least the communities that bear an excess burden of poor health.”

Bassett has her work cut out for her. There is an inherent distrust of government coursing through the public discourse. A recent poll found that about 60 percent of people disapprove of banning large sugary drinks. Sugar, salt and fat are popular choices not only because they are cheap but also because they taste really good.

Changing attitudes is not something that can be regulated. But it can be influenced. Take, for example, the public campaign against smoking. Industry groups said banning smoking in bars and restaurants would destroy business. It didn't. And there is little public outcry over the graphic advertisements warning of the dangers of tobacco use.

“I can't see why they cant have a picture of a big hamburger on the subways that says 'oops, you just had a lot of fat,'” Aguirre-Molina said. “The health department can do that in a New York minute.”

Bassett appears to agree. She has written that engaging with communities is essential for health professionals.

“If successful health improvement were based only on 'facts,' we would be freed from the enduring controversies that surround efforts to alter ways in which people eat, drink, and smoke,” she wrote. “Public health is also personal—the family member or friend who died from a preventable cause, the human story that underlies the statistics we cite. Public health takes place in boardrooms, on street corners, in our homes, and in the legislature. So, too, does public health advocacy.”