LOS ANGELES (MarketWatch) -- In a finding that could strike at the heart of Obamacare, researchers at Harvard University have determined the Massachusetts health-reform effort did little to bring down the rate of preventable hospitalizations and couldn’t make much progress toward reducing racial disparities in the rate of those instances.

Authors of the study, to be published Wednesday in BMJ, formerly known as the British Medical Journal, say it suggests access to doctors on an outpatient basis may not have improved much as a result of the Massachusetts effort, also known as Romneycare.

Improving access to lower-income patients and cut back on ethnic disparities in medical treatment is considered one of the main tenets of the Affordable Care Act, which was implemented nearly eight years after Massachusetts put its own health reform into effect. The Massachusetts effort, however, is showing some signs that may not bode well for Obamacare, says Dr. Danny McCormick, associate professor at the Harvard Medical School and one of the authors of the study.

“I think it’s potentially troubling,” McCormick said.

The study shows that from late 2004—about 21 months before Romneycare was implemented—to late 2009, the rate of preventable hospital admissions came down 2.1% in Massachusetts. But in three nearby states that had no health reform—New York, New Jersey and Pennsylvania—that rate came down 3.5% during that time.

Further, the study shows that the rate of preventable admissions for white and Hispanics came down at a faster rate in those three nearby states than they did in Massachusetts. For blacks, preventable admissions went up at an unadjusted rate of 1.8% from 2004 to 2009 in Massachusetts, and slightly higher—2.1% -- in the other three states.

The Harvard study might be a bit more comprehensive than that of earlier studies, McCormick says. Roughly 900,000 patient records were examined as part of the effort. Since Obamacare was implemented last year, Massachusetts has altered its health plan to get in line with the federal tenets, including provisions for minimum coverage.

There are several key differences between the earlier Massachusetts experience and Obamacare, McCormick says, but it doesn’t erase all concerns.

“It’s hard to assign a weight to all of these factors,” he said.

First, Romneycare also only offered subsidies to households with income at 300% of the federal poverty level. Obamacare raised that threshold to 400% of the federal poverty level, he says.

Massachusetts also had a so-called “safety net” before 2006 in which hospitals that treated indigent patients were reimbursed by the state, a feature that doesn’t exist in many other states.

Finally, the uninsured rate in Massachusetts was much lower than the rest of the nation, sitting at roughly 12% before Romneycare, and brought down to about 6% afterward. In states such as Texas and California, the uninsured rate had exceeded 30%, McCormick says, but the average reduction in the number of uninsured will be roughly seven to eight points.

“That’s higher than [Massachusetts] but it’s not dramatically higher,” he said.

Henry Aaron, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, says the stronger health-care system that existed in Massachusetts before Romneycare could prove to be a major difference between it and Obamacare.

“Massachusetts was already the best-insured state in the U.S. even before Romneycare went into effect,” Aaron said, pointing out it also offered cutting-edge care.

“Most of the rest of the U.S. can’t make that statement,” Aaron said.

More from MarketWatch