Kantarjian: Patients take action against cancer drug prices

High cancer drug prices affect the care of patients and our health care system as a whole. In the U.S., the price of cancer drugs has increased five to tenfold in 15 years, from an average of $5,000-$10,000 before 2000 to more than $100,000 by 2012. This is causing harm to millions of patients and their families. Consider the facts:

Cancer will affect 1 in 3 individuals in their lifetimes;

Recent trends of insurances put a heavy financial burden on patients, with 20-25 percent out-of-pocket expenses;

In 2014, all new, approved cancer drugs were priced above $120,000 per year;

The average household income for a family of four in the U.S. is $52,000 a year.

For one cancer drug that costs $120,000 per year, the out-of-pocket expense would be $25,000-$30,000, more than half the average household income. Patients with cancer then must make hard choices between spending their income to save their lives or forgo the treatment to provide family necessities (food, housing, education). This is even more critical for senior citizens, who are more affected by cancers and have lower, fixed incomes. Because of costs, about 10 percent to 20 percent of patients with cancer do not take the treatment or compromise it.

The catastrophic situation of high cancer drug prices (and the hard choices for patients) is not a rare, unlucky occurrence that we hope to avoid in our lifetimes. It is a common situation that affects millions of Americans and their loved ones, often repeatedly.

One cause for the astounding rise is traced to the 2003 Healthcare Reform Act in which legislation (likely driven by the pharmaceutical lobby) was inserted that prevents Medicare from negotiating drug prices. Beginning in 2006 when the legislation was implemented, this created a financial bonanza for drug companies, which became the sole deciders on the price of cancer drugs. A recent study showed that cancer drug prices have increased by an average of $8,500 a year for the past decade. There is no relief in sight, as drug companies keep testing the market with more shocking new prices, a reflection of pharma "chutzpah."

Despite increasingly more frequent and louder protests against high prices, little has happened. Yet the solutions are simple: prevent "oligopolies" and allow market forces to work better. How do we do this?

Create a post-FDA drug approval mechanism to propose fair prices for new treatments, based on their value to patients and heath care;

Allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices;

Allow organizations such as Patient Centered Outcomes Research Institute - created through Affordable Care Act initiatives to evaluate the benefits of new treatments - to include drug prices in their assessments of the value of drugs and treatments;

Allow importation of cancer drugs across borders for personal use (prices in Canada are about half those the U.S.);

Pass legislations that prevent drug companies from delaying access to generic drugs (pay-for-delay) and prolonging patent lives unnecessarily ( "evergreening");

Request that organizations that represent cancer specialists and patients develop guidelines that incorporate prices of drugs (treatment value).

Perhaps the failure to achieve tangible results is because most of the parties engaged in the discussions are part of a for-profit industry, and most have particular interests: drug companies, insurance companies, pharmaceutical distributors, hospitals, physicians and perhaps some patient advocate groups. But the party that is most harmed and least engaged are cancer patients themselves. Why? They have to spend their precious time fighting for their lives.

It is time for patients to voice their pain and take a page from the AIDS advocacy strategies that resulted, within two decades of the start of the epidemic, in the FDA approval of more than 35 AIDS drugs that now allow patients to live normal lives with affordable drugs. A cancer patient-based grass-roots movement that advocates against high cancer drug prices can accomplish this. A petition with 1 million-plus signatures of patients discussing its impact on their lives should convince our elected representatives to advocate for the interest of American patients and citizens rather than for interest groups. Unless, of course, our country is not a democracy but a "pharmaceuto-cracy."

Kantarjian, a physician, is chairman of the Leukemia Department at the University of Texas M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and a Baker Institute Scholar for Health Policies at Rice University.