The New Republic will be rolling out a new public policy vertical led by senior editor Jonathan Cohn, T.N.R. editorial director Michael Schaffer told Capital.

The vertical—as yet unnamed—will have its own landing page, look and design and will publish articles analyzing and explaining policy issues across a variety of sectors including health, education, the environment, finance, taxes and infrastructure.

“We're not the only one who has noticed this, but there's sort of a hunger among readers for someone who can cut through the bullshit of the daily news cycle,” Schaffer said. “And cut through the bullshit about things like Obamacare. [Cohn's] work ... does sort of have a moral core to it. Writing sometimes geekily about policy issues is something newsmagazines have been doing for a long time, and having a platform from which to showcase that has been a priority of ours for a while.”

But it was only at the beginning of this year that the company budgeted for it, Schaffer said.

Cohn, whom Schaffer refers to as “one of the foremost, expert journalists particularly on health policy," has already begun to build out a staff for his new venture. Nora Caplan-Bricker, who has been a staff writer at the magazine for several years, and newly hired Danny Vinik, most recently at Business Insider, are joining Cohn and will be writing for the new vertical.

The expansion into policy analysis is just one growth area for the site. As Capital reported on Wednesday, the publication hired Salon's Brian Beutler to write and report on political news, one of a series of hires in the past few weeks at the publication, including Jason Zengerle from POLITICO magazine and author Rebecca Traister. And all this more than a year after its website relaunched with a splash last year.

"We redesigned last year with an aim toward having it be a place to have both long, thoughtful, narrative journalism ... and compelling moment-to-moment and day-to-day must-read pieces,” he said. “And we've added a bunch of people to help ramp up that effort.”

Zengerle's hire, in particular, was satisfying to T.N.R. Zengerle worked there 1997 to 2010 and, after a few stints at publications like GQ, joined POLITICO Magazine to help with its foray into long-form journalism in August of 2013. He left POLITICO last month to rejoin his alma mater.

“It felt particulary good to bring him home,” Schaffer said. “Historically, the magazine has been a place where prominent, great people got their start and eventually moved onto other places that were able to woo them away with bigger profiles or bigger money. It's nice now to be able to woo them back.”

These won't be the last we'll hear of new hiring announcements at T.N.R., Schaffer said.

“There's not a huge number of people but there's still a few outstanding pieces,” Schaffer, who joined T.N.R. from Washington City Paper in June of 2012, said. “There's still people we're trying to pull into the mix in various ways, whether as staff writers or regular contract [writers].”