Berkshire Hathaway Home Services agents from Princeton planted and painted at Princeton Nursery School Oct. 1

Volunteers from the Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Fox & Roach office in Princeton painted and planted at Princeton Nursery School on Oct. 1. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Fox & Roach) Story Highlights Volunteers from Princeton office were part of a companywide effort to serve the community on Oct. 1.

This is the 20th year that Fox & Roach Realtors has conducted a Community Service Day.

PRINCETON - On Oct. 1, lending a helping hand in their communities was a gratifying experience for Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Fox & Roach, Realtors' Princeton home marketing center volunteers. They spent the day at the Princeton Nursery School, gardening and painting, during the company’s 20th annual Community Service Day, which was Fox & Roach Charities' 20th Anniversary.

Each fall, the New Jersey-Pennsylvania-Delaware area’s largest Realtor closes its doors for the company-wide Community Service Day so that sales associates and employees can spend the day at local nonprofits helping to paint, repair, stock food banks, and cook meals to help the less fortunate in their communities. This year, more than 3,000 sales associates and employees from the company’s 65 offices volunteered at more than 85 organizations.

“Community Service Day is the heart of Fox & Roach Charities and where we began. Twenty years later we continue to volunteer in our communities across the tri-state, lending a helping hand to those in need. This annual day's projects touch all of us, volunteers and recipients alike. We are pleased to be able to continue to offer more than the financial support we donate, contributing an entire day to help with much-needed projects,” said Fox & Roach Charities President Kassie Erb.

Fox & Roach Charities, a charitable foundation sponsored by Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Fox & Roach, Realtors, is committed to addressing the needs of children and families in stressful life circumstances. Since its inception, Fox & Roach Charities has contributed more than $4 million to more than 250 local community organizations in the Greater Philadelphia and tri-state areas. One hundred percent of every dollar received is donated back into the communities we serve. The majority of funds are raised through voluntary contributions from sales associates and employees through Berkshire Hathaway HomeServices Fox & Roach/Trident real estate transactions and payroll donations to Fox & Roach Charities. In addition, sales associates and employees make substantial contributions of time and effort to local charities in need. For more information, visit www.foxandroachcharities.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1S1R3Qz