This time, DeMarcus Ware accompanied the Broncos to New Jersey.

It was criminal, the way the Broncos played their last game at MetLife Stadium. The Broncos return to the scene Sunday, only this time it will be against the woebegone 2014 New York Jets, not the mighty 2013 Seattle Seahawks.

It’s not the where, but the who.

“There’s not going to be a stadium revenge,” said Broncos coach John Fox. “We were 1-1 in that stadium last year. We’re 0-0 there this year.”

The Broncos drilled the sorry New York Giants 41-23 in regular-season game No. 2 last year in East Rutherford, N.J. It was the Broncos who had to apologize for their pitiful Super Bowl performance there Feb. 2.

The new who for Jersey’s football fans Sunday will be the players on the Broncos’ defense. Seven defensive starters, and nine of the Broncos’ top 14 defensive players, didn’t play in the 43-8 Meadowlands Massacre.

“They’re going to see a difference,” said Broncos safety Rahim Moore.

The four remaining Broncos defensive starters from the Super Bowl: defensive tackles Terrance Knighton and Sylvester Williams, linebackers Danny Trevathan and Nate Irving. A fifth Super Bowl starter, Malik Jackson, plays half the snaps off the bench this year.

That’s it.

“That’s crazy, man,” Williams said. “We’re ready to go back out there. We didn’t win there the last time, but we got some new tools in the offseason and we’re ready to go.”

The changes in Denver’s defensive personnel:

Right defensive end: Ware instead of Shaun Phillips. Ware was signed as a free agent and has three sacks. Phillips left as a free agent and has zero for Tennessee.

Left defensive end: Derek Wolfe instead of Jackson. Wolfe missed the final eight games, including the postseason, because of seizurelike symptoms. Jackson is a top defensive line backup.

Strongside linebacker: Von Miller instead of Irving. Miller was out with a torn ACL. He has four sacks in four games this season. Irving is now the Broncos’ starting middle linebacker, replacing Paris Lenon, whose career probably is finished.

Left cornerback: Aqib Talib instead of Champ Bailey. Talib signed as a free agent and is widely considered one of the league’s top five cover corners. Bailey has since been twice released and is unemployed.

Right cornerback: Chris Harris instead of Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie. Although D.R.C. is a terrific cover corner, he is making $10.73 million this year. Harris, who was out with a torn ACL, is a better all-around football player and is making $1.43 million.

Nickel back: Bradley Roby instead of Tony Carter. Roby, a first-round draft pick, is playing well. Carter has been inactive in two of the first four games this season.

Strong safety: T.J. Ward instead of Duke Ihenacho. Ward is the only Bronco who has been on the field for all 296 defensive snaps. Ihenacho was cut and suffered a season-ending foot injury in Washington.

Free safety: Moore instead of Mike Adams. Moore missed the Super Bowl with a lower leg circulatory disorder. He has two interceptions in five games, while Adams has two picks in six games with Indianapolis.

“I’m definitely appreciative of having this chance to go back to that stadium,” Moore said. “That was one of the worst days of my life not being healthy, not being able to perform and help our guys in that game.”

Top backup defensive tackle: Marvin Austin instead of Mitch Unrein. Austin has been playing 25 percent of the snaps. Unrein has been inactive in three of four games.

The Broncos return to MetLife Stadium with two distinct changes: The Jets aren’t the Seahawks. And the Broncos aren’t the Broncos, at least not on defense.

“It’s totally different, man,” Knighton said as he dished out Italian meals to his teammates Friday. “I don’t know … I’m …”

I had accomplished the impossible. I had picked a subject Knighton didn’t want to discuss. “I’m just tired of talking about Seattle, man,” he said.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis