4. Get rid of bad pre-Affordable Care Act plans

We recently heard from a reader with a plan he bought on his own before the new health law rules took effect. But now his wife is pregnant and his current insurance excludes maternity benefits. He wanted to know where he could get insurance that would cover maternity care, which all plans sold nowadays must do. Alas, the answer was that he can’t until open enrollment starts on Nov. 15. If you have a pre-Affordable Care Act plan, make sure you understand its limitations.

5. Don’t accept an automatic replacement plan

If the plan you chose from your state marketplace last year is being discontinued, the government allows the insurer to auto-enroll you in a replacement plan—unless you say otherwise. Check with your marketplace first to see whether you can get a better deal.

6. Don’t automatically take COBRA

This program used to be a lifeline if you lost your job, because it let you keep your employer’s health plan for 18 months. But now it’s more of an albatross. That’s because COBRA requires that you pick up the full cost of the plan, which can hit $600 or more per month. Thanks to health care reform, you can almost certainly find equally good insurance for a better price on your state’s marketplace, especially because your lower income will probably qualify you for big tax credits. Carefully compare the two before paying your first COBRA premium. Once you’ve enrolled in COBRA, you can’t switch to a marketplace plan until the next open enrollment period.

7. Shop around for care

Obviously you can’t do this for emergencies, and it’s irrelevant for catastrophic situations such as cancer or a heart attack. But for a routine service, such as an MRI, or for things you can plan in advance, such as childbirth, register on your health plan’s website and look for cost estimators. You’re likely to find startling variations in prices for the same service, depending on where you get it.

8. Master your plan’s rules

Don’t assume that all plans are designed alike; they’re not, and what you don’t know can cost you. Say you wake up one day with a fever and a sore throat. A trip to your doctor might cost you a $40 co-pay. An urgent care center might set you back $60. An emergency room might cost $1,500. When you get a new plan, spend a few minutes with its standardized Summary of Benefits and Coverage form. It’s not exciting reading, but it can save you big in the long run.