Buy Photo House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville, says Rep. Jeremy Durham should be expelled from the Tennessee General Assembly if he doesn't resign. If he is removed, he would be only the second member expelled in the past 150 years. (Photo: George Walker IV / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

A new survey conducted by the office of House Speaker Beth Harwell shows nearly six in 10 respondents favor Gov. Bill Haslam's now-doomed Insure Tennessee health proposal.

Harwell, R-Nashville, never publicly stated whether she definitively opposed or supported the plan to provide as many as 470,000 low-income Tennesseans with federally subsidized health care.

In the hours before the plan officially died Feb. 4, she told reporters she didn't think there were enough votes in the House for the proposal, and reiterated those comments Thursday.

"I hadn't taken a position on it. We were continuing to gain information. There were lots of good points," Harwell said in a phone interview with The Tennessean. "Ultimately, the legislature had long-term financial concerns, as well as not having an in-writing commitment (from federal health officials)."

But in mid-January, roughly two weeks before the start of the special session devoted to Insure Tennessee, Harwell told reporters she wanted to gauge the interest of her district on the issue.

"I'm going to send out a survey to my district. We've already devised it. And we'll send that out, we'll hear from folks," Harwell said Jan. 13.

"To be honest with you I haven't heard from a lot of citizens. ... I have had hospital administrators talk to me about it, so we'll wait and see how that survey turns out, and you're welcome to see it."

Harwell's office released the results of the survey this week. The speaker cautioned that the survey wasn't scientific and although the survey was mailed to people in her district, it also was available to anyone online. She said she knows advocates for Insure Tennessee had supporters weigh in on the survey.

The office received more than 5,000 responses, said Harwell spokeswoman Kara Owen. Among those who responded, 59 percent believe Tennessee should implement the Insure Tennessee plan, compared with 41 percent who said "no/undecided."

Acknowledging the program had "some popular support," Harwell wouldn't say Thursday whether the results of the survey would've influenced her decision, had she received them during the special session.

"I think the plan is now moot. I think we are all sitting and waiting for the Supreme Court decision because I think that will drastically alter what the state's facing," Harwell said, later adding it's still unclear what effect the decision will have on health care decisions in Tennessee.

She's referencing the King v. Burwell case, which questions using tax credits on federal health care exchanges established through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. Other Republicans, chiefly Senate Majority Leader Mark Norris, R-Collierville, also cited the anticipated June decision as a reason to wait on Insure Tennessee.

Advocates argue the case and expanding health benefits in Tennessee using a different component of the Affordable Care Act don't necessarily go hand in hand.

The Haslam administration anticipated roughly 288,000 of the potentially 470,000 Tennesseans eligible for the new Insure Tennessee program would enroll in the first year of the pilot program.

The Insure Tennessee question was one of 11 the speaker included on her survey. Respondents were particularly in favor of a proposal that would require anyone accused of domestic violence to be held in custody for a 12-hour "cooling off" period. That comes in response to a well-publicized Nashville case in which the attorney for a man accused of assault had a judge waive the 12-hour hold, at which point police say the man assaulted his girlfriend again.

Legalizing marijuana for medicinal use also was popular: Sixty-four percent of survey takers favor legalization, compared with 36 percent who were against the move or undecided. Harwell said she thinks the general public is moving toward supporting a proposal to legalize cannabis oil for medicinal use — a House committee approved a bill this week to legalize the oil for people who have seizures.

"I don't think this state is ready for a broad piece of legislation," Harwell added.

The speaker spent $8,000 of campaign funds on the survey, Owen said.

Survey from House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville

The speaker regularly conducts surveys on issues that could come before the General Assembly, said Harwell spokeswoman Kara Owen. The results are not scientific, and include more than 5,000 responses.

1. Do you think TN should address this issue through changes to the gas tax?

36% - No, I do not support an increase or reform

26% - Yes, I support a tax increase

38% - Yes, I support reform so everyone pays their fair share

2. Should parents of students who are eligible for free and reduced lunch be allowed to receive a scholarship to send their child to the school of their choice, including parochial schools?

33% - Yes

67% - No/Undecided

3. Do you think TN should implement the "Insure TN" plan?

59% - Yes

41% - No/Undecided

4. Should the state work toward repealing the Hall Income Tax completely?

44% - Yes

56% - No/Undecided

5. Should Tennessee allow for-profit charter entities in the state?

32% - Yes

68% - No/Undecided

6. Do you think there should be a state law making it mandatory for those accused of domestic violence to be held in jail for a 12 hour hold, or a "cooling off" period?

67% - Yes

33% - No/Undecided

7. Are you in favor of legislation to restore certain laws for women having abortions, such as informed consent, a waiting period, and information about the surgery before it is performed?

47% - Yes

53% - No/Undecided

8. Do you support Tennessee's Common Core State Standards for K-12 schools?

36% - Yes

64% - No/Undecided

9. Should the legislature work to close sales tax exemptions?

57% - Yes

43% - No/Undecided

10. Are you in favor of legalizing medicinal marijuana?

64% - Yes

36% - No/Undecided

11. Do you think Tennessee should popularly elect the Attorney General?

41% - Yes

59% - No/Undecided

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1CdqnH3