National public opinion polls consistently show that voters know very little about judges on the ballot and wish they had more information. As Coloradans, we actually have a distinct advantage over citizens in many other states when it comes to voter information.

Of the 17 states where judges are standing in a retention election on Nov. 4, Colorado is one of only six where voters have access to objective, broad-based evaluations of judges’ performance on the bench.

What Colorado’s system evaluates is whether judges are doing their jobs well, based on feedback from those who work with or appear before them. The assessment conducted by Colorado’s Office of Judicial Performance Evaluation (OJPE) is based on whether judges demonstrate the key qualities that the public expects them to possess, including integrity, legal knowledge, communication skills, and judicial temperament.

The evaluation currently used in Colorado is purposefully not ideological. How judges reach their decisions is driven by the facts before them and the way in which cases are framed — and should not involve the judge’s political preferences and viewpoints.

Coloradans need and deserve judges who approach each case impartially and with an open mind, rather than judges who allow political and special interests to influence their decisions. The OJPE’s program ensures that such judges will continue to serve on our courts.

As voters, it is in our best interest to cast our votes based on judges’ qualifications, fairness, and integrity — and to avoid politicizing our judiciary.

Colorado’s own Institute for the Advancement of the American Legal System (IAALS) has worked for nearly a decade to develop and promote ways of choosing, evaluating, and retaining judges that preserve judges’ impartiality while still holding them accountable.

Colorado’s judicial performance evaluation process does just that — and serves as an example to which many other states aspire.

In our state, individuals who have had professional contact with judges, in all types of cases, are surveyed about their experiences.

For example, attorneys who have appeared before the court are asked whether appellate judges make reasoned decisions based upon the law and the facts, and whether they make those decisions in a timely matter. Litigants are asked whether trial judges treat those in their courtroom politely and with respect. Jurors are asked whether the judge in their case was prepared and whether he or she managed proceedings so that little time was wasted.

In other words, the process bears a striking resemblance to the employee performance reviews we in other professions undergo at our jobs on a regular basis.

As an additional tool for voters, our state and local commissions consider the full range of evaluation information and recommend whether each judge merits retention on the bench. The members of these commissions include both lawyers and non-lawyers who are appointed by representatives of all three branches of government: the governor, the chief justice, and legislative leaders.

This fall, Colorado’s commissions have recommended that 142 of the 146 judges on the ballot be retained, while recommending against the retention of three judges and lacking sufficient information to make a recommendation on a fourth judge.

Complete evaluation results are available in the Colorado Blue Book, on the OJPE website, and at KnowYourJudge.com. Please take advantage of your opportunity as a Coloradan to be an informed judicial voter.

Rebecca Love Kourlis is executive director of IAALS at the University of Denver. She served Colorado’s judiciary for nearly two decades, first as a trial court judge and then as a justice of the Colorado Supreme Court.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.