Jamaica has long been ripe for a revival. The most prominent retailers in the once-bustling southern Queens neighborhood are 99-cent stores, bargain beauty salons and dusty no-name apparel discounters. National chains—from Starbucks to Victoria's Secret—have long shunned the one-square-mile area despite its status as one of the city's biggest transportation hubs—featuring the terminus of the AirTrain to JFK and a major transfer station for the Long Island Rail Road, not to mention four subway lines and a half-dozen bus lines.



The problem is that very few of those hundreds of thousands of people who pass through daily stick around. That gives retailers little incentive to open up shop—and in turn forces the area's 643,000 residents to take their shopping and dining elsewhere, typically to places on Long Island.



"We don't need more beauty supplies and nail salons and fast food," said Yvonne Reddick, district manager of Jamaica's Community Board 12. "We need quality stores that are going to draw people in to shop."



Surprisingly, that need may yet be met. In late September, six years after the city rezoned the area to encourage more commercial development, plans were approved for a 24-story hotel on a property across the street from Jamaica's central transit hub. The site, owned by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and the Greater Jamaica Development Corp., has been used as a local meeting-room facility. The hotel could open as soon as 2016.



Meanwhile, the Blumenfeld Development Group, which opened East Harlem's successful East River Plaza shopping mall three years ago, is planning to build a $50 million, two-level retail complex spanning one block on the corner of 90th Avenue and 168th Street, a site that is now home to a parking lot.



The developer is hoping to lure a major national department store, as it did in East Harlem, where anchors include Target and Costco. Neighborhood advocates, including executives at the GJDC, are hoping the two big projects on the horizon will serve as the catalyst to whip the area into shape.



"We've just now reached the period where interest is keen from lots of sources," said Carlisle Towery, president of the GJDC, noting attention from multiple real estate developers and lenders. "The neighborhood is changing."



More specifically, hopes are rising that Jamaica could recapture some of its former glory, when its restaurants and stores, including a big Macy's, drew patrons not just from the immediate area, but also via car and train from Long Island. It was in the 1960s, as new shopping venues such as Green Acres Mall and Roosevelt Field Mall in Nassau County opened, that the flow reversed and Jamaica withered.

Lack of options

Today, locals complain about the dearth of retail opportunities. Almost one out of every three residents said they never dine in Jamaica, according to a survey recently conducted by the GJDC. That report found that such avoidance translates to $228 million in lost revenue each year for Jamaica eateries. Meanwhile, residents doing their shopping elsewhere drain $325 million from the local economy annually.



"Jamaica isn't a place for sit-down dining, and they need more healthy options," said T. Garriga, who just moved to the area from the Bronx to look after her elderly parents.

$553M—Dining, shopping revenue lost to other areas annually

2003—Airtrain opens

5—Train/subway lines in area



Other neighborhood officials say they'd love to see some national retailers in the area, a possibility that may now lie within reach, courtesy of the Blumenfeld retail project. That plan, however, still must go through lengthy city reviews, which will likely push off the start date of construction until at least 2015.



However, Able Management Group, a proven hotel operator with properties on Long Island, is expected to start work on its 24-story hotel next fall.



Viral Patel, chief executive of Able, is hoping to attract business travelers using the AirTrain, which provides an eight-minute journey to JFK airport. With 210 rooms, a sit-down restaurant and 3,700 square feet of retail, the new hotel will still have room rates about 40% lower than prices at Manhattan-based competitors.



"It will only spur growth for others," said Mr. Patel, noting the bevy of retail projects in development, including one next door to his site on Sutphin Boulevard.

'Great potential'

Nearby on Parsons Boulevard, the Dermot Co. opened an eight-story, 350-unit residential building called Moda three years ago. The good news there is that the project has already drawn one important endorsement. In July, Peter Poulakakos, who runs several trendy eateries in Manhattan as well as the Financier Patisserie coffee-shop chain, cut the ribbon on his new barbecue joint, CityRib, in the base of the building. The 4,000-square-foot space includes both dine-in and takeout options, and employs about 30. Mr. Poulakakos explained that he hadn't considered Jamaica until Dermot, his longtime real estate partner, suggested it.



"There's great potential—the transportation to New York is effortless and easy and fast, and the area has a lot to offer," said Mr. Poulakakos. "Obviously, like everywhere else, it just takes time."

Get Crain's Daily Alert Sign up for our FREE daily email newsletter. A summary of the day's top business and political headlines from the newsroom of Crain's New York Business. More Newsletters ›

Comments