By of the

He’s doing better with men than women. He’s doing better with older voters than younger ones. And he’s doing better with conservatives than moderates.

These are some of the sharpest patterns in Gov. Scott Walker’s support in national polls of Republican voters.

They hint at some potential fault lines in his looming presidential bid.

But they also point to how well-positioned he is at this early stage to contend for his party’s nomination. Walker is performing particularly well with the GOP’s conservative base and has been for several months now.

He does less well with moderate Republicans, but even among those voters, his overall ratings are positive.

This is Walker’s early promise in the GOP field: his potential to earn broad acceptance within the party, while showing special strength among the most active and ardent Republicans.

These patterns could change as the race unfolds. The first GOP debate isn’t until August. The first caucuses and primaries take place early next year. And most GOP voters are soft and fluid right now in their preferences.

But the structure of Walker’s support has been fairly stable in the polls for a few months now, despite his modest name recognition and despite some campaign stumbles. That suggests there is something basic about his political story — a conservative governor who has repeatedly defeated Democrats and labor in a battleground state — that is driving his appeal within the party.

Here’s a closer look at how the governor is doing with different kinds of GOP voters in national polling since the beginning of March. (All these numbers are based on surveys of GOP and GOP-leaning voters only):

Conservative strength. In virtually every Republican poll, Walker earns more support and higher ratings from conservative voters than from moderate ones. In some polls, the gap is sizable.

In a recent Washington Post/ABC News poll, Walker does twice as well with conservative Republicans as he does with moderate-to-liberal Republicans.

In a national survey by Monmouth University, Walker’s favorability rating was 63% among “very conservative” Republicans, 41% among “somewhat conservative” Republicans and 32% among moderate to liberal Republicans (with large percentages having no opinion).

In a survey by Public Policy Polling, Walker’s favorability rating was 80% among tea party supporters and 46% among those who don’t support the tea party.

In a McClatchy-Marist poll, Walker had the support of 24% of very conservative Republicans, 20% of conservative Republicans and 15% of moderate Republicans.

These patterns make Walker the reverse image of Jeb Bush in his ideological appeal within the party. In the McClatchy-Marist poll, Bush got only 7% of very conservative Republicans, but 18% of conservative Republicans and 26% of moderate Republicans.

Gender. Walker is doing much better with men than women right now. In a recent Fox News poll, he easily led the GOP field among men with 21%, but ran fifth among women with 8% — the biggest gender gap in the field. In The Washington Post/ABC poll, he had the support of 17% of men and 6% of women. In the Public Policy Polling survey, 26% of men backed him, compared to 14% of women.

Part of Walker’s gender gap could be due to the fact that Republican men are more engaged than women at this point and more likely to know something about Walker, who still lacks the name recognition of many others in the field. In the Monmouth poll, only 45% of women had an opinion about Walker, compared to 61% of men.

But Walker’s strength with male voters also echoes his history in Wisconsin, where he is more popular with Republican men than Republican women and more popular with independent men than independent women, according to polling by Charles Franklin of the Marquette University Law School. Among Republicans, Walker had a 95% positive rating among men and 89% rating among women in Marquette’s last four 2014 polls; among independents, he had a 53% positive rating among men and a 41% rating among women.

Age. Walker is getting higher ratings from GOP voters 45 and over older than from those under 45. He has led among older Republicans in several national polls, while running third or fourth among younger Republicans. That’s the reverse of the pattern for Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, who does much better with younger voters than older voters.

Education. Walker seems to be faring better with more educated Republicans than less educated Republicans. In the Washington Post/ABC survey, he led all candidates among GOP college grads (with 20% of the vote), but ran fifth among non-college Republicans (with 8%). It will take more polling to see how consistent this pattern is. But it runs counter to the perception of some that Walker’s appeal is more “blue-collar” and Bush’s more “white-collar.” In polls by both the Post and McClatchy-Marist, the reverse was true: Walker led the field with college grads, Bush with noncollege grads.

All these numbers are encouraging for Walker for at least two reasons.

One, he’s doing well among the kinds of voters that tend to pay attention, turn out and play an active role in the nominating process: ideological voters, older voters, more educated voters.

Two, he continues to show some versatility in his appeal within the party. He does better with moderates than the GOP hopefuls to his right, such as Texas Sen. Ted Cruz. He does far better with conservatives than the main contender to his left, Jeb Bush. He’s popular with tea party backers. And the polling suggests he’s acceptable to many evangelical voters, even though he’s not their top choice.

Along with Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, Walker may be best positioned right now to appeal across Republican fault lines. But for now, he’s generating more attention and support than Rubio.

In a recent Pew Research national survey, four of 10 GOP voters still hadn’t heard of Walker, which is a reminder of how cautious to be about the 2015 polling. But of those who had, very few of these Republican voters had negative views.

Nine out of 10 conservative Republicans who had an opinion about Walker said they could vote for him. And eight out of 10 moderate Republicans who had an opinion about him said they could vote for him.

Those numbers were better than those of almost everyone else in the field.

The sweet spot for Walker in this race is to be the leading alternative to Jeb Bush, and to be a candidate who excites conservatives without scaring moderates and the party establishment.

The early polls continue to suggest he has that potential, even if he has a long road to travel to get there.

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter