This Week in Crain's New York: April 6, 2015 Listen to the Podcast or Download

More than a week after an explosion wiped out a corner of the East Village, taking two lives and destroying three buildings, businesses in the area are finding they are still a long way from normal.

Altogether, six businesses were lost, and six were still closed as of late last week, among them the circa-1940 B&H Dairy restaurant, which is next door to the blast site and waiting for its gas to come back on. But businesses throughout the neighborhood were feeling the effects, not just those a few doors away from 121 Second Ave., where an improperly and possibly illegally installed gas line led to destruction and tragedy on the Thursday afternoon of March 26.

It turns out that being in the wrong place at the wrong time doesn't only happen to people.

"There's a staggering number of businesses that go out of business when faced with events like this," warned Ted Devine, chief executive of Insureon, which specializes in small-business insurance.

Right now the biggest problem is the barricaded sidewalks that force pedestrians into long detours simply to cross the street and turn the flow of foot traffic to a trickle. That's particularly pronounced on the block where the explosion and subsequent fire occurred, as passersby need to tell police where they want to go.

For Paul's Da Burger Joint, which has been at 131 Second Ave. since 1989, the obstacles are costing the business "tens of thousands" of dollars, said owner Matt Wardrop.

Though the city lifted his building's "vacate order" on March 30, the Monday after the explosion, and he was able to reopen, his clientele still consists mainly of emergency and construction workers from the demolition site on the corner.

Business, interrupted

His problems are compounded by a lack of business-interruption insurance, which would have covered losses for the days the restaurant was closed. Insufficient coverage is a frequent problem for small-business owners, who are always looking to cut what can seem like nonessential costs.

"If you're on a mom-and-pop scale, a business-interruption policy is so expensive, if you never need it, you lost a lot of money paying for it, so you take your chances," Mr. Wardrop said while standing at a barricade at 10 in the morning, before police were letting any pedestrians walk down his block. "So the whole idea is to get fully open as soon as you can."

Mr. Wardrop estimated sales were down 75%. "If [the street] opens up soon, we'll be OK," he said. "But I don't know when that's going to be."

A spokeswoman for the Office of Emergency Management said that full access to Mr. Wardrop's block—the west side of Second Avenue between St. Marks Place and East Seventh Street—will be restored once debris removal and the investigation of what is being treated as a crime scene are concluded. She could not provide a date.

But even on streets that aren't barricaded, and where stores didn't have to close for four days, the disruption of the neighborhood's foot-traffic patterns is continuing. The maze of barricades and fire trucks has cut business by 50% at New Yorkers Foodmarket, on Second Avenue between East Sixth and East Seventh streets, according to owner Michael Schumacher. That's added up to a $50,000 loss of sales during the past week.

Unlike Paul's Da Burger's insurance policy, Foodmarket's does include business-interruption coverage. But Mr. Schumacher said it doesn't extend to a slowdown in business caused by disruptions somewhere else.

The last time his store was in this much trouble was after Superstorm Sandy. But the supermarket owner says this disaster is worse.

"With Sandy, there were no businesses open, and afterwards everybody opened up at the same time," Mr. Schumacher said. "Business came right back. I don't know if business is going to come back, because people are finding other stores to go to."

He was offered a 2%-interest loan through the Renaissance Economic Development Corp., a community nonprofit working with the Department of Small Business Services, but he said he doesn't want a loan when he doesn't know what his revenue is going to be. He'd like the city to offer grants.

Loans are an option

It's far more likely, however, that help will come in the form of low-interest loans. Small Business Services will be holding a neighborhood meeting within the next two weeks to help businesses with their options. Meanwhile, the city's Office of Emergency Management has started the machinery that will let the U.S. Small Business Administration assess the damage for a disaster declaration, which will allow the federal agency to give out low-interest loans to affected businesses.

There will be no shortage of those, including the ones that were destroyed, like Sushi Park, where a busboy and a patron were killed, and Pommes Frites, a beloved spot for Belgian fries. (Last Friday Pommes Frites posted a link for donations on its Facebook page.)

The havoc extends to Via Della Pace, a cozy Italian restaurant on the east side of Second Avenue, at East Seventh Street, which could be approached only through two checkpoints, and where co-owner Marco Ventura had the place almost to himself one evening last week.

Farther north, the landmark Gem Spa newsstand at the corner of St. Marks Place was equally deserted. The shop had closed for eight hours following the explosion, but had since resumed its 24-hour schedule. Blaming the street barricades, sales clerk Shimul Paul said the shop had stayed open through Superstorm Sandy and would remain open despite the lack of sales.

"We never closed this store in 70 years," he said. (That might be stretching it: "The Spa," a onetime counterculture hangout famous for its egg creams, shut down in the winter of 1972, according to a Village Voice clipping from later that year.)

At the next-door street stall that Shakill Shampeen has run since 2003, he sold $50 worth of hats and knickknacks that day. On a normal weekday, sales could total $500. "We are like in a jail," he said.

Though it's probably too late for advice, experts recommend that small-business owners buy business-interruption coverage, read their policies carefully and speak to authorities in their industry about which policies are best. And for getting through the disaster it's important to have all documents in order.

"The No. 1 thing is to have documentation," said Ulas Neftci, director of the Baruch College Small Business Development Center. "You have to be in the system to get something from the system."

But despite their trials, business owners in the neighborhood were also counting their blessings. Thanks to loyal customers seeking out the restaurant, sales at Taqueria Diana, at 129 Second Ave., were down just 30% last week, not counting the days the restaurant was closed, said owner Matthew La Rue.

Far more important, his staff and his store survived.

"We're the lucky ones," Mr. La Rue said. "No one on my staff was injured. Our building is still intact. We're still here."

Get Crain's Small Business Alert Sign up for our FREE weekly Small Business Alert email newsletter. An essential summary of the week's top headlines selected for small businesses. More Newsletters ›

Comments