The Colby Fire burns above Glendora Thursday January 16, 2014. A portion of the former Singer home, of sewing machine fame, partially burned. File/Will Lester/Staff Photographer

The past year had the positive — President Obama came to the San Gabriel Valley to turn 346,177 acres of the San Gabriel Mountains into a national monument — and the negative — the indictment of two men tainted a Montebello political dynasty and a mountain wildfire forced the evacuation of thousands.

These stories were among the top ones as determined by the news staff of this newspaper.

San Gabriel Mountains declared national monument

President Barack Obama came to the San Gabriel Valley in October to sign a proclamation declaring about half of the San Gabriel Mountains as a national monument.

The jagged boundary of the monument roughly stretches from Santa Clarita to the edge of Mt. Baldy and includes the overused San Gabriel Canyon.

The president said the area includes 600 archeologically and culturally significant sites, miles of hiking trails and habitat for several endangered species. Supporters have received commitments of more than $3 million from nonprofit groups to beef up trails, add signage and hire more rangers.

The U.S. Forest Service, which will manage the area, has added 10 new cleanup crews as a result of the presidential designation during the past 2 1/2 months.

Calderons indicted

State Sen. Ron Calderon (he has since been termed out) and his brother, Tom, a former state assemblymen, both Montebello Democrats, were indicted on federal charges.

The 28-page indictment accuses Ron Calderon of accepting $100,000 in cash bribes from Long Beach to Hollywood, in addition to plane trips, gourmet meals and golf resort junkets in exchange for championing laws favorable to those who paid him and fighting laws that could harm them.

If convicted on all charges, he would face up to 396 years in federal prison.

Tom Calderon was charged with money laundering and conspiracy. If convicted, he could serve up to 160 years.

A trial for the two isn’t scheduled until May.

The Calderon political family dynasty stretches back more than three decades, from the Montebello school board to four legislators who traded seats in Sacramento while controlling powerful state legislative committees.

Colby Fire burns foothills

A campfire started by three friends trying to keep warm in the foothills above Glendora in January turned into the 1,952-acre Colby Fire that burned for several days in the Angeles National Forest.

Advertisement

Five homes and 17 other structures were destroyed. Five firefighters and one other person were injured and more than 1,000 residents were evacuated in Azusa and Glendora.

Barely more than a month after the fire, the residents were evacuated again, this time during a rainstorm that brought mud and debris flows down the denuded hillsides.

Transients Jonathan Carl Jarrell and Steven Robert Aguirre, along with Clifford Eugene Henry of Glendora, were convicted in May of a felony charge of setting brush on fire in the national forest and several misdemeanor charges.

Since the fire, Azusa and Glendora residents have been evacuated twice due to rainstorms, had their streets fill with mud a handful of times and adopted K-rails and parking restrictions as a part of day-to-day life.

Pasadena pays $1 million to settle shooting

Pasadena in June agreed to pay $1 million to the parents of unarmed black teenager Kendrec McDade after he was shot by Pasadena police officers in March 2012.

The officers, Mathew Griffin and Jeffrey Newlen, were cleared in the fatal shooting by the Los Angeles County District Attorney’s Office, an internal probe and the FBI.

But the fight over the release of the report from Office of Independent Review of the shooting continues. The Pasadena Police Officers Association filed an appeal to block the release of a redacted copy of the report.

Black activists in Pasadena recently protested police killings of unarmed black people, including McDade.

Central Basin has tumultuous year

Central Basin Municipal Water District’s year began with an audit finding seven “significant deficiencies” in its operations, and finished with its general manager being fired for cause.

The district, which normally flies below the political radar, paid out more than $1 million to settle two lawsuits, lost its insurance, and had Director Art Chacon censured by colleagues after it was discovered he was driving without a license.

It also was discovered the district paid $16,000 to a woman injured in a 2010 car accident in which Chacon was driving without a license and gave him nearly $50,000 in auto allowance payments.

Chacon eventually obtained his license and was re-elected.

Director Robert Apodaca, for whom the district’s former insurance company paid $670,000 to settle a sexual harassment lawsuit, also was re-elected.

Transportation projects progress

Two light-rail projects moved forward, sort of.

The $1 billion, 11.5-mile Gold Line Foothill extension from east Pasadena to the Azusa/Glendora border is about 80 percent complete.

Meanwhile, plans for an extension of the Gold Line Eastside from East Los Angeles had mixed progress.

The Metro board sought more studies on the possibility of building two extensions of the Gold Line, one to Pico Rivera and ending in Whittier, the other along the 60 Freeway ending in South El Monte.

There was also lots of construction on freeways.

The ongoing 5 Freeway widening project continues to be a headache for commuters in La Mirada and Santa Fe Springs.

Caltrans also began adding a car-pool lane to the 10 Freeway between the 57 and 605 freeways this year. The $193 million project will continue through the 2019.

The existing car-pool lanes on the 10 Freeway from the 605 to the downtown Los Angeles connector to the 101 and 5 freeways were turned into pay lanes in 2013. These lanes, as well as pay lanes on the 110 Freeway, called ExpressLanes, started as a pilot project but were made permanent in 2014.

Two new railroad underpass construction projects from the Alameda Corridor East Construction Authority also began.

Whittier approves city council districts

After years of trying to change the city’s at-large voting system, Whittier Latinos achieved success in 2014 with the June 3 passage of Measure W, requiring four districts and an at-large election for the mayor.

The city is holding community meetings and has hired a consultant to draw the boundaries that will go into place for the April 2016 election.

Funerals for fallen officers

Twice in a month, mourners gathered at Forest Lawn Memorial Park in Covina to say goodbye to police officers killed in the line of duty.

Covina Police Officer Jordan Corder, 28, of Fontana, died in October when his motorcycle collided with a SUV on Citrus Avenue near Puente.

Less than a month later, flags lined Forest Lawn for a second time, after Pomona Police Officer Shaun Diamond was fatally shot during a SWAT raid in San Gabriel.

His death led to the arrest of Mongols Motorcycle Club member David Martinez, 36, who police accused of firing the shotgun that killed Diamond. Martinez has denied the charges.

West Covina cleans house

A state audit, a new council and the exit of long-standing employees made for a tumultuous year in West Covina.

The city lost or ousted five department heads in 2014, with most making an exit after State Controller John Chiang announced a state probe of “questionable” finances for fiscal years 2011-2012 and 2012-2013.

The exodus included City Manager Chris Chung, City Attorney Arnold Alvarez-Glasman, City Clerk Sue Rush, Public Works Director Shannon Yauchzee and Finance Director Nita McKay.

The city did not renew Alvarez-Glasman’s contract and paid Chung $440,000 to resign early. Chung, Rush and Yauchzee worked for the city for more than 15 years.

The audit, which is ongoing, was announced in September. Chiang, elected in November to become state treasurer, questioned the city’s ability to provide “reliable and accurate information” in their financial reports.

Sheriff’s deputies shoot innocent Pico Rivera man

An innocent Pico Rivera man was fatally shot in the head and right leg in a fusillade of gunfire by sheriff’s deputies on Aug. 1. The deputies were chasing a wanted parolee who had gone into the man’s home.

After the shooting of Frank Mendoza, Los Angeles County Sheriff’s Department refused to release the name of the deputy who shot him, citing safety and privacy issues.

Sriracha maker stays in Irwindale

Huy Fong Foods, maker of Sriracha, a popular chili hot sauce, stayed in Irwindale after reaching a compromise with the city.

Neighbors near the factory had complained about harsh chili fumes causing their eyes to water and their throats to burn.

The city took the company to court, but after Huy Fong installed stronger air filters the partes reached a resolution.

Montebello children rescued

Police rescued four missing Montebello boys and arrested their father following a pursuit and stand-off on a San Diego-area freeway hours after investigators discovered the body of the children’s mother in the trunk of a car abandoned blocks from the family home.

Other stories of note:

Scavenger hunt

Penn Park in Whittier sustained $5,000 in damages as part of a scavenger hunt, @HiddenCash, put on by Jason Buzi, who made a bundle in Bay Area real estate.

Nelles reports released

The environmental impact report and a development plan for the 74-acre former Fred C. Nelles Correction Facility was released in 2014.

The plan calls for the development of 750 housing units and 208,350 square feet of commercial space but opponents say the plan lacks preservation. A City Council public hearing is scheduled in February.

Pasadena public health director resigns

Pasadena’s public health director Dr. Eric Walsh came under scrutiny and eventually resigned after a series of YouTube videos surfaced of him giving sermons in Seventh-Day Adventist Churches that condemned homosexuals, Muslims, Catholics and others.

The recordings surfaced after Walsh was invited to speak at Pasadena City College’s commencement ceremony, but later backed out.

Restaurants close

Iconic restaurants Scotty’s Family Restaurant in Whittier and the Carriage Coffee Shop in La Mirada were forced to close because of fires.

Dog poop thrown on lawn

A surveillance camera caught Mayor Dennis Kneier of San Marino tossing dog poop onto a neighbor’s yard in June.

People from across the nation and world sent more than 95 pages of email correspondence to rebuke Kneier, who resigned from his post but remained a councilman. A recall effort failed to collect enough supporting signatures.

Trail to Fish Canyon Falls reopened

Local nature enthusiasts celebrated in June when Vulcan Materials Co. opened the access trail to Fish Canyon Falls two months ahead of schedule.

Transgender teen takes the field

A teenager in Azusa broke ground in February as the varsity cheerleader and student body president became one of the first openly transgender high school-level athletes in the state. Pat Cordova-Goff earned a starting position on Azusa High School’s softball team, taking advantage of a change to the state education code and a policy shift for the state’s high school athletics governing body that allowed students to participate in sports “in a manner that is consistent with their gender identity.”

— Staff writers Sarah Favot, Peter Fullam, Jason Henry, Melissa Masatani, Sandra Molina, Steve Scauzillo, and Zen Vuong contributed to the story