Man will face a first-degree murder and stalking charges

Leroy Wallace ( Picasa )

A 47-year-old Loveland man has been arrested in connection with the death last week of Christina Anjoleen Gray, 42, whose body was found Wednesday in a central Loveland home.

Loveland police said Leroy Arlen Wallace was arrested without incident by a SWAT team of police and Larimer County Sheriff's Office deputies at 1:13 a.m. Saturday at his home, 420 E. 57th St., No. 283. No other arrests are anticipated, Sgt. Justin Chase said.

Police obtained a warrant alleging first-degree murder and stalking, also a felony, against Wallace, whom they said "was a known associate of Gray and had a prior relationship with her."

Gray's body was found Wednesday at 1512 N. Jefferson Ave., after a family member concerned about her safety asked two of her friends for help. They discovered her body, which police said showed signs of blunt force trauma and strangulation.

An unstated development late Friday allowed police to take the information to a Larimer County magistrate shortly after midnight to pursue the arrest warrant, and Wallace was in custody in an hour.

"This case investigation is not over," said Loveland Police Chief Luke Hecker in a press release on Saturday. "We will continue to work to insure that all aspects of this investigation are documented and well represented through the court system."

Advertisement

He added, "We recognize that to many, Christina Anjoleen Gray was silenced on Dec. 18, but these dedicated investigators and technicians will continue to work to insure that Christina Anjoleen Gray's voice is heard and that she is well remembered in the on-going investigation and prosecution."

Wallace was booked at the Loveland Police Department and then taken to the Larimer County Jail, where he currently remains. A cash-only bond of $500,000 has been set.

Anyone with additional information regarding this investigation who has not already spoken with police is asked to contact Detective Brian Koopman using the police tip line, 962-2032.