In 2013, during the oral arguments of Hollingsworth vs. Perry, U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia claimed that “there’s considerable disagreement [a]mong sociologists as to what the consequences of raising a child in a [s]ingle-sex family, whether that is harmful to the child or not.”

When I read this claim, it didn’t seem to square with generally accepted social science at the time. The American Sociological Association (of which I am a member) and American Psychological Association, along with other professional organizations, had filed amici curiae briefs in the case.

These briefs reached a common conclusion: “Whether a child is raised by same-sex or opposite-sex parents has no bearing on a child’s well-being.”

Scalia’s claim was not merely a statement of opinion, but attempted to establish a fact: Social scientists disagree. But did they? Recently sociologists developed a strategy that allows researchers to answer questions like these empirically. Citation patterns among published research can be analyzed in a way that identifies if and when scientists achieved consensus about any particular question.

Sometimes social science can be quite straightforward, while other times the process is more complicated than we’d like. The method I adopted to test Scalia’s claim required using search terms to identify all existing research on outcomes for kids with same-sex parents. After doing that, I could determine if and when social scientists achieved consensus.

Directly adopting this approach led to results that I suspected indicated achieved consensus, but I wasn’t yet convinced.

Using search terms to identify the potential corpus of salient research can err in the direction of including substantial amounts of unrelated research — in my case, for example, on how parents influence their children’s same-sex attraction. This could have invalidated the interpretation of my results.

My collaborator Ryan Light of the University of Oregon solved this problem by providing three stages of increasingly restrictive criteria on how to identify the relevant research from among the possibly relevant articles I initially identified. When we got more or less the same results after applying each one of these new criteria, we were finally confident in our answer.

Peer reviewers agreed. Our findings, published in Social Science Research, show that by the early 2000s, social scientists had reached agreement about outcomes for kids of same-sex parents: Children who have same-sex parents do not experience disadvantages compared to their counterparts with opposite-sex parents.

We thought this finding merited attention on its own, both responding to claims made in the case that sparked my initial interest and in light of the Supreme Court’s decision legalizing same-sex marriage nationally (reached just days after our article was published).

If the Supreme Court’s decision can be followed by similar advances for kids of same-sex parents in other factors we know to be detrimental to children — especially discrimination or parental partnership instability — the future should reveal only improvements for kids of same-sex parents.

Beyond the specifics of same-sex marriage, our approach also informs how scientific evidence should inform judicial decisions. Courts looking to scientific evidence should never rely on a single study, but should consider the sum of accumulated scientific knowledge.

While they often ask experts to testify about the state of knowledge to assist in this summary, such expert testimony can devolve into “he said-she said” disagreements when multiple experts evaluate the same evidence on a question and come to conflicting conclusions. Our approach avoids this, and could be adopted by the courts as a validated, objective procedure for systematically measuring scientific consensus.

In the future, justices like Antonin Scalia need not use their amateur social science skills to weigh social science evidence. We hope, instead, that they will use an approach like ours to evaluate the knowledge base for a wide range of (social) scientific questions.

Jimi Adams is an associate professor in the Department of Health and Behavioral Sciences at the University of Colorado Denver.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.