More options: Share, Mark as favorite

Introduction:

The American job-creation machine has slowed noticeably over the last fifteen years. Although the Great Recession of 2007–2009 and an unusually sluggish economic recovery that followed for several years offer some basic cause-and-effect explanations, they fail to tell the entire story. Recent research highlights the importance of young and rapidly growing firms in producing substantial increases in net jobs created. Unfortunately, the longer-term trend in the United States has been moving in a more troubling direction. The share of new startup businesses among all firms has declined noticeably since the late 1970s. The rate of business startup activity remains disappointing, even after a slight pick-up within the last few years. Reversing this trend should be an important priority in efforts to reinvigorate our economy and expand employment opportunities.

This study, funded by the Ewing Marion Kauffman Foundation, will examine the degree to which recent and future changes in national health policy may provide assistance. First, it will place health reform issues within the broader context of what we know about the key factors that shape the relative level and success of “entrepreneurship” (the development, organization, and management of a business venture). Although improved access to more affordable health insurance may help encourage more business startups and job changes, it is not among the most decisive factors.

Second, this study will analyze both the initial promises and early performance of the Affordable Care Act of 2010 (ACA) in aiming to improve the business climate for new startups, other smaller businesses, and their employees. The early record for small business tax credits and health exchanges is disappointing. Providing insurance subsidies more directly to lower-income workers has had a greater impact in increasing their access to health insurance. Overly optimistic projections of significant increases in entrepreneurial activity throughout the U.S. economy under the ACA remain unfulfilled thus far.

Third, this study will assess several possible changes in the near-term direction of national health policy in terms of their potential impact on entrepreneurial activity, business formation, and economic dynamism. Several policy adjustments in a post-ACA world after the 2016 election could alter how, but not whether, insurance coverage for younger and smaller businesses is subsidized and regulated. They include changes in tax policy for health savings accounts, expansion of private health exchanges, greater variation at the state level in how health insurance is regulated, alternatives to the individual mandate, further evolution toward defined contribution financing of health care

Read the PDF.