RENO, Nev. — The Colorado State Rams’ flag was attached to the end of the pole Mark Sambrailo used to vault on the track team at — shh, keep this quiet — at the University of Colorado in the late 1970s. It made it easier for the invited tailgaters, and perhaps even a few crashers, to find the location near Nevada’s Mac kay Stadium on Saturday afternoon.

Mark and his wife, Karen, a University of Denver graduate, are the parents of Rams senior left tackle Ty Sambrailo, and they have attended most of CSU’s games, both home and away, the past two seasons. Because they live along the Northern California coast, in Watsonville, they could drive to Reno this time — spending Friday night at their second home at Kirkwood Mountain ski resort and then coming over to Reno on Saturday.

The Sambrailos were expecting about 40 friends and fellow parents of CSU players to ultimately show up to eat, socialize and prepare for the 4-1 Rams’ late Saturday night Mountain West meeting with the Nevada Wolf Pack. The family contingent also included Ty’s brother, Erik, also a CU grad, and sister, Kiersten, a former volleyball player at Oregon State.

The top experience as visiting fans?

“Alabama was off the charts, probably the best,” Mark Sambrailo said of the Rams 31-6 loss in Tuscaloosa last season. “There were 100,000 people, we came in as 40-point underdogs and they were welcoming Mac (Jim McElwain) and Karen (McElwain’s wife) back. We got invited more places to have a beer or a piece of steak. It was shear the sheep, and if we were the LSU Tigers or Auburn, it might be a little different.”

Said Karen Sambrailo: “There has not been a bad experience. Not one.”

Even Saturday, a mix-up meant the Sambrailos had to scramble for a spot in the tailgating lot next to the campus post office, and Reno fans offered space to the Rams’ contingent.

The Sambrailos didn’t go to the Rams’ first out-of-state game this season, at Boise State, because Ty was hurt and out of the lineup, so Mark extended his duck hunt. But they went to the Rams’ win at Boston College and stayed over an extra day, attending the Yankees-Red Sox game at Fenway Park on the final day of Derek Jeter’s career.

“We were walking out of the stadium, Boston lost, and a guy goes, ‘Hey, Rams, come over here, have a beer!’ ” Mark said. “I’m not going to turn that down. That’s the kind of hospitality we’ve seen, that we’ve so much enjoyed. And we’re going to miss this camaraderie with the other parents.”

Said Karen: “It’s been awesome, just meeting all the other families and with the sense of community. And we’ve got to watch Ty develop the relationships that are going to be life-long.”

Ty originally was a CU fan, too, but when the Buffaloes stalled about offering him a scholarship — and that offer might never have come — he jumped on CSU’s offer.

“He wanted to be a Buff originally, and CU in the (Dan) Hawkins regime just didn’t give him the offer, and CSU had,” Mark said. “He had a week to make a decision, and he said, ‘Dad, the Rams want me and the Buffs are dragging their feet and I’m going to be a Ram.’ So that’s what he did. And it’s been the best fit you could ever find. It’s just been amazing.”

At 6-foot-5 and 315 pounds, Sambrailo is the only returning starter on the CSU line and is a bona fide NFL prospect. That’s especially surprising considering he was so lean when he was young, he was an elite ski racer and still can do flips.

“It’s hard to fathom. It’s very surreal that he’s accomplished what he has,” Mark said. “He’s wanted to be a D-I player; that’s what he went for and he got it. … He’s got this fire, he’s a late bloomer, he’s got a lot of upside. And I want to thank (line coach) Pat Meyer, who’s now with the Chicago Bears. Pat saw something in Ty, and that back flip they saw on film, that helped. Pat saw some upside. Ty was big and learning.”

Next year, the tailgates might be outside an NFL stadium.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei