TUNKHANNOCK - Despite frigid temperatures, Wyoming County's congressman enjoyed exploring the county seat's business district last week.

U.S. Rep. Lou Barletta, R-Hazleton, is taking "Main Street tours" all over his district, to get to know the people and businesses and find out what residents' isssues are.

"For me, this isn't work," he said. "It's a great opportunity to meet people, see unique (aspects) of the community."

The 11th Congressional District formerly contained all of Carbon, Columbia and Monroe counties, most of Luzerne County and parts of Lackawanna County.

After the complete redistricting that is done every 10 years, the 11th consists of all of Columbia, Montour and Wyoming counties and parts of Carbon, Cumberland, Dauphin, Luzerne, Northumberland and Perry counties.

Tunkhannock was formerly in the 10th District, represented by U.S. Rep. Tom Marino, R-Lycoming Township.

Although he has visited there before, Barletta thought it would be nice to get to know the community better.

With Wyoming County Commissioner Judy Kraft Mead as tour guide, the former Hazleton mayor braved the freezing cold Wednesday to stroll around town.

Barletta's first stop was Gay's True Value Hardware Store, which moved from the Bridge Street location it had occupied for decades to a new site at 189 E. Tioga St. after the building was badly damaged in the Sept. 8-9, 2011 Tropical Storm Lee flood.

While Barletta chatted with the owners, brothers Doug and Dave Gay, Mead mentioned how the century-old business was able to expand in its new location.

"That's been a nice addition to town," she said.

Next on the itinerary was Wyoming County's epicenter of the arts, the Dietrich Theater, which Barletta described as "very impressive."

'We've really expanded it. It's a lot bigger than it used to be," the Dietrich's Executive Director Jennifer Jenkins Douthett said.

The theater has gone digital, showing movies including popular, classic and independent films; it also hosts live theater, a popular book discussion group called Wyoming County Reads, art classes and art exhibits. People come from all over - even as far away as Florida, according to Jenkins Douthett.

"We do really well," she said. "We have movies that will rival anything in Scranton, Wilkes-Barre."

The goal is to make the arts available to everyone, and to give children cultural experiences they wouldn't ordinarily have access to, Jenkins Douthett said.

But the biggest challenge is finding funds, she told Barletta. She wanted him to see firsthand "what kind of impact funding means to people."

Barletta told Jenkins Douthett that if there's anything he can do, to feel free to reach out to his office.

Next to the theater is the Dorothy G. Sheldon art studio, where Barletta popped in to chat with women hand-painting winter scenes on little wooden sleds for their regular Wednesday afternoon art class.

Then it was time to check out the freshly renovated Prince Hotel by its owner, Kamran Shahid. It took a year and a half to gut the hotel and redo it inside and out, but Shahid is proud to say it earned the honor of being named a Choice Hotel, a designation for historic and unique establishments.

Barletta toured the hotel, which has been enlarged from 14 to 22 guest rooms with views of the Endless Mountains, a conference room, a new bar, and a restaurant presided over by Chef James Noone, formerly of Alfredo's Pizza Cafe in Scranton.

One issue new to the 11th District is natural gas drilling, which is booming in northwestern Wyoming County.

Mead said there's some gas money coming to town, but people mainly come to Tunkhannock as a destination.

Still, she believes having the gas industry around has helped, especially with the new hotels built to serve it - a Comfort Inn and a Hampton Inn - and the renovated Prince Hotel. It means tourists have options to stay overnight. And if they stay overnight, they spend more, Mead said.

"Which is great, because it's new money," Barletta observed.

In addition, the drillers eat lunch in the local restaurants, buy gifts for their families at the local shops, purchase trucks at the area dealerships, Mead said.

After popping in at some of the bistros and boutiques along Tioga Street, Tunkhannock's Main Street, Barletta finished his tour at Twigs restaurant to talk with owners Jerry and Lori Bogedin.

Aside from worries about the economy, Jerry Bogedin told Barletta he's good.

"The economy's a big thing," Jerry Bogedin said. "The economy and Obamacare, and they're tied in together."

Barletta said he's on the transportation and infrastructure committee in Congress, which is developing a new highway bill - the fastest way to get people back to work is to work on infrastructure.

"When they make decent money, they take their families out to eat, and they spend it in the local economy," Barletta said.

When roads are in bad shape, it impacts tourism, Mead noted.

Lori Bogedin said she appreciated Barletta stopping by, and explaining the issues.

"There's real people back home," Barletta said as he ended his Tunkhannock tour. It helps him to remember, when he gets back to Washington D.C., that "real things we vote on affect the people."

eskrapits@citizensvoice.com, 570-821-2072