Beshear explains plan to save Kynect

With help from Nancy Cook and Rachana Pradhan

BESHEAR: THE FEDS BETTER NOT PAY TO DISMANTLE KYNECT — In an interview with POLITICO following the launch of his campaign to save Kentucky’s exchange and Medicaid expansion, former Gov. Steve Beshear said he’ll be lobbying federal officials to refuse funding for the state’s switch to HealthCare.gov.

Story Continued Below

“It makes no sense for them to allow matching money to dismantle the most highly successful state-based exchange in the country. We’re going to make sure they understand our feelings on that,” Beshear told Pro's Rachana Pradhan.

CMS has told Kentucky it can’t use federal exchange grants to cover IT costs associated with the HealthCare.gov switch. But if Gov. Matt Bevin follows through with his plan, the state is responsible for building a system to send applications back and forth between the federal exchange and Medicaid, and the feds haven’t ruled out financing that system with federal Medicaid funding.

… Beshear plans to use his new 501(c)(4) to fundraise in Kentucky and “across the nation.” Beshear also said he will produce updated estimates on the costs of switching to HealthCare.gov, which his administration previously estimated would be around $23 million. (Bevin argues it will actually cost much less.)

BERNIE, HILLARY RERUN OBAMACARE ARGUMENT — Last night's debate began with an extended fight about health care that tread very familiar ground. Sanders still believes that America needs his "Medicare for All" proposal; Clinton hit him again on whether his plan is economically sound or politically feasible.

— Sanders: Declining white mortality a sign of economic inequality. The moderators asked about a recent study on white mortality, and the Vermont senator suggested its conclusion bolsters his campaign. "[For] white working class people between 45 and 54, life expectancy is actually going down," Sanders said. "Suicide, alcoholism, drugs, that's why we need to start paying attention to the needs of working families in this country, and not just a handful of billionaires who have enormous economic and political power."

— Is Sanders a 'closet moderate'? While Sanders talks a radical game, a deeper look at his quarter-century record in Congress reveals more of a conventional Democratic lawmaker, POLITICO's Nancy Cook writes. http://politi.co/1SLbyVu

THANK GOODNESS IT'S FRIDAY PULSE — And we hope you’ll use the long weekend to make all of your #healthpolicyvalentines come true. In the meantime, make mine come true with tips or leads. Find me at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond.

PROGRAMMING NOTE: Due to the Presidents Day holiday, PULSE will not publish on Monday, Feb. 15. Our next issue of PULSE will publish on Feb. 16.

CALIFF TO GET A TEST VOTE IN SENATE — Robert Califf's nomination to head the FDA has faced multiple holds, but it finally looks like he'll face a procedural vote too. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell scheduled the cloture vote for Feb. 22, the Monday after the Presidents Day recess. Califf is thought to have bipartisan support, although three Democrats — including Bernie Sanders — say they're concerned about FDA's handling of opioids and Califf's ties to the drug industry.

SENATE DEMOCRATS TRY OUT NEW ELECTION-YEAR MESSAGE — "Democrats have blasted Republicans for their opposition to emergency spending to address the Flint water crisis, the opioid epidemic or the Zika virus — a series of emerging crises that have grabbed the national spotlight but will cost millions, if not billions of dollars to resolve," write POLITICO's Jennifer Haberkorn and Seung-Min Kim. "The accusations have touched off a war of words between the parties as they jockey for advantage in a national election season." The story: http://politi.co/1SL328Y

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Expand seniors’ access to prescription drugs. Right now Medicare drug plans force patients to make long trips for medication or to pay more to use their longtime pharmacy. Let Medicare beneficiaries choose the pharmacy that’s best for them. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

FIRST IN PULSE: CAPITO, KING PUSH BILL TO HELP DRUG-ADDICTED BABIES — Sens. Shelley Moore Capito and Angus King will announce legislation today that directs CMS to establish new guidelines for residential pediatric recovery centers, PULSE has learned. The bill is aimed at helping babies born with neonatal abstinence syndrome (NAS), a condition that increased five-fold between 2000 and 2012. Rep. Evan Jenkins introduced a companion bill in the House in October.

— One baby suffering from opiate withdrawal is born every 25 minutes, according to 2012 statistics shared by the National Institute on Drug Abuse. (The frequency may have only increased, given recent trends on drug misuse.) And babies born with NAS stayed in the hospital for nearly 17 days versus a hospital stay of just 2 days for other newborns.

CBO: PRIVATE INSURANCE PREMIUMS TO GROW 5 PERCENT PER YEAR — That's according to a new report requested by Senate HELP Committee Chair Lamar Alexander. The CBO concludes that premiums are rising for a number of reasons, but that the Affordable Care Act is playing a role; the law's provisions like guaranteed issue, guaranteed renewability, and modified community rating "tend to raise average premiums" by encouraging higher cost patients to enroll and then distributing their added expenses across the system.

HOUSE v. BURWELL UPDATE — The Obama administration and the House of Representatives have filed final briefs in this case, which centers on the legality of the ACA's cost-sharing subsidies, via the Yale Journal on Regulation. Up next: Oral arguments, which aren't scheduled yet.

BORDER PATROL ISN'T SCREENING FOR ZIKA — CDC has not advised U.S. customs and border patrol staff to conduct enhanced screening for travelers with the Zika virus, a departure from screening for Ebola and other recent health threats. "Based on our current understanding of the virus, enhanced public health entry screening for Zika would not be effective," CDC announced on Thursday. "[M]ost people who are infected with Zika are asymptomatic and therefore could not be identified during the screening process."

IDAHO GOV DEBUTS SKIMPY MEDICAID EXPANSION ALTERNATIVE — Gov. Butch Otter's administration on Thursday unveiled its proposed Idaho Primary Care Access Program, which would cover the nearly 80,000 Idahoans currently in the Medicaid coverage gap. The bare-bones plan — which doesn't cover prescription drugs, specialty procedures, or catastrophic emergencies — is projected to cost the state about $30 million per year. The House Health and Welfare Committee will hear the bill the week of Feb. 22.

BURWELL LOVEFEST ON THE HILL — HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell appeared before the Senate Finance Committee on Thursday to talk about the Obama administration’s budget blueprint; funding to fight the Zika virus; and the country’s growing opioid epidemic. But Pro’s Nancy Cook could not help but notice the extreme politeness that ran throughout the hearing.

Long-time public servant Burwell (who worked at Treasury and the White House during the Clinton administration and at OMB under President Obama before taking the reins of HHS) kept thanking senators for their “leadership" on various issues before she, as disciplined as ever, answered questions. The senators were just as solicitous. Even the Republicans, including Chairman Orrin Hatch, gushed over her leadership of the agency, which has seen its share of turmoil since the ACA roll-out.

Should a Democrat win the White House in 2016, we’d keep an eye on where Burwell lands. Her strong relationships with Republicans could make her an easy confirmation. Again.

OBAMACARE'S UNLIKELY ROLE IN OREGON STANDOFF — The militia that spent 41 days occupying a wildlife refuge had a bone to pick with the government — and with the Affordable Care Act in particular. In a wide-ranging livestream on Wednesday night, one militia member claimed that Obamacare would "take away our guns" because it forces mandatory mental health screenings. (Fact check: It doesn't.) And on Thursday, the last holdout railed against the ACA before surrendering to authorities. It's tough to extrapolate too much from the episode, but it's a reminder of how inflammatory the law remains, in certain circles.

THERANOS FACES WASHINGTON RECKONING — The much-scrutinized lab company has a board stocked with insiders ranging from Henry Kissinger to former Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist. But Theranos still faces a federal regulatory call Friday that could capsize the firm and threaten an innovative health care sector along with it, POLITICO's Darius Tahir reports. http://politi.co/240nIx3

THE STORY OF THE WEEK … is an ESPN story (yes, ESPN) on how the NBA's schedule is breaking its top players. Tom Haberstroh spoke with leading researchers on sleep and injury prevention, and his piece surfaces new insights on travel, rest, and peak athletic performance.http://es.pn/1KeXzUR

#HealthPolicyValentines LOVEFEST ON TWITTER — According to Keyhole data, Twitter users as diverse as the Cato Institute, Health Affairs, and CMS acting administrator Andy Slavitt on Thursday posted more than 1,500 different health policy valentines. The most shared valentine? "It's like you are Obamacare and I'm a Republican. After five years I still can't think of a way to replace you," Rep. Mark Takano tweeted. See a list of some of PULSE's favorites: http://bit.ly/1O5Q51d

— Looking ahead: CMS on Tuesday will hold an advisory meeting to discuss FY2017 hospital payment related to new medical services and technologies.

WHAT WE'RE READING

Writing in NEJM, Harvard researchers call for health care officials to standardize a "minimum set of outcomes" for every major medical condition.http://bit.ly/1mvZ19T

A congressman busted out a vaporizer during an e-cigarette hearing, and STAT's Dylan Scott explains why. http://bit.ly/1Tc48J9

Harrison Ford broke his ankle when the Millenium Falcon fell on his leg during filming, and British health authorities are now suing Star Wars producers over their safety precautions. http://dailym.ai/20rSUkn

Farm contractors are balking over Obamacare's requirements, KQED's April Dembosky reports. http://bit.ly/1QvqWPg

What Joe Biden said at Duke University this week: "The science is ready" to find cures for cancer. http://bit.ly/20YNTBR

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **