LEBANON, Ohio -- Warren County and the State of Ohio filed a joint lawsuit against the federal government concerning the Affordable Care Act.

Ohio Attorney General Mike DeWine, Warren County Commission President David Young and Warren County Prosecutor David P. Fornshell announced the suit filed Monday morning in a federal district court in Columbus.

The suit targets tax assessments of health insurance companies and certain employers, such as state and local governments, who offer self-insured programs as defined by the law.

“This tax assessment by the Obama Administration is an unprecedented attempt to destroy the balance of authority between the federal government and the states,” said Attorney General DeWine. “The $5.3 million Ohio is being taxed is money that could be used for education, public safety, and roads and bridges. The states are not the federal government’s tax collectors, and the Obama Administration should refund these illegal taxes immediately.”

Essentially, the lawsuit argues it is unconstitutional for the federal government to tax state and local governments.

The lawsuit is not the first to challenge President Barack Obama’s program mandating all Americans must carry health coverage under the threat of penalties and withheld tax returns through the Internal Revenue Service.

The U.S. Supreme Court upheld the legality of the individual mandate component of the law in 2012. The court is preparing to hear arguments concerning subsidies designed to help people signing up for coverage in the federal healthcare exchange.

The Washington Post recently outlined what is at stake in that upcoming case.

“Today we are moving forward with action, based upon the stand I proposed just a few weeks ago, against a blatantly unconstitutional expansion of power by the federal government. It is not my role to question the ACA or its merits but it is my responsibility to protect the funds of the taxpayers I represent. This action simply protects a tradition as old as our republic that governments do not tax each other. The principle of no taxation without representation is something our country was founded on. I call on all other affected state and local officials to join us in our stand against this unconstitutional seizing of taxpayer funds regardless of their political party,” said Commissioner Young.

DeWine argues there is no precedent for the government to impose the healthcare tax and even if the tax is allowed, the language of the law “does not include state or local governments among employers who may be assessed the tax in question.”

Warren County Democrats expressed concern about the amount of taxpayer money that will be spent by the local and state governments to fight what they call a "temporary fee" that will only cost Warren County about $100,000.

"The Transitional Reinsurance Program assesses employers with self-insured healthcare plans $63.00 for every covered employee. These fees/assessments are in place for just three years, and will be used primarily to manage the risk associated with a spike in healthcare spending by people with pre-existing conditions getting health insurance coverage for the first time under the Affordable Care Act. The cost of this temporary fee is minimal, roughly $100,000 for Warren County (and $5.3 million for the state) government employees in each of the next three years," the party stated in a release.

The local Democrats go on to argue Obamacare has improved the lives of millions of Americans, giving them access to affordable insurance and healthcare.

"We believe that the real intent of our Republican state and county leaders is to score political points by attacking the Affordable Care Act. The cost of this program is minimal, approximately 92 cents per Warren County resident per year, or $2.76 in total. The real question is, how much will Warren County spend to fight this unnecessary legal battle, led by Attorney General Mike DeWine?" the organization went on to argue.

When WCPO asked the Obama Administration for a response to the lawsuit, Department of Health and Human Services spokesperson Ben Wakana said it is the federal government's policy to discuss pending litigation.