Wayne Lipton, founder and managing partner for Concierge Choice Physicians, discusses the company reaching its milestone 10th anniversary and the many changes the industry has seen over the past decade.

Wayne Lipton, founder and managing partner for Concierge Choice Physicians, discusses the company reaching its milestone 10th anniversary and the many changes the industry has seen over the past decade.

ROCKVILLE CENTRE, N.Y.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--In 2005, Mariah Carey stood on top of the record charts; the top movie was Star Wars Episode III, and terms like the ACA, exchanges and meaningful use weren’t yet on the horizon. Recognizing that healthcare was about to experience a revolution, in 2005, Wayne Lipton founded Concierge Choice Physicians (CCP), a company created to provide physicians and patients with greater choice and freedom in how healthcare was delivered. This May, the company celebrates its 10th anniversary, making it one of the oldest and largest concierge companies in the nation.

“Few of us back in 2005 could have predicted what healthcare would look like in just 10 short years,” says Lipton. “As healthcare continues to become larger and more systems-oriented, we are seeing a real interest from patients and physicians for a return to a more personalized approach to healthcare.”

It’s because of this desire for a more one-on-one relationship with their physician that CCP’s innovative approach to concierge medicine, including Hybrid Choice™ and FullFLEX™, have grown.

“I was one of the first members of the CCP hybrid model and it has been a very good choice for my patients and practice,” said Glenn Soppe, M.D., a family practice physician in San Diego, California and one of the first to join CCP. “At times I have considered doing this on my own, but with all CCP does for the practice, I decided not, and still, after 10 years, I am very happy about this decision. CCP does a much better job at managing the program and communicating with patients than we could. We wish them continued success,” he says.

Changes in national healthcare law encouraged Sanford Friedman—MD, FACC, FACP, a top cardiologist in New York City, to sign up for CCP. One of the latest physicians to join, he says CCP’s flexible approach to concierge ensures he can care for his patients who want a more personalized connection to their physician, and continue to accept insurance plans and Medicare.

Friedman is representative of a new trend in concierge, a growing number of specialists exploring the option, especially the hybrid (where a small portion of the practice chooses to join the concierge program).

“I have a large practice; I’ve known my patients for years and many are friends,” he notes. “I was forced to make a change because all the turmoil in healthcare was making it difficult for small practices to survive. I was initially concerned that my patients wouldn’t embrace the change, but the response has been overwhelmingly positive! It’s an unexpected validation of my life’s work. I can see why CCP has made it to their tenth anniversary. I wish them the best as they continue to help physicians find ways to care for patients and maintain their practices.”

Concierge care, defined as a relationship in which a patient pays a membership fee in exchange for range of services not covered by insurance, began in the early 2000s. Interest grew significantly after the passage of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) in 2010 when patients and physicians realized it would be hard to secure a truly personal relationship as payers moved to volume and team-based care to ensure greater efficiencies and cut their costs.

In return for a modest fee averaging about $5/day with the CCP program, patients gain access to a range of enhanced services not typically covered by their insurance (which most retain) — including executive-style physicals that retail for considerably more than the annual yearly fee; enhanced preventive care; same- or next-day appointments; leisurely office visits; shorter provider wait times; and direct access to physicians by way of private phone numbers, mobile phones, texts, and other means. Children up to age 26 are covered under their parents’ program.

“I can honestly say the last 10 years have been an adventure,” says Lipton. “We’ve been witness to a historical change in our nation’s healthcare system and I’m proud that we are helping physicians and patients find options that meet their needs and preferences.”

About Concierge Choice Physicians

Dedicated to providing real options for patients and physicians, Concierge Choice Physicians™ is one of the largest private providers of the full range of concierge programs available today—Hybrid Choice™ and FullFLEX™. The company provides innovative, flexible and affordable models proven to work in medical practices of any size—from solo physicians to large medical practice corporations—both independent and affiliated with hospitals or health systems. Headquartered in Rockville Centre, NY, the company works with medical practices in 23 states. For more information, visit www.choice.md, or call 877-888-5590. Follow us: LinkedIn Twitter