A patient receives dental care at a clinic in rural Tennessee. A new study finds that many Americans still struggle to get health care and pay for it. Mario Tama/Getty Images

President Barack Obama's health care law made historic headway in boosting health insurance coverage, but a new report finds that families still face racial and socioeconomic disparities – even if they are insured.

The report, released by the Alliance for a Just Society, is the result of a yearlong study that included a survey of 1,200 low-income people in 10 states and was conducted in Spanish, Cantonese and English. It found that people of color, families in rural communities and those with language and cultural barriers still struggle to get health care and pay for it.

The Affordable Care Act increased insurance availability for the poor by expanding Medicaid eligibility to more people based on their income level. The law originally intended for all states to expand Medicaid, but the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states could choose not to do so. Twenty-two states currently have not expanded the program.



[MORE: Is Obamacare Behind Health Improvements, Job Growth?]

The lack of Medicaid expansion in some states has contributed to costs being a barrier to insurance coverage for some, Gary Delgado, author of the report and a visiting scholar at the University of California-Berkeley's Institute for the Study of Social Change, said in a call with reporters Thursday.

He noted, however, that cost was a struggle even in states that expanded Medicaid, where insurance premiums paid by people every month can be high.

"While the racial barriers are significant, the biggest barrier for enrollment for people of color was premium cost," he said.



Percentage of uninsured residents and estimated number of tax credit-eligible individuals and potential market for marketplace coverage, by state, 2013

Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

Adriann Barboa of Strong Families New Mexico – a group that supports policies related to diversity – said in the call that New Mexican families tell her they are deciding between medication and food, even though the state expanded Medicaid.

"We are one of the states with the highest poverty levels," Barboa said. "Although people have insurance they still have hard choices" and struggle with monthly premiums, copays and deductibles.

Many who don't obtain coverage under Medicaid expansion still have limited incomes. For this group, the health care law offers insurance through health care marketplaces, called exchanges, where Americans can buy coverage that can be offset by tax subsidies.

The survey also showed that Americans are struggling with technical access and language barriers when it comes to obtaining insurance coverage.



Enrollment problems identified by survey respondents who got coverage

Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

Digital Divide

African-Americans, Native Americans and Latino respondents had significantly less access to the Internet at home than did white Americans, the study found.

"Getting people health insurance is just the first step to getting them the health care they need," Barboa said. "We need technology addressed to make sure health care reform is working as well as it should."

Though there are various ways to sign up for health insurance through the marketplaces – including through the phone or with help from in-person navigators – an email address is needed to enroll online, which is the main way most Americans have signed up for plans.

The study found that just 33 percent of Latino respondents had email addresses, followed by less than 50 percent of black respondents.



Survey respondents who had access to email and Internet

Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

"While the [health care law] did not create this gap, neither did it do much to alleviate the barrier which was – and is – a problem that community and advocacy groups have had to address throughout the enrollment process, and will continue to address in terms of people being able to get care," Delgado said.

[RELATED: Survey Shows Young Republicans Support Birth Control, Obamacare Coverage]

Antron McKay-West, with the group Upgrade Mississippi, spoke in a release of his experience growing up in the Mississippi Delta: “It is so rural, most people can’t imagine life there. Most people don’t have Internet, if they do, it is very slow, it’s not the technology most are used to,” he said. “During enrollment, some people were told to just go to the library and use the Internet. In the neighborhood where I grew up, the library is 15 miles away.”

Language and Immigration Barriers

Latinos have the highest rate of uninsurance of all ethnic groups in the U.S., and government health care agencies have poured resources into efforts encouraging them to enroll in tax-subsidized coverage through the health care law. But a report released in late March showed that despite this aggressive outreach, 1 in 4 Latinos hadn't heard of Obamacare's health care exchanges.

Respondents in the study also reported that they were unable to enroll in their own language. The survey found 13.3 percent of Latino respondents and 22.2 percent of Native Hawaiian or Asian-Pacific Islanders who did not speak English at home were unable to do so.

Even among those who did sign up for health insurance, many did not understand what services were included in their plan and did not know about what financial support was available.



Survey participants were asked whether they knew which services were included in their health plans and which ones they would have to pay extra for. Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

Survey participants responded to whether they were informed that financial support was available for low-income people.

Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

Addressing the language barrier is an issue that will persist. By 2019, an estimated 34 million people will obtain health insurance through the exchanges, and a quarter will speak a language other than English at home, Delgado said.

[BLOG: 5 Numbers to Know for Obamacare’s 5-Year Anniversary]

Many Latino participants also expressed a reluctance to enroll in coverage for fear of endangering the status of family members who may be in the country without legal documentation. The health care law does not allow people who are in the country illegally to enroll in coverage through the marketplaces.

Health Disparities

The health care law aims not only to expand insurance coverage, but to improve the quality of care people receive. Survey results showed numerous differences in the types of care people turn to among different racial groups. For example, many still use their local emergency department for care and do not have a personal doctor.



Survey respondents who reported having a personal doctor, by race

Courtesy Alliance for a Just Society

The survey also found that 25.2 percent of Latinos haven't seen a doctor in a year, compared with 17.9 percent of whites.