In a proclamation declaring today John Suthers Day in Colorado, Democratic Gov. John Hickenlooper in one sentence summed up the career of the outgoing Republican attorney general:

WHEREAS, John W. Suthers has, sometimes to the dismay of people on all sides of the political spectrum, vigorously defended the laws and intiatives of the State of Colorado.

Suthers might not have liked the gun laws passed by Democrats in the 2013 session but when the sheriffs sued over the measures, Suthers’ office defended the state. Until the U.S. Supreme Court weighed in, Suthers opposed allowing gay couples to marry in Colorado, pointing out voters in 2006 made it unconstitutional. Yet his office pressed a civil rights discrimination complaint against a suburban Denver bakery for refusing to make a wedding cake for a gay couple. Suthers prevailed, but not before being vilified by religious-rights advocates who backed the baker.

John Suthers leaves office in January because of term limits. Today’s proclamation comes on his 63rd birthday:

WHEREAS, John W. Suthers in January 2005 became Colorado’s 37th Attorney General and is the second-longest serving Attorney General in state history; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers, a lifelong resident of Colorado, is one of the state’s most dedicated public servants; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers as Attorney General has tirelessly represented and defended the interest of the people of Colorado, and served as chief legal counsel and adviser to state government, its statewide elected officials, and its many state agencies, board and commissions; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers protected Colorado consumers and businesses against fraud and helped maintain a competitive business environment by enforcing consumer protection and anti-trust laws; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers has assisted local prosecutors and law enforcement agencies throughout the state, including presenting cases to the statewide grand jury and serving as special district attorneys in counties as requested; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers has worked to protect and improve the quality of Colorado’s natural environment and resources; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers has represented, or at least put up, with three different governors of the State of Colorado; and WHEREAS, John W. Suthers has, sometimes to the dismay of people on all sides of the political spectrum, vigorously defended the laws and initiatives of the State of Colorado; Therefore, I, John W. Hickenlooper, Governor of the State of Colorado, do hereby proclaim his birthday, Oct. 18, 2014 as:



JOHN WILLIAM SUTHERS DAY.

Suthers, the former El Paso County district attorney, ran for attorney general in 1998, losingto Democrat Ken Salazar. When Salazar was elected U.S. senator in 2004, he recommended Rpeublican Gov. Bill Owens appoint Suthers. The rest, as they say, is history.