Immigration, it seems, is the new Obamacare.

Republican candidates (not to mention their primary voters) are unhappy with the immigration situation, particularly as it relates to people coming into, or staying in, the country illegally. And while there is broad bipartisan agreement that the immigration system is broken (much as there was broad bipartisan agreement, prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, that health care delivery and spending were a mess), there is nothing close to a political agreement on how to start fixing it.

That sad situation is politically very freeing for the GOP field, which can be content to call for the repeal of laws they know have no chance of actually being repealed, and offering either no replacement solution at all, or one so insulting or unworkable it won't end up becoming reality either.

On health care, Republicans have sought scores of times to repeal Obamacare – all show votes, since they know the measure would never pass a filibuster threat in the Senate, never mind a presidential veto. But the holding pattern liberates them from actually having to come up with a plan themselves, inviting criticism of whatever approach they came up with.

Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, to his credit, has at least offered his own scheme, giving tax credits to the uninsured so they can buy coverage. People could buy cheap, bare-bones plans, and older people (who tend to require more health care) would get the biggest tax credit so they can buy better insurance. The problem with Walker's plan is that since it has no individual mandate (the part of Obamacare Republicans perhaps hate the most), there is no plausible way to keep the most popular parts of the law, such as that which prohibits insurance companies from rejecting patients because of "pre-existing conditions."

For the rest of the crew, the mantra is pretty much the same – repeal Obamacare. That is not only not going to happen, but it would create incredible havoc if it did, since it would leave states in the position of deciding whether to take Medicaid coverage away from poor people getting it now. And it might upset parents who can now keep their adult children on their plans until the offspring are 26.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Donald Trump]

Now, on immigration, we are seeing a similar theme. Donald Trump (who has already come up with the delusional idea that he can force Mexico to pay to build a wall to keep out undocumented immigrants) is saying that the nation should get rid of the idea that being born here makes one a citizen. If that sounds bizarre, it is. This is a country founded by immigrants (who, notably, did not have papers or visas before they started living off the land until then occupied by Native Americans) and made stronger and more innovative by waves of immigrant groups. Trump – whose idea is also supported by Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal – would take away "birthright citizenship" for children who were born to people here illegally.

There are so many problematic elements to the mean-spirited proposal. First, it punishes children (infants, actually) for infractions committed by their parents. Secondly, it puts a new burden on those currently trying to become Americans; those who came here centuries ago pretty much staked their claim on their own, and many of us are descendants of those immigrants. And third, it flies in the face of the 14th Amendment to the U.S. Constitution, which overruled the Supreme Court's Dred Scott decision saying slaves were not U.S. citizens. There's no legal fast-talk that can get the Supreme Court to rule again in a manner that ignores an amendment to the Constitution.

That means that Trump or Jindal would have to mount a campaign to pass a constitutional amendment undoing the birthright citizenship granted in the 14th Amendment. The legislative and bureaucratic burden is enormous (as Texas Sen. Ted Cruz admitted Wednesday): Amendments must be passed by two-thirds of each chamber of Congress and ratified by three-fourths of the states.



[READ: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

But the added irony is that the task of passing a constitutional amendment relies heavily on approval by the states – the same jurisdictions whose demographics have been changing rapidly because of immigration. Sen. Marco Rubio (who, to his credit, has worked on immigration and seems genuinely sincere about coming up with a solution) looks at Florida and Nevada and even North Carolina and Virginia and sees states that have become politically more volatile because of an influx of Latinos. Trump and Jindal, it seems, look at those states and think their residents will vote against the interests (or at least the families or compatriots) of the people who live there.