Minorities need insurance, too.

President Obama signs the Affordable Care Act into law on March 23, 2010. (Photo: Charles Dharapak, 2010 AP photo) Story Highlights Despite years of political obstruction and months of website troubles, enrollment is now growing.

But who's getting on board? Specifically, what is the breakdown by race and ethnicity?

The law's promise of closing the racial gap is threatened by state decisions to reject funds to expand Medicaid.

In his State of the Union Address, President Obama noted millions of Americans have signed up for health coverage since Oct. 1, most of them through Medicaid, according to the Department of Health & Human Services.

Despite years of political obstruction and months of website troubles, enrollment is now growing rapidly. The health care train is picking up steam.

But who's getting on board? Specifically, what is the breakdown by race and ethnicity?

The Affordable Care Act has great potential to shrink the racial gap in coverage. But we can't tell how it's doing without data on race and ethnicity. HHS officials say they're collecting only some data and don't know when, or even if, they will be released.

That's inexcusable. For the law to work, we need to be able to track its results. The failure to collect full federal data suggests that HHS doesn't see closing the coverage gap as a high priority.

Data or no data, one thing is certain: The law's promise of closing this gap is threatened — not by Washington politics, but by state decisions to reject funds to expand Medicaid.

Martin Luther King Jr. identified health care as a civil rights issue in 1966: "Of all the forms of inequality," King said, "injustice in health care is the most shocking and the most inhumane." Five decades later, this injustice has proved stubbornly persistent.

U.S. uninsured rates diverge widely by race: 13% for white people in 2012, but 21% for black people and 31% for Latinos.

That has consequences. African Americans, Latinos and Native Americans have much higher rates of diabetes. African-American men are twice as likely to die from prostate cancer; Hispanic women are more likely to die from cervical cancer.

These disparities demand action. If every state expands Medicaid, it could cut the uninsured rate for people of color in half. Instead, lawmakers in 19 states have rejected the funds, and six states are still debating.

Many of the holdouts are states where people of color stand to gain the most. In Mississippi, 50% of the newly eligible would be black people, according to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation and the Urban Institute. In Louisiana, it's 47%; in South Carolina, it's 43%. Texas and Florida, with two of the largest Latino populations, rejected expansion.

Expanding Medicaid is critical to combating injustice in American health care. The decision of some state leaders not to lift a finger to help those in need is a betrayal of Americans' belief in looking out for our friends and neighbors. This year, state lawmakers have one more chance. The health care train is leaving the station. The only question is whether your state will be on that train, or watching it pull away.

LeeAnn Hall is executive director of the Alliance for a Just Society. Brian Smedley is interim president of the Joint Center for Political and Economic Studies.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including ourBoard of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.



Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1baYaVN