Every week, we compile the most trafficked and thoughtful stories on MedCity News. Most influential: Whether there’s enough caregiving manpower available to meet the demand.

1. A look at the caregiving economy and matching demand with supply

Rarely do we have an opportunity to align the desires of patients, payers, and providers. In the instance of providing care for older adults in the home, we are afforded this opportunity. Nearly 90% of our loved ones want to “age in place” and live at home as long as possible. According to the US Department of Housing and Urban Development, living at home later in life yields cost savings not only for families, but also for government and health systems. Aging in place also provides the benefits of improved physical and emotional health.

2. Is the time right for digital therapeutics?

Over the last several days I have seen numerous articles and had numerous conversations about treatment and prevention approaches meant specifically to replace FDA-approved pills and surgical interventions. Mostly these alternatives come in the form of health services now thought to be more effective or equally effective as compared to their more “medical” counterparts. These alternate approaches often include three components: cognitive behavioral therapy, focused exercise, and targeted nutrition. Sometimes they also include other types of services or programs, such as mindfulness or breathing exercises. What they don’t include is traditional medical products. No drugs, no devices, and thus few to no negative side effects. 3. IMS Infographic: How many biosimilars are in the pipeline?

At the close of 2015, there were 41 biosimilars under development for four key biologics going off patent, a new report from the IMS Institute for Health Informatics points out. It’s clear that more biosimilars are close to completion and marketing than not; 12 are in preclinical development, whereas 23 are almost ready to be filed. Some manufacturers have already filed marketing authorizations for three of these drugs: Amgen’s ABP501 was filed last year as a biosimilar candidate for Humira (adalimumab), and Aprogen filed two drugs – G5071, which mimics Remicade (infliximab) and AP052, which mimics Rituxan (rituximab). Many more are in late stage development, and should make it to market in time for these drugs to go off-patent.

4. Startups using diabetes prevention program score big win with Medicare reimbursement

Several digital health companies stand to reap the benefits of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell’s move to provide reimbursement for Medicare patients taking part in Diabetes Prevention Programs. It is expected to go into effect next year. It seems fitting that the announcement coincided with the sixth anniversary of the Affordable Care Act which emphasizes preventive care.

5. A state-by-state look at the State of Telemedicine