Politicians are revved up for the epic battle between the Denver Broncos and the Seattle Seahawks in the Super Bowl on Sunday.

ADVERTISEMENT

On hand at New Jersey's MetLife Stadium will be Rep. Diane DeGette (D-Colo.), the deputy Democratic whip, and Rep.(D-Wash.).

DelBene is a mega Seahawks fan and longtime season ticket holder, her office said. She once was a high school football referee and regularly schools her staff on the finer points of the NFL rulebook.

DeGette's family has had Broncos season tickets since 1964.

"This will not be her first, having attended the Broncos only Super Bowl victories in 1997 and 1998,” spokesman Colby Nelson said.

Embattled New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie (R) will also be in the stands, as will New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo (D), Washington Gov. Jay Inslee (D), a former congressman, and Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper (D). Major local politicians like Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.) and Rep. Bill Pascrell (D-N.J.), whose district encompasses the stadium, will watch remotely.

Coming as a guest of Jets owner Woody Johnson will be former GOP presidential candidate Mitt Romney.

While Romney, a Patriots fan, hasn't made his preference in the game clear, House Majority Leader Eric Cantor Eric CantorJohn Feehery: GOP: Listen to Reince The Trail 2016: Dems struggle for unity Overnight Regulation: Supreme Court rejects GOP redistricting challenge MORE (R-Va.) said Sunday he is rooting for the Seahawks because two top players, including their quarterback, hail from Virginia.

"Not only Russell Wilson, but Michael Robinson is from Richmond, he went to Varina High School. We're looking for a good game and a big win,” Cantor said CBS "Face the Nation."

While other members of Congress's Washington and Colorado delegations are in front of the television for the big game, that hasn't stopped them from laying bets with each other.

The prize goes to Rep. Cory Gardner Cory GardnerAmerican technology leadership: We can't take it for granted McConnell touts 'Senate squad' in Wes Anderson-style video Senators push EPA to pay mine waste spill claims MORE (R-Colo.), who bet Rocky Mountain oysters — also known as bull calf testicles.

For the Colorado House Democrats, Rep. Jared Polis bet Celestial Seasonings tea, and Rep. Ed Perlmutter, a porter beer. DeGette has bet whiskey and tamales.

For the Colorado Republicans, Rep. Scott Tipton bet toffee, Rep. Doug Lamborn bet sirloin steaks and Rep. Mike Coffman bet ale.

The Washington House delegation as a whole has vowed to give Skittles to the Colorado delegation, if the Seahawks win. Seattle running back Marshawn Lynch is famous for his Skittles habit.

House GOP Conference Chairwoman Cathy McMorris Rodgers Cathy McMorris RodgersThe Trail 2016: Sanders who? Senior Trump aide assures conservatives on court picks Top female House Republican endorses Trump MORE (R-Wash.) is betting cheese, while DelBene is betting Woodinville wine and smoked salmon.

Rep. Rick Larsen Rick LarsenHouse panel kills LGBT effort on defense bill We must protect open and fair aviation competition Lawmakers seek to ground Norwegian Air’s flight bid MORE (D) has put gin from Everett's Bluewater Distilling on the line, and Rep. Jaime Herrera Beutler Jaime Herrera BeutlerFunding the fight against Zika Lawmaker's husband donates kidney to 'miracle' daughter Capitol Hill’s forest champions helped secure win for wood MORE (R) bet candy from Chehalis Mints. Rep. Doc Hastings Doc HastingsBoehner hires new press secretary GOP plots new course on Endangered Species Act reform GOP accuses feds of bad science in endangered species studies MORE (R) is also betting wine, while Rep. Jim McDermott Jim McDermottLawmakers urge Obama not to send shoulder-fired missiles to Syria GOP group promises ObamaCare replacement plan — soon Sanders fundraising for 3 House candidates MORE (D) has Theo Chocolate on the line.

Rep. Derek Kilmer Derek KilmerOvernight Finance: Fed steady on rates; Dems rally behind retirement rule Overnight Cybersecurity: Feds likely to keep iPhone hack a secret House bill would help small biz thwart hackers MORE (D) has bet caramel apples, and Rep. Dave Reichert David ReichertLawmakers, small businesses praise employee stock ownership plans Bipartisan group of House lawmakers introduces tariff bill Business ups pressure for tariff relief MORE (R) has chocolate, blueberry pie and apples on the line.

Rep. Adam Smith Adam SmithGOP: Congress should study the draft before adding women Key Dem to oppose defense bill House panel kills LGBT effort on defense bill MORE (D) has bet Vietnamese BBQ and Rep. Denny Heck Denny HeckHeck enjoys second political wind Incoming lawmaker feeling a bit overwhelmed MORE (D) has bet scone mix.

Over in the Senate, Sens. Michael Bennet Michael BennetGOP ad calls Clinton 'a living history of scandal' Trump, GOP agree: ObamaCare helps us GOP hopefuls struggle with support of Trump MORE (D-Colo.) and Mark Udall Mark UdallEnergy issues roil race for Senate Unable to ban Internet gambling, lawmakers try for moratorium Two vulnerable senators lack challengers for 2016 MORE (D-Colo.) bet Colorado-raised bison from Tony’s Market, Palisade-grown peaches and a gift certificate to Elway's restaurant if the Seahawks prevail.

Sens. Patty Murray Patty MurraySenate passes broad spending bill with .1B in Zika funds The Hill's 12:30 Report Senate approves Zika funds MORE (D-Wash.) and Maria Cantwell Maria CantwellDems pressure Obama on vow to resettle 10,000 Syrian refugees Moulitsas: Can Hillary pick Gillibrand as her veep? Yes. In conference, Senate energy bill must drop worst provisions, keep best MORE (D-Wash.) wagered smoked salmon from the Nisqually Indian Tribe, a selection of sauces and honey from Brush Prairie, Wash.-based Honey Ridge Farms, and "12th Man" cupcakes from Cupcake Royale in Seattle if the Broncos win.

Underscoring her status as a fan, Cantwell has posted huge 12th Man flags in her Senate office building window.