Rep. Dana Rohrabacher (R-Calif.) suggested Wednesday that President Barack Obama could be impeached for his "unconstitutional approaches" to immigration reform and the Affordable Care Act.

In an interview with conservative outlet WorldNetDaily, Rohrabacher said Obama delaying the implementation of parts of his signature health care law and changing immigration policies could be grounds for impeachment.

"The most important thing we can do is mobilize the American people. The American people can’t sit back and say, ‘Well, Congress has to handle this.’ We all have to do it. We have three years to get this guy out," he said. "Let me put it this way: He probably has been engaged in these unconstitutional approaches that may make his own ability to stay in office a question."

Listen to the interview below:

Rohrabacher's remarks came in response to Obama's town hall with Telemundo last week.

"I am the champion-in-chief of comprehensive immigration reform," Obama said.

Later in the town hall, Obama said that while undocumented immigrants are not eligible for coverage under the Affordable Care Act, children with legal status are -- and shouldn't be afraid to enroll.

“None of the information that is provided in order for you to obtain health insurance is in any way transferred to immigration services,” he said. “That’s something we’ve been very clear about. If you live in a mixed-status family, then the son… he needs to be signed up. And the mother should not be fearful.”

However, despite the record number of deportations under Obama's administration, Rohrabacher insists that Obama is not properly enforcing existing immigration laws.

“We clearly have a president who is dedicated to the well-being of people who are here in our country illegally," he told WND. "Instead of watching out for the interests of the American people, we have him watching out for the interests of foreign people who come here illegally."

The longtime congressman hasn't always been on the side of those calling for Obama's impeachment. In 2009, he called conservative activist Floyd Brown's crusade to remove the president from office "total nonsense and counterproductive."

"He is an elected President of the United States," Rohrabacher said at the time. "We disagree with everything he wants to do, but he has to be treated as the President of the United States, and he has not at this time committed 'high crimes and misdemeanors.'"

(h/t Right Wing Watch)

Also on HuffPost: Shootings In America Shootings In America

1 of 13 Swat team members secure the scene near Sparks Middle School in Sparks, Nev., after a shooting there on Monday, Oct. 21, 2013. Authorities are reporting that two people were killed and two wounded at the Nevada middle school. (AP Photo/Kevin Clifford) Share this slide:

AP