Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Masters of Sex, Showtime, Virginia Johnson, William Masters, Entertainment News

The old Ritz-Carlton Hotel exuded a certain Brahmin charm in Boston, beholden to starchy traditions reaching back to British colonial rule. High tea was sipped late in the afternoon, while swells crowded in the restaurant’s dining room, wrapped in furs, diamonds, and pearls. Upstairs, a fireplace warmed the majestic suites, as butlers tended to the blaze and turned down the plush linens just before bedtime. For out-of-town medical experts, these amenities were part of the mystique of staying at the Ritz while doing business at nearby Harvard, MIT, or the New England Journal of Medicine.

During a visit to see their Boston-based publisher, Masters and Johnson enjoyed this grand hotel and were delighted when it became their book’s launching pad with the press. In facing skeptics before, they’d tried a similar swank approach without much luck. They had chartered a spacious hotel suite to present their findings in Chicago when banned from a national obstetricians and gynecologists convention there. They also served libations for the “Wash U” medical faculty when showing their filmed lab results. Both proved disasters. Still, these past experiences prepared them well for the challenge they were about to endure. They didn’t want to be panned in Boston.

In April 1966, Masters and Johnson presided over an almost quaint series of press conferences at the Ritz that seemed more like informal seminars than a ritualized media grilling in front of a microphone. Sitting in comfortable chairs beside a long, draped window, they discussed their findings during two-hour sessions, which turned out both lively and convincing. They deliberately reserved two separate bedrooms for themselves at the hotel to avoid gossip.

During these sessions, skeptics were impressed with Masters’s crisp authority and technical virtuosity. Johnson, with her trained vocals, further elucidated in plain English. Their publisher invited several influential journalists, including John Corry of the New York Times, Albert Rosenfeld of Life magazine, Arthur Snider of the respected Chicago Daily News, and Earl Ubell of the New York Herald Tribune—a core group that would influence the rest of the media coverage. While some findings had been leaked already, these lengthy, relaxed discussions at the Ritz became Masters and Johnson’s first formal encounter with the press. The outcome couldn’t have been better. “Dr. Masters’ and Mrs. Johnson’s face-to-face confrontation with the nation’s science writers yielded an extraordinarily favorable reaction to their book,” concluded Harper’s magazine in its own laudatory profile, “The Sex Crusaders from Missouri.”

These once-obscure researchers were now described in Nietzschean superhero terms, as “endowed with exceptional sensibility, nerve and persistence” in educating a nation. Reflecting his paper’s unexcitable manner, Corry’s dispatch in the Times stressed numbers that were almost unimaginable. During the eleven-year study, Corry noted, some ten thousand orgasms were tracked through “direct observation” of hundreds of men and women “engaged in coitus and masturbation.” In mentioning the uncounted prostitutes from Masters’s preliminary research before Johnson arrived on the scene, Corry advised readers that “a more accurate and conservative estimate” might be between twelve thousand and fifteen thousand orgasms, figures that boggled the mind. Corry, like the other science writers, underlined that Masters and Johnson were the purest of white-coated scientists, a sober-minded, male-female team that had “taken pains to purge the book of anything that might be considered salacious.” But not everyone agreed.

Critic Albert Goldman, like Farber and others, pointed obsessively to the “plastic dildo” and the study’s coldhearted description of human intimacy. In his review of their book, Goldman complained it should have been called “Sexual Body Mechanics,” as even the elderly seemed hypersexed. “One wishes that we could return to the wisdom of an earlier time that accepted physical decline and sought compensation in pursuits that transcend the physical,” Goldman lamented. “Perhaps a genuinely prophetic imagination is declaring itself in the book’s most indelible image, that of a woman mating with herself by means of a machine.”

Of the seven hundred reviews and notices about Human Sexual Response, the biggest stamp of approval came from the Journal of the American Medical Association, the kind of professional publication that once shunned their work. “Why was this study so long in coming?” asked the JAMA editorial. “It is no more reasonable to teach students the anatomy of the reproductive organs and ignore the way these organs function during their ordered activities than it would be to study the anatomy of the stomach but disdain any knowledge of [how it works.]”

In the whiz-bang scientific era of the 1960s, admirers such as psychiatrist George Krupp suggested Masters and Johnson’s findings illuminated the world of sex that seemed, in retrospect, like the dark side of the moon before NASA documented its deep curves and crevices. “If we are inclined to regard sexual union as something so sacrosanct that it should not be open to investigation, we should remember that a similar view was taken regarding the stars in Galileo’s day,” insisted another reviewer.

Although Alfred Kinsey had provided the broad outlines of American sexual practices and others, such as Dr. Mary Calderone, had pushed for sex education in the classroom, Masters and Johnson produced hard-science answers for specific questions that went unasked by millions. As sociologist John Gagnon observed, “Everybody seems to be in favor of sex education, but they’re against doing the research that would give us the knowledge to educate people with.”