KITCHENER — It takes a village to raise a turtle.

Related Stories Turtle eggs finally hatch in...

Jeffrey Semple and his family were looking for some wild neighbours when they bought their house bordering the Huron Natural Area.

They got them. Over the last six-and-a-half years, they have seen deer, a coyote, beavers, blue herons, snakes, caterpillars, newts, rabbits, owls, mink and more in the neighbouring natural area, a 107-hectare site on Kitchener's south side.

Semple, his wife, Shannon Beynon Semple, and their children, Sara, 6, and Joshua, 4, are fascinated by the natural world. The couple are teaching their children to be curious about nature and to respect it.

Their backyard has become a kind of teaching laboratory for neighbourhood children who want to see the latest bug, snake or frog they've found before it's returned to its habitat the same day.

A walk on the trail behind their house isn't a fast march. It's a stroll, a chance to pick up a caterpillar, watch a beaver in a pond, spot a painted turtle. Sara doesn't blink when she's handed a slimy worm or snail.

"We stop and look at the smallest thing," Semple says. "We are surprised at the diversity we see. We don't take it for granted."

So when Semple saw the female snapping turtle, about three feet in radius, by the side of the trail behind their house during a morning jog, you would hardly expect him to pass it by.

He was delighted to witness the turtle lay her eggs and he took a cellphone video of an egg landing in the deep hole she'd dug.

She covered the eggs and packed the earth tight around them. Then, she looped around and headed back toward the pond, a stone's throw from the path.

Now the Semples are guardians of the nest.

After seeing tattered egg shells from other destroyed nests scattered along the trail — likely the work of raccoons — they're determined to protect these eggs, about 30 in all, laid near their home.

Semple covered the nest with a few small paving stones. He'll move the stones when it's closer to hatching time. Given that the snapper, Canada's largest freshwater turtle, laid the eggs a couple of weeks ago, they should hatch in early fall, he says.

"I take my kids out every morning to check and so far so good," he says. "The raccoons tried to dig around the stones two of the nights, but couldn't get at them.

"There were claw prints but they didn't get down to the eggs."

He estimated the turtle was more than 10 years old.

According to the Ontario Nature conservation group, snapping turtles in Ontario do not begin to breed until they are 17 to 19 years old. They dig a nest in late May or June, and the eggs hatch in fall, says the charitable organization, formerly called the Federation of Ontario Naturalists.

Two years ago, the family came across a dozen hatchling snapping turtles. They were a little bigger than a toonie. After watching the little critters for a while, they helped them across the paved trail and headed them in the pond's direction.

Walking on the wild side isn't new for Semple.

"For me, it's always been life around animals and plants," Semple says. His father, John Semple, is a botanist, a retired professor at University of Waterloo.

When he was a child, Semple and his two brothers would pile into a van that pulled a small trailer during summer holidays. They'd set out to look for plants, especially asters, his dad's research specialty.

"He would describe the plant and send the kids off. I was always looking for asters," he says, smiling. "We told him where they were. He had a dry press in the van."

Semple himself has a PhD in bioscience from the University of Waterloo. He studied animal physiology, primarily fish, for his master's degree and did cancer research for his doctorate. While he was working on his master's thesis, he was invited to do research with top scientists in the interior of China who were looking at scaleless carp.

He's a bioscience professor in the school of health science at Humber Institute of Technology and Advanced Learning in Toronto.

His favourite TV program is Wild Things with Dominic Monaghan, a travel adventure series in which the nature explorer searches the globe for strange and elusive creatures.

"I love that show. There aren't many adult shows that kids of this age can watch. We enjoy it as a family."

Beynon Semple, a math and music teacher at Huron Heights Secondary School, is equally committed to raising their children with an appreciation for the environment. As a child growing up in Kansas, she had plenty of opportunity to explore for herself, she says, adding her parents, Doug Beynon and artist Aggie Beynon, owner of the now-closed Harbinger Gallery, are creative, environmentally conscientious people.

"We didn't have TV so we played outside all the time." Today, she's researching a proposal she's making to add a greenhouse at her school.

The family feels lucky to have found a place to live that is so close to water and wildlife. "To see as much wildlife as this on a daily basis, it's great," Semple says.

"It brings us closer together as a family. It puts a smile on all our faces when we see a turtle."