A bipartisan group of senators are pushing back against possible plans to use revenue generated by mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to offset federal spending.

Led by Sens. Mike Crapo Mike CrapoOvernight Finance: Path clears for Puerto Rico bill | GOP senator casts doubt on IRS impeachment | Senate approves .1B for Zika Senate passes broad spending bill with .1B in Zika funds Housing groups argue Freddie Mac's loss should spur finance reform MORE (R-Idaho) and Mark Warner Mark WarnerThe Hill's 12:30 Report Clinton urged to go liberal with vice presidential pick Lawmaker bemoans tax 'buzzsaw' for on-demand economy workers MORE (D-Va.), a dozen lawmakers introduced a measure on Tuesday that would raise a budget point of order preventing the Senate's use of the guarantee fees charged by Fannie and Freddie if a budget uses them to pay for other initiatives.

ADVERTISEMENT

"Guarantee fees should be used to protect taxpayers from risk, but some want to increase these fees simply to create a piggy bank for Congress,” said Warner, a member of the Senate Banking Committee.

"Raiding Fannie and Freddie G-fees to pay for unrelated federal spending only makes that goal more difficult to reach," he said.

The lawmakers argue that when guarantee fees, which are used to protect taxpayers against losses on the mortgages Fannie and Freddie back, are diverted for unrelated spending by Congress, taxpayers are left exposed to additional risk and homeowners pay for the fee in the mortgages.

They also argue that using guarantee fees as an offset will make it even harder to overhaul the housing finance system because it will increase the cost of any legislation that would wind down Fannie and Freddie.

“Congress must get serious about reforming Fannie and Freddie and stop treating them as political entities,” Crapo said.

“Any increase of guarantee fees should be used to protect taxpayers from mortgage losses — not used as an artificial offset for new government spending," he said.

Crapo worked last year with former Senate Banking Chairman Tim Johnson Tim JohnsonHousing groups argue Freddie Mac's loss should spur finance reform On Wall Street, Dem shake-up puts party at crossroads Regulators fret over FOIA reform bill MORE (D-S.D.) on a bipartisan measure that would eventually eliminate Fannie and Freddie.

They used a measure crafted by Warner and fellow Banking committee member Sen. Bob Corker Bob CorkerThe Trail 2016: Interleague play Top Republican urges Rubio to run for reelection Senate GOP ties Iran sanctions fight to defense bill MORE (R-Tenn.), who is backing this effort.

So far, this Congress hasn't ramped up the push for fresh legislation.

Fannie and Freddie have been under government control since the financial crisis hit in 2008.

Overall, the legislation would ensure that a congressionally mandated increase of guarantee fees can only be used for deficit reduction and will not be scored as an offset.

A 60-vote threshold would still be required on a provision that spends more or reduces taxes and is offset with a guarantee fee increased because the fee would not be recognized as an offset.

The bill is co-sponsored by Senate Banking Committee Chairman Richard Shelby (R-Ala.) and Sens. Jon Tester Jon TesterWasserman Schultz fights to keep her job It's time we empower veterans with entrepreneurial skills Dem introduces bill to block new government hacking powers MORE (D-Mont.), Heidi Heitkamp Heidi HeitkampThe Hill's 12:30 Report House Dems urge Senate panel to vote on Ex-Im Bank nominee Senate Dems frustrated over lack of action on Ex-Im Bank nominee MORE (D-N.D.), David Vitter David VitterOvernight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota Paul blocks chemical safety bill in Senate House Republican pushes bill to 'curb regulatory overreach' MORE (R-La.), Joe Donnelly Joe DonnellyThis week: GOP lawmakers reckon with Trump Democrats block energy spending bill over Iran amendment GOP blocks Obama sanctions czar MORE (D-Ind.), Mark Kirk Mark KirkFunding boost for TSA sails through committee GOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo VA chief 'deeply' regrets if Disney comment offended vets MORE (R-Ill.), Dean Heller Dean HellerLake Mead hits record low water level Tough choice for vulnerable GOP senators: Embrace or reject Trump Press: Forget about GOP unity in 2016 MORE (R-Ne.), Tim Scott Tim ScottGOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo GOP senators: Obama bathroom guidance is 'not appropriate' Senators unveil bill to overhaul apprenticeship programs MORE (R-S.C.) and Jerry Moran Jerry MoranGOP senators propose sending ISIS fighters to Gitmo Passing the Kelsey Smith Act will help law enforcement save lives Overnight Defense: VA chief 'deeply' regrets Disney remark; Senate fight brews over Gitmo MORE (R-Kan.).