The state’s biggest nonprofit health insurers reported mixed financial results Friday as they continue to contend with rising drug prices and new costs associated with the federal Affordable Care Act.

Harvard Pilgrim Health Care of Wellesley and Fallon Health of Worcester each reported losses of more than $7 million for the three-month period ending Sept. 30. Both attributed the losses to new costs of the federal health care law, also known as Obamacare, which requires health insurers with relatively healthy members to make payments to insurers who cover sicker members, in order to share the risks and costs of providing medical coverage to people who use a lot of services.

Advertisement

Harvard Pilgrim’s $7.5 million loss reverses a surplus of $9.9 million the insurer reported in the same quarter last year. Fallon’s $7.1 million loss comes after a $3.9 million loss in 2014.

“Our financial results reflect the challenging fiscal environment as we continue to adjust to changes in our industry related to implementation of the Affordable Care Act,” Charley Goheen, chief financial officer of Harvard Pilgrim, said in a statement.

Federal law required insurers to make so-called “risk adjustment” payments for the first time in 2015. Several insurers collectively paid $61 million into the program, the bulk of which went to Blue Cross Blue Shield of Massachusetts, the state’s largest health insurer.

Boston-based Blue Cross reported a $21.8 million operating surplus in the quarter, reversing a $4.3 million loss in the same period of 2014.

Tufts Health Plan of Watertown reported a $29.1 million surplus, down from a $34.2 million surplus last year.

Advertisement

Blue Cross said the risk adjustment payments were expected and therefore did not contribute to its surplus. Both Blue Cross and Tufts attributed their earnings to better cost control.

Insurers say they’re still concerned about rising prices of medications but are taking steps to curb costs, such as by negotiating discounts with drug makers.

Blue Cross has also reduced the size of its corporate offices to save money, chief financial officer Allen Maltz said.

“We’re keeping a real tight rein on administrative costs and what it takes to run the business,” he said.