No court has ever handed down a majority opinion stating: "As we have inconsistently held." Yet in many of those decisions, other court members, reading the same language, dissented. Thus consistency may be only in the mind of the winner.

If the same set of facts can produce widely different conclusions, something besides logic is involved.

King v. Burwell, argued before the U.S. Supreme Court very recently and commented upon widely, presents the problem acutely -- a case that will define its time: Will the subset of four little words in the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) threaten the subsidies of some 7 million subscribers in the 37 states that, having refused to establish an insurance exchange, left it to the federal government's exchange to serve their residents?

Do the innocent-sounding words "established by the State" mean that people who get health coverage through federal exchanges are not eligible for subsidies?

The court could disable the ACA -- something that majority House Republicans have been unable to accomplish. A District of Columbia federal court held that the "plain meaning" was precisely that: no state exchange, no subsidy. But right across the Potomac, in Virginia, another federal court held exactly the opposite -- that, considering the overall purpose of ACA, the subsidies may be provided whether an exchange is federal or state.

Whether Congress really intended to make a state-created exchange a prerequisite for subsidies would appear to be a simple matter of language, but the two courts' opposing views indicate that something else is in play. To state the problem in its simplest form, what is "plain meaning?" Is it logic or experience?

Oliver Wendell Holmes, probably the greatest legal philosopher in our history, put it thus: "The life of the law has not been logic, but experience." Some 75 years ago, Thurman Arnold in his magisterial "The Folklore of Capitalism" noted acidly, "The law, above all a method of reconciling conflicting ideals, becomes so heavy with definitions that it is almost unintelligible."

In a direct line from Holmes and Arnold is the work of the late Karl N. Llewellyn, one of the most esteemed legal commentators of the 20th century and a leading light of a school known as legal realism. Realists argue that the facade of "logic" obfuscates the reality of judges as people who bring to their decisions embedded opinions, past experiences and, heaven forbid, political leanings. (Chief Justice John Roberts likes to claim the Supreme Court is neither Republican nor Democrat.)

Llewellyn, a professor at Columbia Law School, wrote a masterpiece on the subject in a 1949 Vanderbilt Law Review, the title of which (summarized) is "Remarks ... About How Statutes Are to Be Construed," specifically directed to the problem of clashing opinions. Llewellyn demonstrates that interpretation is more a matter of choice between contradictory canons of interpretation rather than any alleged compelling logic or "plain meaning."

Llewellyn offers examples demonstrating that whichever ground a court chooses can be justified by a perfectly applicable canon of interpretation; it cannot be overemphasized that interpretation is choice, not logic.

To resolve the ACA controversy, the Supreme Court can choose from among the following examples, which Llewellyn introduces by noting that "statutory interpretation still speaks a diplomatic tongue." Borrowing from the argot of swordplay, Llewellyn shows that every "thrust" of interpretation has an opposing "parry." Here are a few applicable to the ACA conflict:

"A statute cannot go beyond its text" (the ACA's thrust per the D.C. court's decision) vs. "To effect its purpose a statute may be implemented beyond its text" (Virginia's parry).

"Where design has been distinctly stated, no place is left for construction (D.C. thrust) vs. "Courts have the power to inquire into real -- as distinct from ostensible -- purpose" (Virginia parry).

"If language is plain and unambiguous, it must be given effect" (D.C. thrust) vs. "Not where literal interpretation would lead to absurd or mischievous results" (Virginia parry).

As an amateur grammarian, I cannot resist this gem: "Words are to be interpreted according to the proper grammatical effect of their arrangement within the statute" (D.C.'s thrust) vs. "Rules of grammar will be disregarded where strict adherence would defeat purpose" (Virginia's parry -- and mine).

Each of these differing examples is fortified by a citation to an upper-court decision.

Is there a solution by rules of statutory construction that can avoid what the Republican House has tried some 40 times -- to destroy the Affordable Care Act?

The odds do not favor a Llewellynian solution if the court's conservative five follow their usual political path, unless Kennedy or Roberts (he did it before) opts out of the seemingly inevitable.

We won't have an answer for a while; meanwhile I recommend 3 Vanderbilt Law Review 395 to the court.

Harold Ticktin is a retired attorney, writer and public speaker from Shaker Heights.