Malcolm Gladwell's review of Vincent DeVita's The Death of Cancer is a fascinating exploration of the tension between innovation and standardization in medicine.

Though the Affordable Care Act has expanded health insurance coverage, patients may still face substantial out-of-pocket costs, causing financial hardships.

More encouraging data have been published in the New England Journal of Medicine about new drugs for hepatitis C. While we agree with the authors that it is reasonable to treat the majority of patients with chronic hepatitis C with these drugs from a clinical standpoint (the major barrier is financial, since a course of these meds costs more than $80,000), we still hope to see data on longer term outcomes. Will eradication of the hepatitis C virus actually prevent clinically important complications like cirrhosis, cancer, or premature mortality?

Drug companies sometimes cite cost-effectiveness analyses to support the use of expensive new therapies that extend life by a few months. But this piece in the NEJM reminds us that often these cost analyses compare the new therapy against an existing treatment that is not cost effective. As a result, the new treatment seems like a bargain -- when in fact it is anything but!

The authors of this well-argued perspective piece advocate for the labeling of genetically modified foods, not because there is any evidence yet that such modifications are directly harmful to consumers, but rather because genetically modified foods are frequently sprayed with very high concentrations of carcinogenic herbicides. Why? The greatest advantage of most genetically modified crops is their resistance to herbicides, allowing producers to spray much more aggressively than they otherwise could. That certainly seems like something consumers should know.

In a landmark study of open fractures in the NEJM, we learn that fancy proprietary irrigation solutions are no better than old-school saline (in fact, they appear to be worse). Nor is it necessary to apply higher pressure irrigation to these wounds. It's yet another important reminder about a recurring Slow Medicine theme: question long-standing, yet untested, practices because they may not actually work.

Placebo effects go untapped, Jo Marchant argues in the New York Times. We agree.

This review article on "Comfort Care," the intensive comfort measures that can be offered to a dying patient in the hospital, is a great quick review of both communication and symptom management strategies that might be used at the end of life. Its senior author is the late J. Andrew Billings, MD, who was a great mentor to many in the palliative care field, including Rachael.

Paul Kalinithi was finishing his neurosurgery residency when he was diagnosed with metastatic lung cancer. In his final year of life, he wrote a book about facing death. Paul's wife, Lucy, wrote a heart-wrenching op-ed about grief in the New York Times.

And here is a review of Paul's book, also in the Times, which we are excited to read.

"Updates in Slow Medicine" applies the latest medical research to support a thoughtful approach to clinical care. It is produced by Pieter Cohen, MD, of Harvard Medical School, and Michael Hochman, MD, of AltaMed Health System in Los Angeles. Rachael Bedard, MD, is a palliative care fellow at the Mount Sinai Hospital in New York. To learn more, visit their Facebook page.