PEKIN — Bob J. Haley, 63, took over as chief executive officer of Pekin Hospital on April 16 and has been working with the hospital board on a strategic plan.



Haley said the plan will be made public before the end of the summer.



Haley, who spent the past two years in International Falls, Minn., likes what he sees of the hospital and the community.



“The facility has a lot of potential,” Haley said. “We offer great services here.



“The physicians — a lot of them practice here and in Peoria, so you’re liable to find the same physician if you go to the (emergency room) here or the ER at OSF (Saint Francis Medical Center), but the other (physician) specialties that we have recruited in the past couple of years are very, very good.



He added that the hospital is actively recruiting physicians.



The hospital, which laid off nine employees in February and cut the hours of 22 additional employees, will not need additional reduction in force, Haley said.



Health care, said Haley, is “rapidly changing with the introduction of the Affordable Care Act, and the hospital here is responding positively to those changes. The Affordable Care Act is not fully implemented yet — it will take another two to three years for the law to be implemented, so yes, there will be changes. We’re not entirely sure what they will be and how the government will interpret the law in the coming months, but we have talked to a number of consultants and are preparing for the best-guess plans of how the law will continue to unfold. We’re not waiting just to react to it, we’re out ahead of it and preparing to have changes in place when new parts of the law come into effect.”



Haley began working in hospital administration in 1975. He spent 16 years at Denton Hospital in a suburb of Dallas.



Hospital Board President Andy Sparks said a news release he said, “The board is impressed with Bob’s experience and believes he will be an excellent leader of Progressive Health Systems. His experience and leader’s skills will allow us to continue our positive momentum, make certain we maintain progress and continue to serve our community with exceptional medical care.”



Haley and his wife, Scarlett, live in North Pekin. They have four grown children, two grandchildren and a grandchild on the way.