If you are a member of the “Tea Party Nation,” chances are you received a very important email this weekend, about how your relatives who may have defended “Obamacare” to you this weekend were basically rapists straight out of “Law and Order: SVU.” Which, um, is disturbing on a number of levels.

The article, written by Tea Party Nation’s Darwin Rockantansky–we can assume, given his name, that he might not get along so well with his parental units–explains how Obamacare, much like everything else the right dislikes, is exactly like rape. Which, sadly, is not even that original a thought. Not only has the right compared Obamacare to rape, they have also compared it to both slavery and the holocaust. Which I suppose just means that it is as bad as rape times slavery times the holocaust. Not to be dramatic, or anything.

Via Right Wing Watch:

There is one particular group of these programs called: “Law And Order: SVU”. And in this series there are a few episodes that I simply cannot watch because they expose the deepest darkest side of human nature and despite their disclaimer that no real persons are reflected, most people recognize that there are far too many real world parallels for comfort. And in some of these episodes, there are gifted actors that portray fictional characters whose defense when charged with rape runs along these lines: “She seduced me.”

“She wanted it.”

“She enjoyed it.” Really? At what point does rape become a pleasurable experience for the victim? And whom among us are not revolted and angered by such nonsense? And whom among us are willing to believe that if we “Just lay back and don’t fight it you will inevitably enjoy it.”? And the “IT” that I am referring to here is “Obamacare”. The Obama Regime is encouraging people to become the evangelists for Obamacare in their own family and social groups over Thanks Giving dinner [sic]. Their message is truly quite simple: Lie back and quit fighting and eventually you will enjoy the experience.

Yes. Much in the same way that women are supposed to lie back and take it when you idiots keep comparing things to rape that are not, in fact, rape? Not only is offensive, at this point, it’s getting a little tedious.

There are myriad things the government has done that I am opposed to and offended by. I was opposed to the Iraq War. I was opposed to the Food Stamp cuts. In fact, I am not thrilled with Obamacare as I would vastly prefer Single Payer. I do not, however, compare every single thing I don’t like and am forced to endure to rape. I don’t compare it to slavery, I don’t compare it to the Holocaust.

There was a study done recently saying that the reason the Occupy Movement failed to influence the Democratic Party the way the Tea Party influenced the Republican Party is because Liberals tend to think they are “unique” and thus do not assume everyone agrees with them, whereas Conservatives assume that everyone does, in fact, agree with them and share their views. I do not see this as “prioritizing uniqueness,” I see this as being a reasonable person. The idea of presuming that everyone agrees with me seems altogether bizarre, particularly given the fact that it is clearly untrue. I am a lot of things, but I am certainly not delusional.

If this study is correct–and I’m not sure that it is–Rockantansky clearly falls into the category of assuming everyone agrees with him. He assumes that Obamacare is being cruelly forced on an entirely unwilling public. If that were the case, tactlessness of the comparison aside, he might have a point. In some ways it is–because it’s a compromise. The right wants the “free market” to decide how much we all pay for insurance, and for it to be a thing that is only available for those who can afford it, while the left sees health care as a human right, and would prefer Single Payer. Neither of us got what we wanted here.

However, the simple fact is that every one of us has to deal with legislation we disagree with, by virtue of the fact that we all have different opinions and stances on things. No one gets everything exactly the way they’d like it to be. In all likelihood, if Darwin Rockantansky got his way on everything, I would probably be pretty damned miserable, and vice versa.

Rockantansky ends his rant by explaining the myriad ways in which Obamacare itself is a rapist:

But I will encourage you to think about your own families and extended families and decide for yourself if there is a point at which this rape experience could possibly become enjoyable; rape of our free will, rape of our religious convictions, rape of free markets, rape of our Constitution, a brutal rape of the American Dream and personal freedoms.

Which is a tad hyperbolic, and, quite frankly, an insult to every non-fictional person who has ever been raped.