The icy mountains of Pluto NASA

Every week, CIO Journal offers a glimpse into the mind of the CEO, whose view of technology is shaped by stories in management journals, general interest magazines and, of course, in-flight publications.

Want to become agile? Learn from your IT team. Companies looking to become more agile in the digital age need to spend time with their information technology teams,McKinsey & Co.’s Paul Willmott suggests. Agile, in one form or another, has been part of IT for at least a decade, its adoption accelerating alongside the rise of nimble Silicon Valley startups which place a premium on iterative software development. So does this mean the CEOs will soon demand leadership “scrums?” Sort of, suggests Mr. Willmott. “[Agile] can be applied more broadly across a business, with small teams meeting frequently and people from relevant functions actively working together with greater authority to make decisions quickly (no more monthly steering committees).” Just how IT embraces modularity and for efficiency, businesses should embrace reusable business processes. Next up: boardroom stand-up meetings.

How a bunch of government space geeks at NASA won the Internet. Everyone’s favorite Kuiper belt dwarf planet peppered social media feeds this week, a reflection both of NASA’s scientific achievement and its social media prowess. Quartz’s Adam Epstein writes that there are lessons to be learned for Earth based-organizations “trying to understand how to break down the barriers between itself and its public.” Astronauts tweet and Instagram and Vine, of course. But the agency’s most powerful social tool is an “irresistible online identity”: many rovers and probes speak in the first person on social media. Here’s the last tweet from Messenger, which ended an 11-year mission by crashing into Mercury: “Well I guess it is time to say goodbye to all my friends, family, support team. I will be making my final impact very soon.” The personal voice, Mr. Epstein writes, “makes people want to care.” Of course it helps to have awesome content. Sharing an image of Pluto trumps anyone’s Instagram of a plate of bacon.

A PC and a dream. The Microsoft cover story in Delta Sky magazine is an odd sort of beast, and not just because Microsoft Corp. CEO Satya Nadella is dropping terms like “we live in is a mobile-first, cloud-first world,” in an inflight magazine. “Microsoft is a misunderstood company,” the company’s manager of storytelling tells reporter Steve Marsh and what follows is an argument for just how cool the company has become. Old offices have been remodeled “into open work areas with spaces that look like they belong in a cool ad agency,” for example. Mr. Nadella wonders aloud what it would be like if T.S. Eliot wrote code. Let’s see: “The month before launch is the cruellest month…” As any middle schooler will tell you, trying too hard to be cool is not cool, but Microsoft is on a mission to disassociate itself somewhat from its PC-focused past. “The thing that I value and look for in other leaders really circles around the notion of: Are they creating clarity and energy and are they a learner?,” Mr. Nadella says. “If you’re not curious, open to learning, raising your own game, admitting your own mistakes, then I think you stop doing useful things at some point.” Now that’s cool.