As he awaited his turn to run into the frigid waters of Lake Shawnee on Saturday morning for the 10th annual Polar Plunge, Larry Bing went over his strategy for all who cared to listen.

“Don’t think about it,” he said. “Just go.”

Then he elaborated.

“You run in as fast as you can, you get in where it’s deep enough to dive horizontally, then you submerge yourself,” he said. “Then you get up and give everybody a high-five.”

Bing did his first Polar Plunge a year ago and enjoyed it so much that he talked his wife, Mary, into doing it this year. Both are 59 and said diving into bone-chilling water helps them “keep in touch with our inner insanity.”

Organizers said around 250 people participated in the event, which was held at the Lake Shawnee swim beach, 3300 S.E. Croco Road.

Each person who ran or walked into the water at the Lake Shawnee swim beach paid $75, with all proceeds benefiting the Kansas Special Olympics.

Kristi Powell, a detective with the Topeka Police Department and one of the event organizers, estimated the Polar Plunge and a related run generated about $35,000 for Kansas Special Olympics.

Funds will be used for people with developmental disabilities to participate in athletic and social events through Kansas Special Olympics. Proceeds also help pay for medical and educational programs for Special Olympics participants.

Powell said Saturday’s Polar Plunge, which started with the Topeka temperature hovering around the 25-degree mark, was considerably colder than the past couple of years. Crews had to cut a large hole in the ice with chain saws so that participants could get into the water.

In spite of the cold conditions, people dressed up in an assortment of costumes for the Polar Plunge. Some wore summer-style swimsuits, while others decked out in superhero costumes.

The majority took part as a member of teams that raised funds for Special Olympics, while some went in solo.

Each group started about 25 yards up the snow-covered sandy beach, then ran headlong into the water. Some went in up to their ankles, while others made it up to their waists. The really brave dove in and went completely under the water.

“We have some people who have participated each and every year,” Powell said. “The crazy ones remain crazy.”

Most of the participants were adults, though a number of high school students also ran into the water to help raise funds for Special Olympics. Among them were five girls from Shawnee Heights High School — Kellie Schmick, 16; Kourtney Schmick, 14; Karli Benson, 16; Emily Wilson, 15; and Cassidy Copeland, 15.

The girls represented the school’s Junior Civitan Club and said they had done the Polar Plunge a year ago.

Shortly before taking the plunge, Wilson said she “just wanted to get it over with.”

After going into the water and coming back to shore, the girls were in agreement that this was one tradition they planned on maintaining again next year.