Rep. Todd Young (left), R-Ind., and Rep. Marlin Stutzman, R-Ind. (Photo: Provided)

A super PAC created to help Republicans keep control of the Senate is trying to boost Rep. Todd Young’s chances of getting the GOP nomination for Senate.

In the first advertising the Senate Leadership Fund is doing across the nation, the group praises Young as a “true Hoosier conservative.”

“Young has stood up to President Obama and his liberal agenda,” says the ad, which is running for a week in the Indianapolis area.

Young is competing in the May 3 primary against Rep. Marlin Stutzman.

Both have conservative voting records. But Stutzman has touted his willingness to stand up to not only Obama, but also to his own party leaders. He was bounced from a lower-level position on the House leadership team in 2003 after he crossed leadership on a procedural vote on an agriculture and nutrition assistance bill. And Stutzman was among 25 House Republicans who did not vote for John Boehner to remain as speaker in January 2015.

“Marlin knows when Republicans bend, America breaks,” says the narrator in one of Stutzman’s ads.

The Senate Leadership Fund’s executive director is Steven Law, former chief of staff to Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky. Law is also the president of One Nation, a group that spent $250,000 on television ads praising Young’s record on national security.

The Senate Leadership Fund is spending $200,000 on the television ads praising Young, and another $30,000 on digital ads targeting likely GOP primary voters, according to the group’s spokesman.

The ad touts several aspects of Young’s conservative record, without mentioning Stutzman and the fact he has a similar record. For example, both have top ratings from the National Rifle Association and the National Right to Life Committee, and both have voted to repeal Obamacare.

The ad also says Young has fought Obama’s “illegal amnesty.”

While Young voted to bar the administration from spending money to carry out Obama’s executive actions on immigration, he supported the underlying bill funding the Department of Homeland Security after the immigration defunding language was blocked in the Senate. Young said he wasn’t willing to risk shutting down the department “to make a political point about a distinctly different issue.”

Stutzman has highlighted that vote as a key difference between the two. He has said in fundraising appeals that the establishment opposes him because “they know they can count on Todd Young to vote for Obama’s executive amnesty.”

Stutzman has been endorsed by the political arms of the tea party group FreedomWorks and the conservative Club for Growth and by the Senate Conservatives Fund. But those groups have yet to run ads on his behalf.

Young is viewed by some as the stronger general election candidate, one reason the Indiana Chamber of Commerce joined the national organization in endorsing Young last week. The U.S. Chamber of Commerce is spending $1 million on ads to help Young.

Contact Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com or @mgroppe on Twitter.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1MQyiRY