MONROE -- Mayor Jamie Mayo found himself standing in the street surrounded by downed power lines and trees following a storm that came through Monroe on Monday.

While he was getting updates on the storm, another call came in from a campaign strategist suggesting he issue a press release suspending his bid for Louisiana's 5th Congressional District seat until after the city was back on its feet.

"I don't have to suspend campaign activities to do my mayoral work because I never stopped doing my mayoral work," Mayo said.

It's true Mayo's day job has gotten in the way of his campaign. He's still got to run northeastern Louisiana's hub city, try to reach a deal to keep a hospital from closing, and after Monday help the city get its power back.

But such experiences -- plus 10 straight years of budget surpluses and a $14 million fund balance -- are why Democrats believe Mayo is the best chance they've had to win the seat since former-Rep. Rodney Alexander first took office in 2002 as a Democrat.

"We think Mayor Mayo is an exemplary candidate," said Democratic Party spokesperson Kirstin Alvanitakis. "The demographics make it a challenging seat to win, but we have an opportunity to steal one from the Republicans."

The district does lean conservative and hasn't elected a Democrat since 2002. Alexander switched parties in 2004 and served as a Republican until he resigned last year.

Mayo and the Democrats believes he has a pro-business message that will resonate with voters looking for a middle ground. Mayo believes he's in the best position to go Washington and bring home the support the heavily impoverished district needs while supporting fiscally conservative principles.

He takes credit for creating a jobs-friendly business climate in Monroe that has attracted major companies like CenturyLink, Vantage Health Plan and Gardner Denver Thomas.

"I'm a moderate. I like to call myself and independent Democrat in that my moderate views are centrist. This district will continue to slide if there's representation too far to the left or too far to the right," Mayo.

Mayo thinks it's a message he can sell if he makes the run-off. He's the only Democrat battling for a top-two spot in a close race between him, Rep. Vance McAllister and Republican challengers Zach Dasher and Ralph Abraham. Nine total candidates are running.

He takes what he believes to be a moderate, practical approach to the Affordable Care Act. He said there's no chance the president will repeal the law, so the district needs a congressman who can fix what's wrong with it, one of them being the employer mandate.

"The areas I think need to be addressed are areas that affect small business negatively," Mayo said. "When they say they want to take the whole thing and do away with it, my thing is fix what needs to be fixed."

While this might be the best chance Democrats have had, Mayo is still a long-shot, according to Joshua Stockley, a political scientist at the University of Louisiana at Monroe. Stockley said the climate in the South isn't the best situation for any Democrat to win and points to Sen. Mary Landrieu's race where she is in the toughest fight of her political career.

"Mary Landrieu in any other year in any other election cycle wins this hands down. She's vulnerable for no other reason than she's a Democrat," Stockley said.

Stockley said Mayo needs to spend a lot of money to get his message out in an expensive district to campaign. Republicans have demonstrated to have more resources than Democrats running in that district. Stockley said Mayo also needs to convince voters he truly is conservative, not a proxy for Obama, and Mayo needs to get his voters to the polls.

"In short, Mayor Mayo has a lot of work to do. In fairness, any Democrat would have a lot of work to do," Stockley said.

* * * * * * *

Cole Avery is a legislative and state politics reporter based in Baton Rouge. You can reach him on Twitter @cole_avery1 or email ravery@nola.com.