Public transportation is a regional issue. Why doesn't state law allow us to treat it that way?

Buy Photo Appleton legislators and business leaders for years have called for a state law that would allow the creation of regional transit authorities. Central Wisconsin leaders should join them. (Photo: Gannett Wisconsin Media file photo)Buy Photo

The bus doesn't run to Weston anymore. In fact, since Rothschild and Schofield followed Weston in canceling contracts with Wausau's Metro Ride, public transportation no longer reaches beyond the borders of Wausau at all.

Right now, today, this has made life a little harder and a little worse for poor people, people with disabilities, the elderly and those who don't like driving. In the long term, I argue it has made the region less connected, less accessible and less positioned for future growth.

It's a bad thing to have the ring of suburbs connected to Wausau be cut off to anyone who can't drive or doesn't want to drive. (Besides the three that just canceled, Rib Mountain and Kronenwetter have never offered public transportation in any form.)

But it's a new year, and it's time for new efforts to restore public transportation in Wausau's south metro area. Here are two possible ways forward. One requires more cooperation among local governments than we are used to seeing; one requires a change in state law that is long overdue.

Last month, I asked Weston Village Administrator Daniel Guild, who is probably tired of me on this subject, whether he thought there was any merit in the idea of forming some kind of on-demand public transportation service — like a cheap, public cab service, essentially.

Buy Photo A Marshfield Public Transit van makes a stop at Opportunity Development Centers Inc. in Marshfield on Monday. The service has been providing shared rides in Marshfield since Jan. 1. (Photo: Megan McCormick/News-Herald Media )

Editorial: On-demand transit can work here

Column: We need a regional transit authority

Story: Officials cancel shared bus route, scold Weston voters

Merrill (population: around 10,000) has offered this type of transit for ages with the delightfully named Merrill-Go-Round service, and Marshfield (population: 18,750) has it, too. Weston alone has about 15,000 people. There are something more than 35,000 people in the south metro municipalities; you can imagine an economy of scale kicking in that would make such a service affordable and effective.

Guild didn't seem too excited about on-demand transit. (And as administrator, of course, he'd need the backing of the Village Board. Hi, Weston village trustees.) He said he wouldn't endorse it or dismiss it and that it would depend on the specifics of cost and what the service could do, which is all fair enough. But then he said something intriguing.

"This discussion over the past several years in the metro area has revealed that transit requires regional solutions and regional collaborations," Guild said. "This issue is bigger than the borders of any one particular community."

Well, hear, hear. That is 100 percent correct. And it points to a glaring flaw in Wisconsin law, which requires cities to treat transit only within their borders and actually forbids a regional approach.

Buy Photo A Metro Ride bus in November runs on the K route near Pick ‘n Save in Weston. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo)

Last year in Madison, Sen. Mike Ellis, R-Neenah, got a bill passed in the Senate that would have permitted the creation of regional transit authorities. (Mind you, it would not have required them anywhere; right now cities and suburbs are barred from creating them.)

Ellis's bill was not brought up for a vote in the Assembly. It responds to a specific gap in transit funding in the Appleton area, and Ellis's successor, Republican Roger Roth, has pledged to continue to push it. Regional transit in a place like Appleton — or Wausau — is a necessity, and it would make a lot more sense to have one regional system rather than leaving it to each individual municipality to worry about.

Does this kind of bill have any chance of passage this year? Maybe not. Assembly Speaker Robin Vos seems to hate it out of pure anti-transit ressentiment, and Vos's control of the lower house is pretty much absolute.

But it's still a good idea. And one has to start somewhere.

Column: Wausau buses: Long history, crucial future

Vintage bus illustration. (Photo: Radoman Durkovic, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

The truth: Municipalities need to be thinking seriously about how people are going to get around in the future, both what they will want and what they will need. Wisconsin is getting older and people are driving less. Millennials do not care about cars the way their parents and their parents' parents did. Meanwhile, Gov. Scott Walker's Department of Transportation is proposing a $751 million tax hike to pay for deteriorating roads, and among the key pieces of that increase are a proposed gas tax hike and a new $800 fee on all new-car purchases. Those taxes won't immediately stop everyone from driving or buying new cars ever again, but over time they won't slow the erosion of those things, either.

Gas is cheap at the moment, but its price is volatile and it would be a very bad idea to assume that today's trend will last forever. Driving also happens to be bad for the environment; not everyone cares about this, but some people do.

Project any of these trends out by a decade or two and it should be clear public transportation will become more important in the future, not less.

Maybe on-demand transit is an idea that could work. Maybe it's regional transit or something else entirely.

But the issue won't go away. People have to get around; not everyone drives and the number of people who don't drive or don't want to drivewill keep going up. Let's keep talking about it.

Robert Mentzer is regional opinion editor for Gannett Central Wisconsin Media. Contact: rmentzer@gannett.com, 715-845-0604; on Twitter: @robertmentzer.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1BxwODJ