Buy Photo Weininger conducts an eye exam on a young patient in his office in New Brunswick. (Photo: Tanya Breen/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo Story Highlights Sixty-seven years ago, the Lions Club co-founded the Home News Tribune's Needy Cases Fund.

Readers can continue to keep things going full circle by donating to the nonprofit's efforts to provide local families in need with affordable eye care and glasses through optometrist David Weininger.

Money cures a lot of evils and deficiencies, said David Weininger, an optometrist who has been practicing in the city for 36 years, one year longer than his involvement with the local charitable Lions Club organization.

Sixty-seven years ago, the Lions Club co-founded the Home News Tribune's Needy Cases Fund.

Readers can continue to keep things going full circle by donating as much cash as possible to the nonprofit's efforts to provide local families in need with affordable eye care and glasses through Weininger.

"If the family is eligible, I'm pleased to take care of them," Weininger said. "The school or church or social worker, someone determined that this family or individual in need didn't have resources for vision. They get sent to me."

When Weininger opened his practice, fairly affluent families from the city often would visit him, he said.

When those families moved away and the city's economy declined, the eye doctor said he was determined to remain in his neighborhood.

"It sounds corny, but it's nice to be needed," he said. "My primary goal in life is not to make a million bucks, but to make enough to survive and help my fellow man. Unfortunately, that doesn't help pay the bills."

A past Lions Club president, Weininger now serves as the organization's secretary.

He said he noticed that as New Brunswick redevelops, needy families are "pushed" into other towns, such as Franklin, North Brunswick or Highland Park. He said he continues to serve them.

Weininger said that he expects New Brunswick to have a much different economic mix in 10 years as renovations continue. And while the job climate seems to have improved for his patients' families within the past five years, needs remain great, he said.

Buy Photo Dr. David Weininger, an optometrist, stands outside of his office in New Brunswick. (Photo: Tanya Breen/Staff Photographer)

"With the advent Obamacare and the big push of insuring kids and family care, I don't see nearly as many patients as I used to, but the ones I do see seem to be deeper in the hole," Weininger said. "I get kids in here in the middle of winter, 30 degrees out, wearing a short-sleeve T-shirt under a jacket. I don't know if it's that the parents who don't know how to dress them or if that's all they got. Most of the time, their clothes aren't clean, so I think for a lot of people, getting by isn't as apparent as it might have been at one time."

Staff Writer Bob Makin: 732-565-7319; bmakin@MyCentralJersey.com

How you can help

From Nov. 30 to Dec. 7, we are highlighting the stories of eight organizations helped by the Needy Cases Fund. Through the words and photographs of the journalists of the Home News Tribune, you will see how these Central Jersey-based organizations improve the lives of your neighbors in need, and how you can help them accomplish their missions.

For the past 67 years, The Needy Cases Fund has collected donations from a caring community during the holiday season, and distributed the funds to local agencies. The community-service project has been sponsored by the Home News Tribune and its predecessor, the Daily Home News, working with the Lions Club of New Brunswick.

As you read these stories, we hope you will become engaged and take action by sending a donation anytime during the holiday season to help support the Needy Cases Fund and local community agencies. Donations should be sent to: Needy Cases Fund, Home News Tribune, 92 E. Main St., Suite 202, Somerville, NJ 08876. Please indicate with a note whether you want to be acknowledged in a wrap-up story about the program, scheduled to run in late December, or whether you wish to remain anonymous. The Needy Cases Fund is maintained in a separate account by the New Brunswick Lions Club, and distribution of the funds is apportioned by representatives of the Home News Tribune and the club.

For any questions, contact Carolyn Sampson at 908-243-6624 or csampson@MyCentralJersey.com.

And please know that every dollar you donate is appreciated, and will be used well.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1A8KnGD