STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- Standing next to the cold medicine and pain relievers stocked inside the St. George Pharmacy on Thursday, District Attorney Daniel Donovan got the endorsement of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in his campaign for Congress against Democratic Councilman Vincent Gentile.

Donovan and the Chamber chose the location on Stuyvesant Place in St. George partly as an example of a local business focusing on the community's needs, citing the space that the owner will soon have for a physician's office.

Donovan is also a long-time friend of the owner.

As the press set up their equipment inside the cramped, narrow space in the store, Donovan purchased Listerine breath strips and chatted with the owner, Al Gentile. No relation to his opponent.

Speaking briefly, Al Gentile said, "We've been asked to give a little bit of our time to and space to represent my friend, my [long-time] buddy, Dan Donovan, who's running for Congress."

Staff worked quietly in the background as Donovan accepted the endorsement.

"I'm proud to be here with my friend Dan Donovan, who I have gotten to know over the course of the last year," said Rob Engstrom, national political director of the Washington, D.C.-based U.S. Chamber of Commerce. "He shares a common vision with America's job-creators in terms of who's going to lead that American recovery. He has a record of leadership and accomplishment on a number of different levels right here on Staten Island. On the issues, he believes and understands that transportation and infrastructure is the tabletop of the American economy. It's critically important particularly on Staten Island."

Engstrom listed lowering taxes, fighting Obamacare, getting transportation infrastructure and creating jobs as top priorities for America.

"If you like Barack Obama, if you like Nancy Pelosi, if you like Mayor de Blasio then you're going to love Vincent Gentile," he said. "He has a record of failure on all the issues that I just talked about and he is embracing and standing by Obamacare."

Engstrom said Gentile didn't return their candidate questionnaire "so apparently he's not interested in having a chance in this election."

Donovan joked that in being pro-business, he doesn't want to disrupt the pharmacy's business any longer than he needs to.

"As I said all along, taxes and regulations are killing our businesses," he said. "As you have seen, my opponent, all he wants to do is tax businesses more. That's how he wants to pay for everything. My ideas are to lower taxes."

In response, Gentile spokesman Justin Brannan said, "Dan Donovan has no idea what the minimum wage is and no idea what's best for the hard-working families of Staten Island and Brooklyn so it does not surprise me that he would solicit the support of a group that opposes equal pay for women, wants to privatize Social Security and dismantle labor unions. Maybe he doesn't know, or maybe he just doesn't care, but Dan Donovan just jumped in bed with a group that has declared war on middle class families."