SYRACUSE, N.Y. -- Former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton is more popular in New York, Virginia and New Jersey than three potential 2016 Republican presidential contenders - New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Congressman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, and U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky - according to a poll released today.

By a wide margin, Clinton was also the answer given by the greatest percentage of people in each state when asked to name who they would most like to see elected president, according to simultaneous identical polls conducted by Roanoke College in Virginia, Rutgers-Eagleton in New Jersey and Siena College in New York.

Clinton, a former U.S. senator from New York, was the presidential choice of 39 percent of New Yorkers polled, 35 percent in New Jersey and 28 percent of Virginians. Christie was named as the top presidential choice by 15 percent of New Jersey residents, the highest score received by anyone other than Clinton in the three states.

Clinton's favorability tops Christie, Paul and Ryan by over 35 points in New York, by eight to 14 points in Virginia, and by 10 to 29 points in New Jersey, according to the poll.



"Head to head, she is untouchable in New York, has majorities in New Jersey and a lead in the potential battleground state of Virginia over not only two lesser known Republican hopefuls, Paul and Ryan, but over Christie who can no longer muster 50 percent favorable in any of the three states," according to Don Levy, director of the Siena College Research Institute.

The polls were conducted February 22-28. The poll include interviews with 821 Virginia residents with an overall margin of error of plus or minus 3.4 percentage points, 842 New Jersey residents with an overall margin of error of plus or minus 3.6 percentage points and 814 New York residents with an overall margin of error of plus or minus 3.4 percentage points.

Voters in all three states say that the country is headed in the wrong direction rather than being on the right track by nearly identical scores: New Jersey, 56 to 32; New York, 54 to 36; and Virginia 59 to 32.

On national issues, a majority of voters in all three states are overwhelmingly in favor of raising the national minimum wage to $10.10 per hour; legalizing the use of marijuana in all 50 states for medical purposes; approving a path to citizenship for people who are in the U.S. illegally, but are working, have no criminal record and pay taxes; approving the Keystone Pipeline to bring oil from Canada to the U.S.; using federal funds to make free prekindergarten education available to all children; and establishing a national gun registry.

Legalizing same-sex marriage in all 50 states is strongly supported in New Jersey and New York while Virginians are in favor by 53 to 40 percent, according to the poll.



Large majorities, greatest in Virginia, oppose allowing the National Security Agency (NSA) to tap domestic phone lines in the interest of national security.

On four issues - the Affordable Care Act, abortion, standardized testing and an extension for unemployment benefits - the voters of New Jersey, New York and Virginia disagreed.

Contact Mike McAndrew at mmcandrew@syracuse.com or 315-470-3016.