By The Associated Press on Sun 01/17/2016 07:34am

Posted in

Latest Wyoming news, sports, business and entertainment.

FAMILY STABBED

Police: Cheyenne man stabs family, crashes car in Colorado

CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) — Police say a 30-year-old man stabbed his wife, the couple's two young sons and his wife's father at a home in Cheyenne, then fled in a car and is believed to have been killed in a collision on a Colorado interstate.

The Cheyenne Police Department says in a statement Saturday that police went to the home late Friday after receiving several hang-up 911 calls. Officers found four people, including a four-year-old and a six-year-old, with multiple stab wounds from a knife. The victims were taken to a hospital and are in stable condition.

Police say officers were told that Randall Van Woerkom had attacked his family after he was confronted by allegations of infidelity.

The officers then tried to call him, but were told at about 1 a.m. Saturday that he was thought to have been involved in a fatal crash on Interstate 25 in Weld County, Colorado. Authorities there are working to confirm the person's identity.

SKIER-GUN RECOVERED

Skier gets gun back after losing it on Jackson Hole Mountain

JACKSON, Wyo. (AP) — A skier has gotten his gun back after he crashed at the Jackson Hole Mountain Resort and lost his weapon.

The resort says the man got his gun back after he called to say he had misplaced it.

According to the Jackson Hole News and Guide, the man broke no Wyoming law or resort rules, but resort officials say they don't recommend bringing weapons on the mountain.

The man was from Wyoming, but he was not identified.

The weapon was discovered when a ski crew skied over the loaded weapon. It did not go off.

WYOMING LEGISLATURE-PUBLIC ACCESS

Wyoming officials delay decision on legislative access plan

CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) — State officials have delayed making a decision on a policy that puts restrictions on demonstrations and other citizen-led events at the Jonah Business Center, where legislators will meet while work is being done on the state Capitol.

According to the Wyoming Tribune Eagle, officials are concerned about balancing free speech with public safety.

The proposed policy says there will be changes for members of the public who want to watch or influence the Legislature's work as compared to how things were handled at the Capitol, including demonstrations, briefings, exhibits and other large events.

The Legislative Service Office staff that briefed lawmakers on plans says it won't affect public hearings on pending legislation where citizens and groups can testify, which is often the first step in passing new laws.

TRAIN HITS VEHICLE

Train hits vehicle near Sinclair; 1 person injured

RAWLINS, Wyo. (AP) — Authorities are investigating after a train hit a vehicle near Sinclair in southern Wyoming, injuring one person.

Carbon County Undersheriff Archie Roybal tells the Rawlins Daily Times the crash happened near Wyoming 76 just before 9 p.m. Thursday. Two men and a woman were in the vehicle.

Investigators have not released the names of anyone involved, or the condition of the person who was injured.

OBAMA COAL-MINES

APNewsBreak: Coal suspension affects 30-plus mining projects

BILLINGS, Mont. (AP) — Federal officials say at least 30 applications from companies seeking to mine hundreds of millions of tons of coal face suspension as the government reviews sales of the fuel from public lands.

Interior Secretary Sally Jewell announced Friday that the coal leasing program would be put on hold for about three years while the agency reviews fees paid by mining companies and the environmental effect of burning coal.

The Associated Press obtained a Bureau of Land Management list of affected sites, which includes mining proposals in nine states.

Some of the largest projects are in the nation's top coal-producing region, spanning Wyoming and Montana.

Cloud Peak Energy, whose mine expansion in Wyoming is affected, accused federal officials of pandering to environmentalists who are trying to shut down the industry.

EMERGENCY LANDING

Student pilot makes emergency landing when plane loses power

CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) — A student pilot and an instructor made an emergency landing on a snowy Cheyenne golf course after the Cessna they were flying lost power.

Cheyenne Regional Airport deputy director Jim Schell says the plane landed safely at the Airport Golf Club course sometime after 9:30 a.m. Friday. No one was injured and the plane was not damaged. Schell declined to release the names of those on board.

The Cessna 172 is registered to Wings of Wyoming, a private flight school and rental business at the airport.

HEALTH OVERHAUL-WYOMING

Judge orders Wyoming health insurance company to liquidate

CHEYENNE, Wyo. (AP) — A health insurance company that was once the second largest in Wyoming will be liquidated to pay off its debts.

The Wyoming Tribune Eagle reports that a Laramie County District judge on Tuesday signed an order to liquidate WINhealth Partners.

Wyoming Insurance Commissioner Tom Glause will oversee the liquidation process. He took over operations of WINhealth last October when his team found the company was financially troubled.

The company announced in October that it would no longer be a part of the individual health insurance marketplace under the federal Affordable Care Act. WINhealth officials say costs from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services were too high to be in the marketplace.

Policy holders with the company will not be held liable for WINhealth's debts.