Two people are in custody in connection to the disappearance of 20-year-old South Carolina woman Heather Elvis, who mysteriously vanished from Myrtle Beach.

She was last heard from in the early hours of Dec. 18, when she returned home from a date. Her date was eventually ruled out as a suspect in the disappearance, and her 2001 Dodge Intrepid was found parked at Peachtree boat landing. Hundreds of volunteers continue to search for her and at least 15 investigators are assigned to the case, Fox News reports.

On Friday, law enforcement agencies swarmed a home in Myrtle Beach on Friday, served a search warrant and took the two into custody. Police didn't release their names or discuss potential charges, but the search warrant was served after some "new information."

"The search warrant was executed in an attempt to identify potential evidence based on new information obtained through expert analysis of previously seized surveillance tapes in the area along with financial discrepancies filed with the State of South Carolina on behalf of the occupants of the residence," the Horry County Police Department reported in a statement.

Fox News reports that a 37-year-old man whom Elvis used to have a relationship with, Sidney Moorer, lives at the residence. It's not clear whether he was taken into custody, but cell phone records show that the two communicated on the morning of her disappearance.

Authorities believe Elvis was driven home by her date some time before 2 a.m. that morning. Later on, she drove herself to the boat landing, but it's unclear why, police say. Her vehicle was found on Dec. 19. It was the first and only break in the case before Friday.

The 5-foot-1 woman weighs about 118 pounds. She has brown/auburn hair and brown eyes. There is a $25,000 reward for information leading to finding her. The family has also set up a Facebook page and a reward donation account with a PayPal account under FindHeatherElvis@gmail.com.

Anyone with information about Heather Elvis should call the Horry County Police Department at (843) 915-5350 or (843)-915-TIPS (8477).

Heather Elvis Missing Heather Elvis Missing

1 of 6 Heather Elvis Heather Elvis, 20, vanished from Myrtle Beach on Dec. 18, 2013. Share this slide:

Facebook

More: Missing Persons