Topics: AlterNet, corporate income tax, Income inequality, laffer curve, Wall Street, Business News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

There’s an old saying going back to the Reagan years: “personnel is policy.” It means that the sort of advisers and staff public officials surround themselves with are key indicators of the sort of policy regimes they will put into place.

The New York Times recently named a number of economic advisers who are currently advising or are interviewing to begin working for GOP presidential candidates. What the Times didn’t do is lay out some of the terrible ideas these economists promoted.

1. Raise Taxes On the Poor to Cut Them on the Rich: Stephen Moore, who works for the Wall Street Journal in addition to being parked at the Heritage Foundation, has been at dinners of economists advising candidates such as Louisiana Governor Bobby Jindal. In 2010, Moore said he’d “raise the 10 percent tax rate to 15 percent and lower the [top] rates.”

2. Just Suspend All Taxes: Art Laffer is most known for his “Laffer Curve” idea, where he proposed that cutting taxes creates so much growth it will bring in more revenue. But he’s been a right-wing economist who has been preaching a number of odd policies for decades. In 2010, he suggested just suspending all taxes to stimulate the economy. He has met with both Jeb Bush and Ben Carson.

3. Get Rid of Corporate Income Tax Altogether: Laurence Kotlikoff of Boston University has advised Ben Carson, who called him to talk to him about the deficit. Kotlikoff wrote an op-ed in January 2014 in which he said we shouldn’t just lower the corporate income tax, we should eliminate it. Larry Kudlow, a CNBC host and economics pundit, also advocated the same idea.

4. Detroit’s Budget Crisis Is a Good Thing: Rand Paul adviser Mark Spitznagel wrote a column urging a collapse of Detroit’s public budget and economic system, noting that “the good news is that, as Rothbard noted, such a collapse is the recovery process….Given this, purging Detroit’s balance sheet (specifically the disproportionate unfunded liabilities that have plunged it deep into the red) is the best – maybe even the only available path to renewal.”