Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Kentucky’s gubernatorial candidates Republican Matt Bevin and Democrat Jack Conway debate during a forum at the Chamber of Commerce in Louisville. Marty Pearl/Special to The Courier-Journal

Buy Photo Matt Bevin and Jack Conway went head-to-head as the 2015 gubernatorial candidates during a Chamber of Commerce meeting at the Downtown Marriott on Tuesday afternoon. 7/28/15 (Photo: Marty Pearl/Special to The C-J)Buy Photo

A debate between Kentucky’s gubernatorial candidates became personal on Tuesday during a forum in Louisville after Republican Matt Bevin accused Democrat Jack Conway of overstating his accomplishments on the staff of Gov. Paul Patton.

“I don’t mean to be dismissive Jack, but some of these things that you were a part of, you were 22, 23 years old,” Bevin said. “You were right out of school in your first political job, you really were not critically involved.”

Conway fired back that while he was young, he was an important part of Patton’s team.

“I was 26, 27, 28, 29 years old,” Conway said. “But I was here. I brought my education back to the state … there are a lot of reporters that are here in this room that were there with me and I think they know that that experience was real.

“Was that education you’re talking about a Duke education,” Bevin shot back, mentioning where Conway attended law school — a school roundly hated by many University of Kentucky basketball fans.

“At least I tell the truth about where I went to college,” Conway replied, an allusion to charges by U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell’s campaign in 2014 that Bevin lied on a Linkedin resume by claiming that he attended the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.

In fact, newspaper stories from the time show that Conway was one of the lawyers who drafted Patton’s higher education reform bill, headed a task force on saving Paducah’s Gaseous Diffusion Plant, served as Patton’s liaison to the utility industry and played a key role in Patton’s plan to extend universal garbage collection to every county.

The discussion at the Kentucky Chamber of Commerce’s Business Summit touched on numerous issues ranging from education to health care to job development and the candidates differed greatly on many of them.

On early childhood education, Conway said he would try to find the money necessary to extend early childhood education programs to children whose parents earn up to 138 percent of the poverty level while Bevin questioned programs such as head start and said the state should focus on improving underperforming schools.

“Let’s start with our failing schools,” said Bevin, who has been critical of the federal Head Start program, which he said scientific studies show isn’t effective. “Let’s start in those communities where we now have multiple generations of academic failure.”

“You’re science is wrong,” said Conway, who said the program is effective in teaching children at an age when their brain is forming the connections that will help them learn.

Conway criticized Bevin’s stance on Common Core academic standards, saying that Common Core “is not a federal takeover of education.”

The standards were created by the National Governor’s Association and adopted by many states. Later, the federal government began tying federal funding to adoption of the standards.

Bevin questioned Conway’s portrayal of his position on Common Core, saying, “I don’t know who the people are who are saying it is a takeover by the federal government,” he said.

Bevin reiterated that on health care, he would get rid of the kynect health insurance marketplace where people can purchase coverage offered through the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, and move them to the federal health insurance exchange.

“We will shut down the duplicity because we don’t need to pay twice for the same thing,” Bevin said. “There is no financial advantage.”

Conway, however, argued that getting rid of kynect and moving people to the federal exchange would actually cost Kentuckians money because they would have to pay higher government fees. (The Kynect website, the state exchange requires people to pay fees equal to 1 percent of their premiums while the federal exchange charges a 3.5 percent fee.”

Bevin suggested that one really doesn’t know what the costs are.

“We’re saying 1 percent, but I’m telling you, I would like to see a true apples to apples comparison before we’re making an assumption about whether we’re really saving money,” he said.

On Medicaid, Bevin argued that he wouldn’t toss nearly 500,000 off the new expanded Medicaid rolls immediately once he took office, as Conway claimed he would.

Some 430,000 people have signed up for Medicaid in Kentucky since 2014, when Gov. Steve Beshear allowed people who earn up to 138 percent of the poverty level to qualify for it.

Reporter Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702. You can follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1SgzHTT