It’s silent. It’s deadly. And it’ll impact you and your family. Obamacare is coming (sooner than you may realize) and as pro-lifers, it’s imperative we be prepared.

The implementation begins as early as October with the funding for insurance plans that include elective abortion coverage. I don’t want you to be caught in the dark, which is why I felt it was necessary to re-visit this topic and provide you with important information relevant to your health insurance decisions.

The largest issue of contention is the abortion mandate. This is a secondary premium that’ll be on the majority of insurance plans and its sole purpose is to fund abortions. The reason this separate premium exists is because under the Hyde amendment, the government cannot directly provide funding for elective abortion services. This abortion surcharge will be collected by the insurance company, not the government, which is how Obamacare dodges the restrictions of the Hyde amendment.

What’s important to realize is the law dictates that the abortion surcharge is not disclosed until the time of enrollment. And even then, it can only be mentioned in the “Summary of Benefits and Coverage.” Essentially, it’s purposely hidden in the fine print. Your employer may not even know that their plan requires the abortion payment.

That leaves you as the employee without options; as you don’t have the choice to be exempt from the abortion premium. Research shows that in the current insurance market, most health insurance plans do provide coverage for abortion because it’s less costly than paying for prenatal care and delivery. Under Obamacare, insurance plans that participate in state exchanges will be eligible to receive federal subsidies. States exchange programs will be established to only sell those designed by the government. Therefore, insurance plans without the abortion surcharge may prove difficult to find and may not provide the desired level of overall medical coverage. Purchasing health insurance independently is cost prohibitive for most families. And because of the law’s requirement to acquire health insurance, those who choose not to carry it will face fines. The federal government will offer at least one states exchange insurance plan that doesn’t include elective abortion. Although pro-lifers will have to intentionally seek it out and it may not include other preferred health plan benefits.

There are 26 states that have “opted out” of abortion coverage for their state. However, this doesn’t provide pro-lifers with a complete safeguard. Even if you’re covered by a plan that does not include abortion, as a taxpayer, you’re still contributing to government subsidies that fund plans with abortion coverage.

In addition, there’s concern regarding the HHS “preventive services” mandate requiring full coverage of abortion-causing drugs under the guise of contraception. This applies to almost all employers and insurance plans. For failure to comply, employers would be penalized with outrageous fines—as much as $15,000 per employer per day and $2,000 per employee per year. It’s been met with pushback by companies such as Hobby Lobby who’ve filed suit in opposition of this mandate. It’s likely this fight will continue to the Supreme Court with the objective of finding the HHS Mandate unconstitutional.

This all sets a precedence that’s challenging for pro-life Americans to navigate. Yet, apparently the Obama administration already has a plan in place. When purchasing health insurance via exchanges, individuals will work with so-called “navigators” to help them find the best suited plan. None other than Planned Parenthood has been selected and paid over one-million dollars to hire these individuals. Please check out the link to find out what highly personal information Planned Parenthood people will have on you.

CLICK LIKE IF YOU’RE PRO-LIFE!

There are many more anti-life measures included within Obamacare. We outline them in our fact sheet, Why You Should Be Concerned About Obamacare. Essentially, this is a large entitlement program crafted to expand abortion coverage and eliminate any “choice” you have in the matter. Once fully implemented, it’s estimated that as many as 30-percent of employers are likely to stop offering insurance. Many have already begun to take action. This is an issue we must address now, before it’s too late.

LifeNews.com Note: Bradley Mattes is the executive director of Life Issues Institute, a national pro-life educational group. Mattes is a veteran of the pro-life cause, with over 33 years of educational, political and humanitarian experience.