BURNABY, Canada, March 2, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

Growing awareness about breastfeeding coupled with rising number of working women to drive United States breast pumps market through 2021

According to Pharmaion report, "United States Breast Pumps Market Opportunities, 2011 - 2021", the breast pumps market in the United States is projected to cross 3.6 million units by the end of 2021. A wide array of factors expected to influence the growth of breast pumps market in the US include implementation of Affordable Care Act (ACA) for breastfeeding supplies providing favorable reimbursement options, high proportion of working women and growing awareness about breast pumps. Moreover, government is also organizing various initiatives to increase the awareness level of citizens about the benefits of breast milk, which is expected to have a positive impact on the country's breast pumps market over the next five years.

In 2013, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), most babies in the US initiated their feed with breastfeeding, but within first week, half of them were given formula. Moreover, by nine months, only 31% of the babies received feed through breast milk, as reported by the CDC. Due to alarming rates of low breastfeeding in the country and benefits of breast milk over formula milk, Affordable Care Act, which provides the freedom to women to purchase breast pumps at less price or free of cost, was implemented. However, the breast pumps market in the US is facing various challenges such as declining fertility rate, side effects associated with breast pumps and easy availability of substitutes.

United States breast pumps market has been segmented into two broader categories, namely, manual breast pumps and electric breast pumps. Out of these categories, electric breast pumps dominated the overall breast pumps market in the US. The segment is anticipated to continue its dominance through 2021 on account of better efficiency to pump more amount of milk in less duration of time, improving economic stability of consumers to purchase expensive electric breast pumps, and availability of the option to pump milk from both the breasts at the same time through double electric breast pumps. In terms of end use, personal-use breast pumps were chosen by maximum consumers in the US in 2015, owing to availability of battery-operated breast pumps at affordable prices for personal use, which provides the freedom of portability and infection-free pumping.

"According to the CDC, low rates of breastfeeding in the US adds to USD2.2 billion a year to direct medical costs, as formula feeding and discontinuation of breastfeeding increases risk of asthma, obesity, infection, and diabetes in children. As a result, the US Government initiated a campaign named as 'Healthy People 2020', to improve health of all Americans. The campaign's maternal, infant and child objectives focus on improving maternal care and breastfeeding. Backed by all these factors, United States breast pumps market is expected to continue exhibiting promising growth over the next five years." said Mr. Karan Chechi, Research Director with Pharmaion Consultants, a research based global management consulting firm focused on pharma and healthcare industry.

"United States Breast Pumps Market Opportunities, 2011 - 2021" has analyzed the potential of breast pumps market in the United States and provides statistics and information on market sizes, shares and trends. The report intends to provide cutting-edge market intelligence and help decision makers take sound investment evaluation. Besides, the report also identifies and analyzes the emerging trends along with essential drivers and key challenges faced by the United States breast pumps market.

About Pharmaion:

Pharmaion is a research based management consulting firm focused exclusively on Healthcare & Pharmaceutical industry. Led by a team of dynamic industry experts, Pharmaion provides its customers with high value market research and advisory services that helps them identify new market opportunities, growth engines and innovative ways to capture the market share. As a result, Pharmaion's clients lead rather than follow market trends. Pharmaion has developed a proprietary database which focuses on identifying the unexplored opportunities in Healthcare and Pharmaceutical industry.

Media Contact:

Karan Chechi

Research Director

Contact Phone- +1 646 862 0089

Email- sales@pharmaion.com



SOURCE Pharmaion