Takes first in 1A boys 1,600 meter run

Prairie senior Zacc Winn takes a glance back to see his lead in the 1A boys 1,600 meter run at the 2015 State Track and Field Championships. Winn finished in 4:42.71 to take first place in his final high school event. (Brandon Boles / Fort Morgan Times)

LAKEWOOD — By now, many in the state of Colorado know about the bravery Prairie High School senior Zacc Winn shows every time he laces up his spikes to run on the track for the Mustangs. Battling Primary Sclerosing Cholangitis, a liver ailment that will one day lead to him needing a liver transplant, Winn has overcome the pain from competing and frequent hospital visits to tough it out and perform at a high level.

With a solid high school career in distance running and basketball, the senior would take to the track for one last time in his career on Saturday at the 2015 State Track and Field Championships at JeffCo Stadium in Lakewood to run in the 1A boys 1,600 meter run.

When the gun went off to start, Winn pushed to get out in the front of the pack early, then began to set his pace for the mile long race. For the first 400 meters, Winn ran mostly in third place, trailing Baca County and Pawnee, who both were pushing the pace early to hold the top two spots. Right at the mile marker, Winn passed the Baca runner, and then had his eyes set on the Pawnee runner for first place.

As the runners rounded the first turn in the second lap of the race, Winn continued to push, and he found himself getting ahead in the back straightaway to lead the pack. It was a spot Winn had become familiar with all season long, as he shined in the 1,600 meter run all season long for Prairie. When he rounded the third turn and hit the second straight to conclude his second lap, Winn continued to push the lead.

Advertisement

Two laps in, Winn worked his way to the top, and with two more laps to go, he looked to extend his lead and pull away for the win. On occasion, Winn would turn his head and look back at who was giving chase. The third lap saw Winn remain out in front, and his lead just a couple lengths ahead of second place as he passed the mile marker and the final lap bell was rung.

In the final lap of the race, that slim lead grew a little bit more, and that was all the motivation Winn needed to finish strong. He turned his pace up to another level, runner faster around the curves and in the straights, as his lead was increased to about three seconds ahead of the second place runner.

Winn headed into the final 100 meters, and the crowd began to cheer him on down the stretch. With his coach and teammates standing alongside the fence, Winn raised both his arms in the air, holding up a No. 1 with each of his hands, as he crossed the finish line at 4:42.71, and with all 11 other contenders behind him.

The emotion came out for Winn as he finished first in his final event of his high school career. He gave out a loud cheer and pumped his arms. For everything he had gone through with his health, and will continue to battle going forward even after being done competing in high school sports, it was all worth it, as he would go out on top with his patented smile shining for all to see.

As Winn lay down on the infield grass following the win to catch his breath, he was congratulated by the other runners in the field, and the cheers from his coaches and teammates were still heard on the west end of the stadium. Shortly after winning the race, Winn took to the medal podium, and he climbed the stairs to the top to stand in the winner's position, where he received his medal for winning the 1A boys 1,600 meter run. It was a place Winn had all ready became familiar with, as he finished seventh in the 1A boys 3,200 meter run on Thursday and eighth in the 1A boys 800 meter run on Friday.

There were plenty of big winners at the 2015 State Track and Field Championships, with some setting new meet and Colorado records, or some winning multiple events. But perhaps no win was more motivational than that of Winn's, proving that no matter the circumstances, you can continue to push through to the end, and even find your way to the top.

Brandon Boles: 970-867-5651, sports@fmtimes.com or twitter.com/FMT_Sports