The perfect Valentine’s Day gift, according to the vice president: government-mandated health insurance.

On Friday, Vice President Joe Biden appeared in a YouTube video posted by the Gregory Brothers, parody song makers who have auto-tuned Biden many times in the past.

In the video, Biden opens with a plug for Valentine’s Day, grinning throughout the video’s opening joke.

What follows is a “songify”-ed viral video about a little boy’s first kiss — but wait, there’s more!

“Your health and well-being is the best gift you can give your parents or anyone else who loves you out there, so go check out HealthCare.gov, and pick a plan that’s best fit for you,” Biden tells one of the brothers Gregory at the end of the video. “I think you’re going to find that it’s more affordable than your cell phone bill.”

He closes with, “Kablooie.”

Watch the video below:

On YouTube, many commenters expressed dismay that the Gregory Brother, who frequently create videos based on political debates and other news events, had basically endorsed government health insurance.

“Would prefer to see you guys stay politically neutral,” one commenter wrote, while another quipped, “Was great until the healthcare.gov ad.”

A third commenter wrote:

Wow, whore yourself out to obamacare more…I love how much of the taxpayer’s money is being wasted on the massive amount of advertising for this incredibly disappointing misappropriation of our money. Seriously, did they take into account how much they were going to have to spend on advertising when they budgeted this out?

The brothers claimed, however, that they weren’t paid to promote government-mandated health insurance — and that the plug with Biden wasn’t really political.

“$0 was spent on this video…so have no fear, no one’s taking your hard-earned cash money,” the Gregory Brothers claimed. “[I]t’s one thing to not be into politics, but i don’t think reminding people it’s good to get insurance is politically charged.”

Want to see an example of Biden getting the Gregory Brothers’ auto-tune treatment? Watch the “Songify the News” clip below:

(H/T: Mediaite)

—

Follow Zach Noble (@thezachnoble) on Twitter