In this file photo, the Haiyang Shiyou oil rig 981 is pictured in the South China Sea. Associated Press

China is moving a drilling rig out of South China Sea waters claimed by both China and Vietnam, easing a two-month standoff that sparked deadly riots in Vietnam and tense encounters between Chinese and Vietnamese vessels.

The move could provide an opening for Beijing and Hanoi to repair relations and comes as the U.S. steps up criticism of China’s efforts to enforce its claims to the strategically important sea. But China’s government said its companies still had the right to explore the contested waters, raising the possibility that tensions could flare again.

China Oilfield Services, a unit of state-owned China National Offshore Oil Corp., said its deep-water HYSY 981 drilling rig had completed exploration and drilling operations off Triton Island, or Zhongjian Island in Chinese. The island is part of the Paracel Islands chain, which is claimed by both China and Vietnam.

A Vietnam coast guard official confirmed that the oil rig began moving on Tuesday night local time. Rear Adm. Ngo Ngoc Thu, vice commander of the Vietnam coast guard, said the Chinese vessels that had been accompanying the rig were also moving. He said Vietnam was keeping its vessels at the site and watching the oil rig’s movement.

Chinese officials had previously said the rig’s work would be completed by August. A spokeswoman for China Oilfield Services, or COSL, confirmed drilling work had been completed ahead of schedule and said the rig’s new intended location, near China’s southern island of Hainan, isn’t in an area of dispute with other nations.

China’s Foreign Ministry said on Wednesday that Chinese companies were within their rights to undertake work around the Paracel Islands. It said it opposed interference by Vietnam and had taken “necessary measures to safeguard the safety of operations” by COSL.

Tran Cong Truc, former chief of the Vietnamese government’s border committee, said Vietnam would remain vigilant. “China’s South China Sea policy is aggressive, so the withdrawal of the oil rig is only a tactic, a responsive measure they need to take right now.”

Vietnam’s foreign ministry spokesman, Le Hai Binh, said his country was determined to protect its sovereignty and demanded that China not move the oil rig back to “parts of Vietnamese waters stipulated by the U.N. Convention on the Law of the Sea.”

Vietnam protested Chinese drilling in the area after it began in early May and had sent coast-guard vessels to confront the rig. Dozens of Chinese and Vietnamese maritime vessels had amassed near the disputed rig, with each side claiming its ships had been violently rammed by the other’s.

Visit wsj.com to read the full story.