Tigard-Tualatin School District stands to get more money from state for an intervention training program, is looking at its options under the federal health law and has its hands free of the old Tualatin Elementary School property.





That's the quick take-away from the Monday Nov. 18 school board meeting. Here's more detail:





Affordable Care Act

Unlike other school districts across the U.S. , Tigard-Tualatin School District is at a lower risk for hefty penalties under the new federal health law , Chief Financial Officer David Moore told the school board. Starting in 2015, employers with 50 or more full-time employees (or equivalent) face penalties if they fail to offer affordable health insurance.





Most Tigard-Tualatin union employees do receive health insurance, but the district needs to pay closer attention to substitute teachers and part-time employees who also coach. That's because they may be averaging the 30 hours a week or 130 hours a month that equates to full-time work under IRS regulations.



Realistically, only about a dozen employees who don't already have health insurance may qualify for insurance next year.





"We are very lucky right now," said Fabienne Fitzwater, the district payroll and benefits manager.





She and Moore said the district may end up paying health insurance for substitute teachers when they work part-time work if they worked close to full-time the previous year. The district plans to convene a health care committee made up of employees to recommend what to do about health insurance in early 2014.





Education Service District

After Beaverton and Hillsboro schools pulled more than $12 million from the Northwest Regional Educational Service District in October, Tigard-Tualatin plans to stick with the service provider. The Educational Service District helps districts pool money to share services such as special education, technology programs and teacher training.





Rick Wahlstrom, the educational service district's chief technology officer, said they will be reducing a video streaming program and shifting around other services.





House Bill 3401 , which passed this year, allowed some districts to take money instead of services from educational service districts. Tigard-Tualatin spokeswoman Susan Stark Haydon said the district found its still cost-effective to go with the education service district, especially for student and special education record-keeping and the grading system Synergy





Board director Jill Zurschmeide asked if the educational service district can work for the smaller districts without money from bigger districts.





"It's hard to say," responded Wahlstrom. "I don’t know yet at this point."

Old Tualatin Elementary

After more than six years on the market, the school board approved selling the rest of the old Tualatin Elementary school property for $1,286,500. The parcel of land is about 5 acres. The buyer Tualatin LTC Properties II, LLC , a real estate holding company. The rest of the 12 acre property was sold to Marquis Companies , who is developing an assisted living facility.





State contract

For years, Tigard-Tualatin schools has been training other school districts about a program to help struggling students called Response to Intervention . Under a revised contract with the state, the district can receive up to $1 million more for helping train as many as 15 other school districts. The program involves early and frequent interventions for students falling behind in academics, and is designed to avoid prematurely placing students in special education tracks.





Tigard-Tualatin was one of two school districts to pilot the program and helped the University of Oregon develop it





--Fenit Nirappil: 503-294-4029