Coach Gary Kubiak had hinted for a while now that this would come. It’s a plan, he said, that has been in the works all along, even though it still isn’t reflected on the Broncos’ most recent depth chart.

DEPTH CHART: Position-by-position rankings of Broncos players

Emmanuel Sanders will be used on punt returns, he reiterated Saturday, after the team trimmed its roster to the mandated 53 players.

“We obviously think he can,” Kubiak said. “I think Omar (Bolden) has done a good job. He’s missed some time with some nicks and stuff, but that’s been part of the plan all along. Emmanuel has been working with (special teams coach) Joe (DeCamillis). Even with the time missed, he’s still been able to go out there and continue to catch. Any way we can get him touches, and this will definitely help.”

2015 BRONCOS ROSTER: Full list of 53 Broncos players ahead of season opener

Bolden fielded three of the team’s seven punt returns in the preseason. The Broncos averaged 1.7 yards per return in the four games.

Sanders had one punt return for 11 yards last season, and from 2010-12 with Pittsburgh, he returned 16 punts for an average of 10.9 yards apiece.

Broncos 2015 depth chart shifts

Shortly after announcing the cuts, the Broncos released their latest depth chart, which included some notable changes.

Montee Ball, who entered training camp as their No. 2 running back, fell to No. 4, behind C.J. Anderson, Ronnie Hillman and Juwan Thompson.

RELATED: Montee Ball keeps job, but falls to No. 4 at RB on depth chart

Ball gained only 68 yards on 32 carries in the preseason.

“Montee is a good football player,” Kubiak said. “He earned the right to be on the 53.”

On the other side of the ball, Antonio Smith moved ahead of Vance Walker at left defensive end for the Sept. 13 opener against Baltimore. Derek Wolfe, the usual starter, is on the suspended/reserve list for the first four games while he serves his ban for a drug violation.

Strong safety T.J. Ward will also miss the opener because of a one-game suspension. David Bruton is slated to start in his place against Baltimore.

Ben Garland a tough cut to make

Ben Garland, a 2010 undrafted free agent and Air Force alum, was one of the more difficult cuts to make, Elway said.

RELATED: Dreams live on, others die as Broncos cut down to 53 players

“He’s the kind of guy that you’d like to have your daughter marry, so anytime you let a guy like that go, it’s tough,” Elway said. “Unfortunately there weren’t enough spots, but I think that Ben will be one of those guys that is going to get an opportunity.”



Nicki Jhabvala, The Denver Post