Republicans confidently forge ahead on their relentless pursuit to alienate all women.

A communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee called Kentucky Democratic Senate challenger Alison Grimes an “empty dress” who babbles incoherently, according to Alexandra Jaffe at the Hill.

Brad Dayspring, communications director for the National Republican Senatorial Campaign Committee, derisively called Lundergan Grimes “an empty dress.” “Alison Lundergan Grimes seems incapable of articulating her own thoughts, and faced with questions, either directly parrots the talking points handed to her by [Sen.] Chuck Schumer or she babbles incoherently and stares blankly into the camera as though she’s a freshman in high school struggling to remember the CliffsNotes after forgetting to read her homework assignment,” Dayspring told The Hill.

If you’re wondering why Republicans would slip up and reveal their true feelings about women, maybe it’s the pressure. In an August 3rd poll, Grimes led incumbent Republican Mitch McConnell by 15 points among people who know both candidates. The conclusion was “To know Grimes is to like her.”

That suggested that McConnell had a likeability problem, which he is solving Republican style; instead of being more likeable, he’s smearing his opponent. It’s a race of negatives with the GOP.

Who can forget Grimes coming after McConnell at an August 3rd event:

Alison Grimes began by talking about her long name and then said with your help Kentucky in January 2015 you can call me senator. Grimes said that she didn’t have to apologize for having more government experience than Rand Paul. She took a shot at Paul by pointing out that he wasn’t in Kentucky, he was spending his weekend with his loved ones, the tea party in Iowa. Grimes slammed McConnell for trying to gut Medicare. She said,”If the doctors told Sen. McConnell he had a kidney stone, he would refuse to pass it.” She hammered McConnell for being the most unpopular senator among both Democrats and Republicans. Grimes said that McConnell is disliked by the voters in Kentucky and in the United States. She said McConnell is at the center of the DC dysfunction. The Democrat said after years of McConnell’s leadership the GOP stands for Gridlock Obstruction and Partisanship. She told McConnell to stop. She called out his empty rhetoric on defending Kentucky coal. She called McConnell on his votes against the Violence Against Women Act, and the Fair Pay Act.

It’s true that Grimes has dodged questions on the issues — especially the issues that Southern Democrats are warned to stay away from like ObamaCare (I’m not agreeing with this, but this is the prevailing wisdom in the South due to entrenched Fox News talking points), but so has McConnell.

McConnell has made a living of dodging issues. McConnell is the person standing in front of the press on a daily basis and blaming Obama for pretty much everything in the world, including his own consistent obstructionism. Mitch McConnell is the babbler, really, if anyone in this scenario is a babbler. He rarely makes much sense, he opens his mouth and commences whinging in that annoying, smug way that certain Southern Republicans invented.

But even if Grimes hasn’t answered the questions, it’s not because she can’t. She’s a business attorney and the current Secretary of State. She’s a smart woman, not that being smart is a requirement of serving in Congress (see the House of Representatives).

Republicans attacked Grimes as being stupid because that is what you do to powerful women. It’s like labeling a black person angry. Women are babbling idiots in a dress who don’t know anything.

This from the party who ran Sarah Palin as a Vice President and called asking her what she READ “sexist”. Remember when Sarah Palin told the press she thought the First Amendment meant that they couldn’t criticize her, as a Vice Presidential candidate? Babble on, GOP.