Protesters chant last Monday outside South Division High School. The group Youth Empowered in the Struggle organized the protest against a proposal in the state Legislature to turn over struggling Milwaukee public schools to the authority of the Milwaukee County executive. Credit: Katie Klann

In 1999, the often-prescient Onion satirical newspaper ran a story with the headline, "Nation's Schoolchildren Call For Cuts In Math, Science Funding." It featured a picture of two elementary school-aged children holding a news conference, demanding less instruction and more field trips.

"How much longer will we as a nation continue to prioritize the teaching of things like algebra and biology?" said the fictional 11-year-old Douglas Witherspoon.

It's not nearly as funny, however, when real-world students demand a substandard education. Last week, students from South Division High School walked out of class to protest a legislative plan that would allow private school operators to take over five of the worst-performing schools in Milwaukee Public Schools. The protest combined two of teenagers' favorite things — demonstrating unearned self-righteousness and getting a day off school.

In opposing the Opportunity Schools and Partnership Program, the South Division students were sticking up for a status quo in which a scant 10.8% of them tested "proficient" or above in reading last year. If Gov. Scott Walker's budget cuts had forced the school to eliminate the use of verbs, the reading scores could hardly be worse.

Of course, the Milwaukee Teachers Education Association would have us believe that the student walkout was a spontaneous demonstration — as if students at a school where 4.3% of students are proficient in math are intimately attuned to the arcane school finance details passed by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee. Perhaps it was just coincidence that the kids just happened to be carrying around the same union signs that have popped up at other recent demonstrations around the city.

And the details of the OSPP plan are important. Under the proposal, the Milwaukee County executive would pick a commissioner to oversee the takeover of the city's five worst-performing schools. Control of those schools would be transferred to current operators of either high-performing private schools or certain types of charter schools. The new operators would put in place systems that have proved effective in their existing schools.

But the teachers union likely didn't tell their students that school takeovers can be avoided entirely under another provision of the plan. Every empty school building that MPS sells to a qualified "education operator" would count toward the limit of five; according to one report, there currently are 17 MPS school buildings sitting vacant. Perhaps the South Division students should have been holding signs that said "Sell Our Empty Schools."

And in the event of an existing school takeover, good teachers still would be given the opportunity to stay at the school. They would, however, have to work by the new rules handed down by the new principal; perhaps the school year would be extended, or they would have to work later in the day, or be required to host an extracurricular club. If a teacher decides to choose his or her work schedule over what can best help students, that is the teacher's decision alone.

The teachers plausibly would argue that other factors, such as poverty, affect the educational climate at South Division. Yet in reading, students designated "economically disadvantaged" actually outperform those not economically disadvantaged. Last year, only 62.5% of the poor kids fell into the lowest reading category, while 83.3% of the nonpoor kids were deemed "minimal" readers.

And it's these low-income minority kids who would have a better chance under the takeover proposal. The framework is inspired by programs in Tennessee and Louisiana that have shown drastic improvement in impoverished areas, and yet the teachers union sends these same kids out as human shields to protect their jobs. If the Onion's fictional Douglas Witherspoon were now 27 and teaching at a Milwaukee public school, it seems his position may not have changed.

Sending schoolkids out to defend a school that's failing them is like when a cartoon pig serves as a barbecue restaurant's mascot — the poor little guy doesn't realize he's the one actually on the menu. For using children to promote trapping those same kids in a failing school, it's the adults who are both juvenile and delinquent.

Christian Schneider is a Journal Sentinel columnist and blogger. Email cschneider@jrn.com. Twitter: @Schneider_CM