Voters in the 31st Congressional District don’t need the presidential race to find Republican candidates attacking each other.

Sean Flynn’s campaign this week unveiled a TV ad that depicts fellow Republicans Paul Chabot and Joe Baca and Democratic incumbent Pete Aguilar as cardboard dummies.

“Congress is full of ‘em: dummy politicians who don’t have a clue,” an announcer says. “Time for an outsider who can fix it, Republican Sean Flynn. Sean Flynn’s no dummy … but he did write Economics for Dummies.”

“The Flynn plan? Streamline and balance the budget, replace Obamacare, cut regulations to create more high paying jobs … now that's smart. Republican Sean Flynn -- because we can't afford more dummies in D.C.”

The Flynn camp sent out a press release about the 30-second ad. Minutes later, Chabot fired back with his own press release accusing Flynn of mud-slinging and donating to “Democrat politicians who bankroll President Obama and his liberal policies.”

“Desperate times call for desperate measures,” said Chabot campaign strategist John Thomas. “Sean Flynn must think voters are dummies if he expects them to buy what he's selling.”

“The truth is Flynn has zero experience fighting crime and terrorism. While Sean was sharpening pencils in the safety of an ivory tower classroom, Paul served in Iraq as a counter-terrorism military officer fighting terrorists, and returned home to fight criminals here in our communities.”

Baca, Chabot and Flynn are trying to unseat Aguilar, a former Redlands mayor, in the 31st, which includes Redlands, Rancho Cucamonga, Rialto, Loma Linda and Grand Terrace. The top two vote-getters in the June 7 primary, regardless of party, advance to the November general election.

Besides sparring over TV ads, Chabot and Flynn are fighting over endorsements. Flynn’s supporters include the Inland Empire Taxpayers Association, Rep. Dana Rohrabacher and Orange County Supervisor Michelle Steel.

Chabot is trumpeting his endorsement of the San Bernardino County GOP, as well as the backing of former UN ambassador John Bolton and Inland Reps. Ken Calvert and Duncan Hunter, among others.

While Flynn has been touting his background in economics, Chabot has been selling himself as a man with a plan to defeat the Islamic State. Chabot has been handing out terrorist “hunting permits” to supporters.