Habitat for Humanity Board President Edie Blankenship, from left, Lindsey, Aubrey and Brandon Witz perform a ground breaking ceremony Saturday in the 200 block of Indian Hills Road in Florence. ( Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record )

Habitat for Humanity founding board members Paul and Thelma Widger, from left, stand with the selected family, Lindsey, Aubrey and Brandon Witz during a reception Saturday after the ground breaking of their new home. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

Florence— All has changed for Penrose residents Brandon and Lindsey Witz, along with their 17-month-old daughter, Aubrey, when they were selected as the family for a new home by Habitat for Humanity of Fremont County.

Saturday, they took the first steps when they broke ground in the 200 block of Indian Hills Road in Florence to begin building their own home.

"We're extremely happy about it," Brandon said. "We're very excited."

Lindsey agreed.

"This is our first home," Lindsey said. "Our daughter will have a good yard to run around and play in."

Lindsey currently is a stay-at-home mother and Brandon works for the state. They were married four years ago.

They will start their share of the project after crews dig the foundation this week. From there, the couple will help with the framing of the 1,300 square foot three bedroom and two bathroom house the following week.

"We're going to help with the whole (house)," Brandon said.

He said, as part of the deal, they have to put in 500 hours of sweat equity. They will continue helping with every aspect of the house until the final inspection, which is currently projected to be June 30, weather permitting.

During a reception afterward on Saturday, at the Florence Senior Center, Habitat for Humanity Board President Edie Blankenship welcomed everyone to the facility.

Advertisement

"Without a lot of generous people, we wouldn't be this far, this fast," she said.

Blankenship recognized several organizations and individuals for their generous donations.

Habitat for Humanity began in 1998 when several people organized a steering committee.

"We were affiliated in January 2000," said Kaye Widger, whose parents Paul and Thelma Widger were part of the original board.

Thelma said they had built playhouses and gazebos to make money to build the first house. In addition, the organization hosted gourmet samplers to help raise funds.

"We had lots of help," she said. "We had help from the federal prison, Loaders and the Presbyterian Church that supplied us with an office for several years before we got the new building. There were other people, too. This was a Penrose operation. All the original people were from Penrose."

For more information, call Habitat for Humanity at 275-7781.