There is an increasing appetite for companies in China that offer imported foods after the latest food scare involving expired meat supplied to big-name restaurants including McDonald’s

A pedestrian walks past an advertisement for McDonald’s Corp. in the Futian district of Shenzhen, China, on Monday, Aug. 4, 2014. McDonald’s Corp. is working to resume sales beef and chicken in China this week after a supplier was accused of repackaging old meat. Bloomberg News

A craving for imported food bodes well for Chinese online food retailer Womai.com, which has just raised a $100 million Series B round from lead investor IDG Capital Partners, alongside SAIF Partners.

SAIF previously invested in an undisclosed Series A round for Womai.com two years ago.

Beijing-based Womai.com plans to use some of the new funding to import more food from outside of the mainland, and will leverage its relationship with its parent company Cofco Corp., a state-owned enterprise that is well known for importing grains and other products, said IDG Founding General Partner Hugo Shong.

Cofco remains a majority shareholder in Womai.com, which also sells domestically produced food from fruit and vegetables, as well as cooking utensils and beverages including wine. However, the nod toward more imported food will cater to an increasing number of Chinese consumers cautious about homegrown food and general food safety in the country.

There has been a recent growing list of food scares in China. Last month, a local Chinese television report from Dragon TV showed Shanghai Husi Food Co Ltd., which is part of OSI Group LLC, a U.S. food supplier to brands including McDonald’s, repackaging and altering the sell by date on meat.

China has since ordered spot-checks on companies that have been supplied meat by the U.S.-owned Chinese supplier.

This comes after an incident earlier this year when the Chinese branch of Wal-Mart superstores had to recall donkey meat products, which is a delicacy in some parts of the country, after fox DNA was found in some of it. Before this, the government was forced to crack down on baby milk suppliers after toxic chemicals were found in infant formula.

For Womai.com, this is a potentially an opportune time to garner more customers seeking safer food products. It currently has around 1.5 million users, and according to Mr. Shong is near break-even. The $100 million Series B round will likely last the company for up to two years. After that it may either tap investors for more money or consider exit options including an initial public offering.

For IDG, it invested in Womai.com from its $750 million IDG Accel Fund II, which targets later-stage deals. The Beijing-based firm recently closed a $586 million IDG China Venture CapitalFund IV in June, for early stage technology, media and telecom investments in China.

Meanwhile, Womai.com’s parent Cofco is no stranger to the private equity world. In June, unit Cofco Meat, an integrated pork company which focuses on providing safe meat products to Chinese consumers, and a group of fund managers comprising KKR & Co., Baring Private Equity Asia, Hopu and Boyu Capital struck up a strategic partnership.

The consortium will invest in Cofco Meat alongside existing shareholders to build and manage large-scale industrialized hog farms and meat processing plants in China.

Write to Sonja Cheung at sonja.cheung@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @sonjacheung