The turmoil gripping the health care industry may soon deliver a juicy payoff for Huron Consulting Group, with analysts predicting growth exceeding 8 percent should the firm succeed in winning some bigger-than-usual projects.

Year-over-year revenue fell for two successive quarters at the publicly held Chicago company known for its expertise in health care and education consulting, dropping to $187.9 million in the first quarter from $210.7 million in 2014.

But in an April conference call with analysts, CEO Jim Roth said the company had started one project in February and was pursuing two others that each were “significantly larger” than the firm's traditional job yielding $8 million to $10 million in fees. The size of the jobs has grown because health care clients are facing dramatic changes to their business model and the projects involve “more than one hospital . . . in some cases substantially more.”

“I am not going to say that megaprojects are going to become the norm,” he said. “But I do think that we are going to see larger projects evolve.”

That has some analysts estimating organic growth for the company's health care segment at 8 to 9 percent in 2016. Others peg organic growth for the entire company at 8 to 12 percent. That's very good, says Tobey Sommer, an analyst at SunTrust Robinson Humphrey. “If it comes true.”

A spokeswoman for Huron declines to comment, citing the quiet period in advance of an earnings release on July 28. The company's stock closed at $68.95 on July 24, about midway between its highest and lowest prices for the year.

Health care is the dominant pillar of Huron's four business segments, bringing in just over half of 2014 revenue, compared with 23 percent from legal, the second-largest segment. Education and life sciences revenue made up 18 percent of the total and business advisory, 8 percent.

Since the 2010 passage of the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare, the health care industry has been trying to adjust to a business model that rewards hospitals and health systems for keeping patients healthy, rather than a fee-for-service model where providers rack up payments by providing more treatments.

The change has led to mergers as providers seek to reduce costs through economies of scale. In 2009, there were 50 hospital mergers in the United States; six years later that number doubled. The number of megamergers has grown, too. There were two deals of over $1 billion in 2010, compared with nine in 2014.

That's been good for Huron, which fought back from a near-death experience in 2009 triggered by a multiyear earnings restatement. Revenue in the company's health care segment grew 61 percent from the second quarter of 2012 to $100.9 million for the same period two years later. In a June report, William Blair analyst Timothy McHugh writes that although organic revenue for the first quarter of 2015 declined 27 percent from a year earlier, “the issues driving the near-term slowdown . . . are actually positive for demand during the next few years,” a sign the company is ramping up for bigger things.

“We believe that the increasing number of 'megamergers' at not-for-profit hospitals could be creating opportunities for Huron,” McHugh writes. “Even one or two engagements of this size could be meaningful for the company.”

The large projects Roth mentioned likely are geared toward aligning hospitals' operations post-merger and realizing anticipated revenue gains and cost savings, McHugh writes. The work could last up to twice as long, and Huron's fees could balloon to $40 million to $80 million per engagement. “Each of these projects could add 5 to 10 percent to annual revenue to the health care segment.”

Huron competes against firms such as Chicago-based Navigant Consulting, FTI Consulting in Washington, D.C., Deloitte and McKinsey in certain areas, analyst Sommer says. Some rivals have told him they can't compete for the largest projects—which backs up Roth's remarks in April that Huron is well-positioned to win these projects and others involving complex health systems and academic medical centers. The company had close to 1,100 health care consultants at the end of 2014 compared with less than 450 at Navigant, or at FTI, which has no stand-alone health care division.

“That's what makes it real,” Sommer says. “When someone who's got skin in the game says, 'We can't go over there.' “

The Chicago company has the resources to tackle a larger project as soon as clients give it the green light, Sommer says. Still, the process of drawing the projects Roth has mentioned into the company's pipeline of work “hasn't been linear or all that pretty.”

Sommer says he also expects growth in Huron's education segment, though it makes up a smaller part of the total business. The education industry is hitting “a tipping point” where revenue gains no longer will come easily, while tenure for faculty makes cost-cutting difficult. That creates demand for Huron's services, and he writes in an April report that the education segment was “a star” in the first quarter with 19 percent organic growth.

The company has appeared poised for growth before, though. In June 2012, Roth promised to add 400 to 600 full-time jobs over three years at the firm's Chicago headquarters, which then had 800 employees. At the close of 2014, there were about 850.