As youngest son leaves for college, most important job recedes

mother and son holding hands (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

Two months ago, I was sitting on a vinyl-covered chair in the emergency room of St. Elizabeth Hospital with my 18-year-old son, who was holding his hands in front of him, waiting. The nurse assisting us, whose name I noticed but have long since forgotten, had her back turned to us.

Fingers over the keyboard of her computer she asked, “Do you feel safe? Is anyone harming or threatening you?”

My son, staring straight ahead, said, “Yes, I feel safe.”

I quickly turned my head toward the door so he wouldn’t see my eyes filling with tears. Why, I thought, was I beginning to cry at my son’s honest answer to this nurse’s question?

I held my fingers tightly to my eyes to stop the tears from flowing. What I wanted to do in that moment was throw my arms around this boy/man who I realized, in that moment, did not need his mom in the room with him. Instead, I turned back and smiled at the complete sentence my normally terse son had just spoken.

How many times had my husband and I sat in emergency rooms and doctor’s offices with our boys over 23 years? Deciding whether bloodied cuts needed stitches or bruised faces needed X-rays or high fevers needed doctors while we frantically paced sterile hallways, waiting for answers.

Breast or bottle? Public or private? Soccer or T-ball? This friend or that friend? These decisions that once seemed never-ending and all-consuming, even on the best sunny day in June, are now just a fading echo of “Mom, I got this!” as my last runs out the door, gets in his car and closes the garage door behind him.

And now that I have stored leftover graduation announcements and packed up old copy-paper boxes with sets of extra-long sheets and beige towels that we have stacked, one on top of another in the back of our Honda, before driving Son No. 2 off to college, I realize that the days of solving problems and making decisions for my boys have all but run out.

When I made the decision to stay home with my boys decades ago, it wasn’t out of some selfless tug to be mother of the year. My husband and I didn’t sit down and weigh dollars to time and decide where each should be spent. I wish that was the way the story went. But it wasn’t.

I stayed home because I wasn’t employed. This best job, hardest job, job for which no one asks to see your sorely underqualified resume, hired because I became pregnant. And now that my last is hastily packed up and ready to go — because that’s what happens when you give birth to a baby, love a child and raise him to adult, he goes — I am worked out of a job I never had training to perform, becoming my best as day wore onto dusk.

The sun is still shining when we leave the ER and Son No. 2’s hands have been cared for and bandaged. I open the passenger-side door for him and stop as I become keenly aware that most of the problems my sons have now cannot be solved by me. I’m now the mother of two grown sons: advocate, observer, never-ending keeper of their hearts, on a journey over much too soon for me, and only just beginning for them.

It’s the slow changes in life that evolve as one month turns into another that cease to make a difference in the pattern of a day, until suddenly, spring’s green leaves turn to fall’s amber gold’s and become piles of memories, packed into scrapbooks, stacked onto shelves and built into the walls of our lives.

One decision at a time, a parent goes from guardian of a life, to consultant when needed, slowly letting go of what was once held onto so tightly.

— Linda Hupf is a Neenah resident. She can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1oFZ1nb