Trace Elliott scores four points in four seconds to take 3rd, earns Rams' highest finish

Merino assistant wrestling coach John Barber (left) hugs senior Trace Elliott after Elliott won the Class 2A 220-pound third-place match during Saturday's final day of the CHSAA Colorado State Wrestling Championships inside the Pepsi Center in Denver. ( David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

»

Just seconds after Saturday's Class 2A 220-pound third-place match between Merino senior Trace Elliott and North Park's Adrian Cereceres, Merino wrestling assistant coach John Barber quipped "I've gotta retire" as he exhaled.

Barber, almost as mentally and emotionally exhausted as Elliott, then strolled over to hug his senior, congratulating Elliott on one of the more unusual, and exciting ends to a match seen inside the Pepsi Center in Denver during the final day of the CHSAA Colorado State Wrestling Championships.

Trailing 7-4 with four seconds remaining in the period, Elliott surprised Cereceres with a quick takedown, and tallied two back points, to steal an 8-7 decision victory.

"I was thinking 'I have to throw this kid or I don't have a chance,'" said Elliott, still trying to catch his breath and comprehend his accomplishment in the tunnel of the Pepsi Center. "I just grabbed him. I tried to get him in a headlock but it didn't work, so I grabbed underhook, tripped his back leg, and I finally got him to the ground and I knew he wasn't getting back up after that."

Elliott's win over Cereceres gave him the highest finish of the three Rams' placers — Trevor Elliott (106) placed fourth and Nick Vollmer (160) earned sixth — and provided a memorable ride into the sunset for the senior.

Advertisement

"It was a great finish to win third — a big third-place finish — a great accomplishment, and a perfect way for a senior to end his career," said Merino head wrestling coach Nathan Schmidt of Trace's match.

The win also provided a little poetic justice to end the day for the Elliott family after Trace's younger brother, sophomore Trevor Elliott, lost a heartbreaker in ultimate tiebreaker (2-1) in his third-place match against Brandon Ward from Dolores Huerta.

Merino senior Nick Vollmer wrestles Wade Kazdorn, Hotchkiss, during the Class 2A 160-pound consolation semifinals on Saturday inside the Pepsi Center in Denver. Vollmer fell by a 5-3 decision and finished sixth overall. (David Wilson / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Each wrestler scored an escape in the match, with Elliott scoring his point first, which gave him the option to take top or bottom during the ultimate tiebreaker.

Unfortunately for Trevor, who chose bottom, he couldn't break Ward's hold during the 30-second period and had to settle for fourth in his first trip to the state tournament, which is made more impressive by the fact Elliott lost his first round match on Thursday before rattling off four straight wins in the consolation bracket.

"In his first match (of the tournament), (Trevor) came out a little lax, little green in his time at state. But he did a nice job battling all the way back to get into the third-fourth place match," Schmidt said. "He lost a tough ultimate tiebreaker match, but he wrestled very well. It's something for him to be proud about."

Vollmer, a senior ranked No. 5 in Class 2A at 160-pounds coming into the tournament, also had to stomach a tough loss to end his tournament as he fell by a 3-1 overtime decision in his fifth-place match — all five of Vollmer's matches in the tournament were decided by two points or less — against Rocky Ford's Carlos Magdaleno.

"That's how it was for him," said Schmidt, referring to the close finishes for Vollmer. "I think the most he lost by was two points the entire tournament. He went into a couple of different overtimes, so it was just a few points here or there. He wrestled really well up here at state."

Schmidt added he was proud of Vollmer, Trace Elliott, and his two other seniors in Marcelino Baptista (132), who was one win shy of back-to-back years of placing at state, and Jaxson Hastings for the leadership they provided this season.

Their leadership may be most evident in the growth of the three underclassmen the Rams qualified for state this season: Trevor Elliott, Remington Canfield (126) and Zhaylon Buckner (182), who, after winning just five regular season matches, won five postseason matches between the Class 2A Region 3 Tournament and the state tournament.

"They are fun to watch. They are a fun bunch of kids. And they have fun out there wrestling, which is what this is all about," said Schmidt about his three underclassmen. "Being able to go to regional tournament and doing as well as that they did, then come to state and all three win at least one match, it was fun to see. Now they're all fat and happy, and hopefully thinking a little bit about next year."

Notes: Merino finished 12th in the team standings with 47 points.

David Wilson: 970-526-9285, dwilson@journal-advocate.com