SAN FRANCISCO, June 9, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- EPIC Insurance Brokers and Consultants, a retail property, casualty and employee benefits insurance brokerage and consultant, announced today the additions of Employee Benefits Consulting professionals Davin Millholland and Rosemary Hughes to its rapidly growing Employer Services Platform (ESP).

Millholland joins EPIC in its Southeast Region (based in Duluth, Ga.) as ESP's Chief Actuary, responsible for assisting clients and EPIC service teams with health and welfare plan design, actuarial analysis, cost analysis and budget setting and other complex employee benefit financial decisions.

Hughes joins EPIC as a principal and senior consultant, responsible for Employee Benefits consulting and new business development. Hughes will focus on continuing to build EPIC's Employee Benefits Consulting operations in the Northeast and will divide her time between EPIC's offices in Stamford, Conn. and New York City. She will work closely with Steve Levene, Managing Principal of EPIC Risk Solutions, an experienced team of large account/complex property & casualty risk specialists, who are also based in Stamford.

Ranked #5 among the fastest growing large group benefits consultants in the U.S. by Employee Benefit Advisor, EPIC has experienced rapid growth since launching its national Employers Services Platform in 2012 in response to the Affordable Care Act and national healthcare reform. Since then the company has invested heavily in its consulting operations around the country with key hires in major regions to expand the expertise and services EPIC offers to employers nationwide.

"As EPIC continues to grow, we knew our clients would appreciate and value enhanced actuarial services and support, as well as world class Employee Benefits consulting capabilities in the Northeast," stated Chris Duncan, EPIC's Chief Growth Officer and National Employee Benefits Leader. In both Davin and Rosemary, we found top professionals whose beliefs, values and strong client focus match well with our own and further strengthen our offerings."

Prior to joining EPIC, Millholland spent more than 10 years with Mercer Health & Benefits in the Greater Atlanta Area, where he was a senior associate and healthcare actuarial analyst. Millholland attended Berry College in Mount Berry, Ga., where he earned a Bachelor of Science Degree in Mathematics. He then obtained a Master's Degree in Actuarial Science from Georgia State University - J. Mack Robinson College of Business. Professionally he is a Certified Associate of the Society of Actuaries.

Hughes was most recently the Director of Benefits for Avis Budget Group based in New Jersey, where she was responsible for benefit and wellness programs in the U.S., Canada, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. In addition, Hughes previously served a wide range of clients as a health and welfare consultant at several large, national brokerage/consulting firms. Hughes earned a Bachelor of Arts Degree in English Literature and Sociology from Fordham University at Rose Hill in the Bronx, N.Y.

Said Dana Liedel, Managing Principal of EPIC's Employer Services Platform, "In an increasingly complex post Affordable Care Act world, continuing to add the best and brightest people while deepening consulting resources is critical to effectively serving our clients. We are pleased and excited to have Davin and Rosemary join our ESP team."

Davin Millholland can be contacted at:

EPIC Insurance Brokers and Consultants

Address: 2405 Satellite Blvd, Suite 200, Duluth, GA 30096

Phone: 678-205-1591

Email: davin.millholland[at]epicbrokers.com

Rosemary Hughes can be contacted at:

EPIC Insurance Brokers and Consultants

Address: 263 Tresser Blvd, Stamford, CT 06901

Phone: 203-658-0516

Email: rosemary.hughes[at]epicbrokers.com

About EPIC

Headquartered in San Francisco, EPIC Insurance Brokers and Consultants has nationwide presence with a depth of industry expertise across key lines of insurance, including commercial property and casualty, employee benefits, unique specialty program insurance, and private client services. Since its founding in 2007, EPIC has grown revenue from $5 million to $160 million through both organic growth and strategic acquisitions, and remains a fixture on the insurance industry's "Best Places to Work" lists. Its strategic partners include private equity firms The Carlyle Group and Stone Point Capital. To learn more, visit http://www.epicbrokers.com/.

PHOTOS:

1) Send2Press.com/mediaboom/15-0609-millholland-300dpi.jpg

2) Send2Press.com/mediaboom/15-0609-rose-hughes-300dpi.jpg

This release was issued through Send2Press(R), a unit of Neotrope(R). For more information, visit Send2Press Newswire at https://www.Send2Press.com

SOURCE EPIC Insurance Brokers and Consultants