Update at 10:00 p.m. - Robert Cluck’s run as mayor ends at 12 years. Jeff Williams won by a solid margin.

Williams, 55, a civil engineer and first time candidate, campaigned as someone who would more aggressively pursue new development. One campaign mailer pointed out the lack of development near AT&T Stadium, which many hoped would attract new investment.

“We’re excited to see the outpour of support for taking Arlington to the next level and building on the legacy we have,” Williams said.

Cluck, 76, who could not be reached for comment, was the only Arlington City Council incumbent to lose. He touted a series of high-profile residential retail and entertainment developments during his tenure during the campaign.

Update at 8:56 p.m. -Mayor Robert Cluck was still trailing by a significant percentage with early voting and nine of 28 precincts reporting. The proposition to ban red light cameras was also winning with a percentage similar to Williams’. He noted in his campaign material that he was opposed to the cameras, while Cluck backed the program. No other Arlington City Council incumbent was in danger of losing.

Original post – Veteran Arlington Mayor Robert Cluck was trailing challenger Jeff Williams with only early voting counted. Voters were also leaning toward ban red light cameras, a proposition placed on the ballot after a tea party led petition drive. Between those two races, Arlington voters have been blitzed with campaign mailers and yard signs. Cluck and Williams have spent at least $260,000 combined on this race. A pro red light camera campaign – funded by the company that contracts with the city for the cameras – has spent at least $55,000. This was expected to be the toughest race yet for Cluck, who has been mayor for 12 years. Williams, a civil engineer and longtime Arlington resident, raised and spent more than the incumbent. Cluck generally has faced challengers who have raised little money and received few prominent endorsements. Two other candidates are also running for mayor but neither ran high profile campaigns. Didmus B. Banda is a bank customer service employee, and Jerry Pikulinski, a retired economist. This is the fifth time Pikulinski has ran against Cluck. All other Arlington City Council incumbents were leading their races with early voting ballots counted.