Experts who study and work in health care can tell the wellness of a neighborhood just by the ZIP code. The poorer the area, the more likely its residents are to have health problems.

In Dallas, where 37 percent of children live in poverty, that means our most vulnerable residents continue to be at risk of all kinds of ailments, including heart disease and diabetes.

So there was promising news in the latest State of Texas Children report that the number of children lacking health insurance in Dallas County and much of Texas has spiked since 2009, the year before Obamacare went into effect. About 87 percent of the county’s kids had health insurance in 2014, the most recent data available, compared with 78 percent in 2009.

That’s the good news from the Center for Public Policy Priorities.

The bad news: Despite those efforts, too many kids — 13 percent in Dallas County — are still uninsured. And the state’s overall rate — 11 percent — continues to be the highest in the country. Hispanic children are much more likely than white, black or Asian kids to lack health insurance in the county, state and nation, the study showed.

The costs of that disappointing data are many. Thousands of uninsured folks wind up at Parkland Memorial Hospital because public hospitals are obligated to care for everyone. And all Dallas County taxpayers are footing the bill.

Why are more poor children not getting the coverage they need? County Judge Clay Jenkins lays the blame squarely on Austin decision-makers’ refusal to expand Medicaid coverage. Gov. Greg Abbott has proudly rejected expansion, and Texans should be spitting mad.

Jenkins and Parkland CEO Fred Cerise have been ringing the alarm bell for years that Texas is leaving a big pot of federal dollars, $6 billion or so, on the table and the county’s poorest residents without an adequate safety net.

It’s a coverage gap of at least 1 million working Texans — too poor to receive federal subsidies for private health insurance under the Affordable Care act but too rich to qualify for coverage under Texas’ current Medicaid requirements.

Jenkins estimates more Medicaid dollars would provide coverage for 200,000 more Dallas County residents alone. Think about the dent that could make in providing care and prevention for people across the county, some of whom make the tragic decision not to go to the doctor because they can’t afford to.

Abbott continues to refuse Medicaid expansion, saying the system is broken and bloated. But the state is perpetuating that broken system by insisting on ignoring the huge coverage gap the state’s refusal has created. Texas has the power to reverse these troubling trends. The well-being of thousands of Texans is on the line.