4322655

On Wednesday, the Institute of Medicine and the National Academy of Science (both institutions receive a combination of federal and private funding) issued a report on how America’s medical system lacks proper end-of-life care. (You can read a summary here.) While I agree that end-of-life care is an issue worth discussing, I think the report’s recommendations contain a basic flaw: having a patient register his/her preferences with the doctor. It’s a lawyer — a professional third-party advocate — the patient needs, not a doctor.

Earlier this summer, the Obama administration was pushing for doctor-patient end-of-life discussions by floating a regulatory proposal to have Medicare pay for this activity. Yesterday’s report adds credence to the administration’s views on this. But that still doesn’t make it the right approach.

What’s the problem with having ‘the’ discussion with your doctor? First, few doctors today are independent practitioners. Most doctors today are employees of large medical groups (and thanks to Obamacare this will be increasing) and many such groups include a hospital. The group may be a for-profit or a non-profit entity, but the key factor is the hospital. More about that in a moment.

Assuming Medicare will pay for ‘the’ discussion, the aim of the large medical group will be to have the discussion be as brief as possible – as Medicare is likely not to pay very much for the activity.

Hence the large medical group will devise a checklist form.

Let’s say Dr. Jones of Gizmo Medical Group hands Mrs. Smith the Gizmo end-of-life form – a questionnaire, consisting of a list of issues with ‘yes’ and ‘no’ boxes. Doctor and patient spend a few minutes talking about the questionnaire. Then Mrs. Smith checks some boxes and signs Gizmo’s form; the receptionists witness the form, and as one of them is a notary, she notarizes a copy for Gizmo’s files and one for Mrs. Smith.

Sounds sensible, but is it in Mrs. Smith’s best interests? For example, do the phrases in Gizmo’s form actually represent what Mrs. Smith wants?

Suppose Gizmo’s form asks: “Can we use extraordinary measures to keep you alive if you are in a coma for more than one week or are diagnosed as being in a persistent vegetative state?” A natural reaction might be to check the NO box, but what exactly do ‘extraordinary measures’ mean?

As we learned in the Terry Schiavo case, a hospital may define ‘extraordinary measures’ to include providing food and water for a patient in a coma or persistent vegetative state.

What would Mrs. Smith’s answer be if the question was reworded to ask: ‘If the doctor determines you’re brain dead, or if you’re in a coma for more than a week, do you give us permission to stop feeding you and giving you water?’ Would Mrs. Smith agree to that? Would you?

Here’s where the hospital connection enters the picture. From a purely financial angle, a hospital is likely to want to have the patient’s permission to stop providing food and water when it deems the patient is beyond recovery.

Having a hospital patient in a coma or vegetative state is costly – with Medicare or Medicaid picking up a lot of the tab, but not all of the tab. If the patient lacks secondary insurance, the hospital will have to make up the payment gap.