Back in 2006, a couple of years after averring that he was just “a lowly state senator trying to get to the U.S. Senate,” Barack Obama told Vogue, “There are—what?—maybe ten presidents in our history out of 40-something who you can truly say led the country? And then there are 30-odd who just kind of did their best. And so I guess my point is: Just being the president is not a good way of thinking about it. . . . You want to be a great president.”

Tonight, President Obama gives his final State of the Union address, one that promises to omit any “long list of proposals,” according to The New York Times, in favor of a “thematic message.” I always liked the president best as an interviewee rather than orator. In one-on-one interactions or extemporaneous moments, Obama has often cast himself in self-effacing terms—“We’re part of a long-running story; we just try to get our paragraph right,” etc.—even when he is, perhaps, suggesting that he might want to become one of the greatest presidents in history.

But Obama’s public speaking, for which he is celebrated, might actually reveal even more of his true personality—one that has always been hard to fully get. Through his speeches, over the years, we have been able to glimpse the true scale of his ambition. And on this measure, even by presidential standards, Obama stands out.

Most presidential speeches, of course, err on the side of grandiosity. Bill Clinton vowed, “America will lead the world toward shared peace and prosperity and the far frontiers of science and technology.” George W. Bush intoned that we would “take the next steps of space exploration: human missions to Mars and to worlds beyond.” (Yeah, that would have been well managed.) But, as Obama once said, “I actually believe my own rhetoric.”

Over the years, that rhetoric called for a whole lot. In February 2009, Obama vowed to tackle health care, education, energy, the financial industry, the auto industry, Guantanamo Bay, peace in the Middle East, and possibly tartar buildup (I’d have to check). That September, when health-care reform looked fragile, the president took to the stage before a joint session of Congress to tell us to “meet history’s test.” He also—for neither the first time nor the last—told everyone to stop playing games and “replace acrimony with civility, and gridlock with progress.” You may recall the era of good feeling that ensued.

Obama’s repeated vow to bring lawmakers together may have been one of his costliest follies. If a man persuades his ex-wife to sit down and rework some details on their divorce settlement, it’s best if he doesn’t turn to the cameras and say, “See, I told you I could get us both sitting down to talk.” Since Obama had sold himself as a unifier during his initial campaign, every legislative deal, if completed, promised him a double win: here’s a deal the president achieved, which also showed what a great unifier he could be. That meant a double loss for the opposition, of course, and politicians tend to disfavor that sort of thing.

But the folly had an unexpected benefit too: it allowed Republicans to win the narrative, so to speak, while Obama won the war. Even as the G.O.P. could get everyone to agree that Obama had failed to change the culture in Washington, the White House was steadily, obstinately muscling through massive changes: health-care packages, stimulus plans, Wall Street reform, major trade deals, executive orders for amnesty, a nuclear deal with Iran, diplomatic relations with Cuba, the climate deal in Paris, the New START treaty, repealing “Don’t ask, don’t tell,” removing banks from student-loan programs, two liberal Supreme Court appointments (leading to same-sex marriage rights), and so on. Imagine if everyone had gotten along.