Barack Obama (Photo: File) Story Highlights Democrats must walk a fine line in Kentucky

Conway has made an effort to distance himself from Obama

Race remains a toss-up

Republicans don't think it will be the last time you hear of Obama in Kentucky races

President Barack Obama has proven useful to Kentucky Republicans.

They've wielded the president's unpopularity in the state as a weapon against Democrats, most notably against Democrat Alison Lundergan Grimes during Sen. Mitch McConnell's successful 2014 re-election campaign.

The Kentucky gubernatorial election this year will be one of the final opportunities for the GOP to use Kentuckians' dislike for the president before Obama leaves office in January 2017.

Indeed, many see the president as the main obstacle for Democratic gubernatorial candidate Jack Conway to beat Republican Matt Bevin.

Republicans have used the McConnell playbook against Conway, with Republican ads labeling him "Obama liberal Jack Conway."

"Ultimately if Conway loses, it has everything to do with Obama," said Jennifer Duffy, senior editor for the Cook Political Report.

Democrats in a state like Kentucky have to walk a fine line between appealing to their base and distancing themselves from Obama, Duffy and others said.

Conway, in an effort to walk that line, has emphasized his allegiance toward the coal industry and opposition toward Obama administration regulations designed to lower emissions from coal-fired power plants. Conway released a pro-coal ad in September boasting "he stood up against Obama" when he sued the Environmental Protection Agency over the coal regulations.

The race remains close, with the most recent Bluegrass Poll released Sept. 29 by the Louisville Courier-Journal and other news outlets showing Conway out in front of Bevin 42 percent to 37 percent. Only 31 percent of Kentucky voters approve of Obama, the Bluegrass Poll showed. Nationally, Obama's job approval rating at the end of September was 48 percent, according to Gallup, Inc.

The 20 to 25 percent of the state's Democrats who may vote Republican will decide the race, said Al Cross, director of the Rural Institute for Journalism and Community Issues at the University of Kentucky.

"That's one reason he doesn't like to talk about health care much," Cross said of Conway. "He's afraid of getting tagged with the Obama label even more."

Some Kentucky Democrats think Obama's relevance to the gubernatorial election is waning. The popularity of outgoing Gov. Steve Beshear's Medicaid expansion and health care exchange under the Affordable Care Act has helped soften the stigma of Obama, said Col Owens, chairman of the Kenton County Democrats.

"I think people are understanding better some of the administration's policies," Owens said. "The economy is getting better over time."

So why do Republicans believe Obama is such an effective weapon against the Democrats?

"Obama is the epitome of Democratic principles," Fourth District GOP chairman Troy Sheldon said. "Jack Conway follows in step in the same philosophy."

Whose weakness is worse?

Bevin's main weakness in the eyes of some political experts is his lack of support among the Republican base. Some Republicans in Northern Kentucky have come out in support of Conway instead of Bevin, who's seen as an outsider tea party candidate. Conway's main weakness — Obama — is still the bigger one of the two, Duffy said.

"Obama had a big effect in '14 on the Senate race," Duffy said. "That hasn't gone away."

But the discontent in the ranks of the Republican camp seems to be catching up to Bevin, she said.

Other experts think Bevin's weakness trumps Obama's unpopularity. The division between the tea party and establishment Republicans will likely have more influence than Obama, said Stephen Voss, a political science professor at the University of Kentucky.

"It is likely to be a low turnout election, and Bevin is looking pretty weak among his base," Voss said. "Normally you need an extremely motivated base to win."

Obama an effective weapon but not invincible

Democrats have overcome the Obama label in Kentucky state races. All but one of the statewide elected offices are held by Democrats.

Beshear won in 2011 with 55 percent of the vote. He even won Kenton and Campbell counties with 53 and 51 percent of the vote, respectively.

Political observers credited Beshear's win to his down-to-earth, folksy demeanor and moderate record combined with his Republican opponent David Williams' unpopularity.

"He did it because he was able to present himself to voters as someone with solid ideas who was independent," Northern Kentucky attorney and Democrat Mark Guilfoyle said.

As for Republicans, they don't think this will be the last time they use Obama against the Democrats.

Once Obama's out of office, Republicans in the state can still use his legacy to run against Democrats in campaigns, Fourth District GOP leader Sheldon said. He predicts Environmental Protection Agency regulations on the coal industry and the Affordable Care Act will have negative consequences for years, maybe decades.

"He will go down in history with a less favorable rating than Jimmy Carter," Sheldon said.

Democrats, on the other hand, see a bright future after Obama leaves. Hillary Clinton wouldn't' be as effective of a cudgel for Republicans as Obama, Owens said. Bill Clinton won Kentucky both times during his presidential runs, Owens noted. Plus, he thinks history will prove Obama right.

"He is a great president and will go down in history as a great president," Owens said.

Read or Share this story: http://cin.ci/1LmEMFc