By ABBY WEINGARTEN

Living in a gluten-sensitive, nut-allergic, dairy-intolerant kind of world is often tough to navigate, especially when you’re trying to grow up.

Parents are experiencing an ever-increasing need to make healthy, kid-friendly snacks for parties and school events, all while keeping the flavors delicious — despite removing potentially unsafe ingredients. Accommodating dietary restrictions — with sensitivity and creativity, no less — can be a daily challenge.

“Modeling good nutrition for our children should be at the forefront of our minds. We know that children learn more from what they see than from what we say,” says Nora Clemens, Sarasota-based licensed dietitian with 30 years’ experience who runs Nutrition and Wellness Solutions.

“Food allergies can be life-threatening, so calm, age-appropriate conversations with children are important,” Clemens says. “A periodic discussion about this — without making the child feel panicky — may reassure parents that their children are clear about foods they should avoid and why.”

According to a 2013 study from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, food allergies among children increased by about 50 percent between 1997 and 2011. Approximately 15 million Americans have food allergies, and one in every 13 children in the United States (ages 18 and younger) is affected.

This adds up to roughly two children with food allergies in every classroom, Clemens says.

Eight foods account for 90 percent of all allergic reactions: milk, eggs, peanuts, tree nuts, soy, wheat, fish and shellfish. Even trace amounts of any of these foods can cause reactions — from a mildly itchy mouth to anaphylaxis, a potentially fatal, whole-body response.

This is, no doubt, scary for parents. Kate Wight, a Sarasota mother, has dealt firsthand with the ups and downs of food sensitivities since her 2-year-old toddler, Eisley, was an infant.

“While Eisley hasn’t been diagnosed officially with a dairy allergy, she has always struggled with a sensitivity,” Wight says. “I had to keep a strictly dairy-free diet when she was still nursing as a newborn, and if I splurged on a single bite of ice cream, she would pay the price with agonizing silent reflux. Over the years, this sensitivity has waxed and waned. She can have dairy, but it’s definitely better for her in moderation.”

Wight began giving Eisley almond milk instead of cow’s milk, and limiting her exposure to other dairy products as often as possible.

“We were also happy to switch to a preschool that has a strict nut-free policy, even though none of their current students suffer from a nut allergy,” Wight says. “Their sensitivity to the growing number of severe food allergies reassures us that they will take even her vague and undefined sensitivity seriously, and will keep a close eye on her health.”

IN THE REAL WORLD

Fortunately, Sarasota and Manatee county schools have policies in place regarding food allergies, and students are discouraged from sharing their food, Clemens says.

But part of raising awareness about food allergies is recognizing that they transcend socioeconomics. Beverly Girard, the director of food and nutrition services for Sarasota County Schools, has been instrumental in Share Our Strength’s No Kid Hungry campaign, which connects children in need with nutritious food and teaches their families how to cook healthy, affordable meals.

“In Sarasota County specifically, 21,000 out of 42,000 students are eligible for free meals at school. In some cases, school-provided breakfasts and lunches are a child’s only meals for the day,” Girard says. “We are seeing children are actually worried about where their next meal will be from and if it will be healthy. Federal nutrition programs have very positively affected our students in Sarasota County. Families look to our program as a safety net.”

To extend that safety net even further, innovators are seeking new ways to combat “allergy bullying” — singling kids out or shunning them because of dietary differences.

Keeping these children emotionally and physically shielded is part of the mission for Shelly Fisher, CEO of Hope Paige Designs, a Pennsylvania maker of medical ID bracelets.

To this end, Hope Paige developed bracelets to protect children without “branding” them for their food allergy. Created for all ages, each bracelet is custom- engraved with wearer’s medical information and can immediately be recognized by health care providers. But it also blends with everyday clothes.

Even though schools are attempting to protect students across the board who have food allergies, and design companies are making it cool to be different, parents are still the ones buying the majority of the groceries and preparing many of the meals.

For parents seeking unique ways to cook, Clemens suggests referring to the food guide at ChooseMyPlate.gov.

Clemens recommends keeping raw vegetables cut up in a container for grab-and- go snacks, and offering dipping sauces like ranch dressing, tzatziki, nut butters and hummus. Sweeten up meals with dried or fresh fruit, and stock up on leftovers.

“Use a tortilla and roll up your favorite items such as hummus, turkey or chicken slices, tuna or turkey salad, roasted veggies, feta or shredded cheeses, peanut butter and jelly, boiled eggs, bean/veggie burger chunks, and avocado slices,” Clemens says. “Soup it up. Bring along a bowl of hearty soup in a thermos. Some protein-packed favorites are lentil soup, turkey vegetable, minestrone or black bean. Make a pot of soup on a weekend and portion it out for the week.”

SARASOTA COUNTY SCHOOLS GO TO ‘MEATLESS MONDAYS’