Batten disease is a rare, neurodegenerative disorder children inherit from their parents: two defective genes, one from each parent. Though rare, the disease often affects more than one person in families carrying these defective genes, the National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS) reported — a truth Hollywood movie producer Gordon Gray learned himself.

Gray, who’s known for producing The Rookie and Miracle, recently revealed his two young daughters Charlotte, 4, and Gwenyth, 2, were diagnosed with the disease in March; there is currently no cure. Initially, children with the disease start experienced vison problems, seizures, or personality and behavior changes during onset, which is usually between ages 5 and 10. Over time, the NINDS added, children’s symptoms significantly worsen and become “blind, bedridden, and demented.”

ABC News reported Gray’s daughter Charlotte is already showing signs of struggle.

“She has the same heart and she still loves life, but she is having a hard time,” Kristen Gray, the children’s mother, told ABC. “We don't know what tomorrow's going to look like for Charlotte and Gwenyth.”

With hopes to bring light to their situation, Gray and his wife have begun the Charlotte and Gwenyth Gray Foundation to Cure Batten Disease, a foundation devoted to raising the necessary money “to fund the urgent medical research to save the lives of all children devastated by this disease.” This amounts to $10 million.

ABC added Gray believes he’s found the scientists and doctors in position to “cure our girls,” but there’s a severe lack of funding. To reach his goals as soon as possible, Gray has asked a large group of people, including celebrities like Reese Witherspoon and Channing Tatum, to donate a single dollar to the foundation through various social media networks; those donating or simply spreading the word are using the hashtag #CureBatten.

As of this print, the foundation has raised $528, 001 so far, growing from just $356,000 the day before. Kristen said the outpour of Hollywood support in the two days since announcing their crowdfundraiser gives her and her family hope.

“It gives us hope that not only are we going to be able to save our daughters, but we're going to be able to save these other children,” she said.

And her husband concluded: “We’re never going to give up hope.”