Economy: Any month with job growth is a good month, and when it tops economists’ expectations, even better. But let’s not get carried away with either the number or the reasons behind November’s 321,000 gain.

Maybe it’s because unquestionably good news about the economy is so rare these days, but economics reporters were falling over themselves to deliver superlatives about the November jobs report.

They called it “a knockout,” “boom-like numbers” and “the strongest streak of hiring in several decades,” and said that the report “jumped decisively into ‘great news’ territory.” Even the White House showed more restraint, simply calling the November numbers “strong.”

These reporters would be well served — as would their readers — actually to look at the jobs data. They’d discover that a 300,000-plus job gain during an expansion isn’t earth-shattering. In fact, it’s fairly common.

The expansion during the 1960s, for example, included eight months of 300,000-plus job growth, three months of which topped 400,000.

The Reagan recovery produced 23 such months — one saw a million jobs created. Even the so-called “jobless” Bush recovery produced seven 300,000-plus job-growth months. Obama’s recovery has produced all of two such months.

Remember, too, that the previous gains occurred in much smaller labor pools. In the early 1980s, for example, the labor force was 29% smaller than today. Account for the difference, and 300,000 jobs a month in a recovery should be the norm, not a rarity to celebrate.

Plus, let’s not forget that during this allegedly record-setting job growth year, labor force participation actually fell to 62.8% from January’s 63%. It’s still way down from 66% at the peak of the previous expansion.

In addition, 9.1 million remain unemployed, which is 1.9 million more than there were in November 2007. Meanwhile, don’t praise Obama for this growth.

After all, since re-election he’s failed to get any of the things he claimed were vital to strong job growth. He didn’t get his minimum wage hike, a big boost in spending on highways, immigration reform or another extension of long-term jobless benefits.

If anything, recent job gains are a result of Washington gridlock — no new taxes or big regulations, no economic tinkering, the government mostly on autopilot and spending virtually flat. Obama even spared most employers the pain of ObamaCare’s employer mandate.

Unfortunately, this reprieve may not last long, even with a GOP Congress. Obama plans to unleash massively expensive environmental regulations soon, the ObamaCare mandate will hit employers, and who knows what other mischief Obama will create under the guise of executive authority?