The latest chapter in the relationship between Nuggets coach Brian Shaw and his growing star, Kenneth Faried, featured a smile and a Santa Claus hat in Nuggets yellow.

It was there, standing in a Pepsi Center hallway, that Faried talked about what made him happy. And what was making him happy at that point was the assurance his playing time would increase.

But there’s more.

Faried had some admitting to do. He had not played the way anyone had expected this season, and in a meeting with Shaw last week he got down to the gritty truth as to why.

“I knew I was kind of just slighting myself and just not focused on the main goals that I wanted to achieve,” Faried said. “It was just all on me.”

But wait. There’s more.

“I just had to bring myself back in and gain my confidence back, pretty much,” he said.

Those were bombshells.

But, truthfully, Shaw already knew them on some level in his mind. Faried just spelled it out for him, right there, in direct fashion, in order to exorcise some demons and get back to what should be the always-fun business of being the “Manimal.”

But it underscored another truth about the relationship between Shaw and Faried. It’s much less complicated than it seems. There are times they talk. There are times they don’t talk. There are times when they’re content with each other, and there are times when they’re on each other’s nerves.

But they’ve never strayed from one thing: the truth.

Straight shooters under the same roof aren’t always going to see eye to eye. And when these two don’t, they’re not going to be shy about expressing what’s on their minds.

They have struggled at times to learn what makes the other tick, but they have never stopped trying. And the honesty component — a cornerstone of any healthy relationship — has been the biggest and best bond between them.

So, this week, Shaw called Faried into his office to understand Faried more. Faried pulled no punches in the meeting with Shaw. Shaw pulled no punches in expressing what he needs to see from him to get him the minutes he desires.

They both left feeling better. And, yes, a bit closer.

And Faried averaged 30 minutes in the next two games.

“It feels great to get my minutes and be out there with my teammates and bring that energy and get them going and focused,” Faried said. “It feels good to be back out there, period.”

This relationship has been mischaracterized again and again as being adversarial. If anything, it has elements similar to a father and a son, just figuring things out as they move through life.

Faried and Shaw never hated each other. Faried hated not playing as much as he wanted; Shaw hated some of the bad habits Faried displayed on the court. And at the end of the day they’ve always had one thing in common — the desire to perform well and win games.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost