Buy Photo University Health Conway (Photo: Dacia Idom/The News-Star)Buy Photo

A legislative audit of Biomedical Research Foundation, the organization that operates University Health Conway and the Shreveport hospital, found BRF sustained a loss of $700,000 over its first 12 months of operations.

The research foundation took control of the two hospitals in October 2013 and operates them as University Health System, as part of Gov. Bobby Jindal's push to privatize most of the university-run public hospital system. The foundation had never previously run a patient facility.

The audit was conducted by Postlewaithe and Netterville of Baton Rouge.

The period audited covers Oct. 1, 2013, when BRF assumed control of the privatized hospital, through Sept. 30, 2014, the end of BRF’s first full fiscal year operating the hospital.

Under terms of the professional service agreement with LSU Health System, the BRF paid a total of $83 million to LSU to fund the work of LSU-employed physicians and allied health professionals in hospital and clinic patient services. An additional $19 million was paid for services prior to Oct. 1, 2013.

For leasing hospitals, clinics and medical equipment, the BRF paid the $44.7 million to the state.

There were no findings of material deficiencies of accounting or financial operations issues in the audit.

By the close of the fiscal year, BRF had cash equivalent of $15.7 million; total assets of $314 million; total liabilities of $268 million. BRF had total revenues of $502 million, but total expenditures of $503 million, resulting in an operating loss of $710,164.

Despite the operational loss, BRF officials responded to the audit, saying the state’s privatization of the Monroe and Shreveport hospitals has been proven to be efficient and effective.

“To go from essentially a complete business start-up in hospital operations in 135 days, and then from October 2013 to September 2014 essentially achieve a break-even operation is indeed remarkable. Current financial results since the audit period show a continuing trend of efficiency and sound fiscal policy in the BRF’s management of the north Louisiana hospitals,” BRF said in a prepared statement.

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1D4tmBL