As Congress seeks to reach consensus on mental health reform, critics say deficits in insurance coverage often leave individuals and families struggling to afford therapy and medications to treat psychological issues, or worse: forgoing care altogether.

No overarching remedy exists to alleviate widespread impediments to access, rooted in everything from health plans that don’t cover many mental health providers to higher out-of-pocket costs for some drugs that treat mental health conditions. Still, there are situation-specific strategies that may maximize coverage and make mental health services and medications more affordable. Here are a few, highlighted by health insurance brokers and experts at the National Alliance on Mental Illness, or NAMI, a grass roots advocacy, education and support organization.

Do Your Homework Before Enrolling in a Plan

With the next open enrollment period under Obamacare set to begin Nov. 1, it’s a good time to get an early start researching health insurance plans. That's a solid idea whether you're getting a plan through a health insurance exchange or looking at several options an employer offers.

Large employer plans are not required to cover mental health services, but if they do offer mental health benefits, they must be on par or equivalent to benefits for general medical care, says Sita Diehl, director of state policy and advocacy for NAMI. “So the first thing to do if you’re shopping for a plan through your employer is to make sure that mental health benefits are covered. Most are – most plans do cover mental health – but you’ve got to check it out,” Diehl says. Those who work for a company that offers a plan that doesn't cover mental health may choose to purchase insurance outside their company. You may end up spending more of your own money on monthly premiums as a result, however.

If you’re already seeing a mental health provider for therapy or medication management, make sure he or she is in your plan’s network. “The provider networks are nowhere near as extensive” for mental health as for clinicians who treat physical issues, Diehl says. “So it’s harder to find someone in your health plan’s network.” But experts say enrolling in a plan that covers the providers you see and the medications you take can make a substantial difference in what you pay out of pocket. For many, that can affect whether they’re able to afford needed mental health treatment. For those getting a plan through health insurance exchanges, go to healthcare.gov. "You do have to [dig] down deep, but you can see whether your provider is in the various plans’ networks, and whether your medications are covered by those plans,” Diehl says.

She also recommends that those signing up through exchanges get help from designated, government-funded enrollment navigators or assisters located in most cities and many rural areas. You can locate one nearby through healthcare.gov by going to “Find Local Help.”

Crunch Dollars and Cents Upfront

Take into account plan deductibles – including out-of-network versus in-network for preferred provider organization, or PPO, plans – and out-of-pocket limits, says Nicholas Moriello, a health insurance broker and president of Health Insurance Associates in Newark, Delaware.

Then go a step further in your cost assessment. Plans commonly use a tiered coverage system, in which drugs – including some for mental and behavioral health – falling into higher tiers receive less-robust coverage, resulting in higher out-of-pocket costs for consumers, says Moriello, who is also a member of the national legislative council for the National Association of Health Underwriters, an industry trade group. Check to see not only whether your medications are covered, but to what degree.

He suggests looking for a plan that covers a larger network of providers, like a PPO, and that also offers out-of-network benefits. This would enable patients to see an out-of-network provider and not be "totally without coverage,” he says. “One area of specialty [where] that tends to come up more frequently than others is in rehab, [including] addiction treatment.”

To further evaluate what you may pay, go over any anticipated mental health care needs with the navigator or health insurance broker who might be helping you find a plan. This would include detailing things like: “‘I want to see a therapist once every three months; I’m going to see my psychiatrist once every six months; these are the medications I take,’” Diehl says. “Get down to that sort of level of detail so they can actually do a dollars-and-cents analysis for you.”