LOS ANGELES (MarketWatch) — When HCA Holdings Inc. reports earnings early Tuesday, one thing to watch for in addition to fourth-quarter results will be whether the nation’s biggest hospital chain can live up to its own raised expectations and the praise it received from outsiders last month.

HCA HCA, +0.22% said in early January it should see adjusted earnings of $7.4 billion for the year, up from the $7.25 billion to $7.35 billion prediction it made in October. Further, Standard & Poor’s upgraded the Nashville, Tenn.-based company’s corporate credit rating on Jan. 13 by two notches, to “BB” from “B+”, and its senior secured debt to “BBB-” from “BB”.

S&P also put HCA on its vaunted S&P 500 stock index, replacing grocery retailer Safeway Inc., which has been taken private.

HCA is expected to offer insight into how it expects 2015 to go, and analysts appear optimistic that the Affordable Care Act — as well as a promising environment for hospitals — should help boost its fortunes.

There could be a few hiccups for the hospital company, however. Here’s the outlook for HCA:

Earnings: Analysts polled by FactSet see HCA reporting net income of $1.22 a share, and they offer a sharp consensus of $1.24 a share. That’s up from the 92 cents reported a year ago.

Disappointment could be in the air, however, as forecasts from Estimize.com, a crowdsource estimate of hedge-funds, brokers as well as analysts, put HCA earnings at $1.15 a share.

Still, HCA has had a good track record of beating FactSet forecasts, as it has come in ahead of expectations in nine of the last 12 quarters. And when it misses, it’s been by no more than three cents in that time frame.

Revenue: HCA’s revenue is expected to come in at $10.4 billion for the quarter, up from $9.96 billion a year ago.

Stock reaction: HCA shares have climbed steadily from the $20 level in late 2011 to the $70 range where they stand now. HCA’s all-time intraday high is $76.18, which it reached in mid-January.

After hitting that high, shares dropped to below $68, and recently have traded in a high-$60s to low-$70s range.

What to watch for: In addition to keeping an eye on full-year and quarterly earnings, look for HCA to offer a sign on where business is headed for the year, and whether that brings shares back up to the mid-$70 level.

More from MarketWatch