Former teacher, coach remembered during Celebration of Life ceremony Sunday

The crowd waves their hands at the Celebration of Life ceremony Sunday for Gerald Boland at Lyons Elementary School. Boland's daughter, Amy Hoh, asked the crowd to do the gesture, which she uses as home to signal a job well done to her deaf dogs. (Whitney Bryen / Longmont Times-Call)

Nearly 100 people gathered outside Lyons Elementary School on Sunday afternoon clapped, waved their hands in the air and blew kisses in honor of the former teacher, coach and resident who died during last year's flood.

Amy Hoh, one of Gerald "Gerry" Boland's daughters, asked the crowd to celebrate her father's life and legacy by performing the three gestures, which signal a job well done to her deaf dogs.

Boland was a teacher and coach in Lyons schools for 30 years and was the only Lyons resident who died during the 2013 flood.

One year later, Boland's three children, Amy Hoh, Holli Stetson and Brent Boland, unveiled a sandstone in front of the elementary school in remembrance of their dad. The stone reads "May we forever remember Gerald Boland, teacher, coach and lifelong resident of Lyons. Through caring, compassion and leadership, he taught our children well for 30 years."

From left: Holli Stetson, Amy Hoh and Brent Boland unveil a stone outside Lyons Elementary School Sunday honoring their father, Gerald Boland, who died during last year's flood. (Whitney Bryen / Longmont Times-Call)

A sandstone bench that reads "In loving memory of Gerald Boland, teacher, coach, father and mentor to all" was also dedicated near the school's bus lane, which was renamed Boland Lane.

Boland's wife, Cheron, said the week has been a difficult one, marking the anniversary of her husband's death and the flood that forever changed her life. But the stories told by former students and friends of Boland softened the blow.

"It was a beautiful event after a tough week," Cheron Boland said. "We're ready for the week to be over."

Hoh recognized and thanked the men who rescued her mother from her drowning car.

Lyons resident Rusty Ripple drove the front-loader that carried Cheron Boland from the raging water. Evan Patronik of the Lyons Fire Protection District helped her into the vehicle's scoop and held her hand and comforted her during the evacuation.

"Amy said I was just doing my job and, honestly, that's what it is," Patronik said. "That's what I signed up for, but Rusty, he's the real hero. He's just a guy with a front-loader who had the courage to perform some pretty incredible rescues when his town needed him."

The Celebration of Life ceremony ended with one of Gerald Boland's former students, George Finnell, performing two songs, including one that he wrote about the last time he saw Boland.

"Mr. Boland lost his life that very night, the night the river rose," Finnell sang. "We all lost a little bit of our lives the night the river rose."

Contact Times-Call community reporter Whitney Bryen at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.