Health Why More Missouri Women Will Be Forced To Cross State Lines To Get An Abortion CREDIT:

As a harsh new abortion restriction is about to take effect in Missouri, clinics in neighboring states are preparing for an influx of women crossing the border to get the reproductive care they need.

Two weeks ago, Missouri lawmakers overrode Gov. Jay Nixon’s (D) veto of a 72-hour abortion waiting period, ensuring that the policy will go into place in October. The new law triples the state’s former 24-hour waiting period and doesn’t have any exemptions for victims of rape or incest.

Since there’s only one abortion clinic left in Missouri — located in St. Louis — the additional two day wait may pose too much of a barrier for the women who have to travel more than 100 miles to get there, particularly if they can’t afford a stay in a hotel or an additional lengthy round trip. Some of those women may instead opt to travel to Illinois or Kansas, where there isn’t such a lengthy waiting period before they’re allowed to have the procedure. Illinois doesn’t require women to wait for any length of time before an abortion, and Kansas’ waiting period is 24 hours long.

The closest option is in Granite City, Illinois, where there’s an abortion clinic just about 15 minutes from Missouri’s sole provider. Dr. Erin King, the associate medical director there, told the St. Louis Post-Dispatch that she may hire more staff if necessary to accommodate a rise in out-of-state patients. “We are prepared to handle women from Missouri that come over the river from Missouri because of the restrictions,” King said.

“We definitely know that this law is coming,” Julie Burkhart, who runs an abortion clinic in Wichita, Kansas, added. “We certainly expect that this law is going to be a hardship for women and it’s clear that this law is meant to do nothing but block access when it comes to abortion care.”

This dynamic is hardly unexpected. Last year, when the legislature was first considering the 72-hour waiting period, reproductive rights advocates argued that the measure may actually represent an indirect method of ending abortion in the state of Missouri. Writer Robin Marty pointed out that if women all start going to Granite City, abortion opponents will have won a significant symbolic victory. “If it simply becomes that much more convenient to leave the state, the Missouri legislature will have accomplished what multiple states have been itching to do — be the first to eliminate abortion access in the state altogether,” she wrote last winter.

Across the country, this has played out over and over again as states have passed increasingly harsh restrictions limiting women’s access to the procedure. These state-level abortion restrictions are designed to force women drive farther to get to a clinic, make additional trips to the same provider before finally completing the procedure, and ultimately pay higher prices for their abortion. Those mounting hurdles mean that women’s reproductive rights are becoming dependent on their zip code.

As one abortion provider in Maryland put it last year, when stringent laws in Pennsylvania led to an increase in out-of-state patients at her clinic, “As long as there are clinics, you could make the argument that there is access, but the question is, how Herculean of an effort does one have to put forth in order to gain that access?”

Plus, this points to the fact that state-level abortion laws need to considered in a national context. The implications of new anti-choice restrictions aren’t contained within a single state’s border, particularly if abortion opponents are going after a state that serves a large portion of patients from other places.

That’s exactly what’s currently threatening to unfold in Tennessee, where anti-abortion activists are attempting to mobilize support for a ballot initiative that would roll back access to abortion in one of the last states in the region where women can still manage to end a pregnancy. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, about one in four abortions performed in Tennessee are sought by a resident of a different state.