Bruce Springsteen and the E Street Band played the first of back-to-back shows at the Hope Estate, a winery in Hunter Valley, Australia on Saturday.

The show began with Bruce saying "Where is the wine? Where is it? Where are the women?" before playing "Drinkin' Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee" a 1947 song by Stick McGhee and later recorded by Jerry Lee Lewis).

But some believe the song may be the 1968 song "Wine" by The Electric Flag. Trumpet player Curt Ramm posted this on his Facebook page: "Another crazy-fun show tonight here in Australian wine country. We started the show with Wine, Wine, Wine by Electric Flag. My High-Times Band training paid off - LOL!"

Looking at the clip below, I say it's a combination of both songs. Chris Phillips of Backstreets Magazine in his review wrote it was "Drinkin' Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee" as does Sean Sennett in his review for brucespringsteen.net. But then, the set list posted on brucespringsteen.net calls it "Drinkin' Wine."

So we'll just say it was a "Wine" song. Here's video of it:

My friend Mitch, formerly of Manalapan, is back following Bruce around and he texted me that during "Darlington County" Bruce got a bottle of wine from a fan at the platform of the back pit, opened it and sprayed the fans witht he wine.

"He's in great spirits tonight," said Mitch. "The weather was pretty cool. It reminded me of the Vernon Downs show in August of 2012."

Overall a 26-song, two-hour-and-28-minute show which ended at 10:30 p.m. due to a local curfew.

It was a pretty standard set list except for "The Wish," being played solo acoustic, opening the encores. It was the first time it has ever been played at an E Street Band show and the first time it has been played since May 27, 2005 at Royal Albert Hall in London on the Devils & Dust tour.

Here's "The Wish" to start the encores:

The show closed with a full band "Thunder Road" instead of the acoustic version Bruce has been playing to close.

Jake Clemons was back with the band after missing Wednesday's show in Sydney following the death of his father.

Show began at 7:32 p.m. local time (16 hours ahead of New Jersey)

Set list



1. Drinkin' Wine Spo-Dee-O-Dee (tour premiere)

2. Badlands

3. No Surrender

4. Two Hearts

5. Bobby Jean

6. High Hopes

7. Just Like Fire Would

8. Murder Incorporated (Sign request)

9. Trapped

10. Wrecking Ball

11. The River

12. American Skin (41 Shots)

13. Because the Night

14. Working on the Highway

15. Darlington County

16. Shackled and Drawn

17. Waitin' on a Sunny Day

18. The Ghost of Tom Joad

19. Land of Hope and Dreams

Encore:

20. The Wish (tour premiere, solo acoustic)

21. Friday on My Mind

22. Born to Run

23. Dancing in the Dark

24. Tenth Avenue Freeze-Out

25. Shout

26. Thunder Road (full band)

Show over at 10:30 p.m.

Next show: Sunday at the same venue