Two people stand a the El Al Airlines ticket desk at Terminal 4 in John F. Kennedy Airport Tuesday. Getty Images

The Federal Aviation Administration’s decision to bar U.S. carriers from flying to Tel Aviv has temporarily severed part of a crucial link from New York City and Israel.

Of the eight direct flights from U.S. airports to Tel Aviv scheduled on Tuesday, six were scheduled from John F. Kennedy International and Newark Liberty International airports, according to FlightAware, a flight-tracking website.

The FAA issued its 24-hour ban on U.S. based carriers flying to Tel Aviv after a rocket attack near Ben Gurion International Airport. The FAA’s decision also came in the wake of the apparent downing by a surface-to-air missile of Malaysia Airlines Flight 17 in war-torn eastern Ukraine, killing all 298 people on board.

The New York City area is home to a Jewish population of 1.1 million, the nation’s largest, according to a report released last year by the Pew Research Center’s Religion & Public Life Project. Newark and Kennedy airports have more direct flights to Tel Aviv than any other U.S. city.

The FAA’s decision drew criticism from some New York politicians with strong ties to the city’s Jewish community.

“I’m very disappointed. When I saw the news, I was upset,” New York state Assemblyman Dov Hikind, a Brooklyn Democrat who had just returned from a trip to Israel on Monday. “The terrorists rejoice over things like this. This encourages them. There is no doubt about that.”

The FAA’s temporary ban didn’t affect non-U.S. based airlines: El Al Israel Airlines Ltd. was continuing with flights Tuesday from Newark and JFK, according to FlightAware.

At JFK on Tuesday, lines at the El Al counter moved swiftly ahead of a 7 p.m. flight to Tel Aviv, although security was heightened. Members in a group of Israeli campers who had spent the past month in Milford, Penn., said they weren’t overly concerned about the dangers of traveling to and from Israel.

Moshe Kranz, a 22-year-old yeshiva student from Monsey, N.Y., in Rockland County, said he was one of hundreds of passengers at Tel Aviv’s Ben Gurion International Airport to be briefly evacuated from his flight Tuesday. Mr. Kranz, who has spent the past year studying to become a rabbi in Jerusalem, said his entire New York-bound El Al fight was evacuated amid safety concerns and he was shuttled to an emergency shelter inside the airport.

His flight was delayed about 40 minutes before he arrived late Tuesday afternoon. He has a trip planned to go back to Israel in the coming weeks but said he fears “things might not be back to normal by then.”

“I watched the dot on the map move across the screen as we flew,” Mr. Kranz said. “I didn’t feel safe until we were over the Israeli border.”

Mr. Hikind said he didn’t believe El Al would be flying if passengers faced a real danger. “I would not hesitate to fly today on El Al or any airline that would fly me to Israel,” he added.

Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg issued a statement on Tuesday evening about his plans to fly on El Al to Tel Aviv “to show solidarity with the Israeli people and to demonstrate that it is safe to fly in and out of Israel.”

“The U.S. flight restrictions are a mistake that hands Hamas an undeserved victory and should be lifted immediately,” Mr. Bloomberg said. “I strongly urge the FAA to reverse course and permit U.S. airlines to fly to Israel.”

Mara Gay contributed to this article.