It's a new approach to patient care and it could make health care more affordable for all of us.

Mount Carmel Health System is teaming up with Violent Township, Truro Township, and Whitehall Fire Departments to develop a pilot program that sends paramedics to patient’s homes after they’re discharged from the hospital.

Gene Wolford lost his father and his wife in 2015. He says some of his most frequent visitors were Violet Township Paramedics.

Wolford has health issues that affect his ability to walk.

He says he is required to wear leg braces, but says the last time he was discharged from the hospital he was having trouble with failing straps on his braces, and chaffing that wasn’t allowing his injury to heal properly.

Violent Township Fire’s new community paramedic helped Wolford find the resources to repair his braces which enabled the patient to take part in physical therapy.

Now, instead of repeated falls, Wolford is slowly getting back on his feet.

"What we're really doing is navigating them through the health system,” Violent Township Fire Lt. J.D. Postage said. "It's just the little things sometimes that make the huge difference.”

Community paramedics make house calls to patients after they are discharged from the hospital.

Paramedics help patients with everything from filling prescriptions to applying for home health care to securing rides to doctor’s appointments.

The Affordable Health Care Act fines hospitals if patients are re-admitted within 30 days of discharge.

Mount Carmel Health Systems says it’s developing the community paramedic pilot program to make sure patients get well and stay well.

"The goal is to help people find their best health so they don't have to spend as much time in the hospital. We want to close the revolving door,” Mount Carmel’s Director of Community Outreach Brian Pierson said.

Violet Township Fire Chief Mike Little says that not only makes health care more affordable for everyone, but says fewer calls to 911 frees up firefighters for other emergencies.

"These are the patients that may be calling us two, three, four times a week,” Chief Little said.

The community paramedic concept is new in Central Ohio, but Wolford says the improvements to his health are proof the pilot program is making a difference.