The Illinois District 75 House of Representatives Seat is up for grabs and despite the fact that there is an incumbent involved I still think that the election between Martha Shugart and John D. Anthony is a no-brainer. And this is coming from an Independent who tends to vote for conservatives far more often than liberals.

Look, our House of Representatives requires that it be filled with a proper balance of political thought and that means there will be times when an elected official will need to buck the Party Line in order to do the right thing for their constituents. Unfortunately, the incumbent John D. Anthony has not shown himself capable of bucking the State GOP given his voting record thus far.

The 75th House of Representatives District currently has a footprint that extends into four counties; Kendell, Grundy, LaSalle and Will. And it is for that precise reason it requires an open-mined free-thinker like Martha Shugart to make the difficult and necessary decisions needed to re-energize the area economically.

Of course there are other reasons to offer as to why Shugart makes the better candidate here but none greater, in my mind, is the fact that in her capacity as a Nurse the past 25 years she understands Health Care and the Medicaid Abuse that goes with it here in Illinois. And that is an area that needs to cleaned-up in a hurry before mandates associated with the Affordable Health Care Act further buries our State Treasury even deeper.

Shugart's medical experience alone is an invaluable asset here!

Quite frankly, I like that Shugart demands healthcare professionals be at the table as decisions are being made and not afterwards. Besides, it really is no secret that our State Medicare Program is in severe need of scrutiny and overhaul. Martha Shugart also believes that a line-by-line review of the State Budget be conducted to eliminate redundancies and inefficiencies. And that would include the elimination of that useless Office of State Comptroller.

So please do yourselves a favor if you are looking for real solutions and progress on Election Day -

Vote For Martha Shugart!