Some of the wellness experts at the pre-marathon expo held at the Metropolitan Pavilion. Dr. Doris Day, dermatologist; Eric Schwarzkopf, Fitness magazine publisher; Dara Torres, five-time Olympian; Betty Wong, Fitness magazine Editor-in-Chief; Alison Adler Matz, More magazine publisher.

Some of the wellness experts at the pre-marathon expo held at the Metropolitan Pavilion. Dr. Doris Day, dermatologist; Eric Schwarzkopf, Fitness magazine publisher; Dara Torres, five-time Olympian; Betty Wong, Fitness magazine Editor-in-Chief; Alison Adler Matz, More magazine publisher. More Magazine

This past weekend, women from all over gathered in New York City for the 11th Annual More Magazine/Fitness Magazine Women's Half-Marathon. Partnering with the New York Road Runners Club, this race started as the More Marathon for Women over 40. Then in 2009, More partnered with Fitness magazine to open the race up to women of all ages.

In preparation for the race, More and Fitness hosted a wellness day in New York City’s Metropolitan Pavilion. Vendors, fitness experts, health care professionals, and celebrity athlete Dara Torres, a former U.S. Olympic swimmer, participated in the event.

"It's such a supportive environment. There are compliments, high-fives, and cheers throughout the entire weekend. It's amazing to see so many women band together to accomplish something great,” said Lesley Jane Seymour, More magazine editor-in-chief, to Medical Daily.

Experts like Dr. Doris Day, dermatologist and clinical associate professor of dermatology at NYU Langone Medical Center, shared tips and helpful information for runners such as the importance of wearing sunscreen. “I tell people that the only way they don’t need sunscreen is if they need a flash light to see,” she told Medical Daily.

“Because they are often spending extended times outdoors and need to pay special attention to sun protection, especially due to the fact that they may be sweating or rubbing off the sunscreen,” she continued. “Try to run earlier or later in the day. Wear sun protective clothing when possible, and run in the shade as much as possible.”

This weekend was more than a race for many, but a way to bond with friends and to experience New York City. “This is my 8th consecutive year running the More/Fitness Half. It's my favorite race of the year and I never miss it.” said Betty Wong, editor-in-chief of Fitness magazine. “There's just something really special about having an all-women's course!"

The race was held in Central Park. Take a look at some of the pre-race festivities below: