Andy Morgan, KOB Sports

Updated: 02/14/2016 10:16 PM

Created: 02/14/2016 8:05 PM

Lobo fans as well as Cullen Neal’s teammates speak out about an issue that has sent shock waves through the UNM athletic department.

Saturday was the first opportunity for fans to see the Lobos basketball team on the floor since word got out that Cullen Neal has received death threats for his play on the floor.

The situation has been dire enough that Neal has changed his cellphone number twice and shut down his Facebook and Twitter accounts after receiving these threats from so-called “fans”.

“Leave Cullen alone.” said Lobos head baseball coach Ray Birmingham. “You want to yell at someone, yell at me. He's a student-athlete, he's a kid, he's trying to play a game, he's wearing cherry and silver, he's our brother and he's our teammate. You want to yell at someone, come to the baseball field and yell at me."

Birmingham is sticking up for a student athlete who has never even been on his team.

Birmingham felt so strongly about what has taken place in Lobos country, he sent baseball players to hand out 'Go Cullen' signs before Saturday’s game versus San Jose State.

"Support our fellow Lobos,” Lobos baseball player Austin Isenhart said. “He's been going through a tough time so we just figured we'd help him out. We know if we were in that kind of situation we'd want him to do the same."

Around 13,000 Neal supporters came to The Pit with some of their own “Go Cullen” signs in hand to give Neal the biggest ovation he’s received since putting on the cherry and silver.

"It was awesome,” Cullen’s father and UNM basketball head coach Craig Neal said. “It's good to see. I feel kind of bad that I had to come out and say something. It's one of those things where you don't want that to happen. You just want the fans to support all our players in our program and I would've done that for any player. It just so happens he's my son."

Craig Neal revealed the threats have shaken his son mentally, and it has affected his play on the floor.

"Nobody deserves that,” Lobo fan Bob Agnew said. “People forget these are kids playing a game."

"I am absolutely embarrassed for my fellow fans who have stepped over the line,” Kenneth Peters said.

Neal Is one of the best players on this team averaging 13 points and 4 assists per game.

"He's turning his energy around,” Neal’s teammate Elijah Brown said. “I think the fact that he knows we have his back. The fact that he knows (now) that the fans are supporting him. I think he'll start to come around and just be the player he is."

Lobo faithful made it loud and clear Saturday this is a fan base proud to have Neal as their hometown kid.

After the game, Neal released this statement:

"I love this game,” Neal said. “I really appreciate the way this community has supported me and my teammates the past few days. It's an honor to be a student-athlete here and I'm proud to represent this university and this city. We will continue to work hard and strive for excellence."