The knives are out for Valerie Jarrett, President Barack Obama's closest aide.

Jarrett's official title is senior adviser to the president. Her portfolio includes overseeing the White House Offices of Public Engagement and Intergovernmental Affairs and chairing the White House Council on Women and Girls.

But Jarrett is much more than that, according to Noam Scheiber's profile in The New Republic. The president consults her on every major decision. She holds a key vote on cabinet appointments. She determines who sits where at the State of the Union address and state dinners. Wherever the president goes, Jarrett goes.

Is Jarrett a yes-woman insulating the president from his critics? Or is she his only connection to the real world outside the White House? Both, Scheiber suggests:

Not surprisingly, all this influence has won Jarrett legions of detractors. They complain that she has too much control over who sees the president. That she skews his decision-making with her after-hours visits. That she is an incorrigible yes-woman. That she has, in effect, become the chief architect of his very prominent and occasionally suffocating bubble. ... Still, Jarrett's role is far more textured than this narrative would suggest. She has served as a teller of hard truths, urging Obama to clean up his initial remarks about Harvard Professor Henry Louis Gates's arrest in 2009, which, she worried, sounded disrespectful to police. She is an all-wise interpreter of the president's thoughts. When the White House began taking flak for its man-cave sensibilities, senior officials consulted Jarrett to figure out where Obama stood. "The White House counsel Greg Craig stopped by," recalls a former Jarrett aide. "He was like, 'Hey, is the president worried about this?'" (He was.) ...

Two days before Scheiber's piece hit, Politico published a piece by Carol Felsenthal provacatively titled "Fire Valerie Jarrett.'' Both pieces cover much of the same ground but Felsenthal does it with an edge:

Almost since the start of Barack Obama's presidency, people who have actual, real duties in the West Wing of the White House--the working, executive part of the government, that is--have been urging him to do something about Valerie Jarrett. Push her into the East Wing, where she can hang out with Michelle Obama and the White House social secretary, or give her an ambassadorship--or something--but for Pete's sake get her out of the way of the hard work of governing that needs to be done. Now it's really time to do it.

And toward the end, this twist of the knife:

Jarrett's questionable career inside the White House somehow symbolizes the opportunity cost of the Obama presidency--a wasted chance to make change. From foreign trips to White House policy meetings, she is occupying a critical space that ought to belong to an operator focused on governing and government, someone experienced in the levers of the bureaucracy and playing on the world stage. Now in his sixth year, humbled by the midterms, the president badly needs the best people around him, people who can provide real advice and build a lasting legacy. Instead, he's got the palace guard watching his back--and judging from Obama's poll numbers, they haven't done it well.

The Politico and New Republic profiles, coming right after the disastrous midterm elections for Democrats, has Washington abuzz.

Matthew Yglesias, writing in Vox, says the real reason people hate Jarrett is because she personifies Obama's interests, not the interests of his party or his political allies:

In the early years, the Obama administration was often said to be full of "Clintonites." In truth, it was just full of experienced Democrats. A lot of them had worked in the Clinton White House, but others had been with Tom Daschle or Dick Gephardt or Max Baucus or other prominent Congressional Democrats. Jarrett is the exception to that rule. She wasn't in national politics before 2009 and when Obama leaves office she'll go wherever he goes. She the representative of his interests -- his priorities, his legacy -- as opposed to party or interest group concerns. This is a valuable role to play, but it very naturally sets her up to be hated. In addition to her formal role as Barack Obama's personal representative to outside groups, her informal role in the counsels of state is to get in people's way and make calls that wouldn't get made in a fully genericized White House. Naturally, that ends up with her stepping on toes and making enemies. Not because she's doing her job poorly, but because that's her role in the administration. And it's a very difficult job.

Mika Brzezinski, co-host of MSNBC's "Morning Joe'' and a friend of Jarrett's, called the criticism of the White House aide "sexist.''

... I have dished out criticism toward Valerie and her peers many times. But I must say this week's gossipy post-mortems after the elections are unbecoming. Would these criticisms be leveled at men like John Podesta or Dan Pfeiffer? They work closely with the President. In fact, Ms. Jarrett was out of commission for the most important stretch of the campaign because of a serious medical procedure on her spine. So why is Valerie the focus of these ridiculous attacks? Perhaps it is because she is a woman. In the case of the Politico piece, which was written by a woman, I can draw from the conclusions in my book - women are often the toughest on their own. But whether the attacks come from women or men in the media, it does seem that strong female advisors who are close to the president become the focus of the most hostile and catty criticism. Whether it was the horrific caricatures of Condi Rice, or the snide sneers aimed at Karen Hughes, or today's unfair focus on Valerie, at this point the whole "blame-the-woman" routine is just getting old.

Fox News media critic Howard Kurtz detects no sexism in the coverage of Jarrett but does call her "scapegoat-in-chief'' for the media.

... The notion that a single staff person is responsible for most of the administration's shortcomings over the last six years is rather far-fetched. Whether it's ObamaCare or the VA or immigration or ISIS or Syria, it's the president who is making the decisions and selling them. If the principal problem, as the president told Bob Schieffer on "Face the Nation," was a failure to adequately communicate his policies, then the man with the bully pulpit must take most of the blame. But the press has a shakeup mentality: all major political defeats must be followed by some kind of housecleaning. And reporters are getting tired of the story line about Obama essentially brushing off the debacle. So the journalistic knives are out for Jarrett.



More reaction from Twitter:

.@vj44 is a tremendous partner & voice for women & girls. Disappointed in Politico for running a hit piece that's all sexism & no substance. — Cecile Richards (@CecileRichards) November 8, 2014

.@Politico Yes, fire Valerie Jarrett but the real problem--the real embarrassment--is Obama himself http://t.co/XEGN3ZeIRf — Dinesh D'Souza (@DineshDSouza) November 8, 2014

Don't know enough abt Obama WH to know if it's right or wrong. But jeez this one of nastiest takedowns read in while http://t.co/zpVIzU2Plk — Josh Marshall (@joshtpm) November 8, 2014