HASBROUCK HEIGHTS — Texas Gov. Rick Perry called the nation’s implementation of Obamacare “a criminal act” as he ended his trip across New Jersey today with a rally for U.S. Senate candidate Steve Lonegan outside a Bergen County diner.

“If this heath care law is forced upon this country, the young men and women in this audience are the ones who are really going to pay the price,” Perry, a former Republican candidate for president, told the crowd outside the Bendix Diner. “And that, I suggest to you, reaches the point of being a felony toward them and their future.

“That is a criminal act, from my perspective, to put that type of burden on them — to mortgage their future like that,” he continued. “America cannot stand that.”

Perry — who ran an unsuccessful campaign last year for the Republican presidential nomination — visited New Jersey to stump for Lonegan, the conservative activist and former Bogota mayor running in the state’s special U.S. Senate election Oct. 16. He joined Lonegan at rallies in the Shore towns of Smithville and Bayville before trekking up to north Jersey to cap the day at the diner, a landmark on Route 17 in Hasbrouck Heights.

The appearances came on the same day enrollment began in Obamacare, President Obama’s controversial health care overhaul officially known as the Affordable Care Act.

Today also marked the first day of a federal government shutdown that took affect after Republicans in the House of Representatives and Democrats in the U.S. failed to reach a budget agreement over Obama’s law. Republicans sought to defund Obamacare, and Democrats wouldn’t budge.

Both Perry — a possible 2016 presidential candidate — and Lonegan praised Republicans in Congress for fighting the law. Lonegan said he was proud they had “the guts to hold the line against Obamacare.”

A proponent of small government, Lonegan said he barely noticed the effects of the shutdown — which closes services like national parks but doesn’t stop Social Security payments, the military from working or the delivery of U.S. mail.

“On the federal level, it’s a little inconvenient,” he said, “but not so much so. … We’re shutting down unnecessary parts of government? Good.”

Perry praised Lonegan as someone who would fight for similar causes.

“I’m in this state today because I believe in this man,” Perry said. “I believe in his vision for America.”

Lonegan’s opponent, Democratic Newark Mayor Cory Booker, supports Obamacare and blamed Republicans for the shutdown during an appearance at Farleigh Dickinson University in Madison this afternoon.

“I can’t help but get a little upset about what's going on in America today,” Booker said.

The Newark mayor is a heavy favorite against Lonegan. But recent polls show Lonegan closing the gap: He was down by more than 30 points in polls released a few weeks ago, while polls released in the last week reveal him to be trailing Booker by only 12 or 13 points.

“That is called momentum,” Lonegan, who has mounted a fierce campaign criticizing Booker, said.

Lonegan today also praised the job Perry has done in three terms as Texas’ governor, noting how that state’s economy is much more robust than New Jersey’s. Unemployment last month in Texas was 6.5 percent — lower than the U.S. rate of 7.3 and a full 2 percentage points lower than New Jersey’s 8.5 rate.

“Texas is a model of economic growth,” he said. “No state even comes close.”

Lonegan said the key reason is “liberty.”

“Texas is a free state,” he said. “You walk up to a restaurant there, and it says, ‘Leave your firearms outside.’ That is so cool.”

Perry could end up facing Republican Gov. Chris Christie in the 2016 Republican presidential primary. A campaign spokeswoman for Perry said he is not meeting with Christie during today’s trip.





RELATED COVERAGE

• Senate candidate Cory Booker hits opponent Lonegan, Republicans at FDU speech

• While campaigning with Lonegan, Texas Gov. Rick Perry blasts Booker, Obama

• Americans anxious, irritated as government shuts down

• Complete coverage of the 2013 special U.S. Senate election