It looks like Screech wasn’t saved by the bell when he got arrested last week.

According to CNN, actor Dustin Diamond — most famous for his role as “Screech” in the ’90s sitcom “Saved by the Bell” — was arrested Friday for his involvement in a bar stabbing in Port Washington, Wisconsin.

As detailed by the police report, the now-37-year-old Diamond faces three misdemeanor charges after a man was stabbed at the Grand Avenue Saloon Thursday night.

In particular, Diamond has been charged with second-degree recklessly endangering safety, carrying a concealed weapon, and disorderly conduct with use of a dangerous weapon. He’s being held on a $10,000 bond.

The former tween star, who is from Port Washington, alleged that he and his girlfriend Amanda Schutz encountered a group of people in the bar behaving rudely and he thought “there was going to be a brawl.”

After moving to pay the bill and grab their coats, Diamond said he turned to see his girlfriend bleeding as two men held her hair. A man then grabbed Diamond, and the actor said that he may have stabbed him. While Diamond originally claimed he used the pen he was signing the bar receipt with as a weapon, he later admitted to having a knife.

“Diamond stated that he did not intentionally stab the individual in the bar but that chaos broke out and people were grabbing at him and that he swung his arms to break free,” reads the police report.

Officers found a “stiletto folding knife with a 3.75-inch blade, which uses a thumb stud and assisted opening mechanism” at the scene of the crime.

Other witnesses spoke of a confrontation between two women that evolved into a larger fight. One of the women, witnesses explained, was complaining about people photographing her boyfriend. Should such a spontaneous photo op have occurred, it’s probably a safe bet to assume that the former “Saved by the Bell” star was the subject.

The victim of Diamond’s apparent stab suffered a non-life threatening wound and even said he didn’t initially notice the cut. Perhaps he was undermining the damage out of embarrassment for being hurt by Screech.

Diamond and Schutz fled the bar in a vehicle after the incident but were later stopped by police. Schutz was charged with disorderly conduct but released from police custody.