As Sen. Patty Murray describes it to Yahoo Health, this year’s government shutdown drama — with Planned Parenthood and women’s reproductive rights squarely in the crossfire — is nothing new. It’s a veritable Groundhog Day, happening in 2011, in 2013, and now again, in 2015. (Photo: Susan Walsh/AP)

“It’s the same story, just running with a different title,” Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., told Yahoo Health in an exclusive interview on Tuesday afternoon.

Murray was speaking of the choice of her Republican colleagues to use the Senate’s critical time before the federal budget deadline on Oct. 1 to attack women’s health — such as Tuesday’s failed attempt by Senate Republicans to pass a federal 20-week abortion ban — instead of working on a budget deal to avert a looming shutdown.

“To me this is déjà vu,” Murray said, “In 2011, every item of the budget was agreed to except this one issue. They held out until we had hours to go [until a shutdown]. But women in the House and Senate fought back and were loud and clear — and they backed down.”

Here’s what happened in 2011…

In April of 2011, a little more than an hour before the midnight deadline that would have forced a partial shutdown of the federal government, congressional leaders and President Obama were able to reach a budget agreement that included $38 billion in across-the-board spending cuts, but did not, as Republicans had previously demanded, eliminate federal funding for Planned Parenthood.



At the time, then-Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nevada, noted that his Republican colleagues could either “keep their word and significantly cut the federal deficit or they can hold their ground and shut down the government over women’s health. If that sounds ridiculous, it’s because it is ridiculous.”

Related: Senate Blocks 20-Week Abortion Ban Bill

During the looming shutdown in 2011 over Planned Parenthood, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney, the Republican presidential nominee in 2012, vocally supported Republican efforts to eliminate federal funding to Planned Parenthood. Almost a year after a shutdown was averted, he told a reporter that when it comes to his plans for reducing the deficit: “Planned Parenthood, we’re going to get rid of that.”

Romney went on to lose to incumbent Barack Obama, who won female voters by 12 points, 56 percent to 44 percent. Romney won among men by 8 points. Gallup said the “total 20-point gender gap is the largest Gallup has measured in a presidential election since it began compiling the vote by major subgroups in 1952.”

And it happened again in 2013…

Murray notes that when there was an actual shutdown after a budget deal failed to be reached in 2013 — at the time, Republicans were refusing to move forward on a budget without the repeal of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), known colloquially as Obamacare — women’s health was also a key component.

Regarding the ACA, she says, “Much of that has really helped women” — indeed, critical pieces of the legislation pertained to mandated coverage of well-woman and preventative health care services for women, as well as full coverage without a co-pay for contraception — “So that was a personal affront too.”

“What the Republicans are doing is putting women’s health as hostage to everything else they’re doing — and today’s vote shows that they don’t have the votes to do it,” Murray says, referring to Tuesday’s Senate block of the bill to ban abortions after 20 weeks.

Murray was so confident that Republicans would not be able to secure the 60 votes needed to pass the abortion ban legislation on Tuesday that she skipped the vote.

Murray instead honored a preexisting commitment to the president of China, Xi Jinping, who arrived in Seattle this morning to meet with technology industry leaders and state elected officials as the first stop in his six-day visit to the United Stated, in advance of his state visit with Obama in D.C. later this week.

“We have really important issues to talk about, and it’s really important that I be here to meet the president and discuss the economic issues that are important to us and to China, said Murray of her meeting with Xi. “I didn’t feel that partisan posturing should trump the ongoing relationship between the U.S. and China.”

Read More