A man walks his dogs in Brooklyn Bridge Park in the Dumbo section of Brooklyn on Thursday. European Pressphoto Agency

Commuters in the New York-New Jersey metropolitan area faced yet another messy commute Thursday morning, as snow slowed both mass transit and roadways.

Snow began falling steadily in the tri-state area around 5 a.m. Thursday morning, with accumulation ranging from two to three inches by mid-morning, according to the National Weather Service.

At New York’s La Guardia Airport, a Delta Air Lines Inc. jet with 125 passengers skidded off the runway while landing and struck a fence Thursday morning.

The Fire Department of New York said it was treating minor injuries at the scene but hasn’t transported any one to the hospital. The National Transportation Safety Board said officials were headed to the airport to investigate.

Elsewhere in New York, the MTA reported delays on some New York City subway lines on its website, while the Metro-North Railroad reported delays on its New Haven and Hudson lines due to weather-related power problems.

In New Jersey, Gov. Chris Christie declared a state of emergency and closed state offices Thursday morning. The state Department of Transportation had deployed 2,300 salt spreaders and plows to help clear highways as of the morning.

NJ Transit trains running to New York City experienced delays this morning due to overhead wire problems, and the agency was cross-honoring tickets between its trains and buses Thursday. Many school districts were closed.

Snowfall is expected to continue throughout the day and into the early evening, with temperatures continuing to drop into the lower 20s. That means commuters can likely expect additional hiccups heading home later Thursday.

“The evening commute period will obviously be impacted,” said Tim Morrin, meteorologist with the National Weather Service. “With those cold temperatures, it will be more difficult to treat roadways. We would expect a much slower than average commuter time period for the evening hours.”

Southern parts of the region, including Staten Island, Brooklyn, Queens, and Nassau and Suffolk Counties are expected to see a total of six to eight inches of snow Thursday, Mr. Morrin said. Farther north in Manhattan and the Bronx, snowfall totals will be slightly less, around four to six inches.

Tri-state area residents will have to brace for more cold Thursday evening and into Friday, but there is hope for warmer weather ahead.

The National Weather Service expects a calmer forecast early next week, with temperatures reaching into the 40s.

“We’re not expecting any storms at least through Wednesday of next week, and we’re expecting moderating temperatures,” Mr. Morrin added.