Getting to know ESSA

With help from Marcella Bombardieri, Allie Grasgreen Ciaramella, Lauren Dezenski, Kimberly Hefling and Maggie Severns

GETTING TO KNOW ESSA: The education world is eagerly awaiting a bill expected early next week that could replace No Child Left Behind — and waivers, too — by the end of the year. So what’s going to be in the Every Student Succeeds Act? A lot has been written (some of it by us) but Morning Education will be laying out even more on the forthcoming bill, based on information currently available, in the days to come. Spot something interesting and wonky in an outline or draft bill? Send it our way.

Story Continued Below

— The new SIG: The framework for updating NCLB includes a 7 percent set-aside in Title I for school support and improvement. Schools will receive the funds for plans that are “evidence-based,” and the framework has language laying out the bar those plans will have to meet in order to qualify as “evidence-based.” Districts and schools will also have to consult with teachers, parents, principals and others when they’re putting together plans for school improvement.

— The new tests: The framework allows for computer-adaptive tests that were hard to use under NCLB, which required all students to take the same tests. That made it difficult to measure progress made by students who were either above or below their grade level. Fordham Institute President Michael Petrilli said he’s “especially glad” to see this provision because it “should open the door to true adaptive tests, which will lead to lots more accuracy for kids way above or below grade level (and thus more accuracy in their growth scores — important for schools and teachers).”

— Joel Packer has the roundup of which programs are funded, and by how much, based on details currently available: http://bit.ly/1leOqj8 .

— Mailbag: Maggie Severns’ story about how many on the left fear that the bill could hurt poor and minority kids [ http://politico.pro/1LuNeNT ] elicited this response from an education advocate who’s been involved with the reauthorization process: “There seems to be collective amnesia about waivers among the chattering class,” the advocate said. “Under waivers, individual groups of students don't have to matter at all in school ratings. And when it comes to improvement action, states and districts are invited to ignore all but a small fraction of schools with under-performing groups.” Ultimately, the new agreement “gets us back closer to the intent of Title I: Expectations and support for vulnerable students.”

— Bush-era Education Secretary Margaret Spellings slammed the rewrite while in Austin earlier this week, Houston Chronicle reports: http://bit.ly/1R2wF2Z . But Sen. Patty Murray sang its praises at a Seattle elementary school last week. The Columbian: http://bit.ly/1P4ZVXF .

GOOD TUESDAY MORNING, NOV. 24. Greetings from Rochester, New York, where I’m spending Thanksgiving! We got about an inch of snow [ http://bit.ly/1NodTDx ] on Sunday night and I have to say, I don’t hate it. [ http://bit.ly/1PVXepM ] Don’t forget to send your tips, clips and amusing GIFs — to cemma@politico.com or @caitlinzemma . Send events to: educalendar@politicopro.com . And follow us on Twitter: @Morning_Edu and @POLITICOPro .

EDUCATION AT A GLANCE: Teachers of elementary school-aged children and younger across OECD countries are paid, on average, 78 percent of the salary of a similarly-educated, full-time worker. The numbers aren’t much better for middle school teachers and high school teachers across the globe, OECD’s new “Education at a Glance” report finds. That’s because the economic downturn in 2008 led to a drop in teacher salaries, even as countries started to make a slow recovery. Between 2010 and 2012, public spending on education overall fell in more than one in three OECD countries. Without competitive salaries, it’s hard to attract the best and brightest to the profession, the report says. The news comes as the teaching force across OECD countries is aging: In 2013, more than a third of teachers teaching high school-aged students were at least 50 years old. Find the report here: http://bit.ly/1jgzXSt .

— When it comes to higher education, 80 percent of adults across OECD countries who completed some kind of post-secondary education are employed, compared to 70 percent of adults with the equivalent of a high school degree and 60 percent of adults without the equivalent of a high school degree, the report finds. Adults who pursue higher levels of education are also more likely to be engaged in the world around them, the report says. They’re more likely to be in good health, volunteer, trust others and feel like they have a say in government.

TFA UNDER FIRE IN LAUSD: Traditional public school advocates are urging Los Angeles Unified School District board members to rescind a contract with Teach for America for special education services. At its meeting this November, LAUSD’s board ratified a contract with TFA to fill more than two dozen special education teaching positions. “There was no debate on the matter; it was hidden in the consent calendar with attachments of attachments buried deep,” the advocates write in a petition. “LAUSD senior staff needs to go back to the drawing board to create partnerships with reputable teaching programs to recruit teachers who will be qualified on Day 1 and are likely to remain committed to the teaching profession.” Find the petition here: http://bit.ly/1kQntmh .

— In a statement, TFA said the petition “does a disservice to the district’s students and to the dedicated TFA corps members working alongside their fellow teachers to expand opportunities for these students.” TFA is a proud ally of the special education community, the statement continued, and “adding capacity in this content area is one of the most urgent issues facing our education system — and it’s imperative that we engage in transparent and productive dialogue that will lead to better outcomes for students.” Read the full statement: http://bit.ly/1jgPnGg .

SUPPORT FOR STRUGGLING STUDENT LOAN BORROWERS: Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey will roll out a new initiative today to provide assistance to struggling student loan borrowers, as well as outline actions already taken by her office against unlawful debt relief companies in Massachusetts. Healey has worked with Democratic Sen. Elizabeth Warren to push for a federal crackdown on for-profit colleges that engage in unlawful practices. Today’s announcement will apply to any student who has attended any college or university, according to Healey’s office. Affected students, the National Consumer Law Center, the Project on Predatory Student lending and the Crittenton Women’s Union will be on hand for a press conference, which starts at 11 a.m. ET in Boston.

HELP STILL WANTED: Fewer schools reported having teaching vacancies and difficult-to-staff positions in 2011-12 than did so a decade prior, but problems persist, the Education Department’s National Center for Education Statistics says in a new report. Sixty-eight percent of public schools had at least one vacancy four years ago, compared with 83 percent in 1999-2000. Another 15 percent said they had openings that were either “very difficult” to fill or that the school “could not” fill, down from 36 percent in 2000: http://1.usa.gov/1XbYJ3v .

— Speaking of teachers, the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards will offer certification to foreign language instructors other than those in French and Spanish through a new alliance with the American Council on the Teaching of Foreign Languages. The groups also intend to boost professional development in world languages departments, strengthen their teaching and get more Board-certified teachers in front of students.

— Indiana Superintendent Glenda Ritz said Monday that she’s seeking an extension to provide schools with more time to implement new requirements for dual credit teachers. The move will also help the state deal with an anticipated shortage of dual credit teachers because of the new requirements. “As Superintendent and Co-Chair of the Dual Credit Advisory Council, I have advocated for additional flexibility from these burdensome requirements which would needlessly limit Hoosier students’ access to quality, college-level coursework,” Ritz said. “While a five-year delay in implementation will greatly help students and schools, I remain committed to working to finding a long-term solution to this problem to make sure that our students continue to benefit from rigorous, dual-credit courses.”

TEACHER EVALUATION NIRVANA: Brookings is critiquing a recent policy statement from the American Educational Research Association that was skeptical of using value-added scores when making decisions about teachers. AERA said the conditions needed to make VAM scores accurate can’t be met in many cases: [ http://politico.pro/1Tbil7y ]. But Michael Hansen, deputy director of the Brown Center on Education Policy, said VAM should be measured in the context of other performance measures, “not relative to a nirvana that does not exist.” Alternatives to VAM like teacher observation have their own problems, he wrote. He agreed with AERA that more research would be valuable, but argued, “If we are looking for a performance measure that has zero errors, we ought to abandon performance evaluation altogether.” More: http://brook.gs/1QER2Ej .

NEW FOR EDU LEADERS: The Council of Chief State School Officers and the National Policy Board for Educational Administration have released new, final revamped standards for education leaders. Both groups first embarked on an effort to refresh the standards last year. Find the new standards here: http://bit.ly/1MylNXy .

MOVERS AND SHAKERS

— The Chronicle of Higher Education turns 50 this week: http://bit.ly/1Oombsg .

— The Parent Coalition For Excellent Education, a New Jersey advocacy organization, has formally launched: http://bit.ly/1HiCnvB .

REPORT ROLL CALL

— Young, black households are much more likely to have student debt than their white peers, Demos and IASP find in a new report: http://bit.ly/1YpO1Js . In a second report, Demos says there’s no sound rationale for applying such an “unforgiving” bankruptcy standard to federal student loans: http://bit.ly/1Oc7SZx .

— The New York opt-out movement is also about wealthy school districts struggling to meet the state’s new, challenging standards for college readiness. Union Square Learning: http://bit.ly/1I4wlto .

— Parents’ fears about their teenagers’ heavy use of cell phones and social media may be exaggerated, but cyberbullying and sleep disruption are important exceptions. Perspectives on Psychological Science: http://bit.ly/1QTM9pV .

SYLLABUS

— North Carolina school districts sue to recoup funds from fines. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/1Oc7AC6

— It will take more than $90 million to cover the cost of an additional 9,730 students expected to enroll in Utah schools next fall. Deseret News: http://bit.ly/1OSNzSa

— Lawyer reveals details of arrest of “clock kid” Ahmed, plans to file suit. The Washington Post: http://wapo.st/1N4Y7ac

— AltSchool, the Zuckerberg-backed tech primary school, heads to Chicago. ChicagoInno: http://bit.ly/1QF54FW

— Arizona state schools chief seeks dismissal of state education board's lawsuit. Arizona Daily Star: http://bit.ly/1lGftEt

— Fight over who pays for Pennsylvania public schools heads to Senate floor. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/1YpUIes

— Youngstown State University investigating graffiti in support of Islamic State. Cleveland.com: http://bit.ly/21cZbn9

— Who will be the next Texas education chief? Texas Tribune: http://bit.ly/1SgJJAk

— Florida Gov. Rick Scott proposes record $20.2 billion education budget. POLITICO Florida: http://politico.pro/1I6U814 .

— Idaho panel approves moving away from failed broadband program. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/1LwjeBi

— Declining coal production will cut Wyoming school funding. The Associated Press: http://bit.ly/1Oc7Ocq

Hello [ http://bit.ly/1OVFaLO ] it’s the Pro Education team: @ MLBombard or mbombardieri@politico.com , @ CaitlinZEmma or cemma@politico.com , @ alliegrasgreen or agrasgreen@politico.com , @ khefling or khefling@politico.com , @ MaggieSeverns or mseverns@politico.com , @ NirviShah or nshah@politico.com .