During this time of expansion in the Health & Welfare and Affordable Care Act Compliance areas, there is no better person than Michelle Barki to lead our professional compliance team to the next level of growth.

Medcom, a leading provider of fringe benefit administrative services for Flexible Spending Accounts (FSAs), Health Reimbursement Arrangements (HRAs), Health Savings Accounts (HSAs), COBRA and Retiree Billing, Affordable Care Act (ACA) Consulting and Health and Welfare Compliance Services, announced today that Michelle A. Barki, J.D. has joined the company as Senior Legal Counsel effective November 17, 2014. Ms. Barki brings over 25 years of experience healthcare benefits including several assignments with major Healthcare carriers, Third Party Administrators, leading nonprofit agencies, and the public sector. Ms. Barki has also practiced law for the past ten (10) years.

With a singular focus on making customers successful, Ms. Barki has a proven track record of creating an outstanding client experience. Her extensive background and experiences make her uniquely qualified to lead Medcom to the next stage of growth, as the organization continues to make significant investments in its Health and Welfare and Affordable Care Act consulting practice.

“During this time of expansion in the Health & Welfare and Affordable Care Act Compliance areas, there is no better person than Michelle Barki to lead our professional compliance team to the next level of growth” said Michael J. Bracken, President of Medcom. "Michelle is a proven leader in both the health care and legal communities, with strong experience in meeting the employee benefits needs of major employers. Michelle has a strong vision for how our resources, technology, and professional guidance will enable Medcom clients to reduce their exposure to Health and Welfare and Affordable Care Act violations. This is exactly the right step for Medcom as the company continues to innovate and grow.”

“Medcom has built an industry-leading fringe benefit administration and compliance platform, boasts an impressive roster of clients, and has a strong management team with deep and diversified experience. I couldn’t be more honored to join the company,” Ms. Barki said. “The increased oversight of the Department of Labor (DOL) and Internal Revenue Service (IRS) in monitoring Health and Welfare Compliance programs and the great complexity of the Affordable Care Act creates a tremendous opportunity for organizations like Medcom to provide viable solutions for employers, which empower them to focus on their business enterprise rather than compliance risk. Medcom has a solid foundation in place, and is well positioned to add even greater value for its clients and end-users. I look forward to working with Michael Bracken and the entire Medcom team. Together, we will continue to relentlessly focus on our clients, helping them to better manage their entire employee benefit program."

About Medcom

Medcom is a leading employee benefits administrator and Health & Welfare compliance consultant, well-known for specializing in exceptional service and offering a variety of products that are designed to help employers meet the challenges of a rapidly changing workforce. With a professional staff of specialists, Medcom offers consulting services relating to ERISA compliance, COBRA administration, Flexible Spending Account administration, Health Reimbursement Arrangement administration, Health Savings Account administration, and Retiree Billing services.

Founded in 1983, Medcom has grown and changed with the economy and the workforce. Medcom administers a variety of tax advantaged benefit plans using sophisticated debit card technology to meet the convenience needs of Plan participants and the administrative goals of the employer.

Medcom is a leader and innovator among Third Party Administrators. Our business continues to grow, resulting from superior personal service from our staff of customer service and other benefits professionals.

As regulatory compliance continues to increase in complexity, Medcom has expanded our scope of regulatory compliance services to include educational seminars, technical writing, Form 5500 Reporting, Non-Discrimination Testing, Wrap Plan and Section 125 Cafeteria Plan preparation, Wellness Program Audits, HIPAA Privacy Policy preparation, Comprehensive ERISA Plan Reviews, and employee communications.

Medcom provides a full "turnkey solution" for employers electing to partner with us for their tax advantaged benefit plans, COBRA administration, and Health and Welfare Compliance needs.

Contact:

Michael Bracken, President

Medcom

(904) 596-2239

mbracken(at)medcom(dot)net