In years past, companies of all shapes and sizes needed to offer a good employee-benefits program in order to attract the best candidates. This was even true for early-stage startups since many found that such benefits could help them get people to leave jobs at big companies to join their small teams.

But a lot of things have changed over the years, and my feeling today is that early stage startups should not worry about offering employee benefits. If you can afford them, great, offer them. But honestly, how many startups really have the financial means to treat their work forces to catered lunches every day or on-site massages?

Of course, some benefits are valued by workers far more than others, like health insurance. Yet startups should still think twice before offering health coverage to their employees due to the cost. It’s so expensive that even big companies are cutting way back on the coverage they provide or the number of employees they make eligible for coverage. (For a recent example, see “Target Cuts Health Coverage for Part-Time Workers.”)

Secondly, individual plans are now more accessible due to the Affordable Care Act, so employees don’t necessarily need a company-sponsored plan to access affordable health insurance.

Finally, many workers are now “mobile” in their careers, meaning they jump from company to company every few years. For these folks, having to re-apply for health coverage every time they change jobs would be a hassle. A “portable” plan that moves with them from job to job would make more sense.

I spoke with an insurance broker to get a sense of how many startups were actually offering health-care benefits. Here is what I learned. For companies with two to 15 employees, approximately 35% offer health-care benefits, so the remaining 65% have decided not to offer it). And for companies with 16 to 50 employees, a materially higher 65% offer health-care benefits, as their budgets grow. And under the health-care law, companies with 50 or more employees will be required to offer insurance coverage to all full-time staff starting in 2015, which helps validate my assumption: Early-stage startups should not feel like they have to offer benefits. That’s something they should worry about only after they grow their revenues and profits to a point when doing so makes sense.

In addition, I wanted to know for the companies that do offer health-care benefits, how much do they contribute toward premiums. The answer: Companies with two to 15 employees typically only cover about half for employees and 30% for dependents. And those with 16 to 50 employees tend to cover 70% for employees and 50% for dependents. So once again, the level of benefits correlates to company size.

So if benefits are not the key draw for attracting early-stage startup employees, what are? Let me count the ways! First, hopefully the employee is getting equity in what could become a huge financial windfall if the company is successful (albeit with high risk here). Second, the employee has a lot more responsibility and fun working inside a nimble, early stage startup compared with being a “cog in the wheel” at a big company. And, third, there is nothing more personally rewarding than being part of a team that is building something from scratch and getting to see it succeed firsthand.

Rest assured, all you early stage entrepreneurs, it’s not a big deal if you can’t afford to offer employees benefits. You are in really good company among your peers.

Mr. Deeb is managing partner at Red Rocket Ventures, a startup consulting and financial advisory firm based in Chicago.

Follow @georgedeeb



Follow @WSJstartup