Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

PARIS (AP) — The latest from the final day of the French Open:

___

5:34 p.m.

Top-ranked Novak Djokovic is in trouble in the French Open final after losing the third set 6-3 to Stanislas Wawrinka, who now leads 2-1 in sets.

Wawrinka, unleashing winners from all over the court, broke Djokovic to lead 4-2 and then saved a break point on his serve.

He served out the set against an increasingly despondent-looking Djokovic, holding to love.

Wawrinka is looking to win his second Grand Slam title, while Djokovic is seeking his ninth.

Neither player has won the title at Roland Garros.

___

4:50 p.m.

Jeers on center court for Novak Djokovic as he smashes his racket angrily into the red clay after losing the second set 6-4 to Stanislas Wawrinka in the French Open final.

Djokovic, who had saved four break points in the second set, looked in control of the 10th game when he led 30-0.

But Wawrinka found his range and, after a long rally, Djokovic hit a backhand long to lose his serve, and the set.

Djokovic won the first set 6-4. Neither player has won the French Open before.

___

4:30 p.m.

Midway through a tense second set in the French Open final, the players have been keeping their energy levels up.

Top-ranked Novak Djokovic, who won the first set 6-4, has been eating dates during changeovers, while Wawrinka prefers to nibble at bananas.

___

3:56 p.m.

Novak Djokovic has won the first set of the French Open final 6-4 against Stanislas Wawrinka.

It looked set to be a long match on center court in warm conditions. The marathon ninth point lasted 40 strokes, ending when Djokovic pushed a backhand long.

But the top-ranked Serb stepped things up, breaking Wawrinka in the seventh game and holding for 5-3.

After saving break point with an ace, Djokovic clinched the first set when Wawrinka hit a forehand long.

___

3:31 p.m.

The odds are stacked against Stan Wawrinka in his French Open final against top-ranked Novak Djokovic, but former Switzerland Davis Cup captain Marc Rosset is betting on him to create an upset.

“Let’s be crazy,” Rosset told The Associated Press in the corridors of Roland Garros. “Stan in straight sets.”

___

3:18 p.m.

The French Open final between Novak Djokovic and Stanislas Wawrinka is under way in sunny conditions at Roland Garros.

Both players are looking to win the tournament for the first time, with Djokovic chasing a ninth Grand Slam title and Wawrinka going for a second title after his victory at the Australian Open last year.

The top-ranked Djokovic has not lost on clay this season.

The French crowd seemed to have picked their winner: breaking out into chants of “Novak, Novak” as he stepped onto center court.