Passing judgment. With the Los Angeles Rams trading up for the No. 1 pick in the NFL draft, maybe it’s time to say: Welcome to Denver, Colin Kaepernick.

Christian, reading the tea leaves

Kiz: In one respect, NFL execs are no different than fans drinking beer on the sofa. Everybody in NFL Nation goes cuckoo for quarterbacks. The absurd trade made by the Rams was great for … Tennessee, which unloaded the No. 1 pick. It now seems likely that no matter how you rank them, quarterbacks Carson Wentz and Jared Goff will be the first two players taken in the draft. Quarterback run! That’s not good for the Broncos. We here at Kickin’ It Headquarters like Memphis quarterback Paxton Lynch. But is it reasonable to expect Lynch will now fall to 15th or lower in the opening round, where Denver could trade up to get him? The Magic 8-Ball says: Outlook not so good.

Overcooked. Well, is Lynch that much better than Connor Cook of Michigan State? So much info flying around, it’s hard to tell. I heard someone say Cook was the college QB most ready to play in the NFL.

Doug, in the QB hunt

Kiz: Video study, player interviews and hand size all matter when evaluating a quarterback. But what a player does on the field in a big game counts the most. If you watched Cook lead Michigan State on the winning drive against Iowa in the Big Ten championship game, you might love him. But I also saw Cook get beat 38-0 by Alabama in his final collegiate game, and don’t understand the first-round love for him. If you’re asking me, the best quarterback in recent Sparty history is Kirk Cousins, not Cook.

Dak data. When it comes to passing ability, Mississippi State quarterback Dak Prescott is John Elway when compared with Tim Tebow.

Eddie, Dallas-Fort Worth

Kiz: I think the Broncos would be crazy to select Cook with the final pick in the opening round. While the scouting staff here at Kickin’ It Headquarters isn’t doing yippy-skippy cartwheels over Prescott, we’re willing to keep an open mind on him. Yes, he’s better than Tebow. Prescott, however, is a project who should not see the field in 2016. So, late in the second round, I’d rather take a gamble on the health of Notre Dame linebacker Jaylon Smith.

Bernie was bad. And today’s parting shot looks back in anger at the summer of 1996, when Nuggets general manager Bernie Bickerstaff passed on a chance to draft Kobe Bryant or Steve Nash, then let Dikembe Mutombo walk as a free agent:

Thanks for the reminder, Kiz, of how badly Bickerstaff messed up the most fun, promising group of Nuggets I’ve ever experienced. I’ve long said Bickerstaff was the most destructive figure in Denver sports history.

Matt, bitter (and for good reason)