DOMESTIC VIOLENCE/DISORDERLY CONDUCT, BULLHEAD CITY — Frank Junior Terriquez, 24, was arrested Tuesday after police were called to the area of Talc Road and Highway 95 where it was reported that a man was beating up a woman. Officers contacted a couple matching the description given by the reporting party, police spokeswoman Emily Fromelt said. Terriquez was very defensive and uncooperative with police, she said. He refused to listen to officers’ commands, Fromelt said, and had to be Tased for acting disorderly and uncooperative. The victim reportedly told officers that Terriquez had been drinking and was angry because she said that they needed to stop drinking after he started to become disorderly with her. When she left, Fromelt said, he followed the victim and threw her to the ground. Terriquez was booked on suspicion of disorderly conduct, resisting arrest, disorderly conduct per domestic violence and assault per domestic violence. Terriquez was taken to Western Arizona Regional Medical Center to be medically cleared, Fromelt said, and was very disorderly and non-compliant at the hospital and had be Tased again. He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

AGGRAVATED ASSAULT, FORT MOHAVE — Holly Marcella Palmer, 51, of Mohave Valley, was arrested Wednesday after Mohave County Sheriff’s deputies responded to a report of a combative subject at Valley View Medical Center, 5330 Highway 95. Upon arrival, deputies contacted a medical technician, who reportedly said that while staff were treating Palmer, she became irate and started punching him in the face. Deputies noted light bruising around the victim’s eye, sheriff’s office spokeswoman Trish Carter said. Deputies contacted a witness, who confirmed the victim’s statements, Carter said. Palmer was booked on suspicion of aggravated assault on medical staff, felony. She was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

WARRANT ARREST, FORT MOHAVE — Joseph David Beals, 48, of Fort Mohave, was arrested Thursday night after a traffic stop near Highway 95 and Camino Colorado. Mohave County Sheriff’s deputies ran a check that showed him to have an outstanding Texas felony warrant for probation violation. Beals was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman to await extradition.

WARRANT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — Dorann Marie Rhodes, 31, was arrested Thursday in the 1000 block of Highway 95 on an outstanding misdemeanor warrant for failure to appear. She was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

WARRANT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — William Pando Jr., 55, was arrested Thursday in the 300 block of Lee Avenue on an outstanding California felony warrant for probation violation. He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman to await extradition.

WARRANT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — Christopher Ken Payne, 24, was arrested Thursday in the 3000 block of Oak Place on an outstanding warrant for probation violation. He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

TRAFFIC OFFENSE, BULLHEAD CITY — Michael Paul Edman, 31, was arrested Thursday after officers reportedly saw him walking in the roadway at Highway 95 and Fifth Street. Officers warned Edman, acting police public information officer Carina Spotts said, but he continued to walk in the street and obstruct traffic. He was booked on suspicion of obstructing a public thoroughfare and public nuisance. Edman was held for court.

COURT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — Zachary Warren Jimenez, 23, was arrested Thursday on the orders of a judge at Bullhead City Municipal Court He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

WARRANT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — Scott Ryan Eldridge, 49, was arrested Thursday in the 1000 block of Highway 95 on an outstanding misdemeanor warrant for failure to appear. He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman.

WARRANT ARREST, BULLHEAD CITY — Nathan James Ortiz, 25, was arrested Friday at Sea Creek Drive and Forest Drive after a traffic stop on a vehicle in which he was a passenger. The driver did not dim his lights while approaching a patrol vehicle, Spotts said. A check showed that Ortiz had an outstanding misdemeanor warrant for failure to appear. He was taken to the Mohave County Jail in Kingman. The driver of the vehicle was given a verbal warning.

Unless otherwise indicated, the preceding information was taken from Bullhead City police reports