Vermillion, SD

South Dakota running back Trevor Bouma rushed for 117 yards and three scores and the Coyote defense took advantage of a backup quarterback in crushing Drake 52-0 Saturday inside the DakotaDome.



South Dakota (2-1) won its 13th consecutive home opener dating back to 2003 and earned its first shutout since 2011. The team is off next week, but will host Youngstown State Oct. 3 on Dakota Days.



Drake senior quarterback Cody Thibault made his first collegiate start in place of Andy Rice, who sat out with bruised ribs. Thibault completed 4 of 22 passes for 46 yards in the first half as South Dakota built a 31-0 lead. He threw two interceptions, the first of which was returned to the Drake 1. Bouma carried in on the next play to give the Coyotes an early 7-0 advantage.

It was Jacob Warner’s interception and 21-yard return that led to the first South Dakota touchdown. Coyote cornerback Micheal Lilly returned an overthrown pass 45 yards to Drake’s 18-yard line midway through the first quarter when the lead was 10-0. In addition to the two picks, the USD’s defense got its hands on 10 other passes during the game.



Bouma scored on two 1-yard plunges and on a 10-yard sweep along the right end. His third score made it 24-0 with 10:50 to go in the second quarter. He had 56 yards on 14 carries in the first half. His 16th and final carry went for 54 yards on the final play of the third quarter.



South Dakota piled up 296 yards rushing while quarterback Ryan Saeger totaled 157 yards through the air. Saeger threw a 35-yard touchdown pass to Nick Meyer just before halftime to make it 31-0. His 44-yard bomb to Brandt Van Roekel on the Coyotes’ first drive of the second half made it 38-0. Saeger also gained 67 yards on seven carries.



Coyote defensive end Andrew Van Ginkel forced a fumble inside the red zone and blocked a 31-yard field goal attempt with 7:14 left to play to help South Dakota preserve the shutout. He had both of the Coyotes’ sacks against Thibault and made two other stops behind the line. He finished with five tackles.



South Dakota finished with 476 yards compared to 282 for Drake. The Coyotes scored on all six of their red zone chances while Drake was scoreless in three.



Thibault finished 14 of 37 for 147 yards. Conley Wilkins carried 16 times for a team-best 59 yards for the Bulldogs while Brock Reichardt ran 12 times for 37 yards.

College {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 Associated Press. All Rights Reserved. Material may not be redistributed.