WASHINGTON — A plurality of New Jersey voters no longer approve of the job U.S. Sen. Robert Menendez is doing in office, and are showing greater dissatisfaction with fellow Democratic U.S. Sen. Cory Booker, according to a poll released Tuesday.

The Monmouth University poll found 38 percent of the state's voters both approved and disapproved of the job being done by Menendez, who was indicted April 1 on federal corruption charges. That was the first time New Jersey's senior senator was not in positive territory.

In May, Menendez's job approval rating stood at 42 percent while 38 percent disapproved, and in February, he had a 49 percent approval rating with 27 percent disapproving.

"The corruption indictment appears to be taking a toll on the senator's popularity," said Patrick Murray, director of the Monmouth University Polling Institute in West Long Branch.

Booker's job-approval rating remained in positive territory among registered voters, though it dipped to 45 percent from 51 percent and his disapproval rating increased to 24 percent from 21 percent in February.

President Obama's job-approval rating stood at 52 percent among registered voters, compared with 46 percent who disapproved. That was his second-highest positive rating since he polled 55 percent in April 2013. In February of this year, Obama had a 54 percent job-approval rating.

RELATED: Obama calls Camden a 'symbol of promise for the nation'

In addition, support for Obama's signature Affordable Care Act increased to 49 percent among adults in the state. That is the highest it has been since the question was first asked in September 2013. The poll said 43 percent disapproved, the lowest ever. In June, before the U.S. Supreme Court last month rejected another challenge to the law, 52 percent of New Jersey residents disapproved of the measure and 42 percent approved.

Seventy percent of New Jersey adults said they supported same-sex marriage, also the highest ever recorded since the Monmouth poll started asking the question in February 2009.

"The past couple of weeks have been good for the president, and that is reflected both in his job approval rating and an uptick in support for his signature healthcare policy," Murray said.

The June 30-July 1 survey of of 503 adults had a margin of error of 4.4 percentage points and the subset of 453 registered voters had a margin of error of 4.6 percentage points.

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.