Todd Davis didn’t follow yellow bricks to Dove Valley. In a league with eye-opening stories, his path sticks out. The rookie prepared for the NFL by starring at Sacramento State. Then, after an anxious six weeks following OTAs last summer, the New Orleans Saints signed the linebacker for training camp.

The Hornets aren’t a football factory. They don’t play major-college football. Their most notable victory was upsetting the University of Colorado in Boulder in 2012. Davis starred in that game.

“I had a big third-down stop that helped (set up the Hornets’ winning field goal). But it wasn’t me. It was the entire team,” he said. “Everyone contributed.”

Davis has even better memories of Colorado. Claimed off waivers a month ago from the Saints to fill in on Denver’s special teams, Davis could be a starter Monday night at Cincinnati, or at least receive significant snaps, at weakside linebacker after injuries to Brandon Marshall and Danny Trevathan. Davis talked last week about his winding journey to Denver.

Q: You played 28 snaps last Sunday at San Diego, including 23 in pass coverage. Are you ready to be a starter in prime time against the Bengals?

A: I couldn’t ask for a better situation and scenario with family watching Monday night. I always dreamed of this. Coming from Sacramento State, it was always a dream, but a dream that’s hard to realize. For me to be in this position, it’s a blessing. I will be ready for any opportunity. The communication is the biggest adjustment with the different groups in the base package.

Q: How do you compare being in the NFL with the Broncos to your college experience?

A: It has definitely been different. You get a few people at Sacramento State who know your name. It’s a smaller school. Here, you have thousands of fans waiting outside practice yelling “Todd!” I am like, “You know my name?” That’s crazy. It’s been a great experience.

Q: Your arrival in Denver created headlines because the Broncos were upset that they couldn’t reach you immediately in New Orleans, which suggested the Saints were trying to keep you from other teams. What happened?

A: It was an off day. I didn’t know people were trying to contact me. I went to the Saints’ facility and turned my phone off like I always had. I didn’t think I was going anywhere. The plan was to go back to their practice squad. When I turned my phone back on later in the day, I had a Colorado number on there. I was like, “Why is someone from there calling me?” I found out I was going to be a Bronco. Sounds good to me.

Q: A teammate, linebacker Brandon Marshall, praised how quickly you have learned the Denver defense. How has your transition gone?

A: I just saw it as an opportunity. I didn’t know what to expect. The guys have been great. It felt like home, felt good from the start. The guys here took me in and took care of me.

Q: Who was your favorite player growing up?

A: I am a big Ray Lewis guy, everything about him. His intensity, the way he talks. I watch his highlights before I play even today. I think I have seen every (NFL Films) miked-up show, every inspirational video. I don’t have a pregame dance. I don’t bring that yet. His dance was sick, though. Being from SoCal, I was a Raiders fan. I loved the Ravens later. I just loved the way Ray played. He’s the kind of person that makes you switch teams. Like LeBron James. You are a Heat fan one minute and next minute you are a Cavaliers fan again. It’s like that.

Q: Who is the biggest influence in your life?

A: My dad, Todd. He taught me how to walk the right path. He’s a pastor. He taught me the right morals. Not only to treat women with respect, but treat people the right way. Everything you do, do it as if you’re doing it for God. I talk to my dad every day. I talk to my mom every day. If I don’t, I am in trouble. That’s the other thing that brought me to Ray (Lewis). His faith. How intense and passionate he is about it. It’s something I gravitated to very strongly.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck

Todd Davis file

• 6-foot-1, 230 pounds. Plays fast. Before the draft, was hurt by pro-day workout times when his legs were fatigued from overtraining.

• Signed by the New Orleans Saints on June 23. Was waived four times over the next five months before landing in Denver.

• Played college football at Sacramento State because it was close to home. Helped the Hornets upset CU at Folsom Field in 2012.

• Finished his college career with 351 tackles (157 solo), 9½ sacks and three interceptions.

• Left the Hornets ranked second in school history in tackles.

• At the San Diego game last Sunday, had 15 friends and family members, including his grandmother, in attendance. “She will get mad if I tell you how old she is,” Davis said.

• Has impressed his Denver coaches and teammates with how quickly he has grasped the defensive schemes.