Photo

General Electric on Friday reported modestly higher quarterly profit and revenue, as it increasingly relies more on its industrial business and less on finance.

Jeffrey R. Immelt, G.E.’s chief executive, has described the strategy as a historic “pivot.” And in a morning conference call with analysts, he invoked the term again and pointed to the company’s fourth-quarter performance as evidence that the plan was succeeding.

Some crucial measures beyond top-line sales and profit also showed the progress, despite an uncertain global economy, weakness in some product lines and a stronger dollar. For example, so-called organic growth in its industrial business, which excludes the effect of acquisitions, grew by 9 percent to $32.2 billion. And the profit margins in G.E.’s industrial operations, helped by cost-cutting initiatives, continue to improve, rising by half a percentage point to 18.8 percent.

“Over all, G.E. is doing the things it said it would,” said Steven Winoker, an analyst at Bernstein Research.

G.E.’s results were helped by improving industrial demand in the United States, which is the company’s largest single market, accounting for just under 45 percent of revenue.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The American market for G.E. products, Mr. Immelt said, was “the best we’ve seen since the financial crisis.”

In the fourth quarter of 2014, G.E.’s net income jumped 61 percent, to $5.2 billion. But the percentage increase was so large only because the year-earlier quarter included a charge of nearly $1.8 billion for payments related to a consumer finance business in Japan that G.E. had sold off.

The company’s operating earnings per share rose 6 percent to 56 cents. That result was slightly above the average estimate of analysts of 55 cents a share, as compiled by Thomson Reuters.

Photo

The company’s quarterly revenue rose 4 percent to $42 billion, which was just below the Wall Street consensus of $42.1 billion. A stronger American currency, which reduces the dollar-denominated value of goods sold abroad, trimmed G.E.’s reported revenue by $600 million in the quarter.

G.E. has pursued a strategy of paring back its big finance unit, GE Capital, and expanding its industrial business since the financial crisis. The company is on track to reach its goal of cutting the earnings contribution from its finance arm to a quarter of the corporate total by next year, down from nearly half.

G.E. has returned to its roots as a manufacturer of industrial equipment including jet engines, gas turbines, locomotives and medical-imaging equipment. Its biggest move to date, agreeing to buy the energy-generation business of Alstom of France, came last year in a transaction that is expected to close by July, Mr. Immelt said.

The steep drop in oil prices, G.E. executives warned, will hit profits over the course of 2015. The company’s division selling equipment for oil and gas drilling and production generated $18.7 billion in revenue in 2014 and about 15 percent of the earnings from G.E.’s industrial business.

Equipment orders typically trail oil-price movements by six to 12 months, so the impact was muted in the fourth quarter. Revenue from G.E.’s oil and gas business declined 6 percent, to $5 billion, with operating profits rising 1 percent, to $814 million.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

But G.E. expects things to get worse for its oil and gas unit as the year proceeds, said Jeffrey S. Bornstein, the company’s chief financial officer. But that division’s management, he said, is moving swiftly to contain costs as demand deteriorates and that the problem should be “manageable.”

Yet investors and analysts are skeptical. “It’s still a significant concern,” said Mr. Winoker of Bernstein. The company’s shares have fallen 4.6 percent in the last six months, though they were up 1.9 percent, to $24.75, in afternoon trading on Friday.

G.E.’s broad portfolio of industrial businesses should help to offset the falloff in orders for oil and gas equipment. G.E.’s aviation business, which makes and services jet engines, and reported revenue of $24 billion last year, stands to gain from lower oil prices. When fuel prices drop, analysts say, airlines tend to use those savings to buy more aircraft — and consumers with more cash in their pockets travel more.

G.E.’s health care business is picking up in the United States, after being weak for a couple of years. Orders for the company’s medical-imaging equipment increased 9 percent in the American market in the fourth quarter. Hospital administrators, it seems, have learned enough about the likely impact of the Affordable Care Act to formulate plans and move ahead with investments again.