JACKSONVILLE, Fla. - Hundreds of men from the Omega Psi Phi fraternity are in Jacksonville this weekend to discuss the best ways to deal with national racial and civil rights problems.

They held a forum Friday at the Hyatt Regency downtown with the fathers of Jordan Davis, Trayvon Martin and Tamir Rice -- three African-Americans whose shootings deaths became high-profile cases -- and some of the biggest current names in civil rights. The goal is to prevent future tragedies.

The participants came to the table with personal stories on the big issues facing the African-American community today. They hope meetings like this one can make a difference.

A group of fathers who lost their sons to violence say they're now members of a club they never wanted to be in.

"It is ridiculous that we see this happening day in and day out," Ron Davis said.

Ron Davis' son, 17-year-old Jordan, was killed at a Jacksonville gas station in 2012 during a fight over loud music. The killer is serving a life sentence.



Leonard Warner's 12-year-old son, Tamir Rice, was shot and killed by Cleveland police last year. So far, the officers haven't been charged in his death.



"I really want to know -- that is my only closure -- why?" an emotional Warner said Friday.



Tracey Martin's son, Trayvon, was killed in scuffle with George Zimmerman, a neighborhood watchman acquitted in Trayvon's death.



And Anthony Scott's brother, Walter, was gunned down as he was running from an officer in Charleston. The cop in that case is facing murder charges.



The men, united by tragedy, spoke Friday about finding ways to end the violence and to make sure African-Americans are treated equally. Others weighed in as well.



"These men that kill these kids didn't look at them as human," TV personality AJ Calloway said. "They did not think that they were human. They do not look at black males as human. They have lost touch of how to treat us humanely."



The forum focused on setting good examples through leadership, being positive role models and building bright futures for others in the black community.



The participants said they feel banding together for good will slowly but surely make America a better place.



"This is great that we have this conference, this leadership conference that we can go back and take action and say, 'You know what, we have to make laws and legislation to say that black lives matter,'" Ron Davis said. "And we are not going to continue to let our loved ones get shot in the back and continue to let our loved ones be in danger in this country, because we all have to share this country together."



The leadership conference continues through the weekend. The presenters urged those in the audience to speak up, reach out to their lawmakers and demand justice for all of these high-profile cases, so that the killing stops.

Copyright 2015 by News4Jax.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.