ST. LOUIS — Kyle Parker believes he’s major-league ready. Now he gets a chance to prove it.

The Rockies called up the outfielder/first baseman from Triple-A Albuquerque Saturday to take the place of left fielder Corey Dickerson, who was placed on the disabled list with fractured ribs.

“I feel like my game still needs to improve, but I keep getting better. I have been playing a lot more first and I feel a lot more comfortable there,” said Parker, who played 18 games for the Rockies last season, but got limited at-bats and limited results. He hit .192 (5-for-26) with one run, one double and one RBI.

Promoting Parker was just one of the moves the Rockies made Saturday. Right-handed starter Kyle Kendrick was placed on the 15-day DL with right shoulder inflammation. He’s scheduled to undergo an MRI on Monday to determine the severity of his injury.

To bolster an overtaxed bullpen, the Rockies moved right-hander Christian Bergman off the disabled list and recalled right-hander Scott Oberg from Triple-A. To clear another spot on the roster, the Rockies designated lefty Aaron Laffey for assignment, with the hope he will pass through waivers and they can keep him.

Parker, 25, was the 26th overall pick in the 2010 draft. In 93 games with Albuquerque this season, he hit .280, with 53 runs, 19 doubles, four triples, nine homers and 58 RBIs. After a sluggish April, he caught fire. Since May 1, he hit .315 with seven home runs, 16 doubles and a .352 on-base percentage.

The former Clemson quarterback has tried to learn to deal with the frustration of playing the waiting game in the minors.

“It’s been difficult. To say it hasn’t been difficult would be a lie,” he said. “You never want to get caught in a bad mind-set, especially during the season. You see it all the time, guys come there (to Triple-A) and they struggle.

“I mean, it’s not like hitting in the big leagues, but it’s close. You have to be there mentally. So if I want to succeed and get where I want to go, I can’t have bitter thoughts or have those negative thoughts in my head. It wouldn’t help me produce. This is my everyday job, so I have to show up and play.”

Manager Walt Weiss said he plans to use Parker as a corner outfielder and at first base.

“He will get an opportunity to get more consistent playing time than he has in the past,” Weiss said. “He was getting better and better down there, so this is a good chance for him.”