The Delta Music Institute All Stars will perform Jan. 18 at Crystal Ball fundraiser at the Arena at Southaven for the Community Foundation of Northwest Mississippi. (Handout photo)

By Henry Bailey

The musical lineup will educate on regional culture as well as energize with “monster” dancing dynamics at the Jan. 18 Crystal Ball fundraiser for the Community Foundation of Northwest Mississippi at the Arena at Southaven.

The deadline to purchase tickets is Friday.

Gala-goers will feast on dinner music by the Delta Music Institute All Stars, which banded in 2013 to represent Delta State University during Grammy week in Los Angeles.

“Oh, it’s going to be fabulous,” said Stacye Rawlings, foundation spokeswoman. “It’ll be native Mississippi music. And the week after the Crystal Ball, they’ll be playing at the Grammys again.”

The DMI All Stars are entertainment industry majors at the institute in Cleveland, Miss., and they only do songs written or performed by Magnolia State winners of Grammys, presented by the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences.

Which means the All Stars have an extensive playlist, said foundation president Tom Pittman,

“Mississippi has more Grammy winners per capita than any other state,” Pittman said of the birthplace of the Delta blues and Elvis Presley.

Leading off the musical program at the Crystal Ball will be Mark Anderson, resident deejay for the Peabody Rooftop Party series in Memphis, with his “Video Super Show,” said Pittman.

After dinner, the gala rocks into party mode with a regional favorite, Dr. Zarr’s Amazing Funk Monster band: They range from disco infernos to ’80s glam rock, and “they’re guaranteed to get everyone out their seats and dancing,” said Pittman.

The ball’s musical range fits nicely under this year’s “Studio 14” dance club theme, he said. “We’ll have dozens of volunteers transforming the arena.”

The black-tie preferred gala is chaired by Jimmy and Courtney Tharp; the night’s Star honoree is Pittman’s brother, MTV founder Bob Pittman, and four local Community Stars also will also be recognized. The evening will include live and silent auctions with items ranging from a weeklong stay in Chicago to a bear hunt in Arkansas.

The Crystal Ball benefits some 400 nonprofit groups and causes through the Community Foundation, founded in 2002 and serving DeSoto and nine other counties — Bolivar, Coahoma, Marshall, Panola, Quitman, Sunflower, Tallahatchie, Tate and Tunica. Tickets are $150 per person and are available at 662-449-5002 or online at cfnm.org.

“It’ll be exciting, educational and fun, all in one package,” said Tom Pittman.