Former Colorado prep standout and Southern California running back LenDale White was in attendance for the Trojans’ blowout win over CU at Los Angeles Memorial Coliseum on Saturday.

For a little while, anyway.

White was escorted out of the game and he quickly took to Twitter to call out USC athletic director Pat Haden for the incident.

I can't believe @ADHadenUSC kicked me out of #thecoli shook my hand then had me escorted out. I'm still at a loss for words!!! — LenDale White (@THEREAL_LENDALE) October 19, 2014

I can't believe this for the 1st time in my life I'm truly embarrassed to b a #TROJAN I've done Wayy to much to b treated like that — LenDale White (@THEREAL_LENDALE) October 19, 2014

@ADHadenUSC u are a coward and USC should fire your punk ass — LenDale White (@THEREAL_LENDALE) October 19, 2014

Video of the incident posted on USCFootball.com showed White being escorted out of the Coliseum tunnel by police officers.

Scott Wolf, Los Angeles Daily News’ USC writer, reported that White yelled he was 41-2 as a player at USC as he was be escorted out. Wolf later reported this:

#USC A.D. Pat Haden said he did not see LenDale White after the game or have him kicked out of Coliseum — InsideUSC (@InsideUSC) October 19, 2014

It’s unclear why White was kicked out, but it’s worth noting that a week ago he had some choice words for USC defensive coordinator Justin Wilcox during the team’s win at Arizona.

“Lame a** prevent defense will do it to u eveytime. Justin Wilcox u stink. Ur play calling is absolutely f****** horrible,” White tweeted, among other expletives.

White, a running back at South High in Denver and later Chatfield Senior High in Littleton, was named the Gatorade Colorado Player of the Year in 2002 and finished his career as the state’s all-time leading rusher with 7,802 yards. (The record was broken in 2003 by Kyle Bell of Weld Central.)

White went on to play three seasons at USC, alongside Reggie Bush, before declaring for the 2006 NFL draft. He was selected in the second round (45th overall) by the Titans, but poor conditioning and off-the-field issues led to a short pro career. He last played for the Broncos, but after tearing his Achilles’ and sitting out the entire 2010 season, he was released in the summer of 2011.