Somerset County author encourages communities to embrace change in education

Felecia Nace’s new book, “Massaging the Mindset: An Intelligent Approach to Systemic Change in Education,” explores the subject of systemic change in education. (Photo: ~Courtesy of Felecia Nace) Story Highlights Somerset County author says her book helps schools and communities embrace and implement change

Book was written with a focus on school leaders, in layman’s terms

Felecia Nace — a former teacher, a change facilitator for schools and businesses, and an education specialist for the New Jersey Department of Education — has written a book exploring the subject of systemic change in education.

Her recent book, “Massaging the Mindset: An Intelligent Approach to Systemic Change in Education” (Rowman and Littlefield; February, 2015) is targeted to help schools and communities, she said.

“This book was written with a focus on school leaders, but I chose to write in layman’s terms,” Nace said. “I wanted families, community members and educators in various positions to easily grasp the concepts about current trends and changes in schools in the U.S and how each of us plays a unique role, and most importantly, a shared responsibility in the education process.”

Nace explained that systemic change or collective movement of a system can be challenging for school districts, businesses and even families.

“It is often difficult for a large group of individuals to come to agreement about how directional changes will take shape,” Nace said. “In organizations like schools that can sometimes have difficulty moving innovative ideas forward, leaders will often say ‘employees don’t want to change.’ However, there are three sides to every story. My book is written from the perspective that humans are creatures of habit and ‘effective change is learned behavior.’

“All of us have a comfort zone that we enjoy. In order for systemic changes (which involves collective movement) to occur in schools, everyone attached to the system must recognize some need for change, know how the change will enhance learning, have a voice in the change process, and understand the expectations of each individual who is attached to a given school system. So, it may not be that people don’t want to change, but more a case of people don’t know how to effectively change. In other words, the elements of systemic change can be taught.”

In addition, she continued, the breadth and depth of inclusiveness and the clarity of messages in an organization can be the “tailwind” for moving changes forward.

She said she used Somerset County resources to research her book.

“The Clarence Dillon Public Library in Bedminster was a great resource to me in completing my book as the staff was extremely helpful and it was often a quiet place to write away from the distractions of home,” she said. “The county library in Bridgewater also served as a great resource.”

Nace holds a doctorate in Educational Leadership and Change from Fielding University, Santa Barbara, California.

She said the idea for the book started from a graduate course about 14 years ago.

“Ever since I enrolled in a systemic thinking course in graduate school back in 2001, I have been fascinated with how change occurs in large organizations — taking into account all the different personalities, opinions and mindsets that leaders of organizations encounter,” she said. ‘“Naturally, my curiosity about systems thinking and systemic change centered around school systems since I have been involved with school systems for over 20 years, wearing many different hats. Systemic change is not a new topic in education. It has been written about in myriad forms.”

She said it is a community effort and parents, administrators, community leaders, teachers and school staff must work together for the greater good.

“Given the tsunami of changes that schools are currently navigating, it is wise to consider that all of us — educational leaders, school staff, parents and community members — hold a piece of the puzzle about how to improve education, but rarely do we have the opportunity to share our ideas on a large scale,” Nace said. “This was my opportunity to share my collective experiences in the field of education with the world.”

Additionally, Nace is serving on Bedminster’s Historic Preservation Commission, appointed by Mayor Steve Parker in January 2015 to serve a three-year term. The Historic Preservation Commission advises the township’s Planning Board and Zoning Board of Adjustment on all matters pertaining to historic districts, sites and structures.

“Since serving on the board, I have learned of hidden treasures about the history of Bedminster and the surrounding area,” Nace said.

“Massaging the Mindset: An Intelligent Approach to Systemic Change in Education” is available online through Rowman and Littlefield publishers (https://rowman.com/RLPublishers), barnesandnoble.com and Amazon.com. The softcover is priced at $20, eBook 19.99, and the hardcover is priced at $40. The official date of publishing was Feb. 11. Nace can be contacted at educationalhcange@ymail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1IFx5sJ