Gov. Scott Walker's Medicaid decision is looking worse and worse.

Julie Lassa

The cost of health care coverage is high enough without having to pay more and get less. But Wisconsin citizens are paying a high price for Gov. Scott Walker's refusal to accept federal funding to help strengthen BadgerCare. That decision resulted in the loss of billions of dollars from our state's economy and higher health care premiums that amount to a hidden health care tax on all of us — even as tens of thousands of people have lost their health care coverage.

I spoke out against Walker's decision back in 2013. By accepting this funding and getting a portion of our federal tax dollars back, Wisconsin could have insured tens of thousands of more working people and saved taxpayers millions of dollars in the process. Instead, the governor's plan changed program requirements that made it harder for low-income workers and their families to keep their health insurance under BadgerCare.

By limiting BadgerCare eligibility to people at the federal poverty level, the governor's plan resulted in roughly 63,000 people losing their health insurance coverage. Only those whose incomes are at or below $11,670 for individuals or $19,790 for a family of three can now qualify.

According to the Legislative Fiscal Bureau, the governor's plan costs Wisconsin taxpayers $119 million more than if he had accepted the federal investment in BadgerCare through the Affordable Care Act. And our federal tax dollars that were turned away are not going back to federal coffers — they're meeting health care needs in other states instead.

In turning our money away, Walker claimed that nearly everyone who would lose BadgerCare coverage could obtain coverage from the health care exchange created under the federal Affordable Care Act. But figures released recently by the Wisconsin Department of Health Services show that nearly 60 percent of those who lost their health insurance and had income just above poverty level did not buy insurance by the June deadline.

It's a mistake to assume workers and their families who are barely able to make ends meet now can afford health care coverage.

And these cuts affect more than the low-income working families who have lost health care coverage. With their coverage gone, people will defer getting medical treatment until their conditions are so serious that they have to go to hospital emergency rooms, where they will be treated regardless of their ability to pay. Hospitals pass this cost along to other patients, and that contributes to the soaring cost of health care and higher insurance premiums. The Fiscal Bureau estimates that this hidden health care tax will cost Wisconsinites an average of $250 more per year in health insurance premiums than residents of states that accepted federal help.

Then there's the cost to our economy. The Fiscal Bureau also estimates that accepting federal funds for BadgerCare would have brought over $2.4 billion of our federal tax dollars back into the state; it's also estimated that more than 11,000 good-paying jobs would be created as a result — jobs our state badly needs.

The evidence is clear that Wisconsin's current health care policies aren't working. That's why counties all over the state, including Portage County, are considering referenda to ask the state to reverse course. Gov. Walker should listen to them. It's time to stop asking Wisconsin taxpayers to pay more and get less.

Sen. Julie Lassa, D-Stevens Point, represents the 24th Senate District.

Read or Share this story: http://spjour.nl/1rCCoRL