No tax professional will admit it, but many are calling this tax filing season “the liar year” when it comes to the new penalty tax for not having health insurance.

The Affordable Care Act’s mandates for larger employers to offer affordable, quality insurance have been so delayed, including the assignment of health plan identifier numbers for employers to provide to the Internal Revenue Service, that there’s no way for the agency to cross-reference whether taxpayers had health insurance in 2014.

Starting last year, under the ACA or Obamacare, most U.S. residents were required by law to have health insurance or, on this April’s tax returns, pay a penalty that, for a single taxpayer, can be as little as $95 or as much as $2,448, depending on income. For a couple with three children, the penalty can range from $285 to $12,240.

Penalties are steeper next year and beyond. But on this year’s returns, filers merely have to check a box that they have minimal essential coverage that meets ACA standards.

Few submissions required

Only the 69,221 Oklahomans who bought insurance on the exchange last year are required to submit forms, including Form 1095-A issued from the exchange and any forms for underestimating or overestimating their 2014 income for the tax credits that 79 percent received. Also, those taxpayers who choose to claim one of 33 exemptions to the requirement to carry insurance must file Form 8965.

The Internal Revenue Service estimates three of four filers legitimately should be able to check the box. Most individual health plans and employer-plans, along with Medicare and Medicaid meet standards, officials say.

Confusion reigns

Meanwhile, Oklahoma City tax professionals say many area consumers are more than confused about the new tax penalty.

Rex Lykins of H&R Block said his office is fielding three to four calls a day.

“They’re asking how it will impact their taxes. But there’s no blanket answer,” he said. “We can’t compute the penalty unless we know who in their family, including their spouse and dependents, have coverage and who doesn’t, and what their household income is.”

Tax prep fees vary with the complexity of returns, Lykins said. Each additional form is an additional cost, he said.

ACA uncertainty

Midwest City enrolled agent Sean Reed said the biggest confusion is about the ACA itself.

“Surveys show only two in 10 people know what it is, but 8 in 10 know Obamacare,” he said.

Taking due diligence measures, Reed is asking his customers, for his own office files, to sign and date additional forms verifying they have insurance.

“If they’re randomly audited, I don’t want them to scream their tax preparer did this,” Reed said.

Most unaffected

Edmond certified professional accountant Mike Bell estimates the health insurance verification will add five to 10 minutes to every return preparation, but he said most of his clientele won’t be affected.

Bell said he has talked with some adult children of clients, who’ve “done the math” and are opting to go without insurance and pay the penalty because it’s less than the premiums for bronze plans on the exchange.

“They figure they’re healthy now and will buy it when and if they need it,” he said.

It’s true that with the new ACA laws, sick consumers can’t be denied health insurance or charged higher premiums because of pre-existing conditions, said Leah-Anne Janway, Oklahoma City independent agent.

“But, with few exceptions, they (those opting to go without coverage) would have to wait until the next enrollment period to get it,” she said. The rules are the same for insurance bought on or off the exchange, Janway said.

Coverage ‘worthless’

Kevin Hughes, 57, of Oklahoma City, has decided to go uninsured this year after the health insurance he bought on the exchange last year failed to cover $5,000 in heart tests for his wife. Before benefits kicked in for her, she had to meet a $6,000 deductible, to which premiums and co-pays didn’t apply, he said.

“The coverage was worthless,” he said.

“Obamacare is a farce except for those at or below the poverty level,” Hughes said. He said a Blue Cross Blue Shield plan for him and his wife would cost them $432 monthly with a deductible of $12,700, which he said amounts to 31 percent of his gross income at a small machine shop. His wife stays home with their adopted daughters, who because of special needs are insured through Medicaid.

Hughes said the new mandate gives unfair preferential treatment to federal employees. He said the same plan he considered buying on the exchange is offered to federal employees for $426 a month with a family deductible of only $700.