WASHINGTON — U.S. House Republicans from New Jersey voted Thursday to repeal the tax on multimillion-dollar estates, increasing the federal deficit by billions of dollars, a month after most supported cuts to food stamps and education aid in an effort to balance the federal budget.

The lawmakers said their vote to eliminate the inheritance tax, which covers only estates worth more than $5.4 million for individuals and $10.8 million for couples, was designed to protect heirs from having to sell small businesses and family farms to pay the levy.

"They're being punished for saving money and passing it along to their children," said U.S. Rep. Tom MacArthur (R-3rd Dist.), who said families have been forced to sell businesses because they didn't have cash on hand to pay the tax.

Rep. Leonard Lance (R-7th Dist.) said that ending the tax would encourage the growth of small businesses and the jobs they bring with them.

"The best way to create success economically in this country is to encourage the creation of businesses," Lance said. "I want a tax system that encourages the American people to engage in the entrepreneurial spirit."

The vote was 240 to 179 in favor of repealing the levy, mostly among party lines. All six of the GOP lawmakers backed the measure and all six of the state's Democratic U.S. representatives voted no.

Only 0.2 percent of estates are affected by the tax, meaning almost all family farms and small businesses are exempt from the levy, according to the Office of Management and Budget. Only approximately 5,400 estates, including 130 in New Jersey, will have to pay the tax next year, according a White House report. They would each get a tax cut averaging $3 million, according to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a Washington-based research group.

The Congressional Budget Office said repealing the tax would cost the U.S. Treasury $270 billion over 10 years.

The estate tax hasn't caused any farmers or ranchers to lose their property, Vice President Joe Biden said at a briefing with reporters from local newspapers. What it does is ask the wealthiest Americans to help fund needed government programs, he said.

"This isn't about punishing anybody," Biden said. "My wish for you is you have to pay an estate tax. I hope my children have to pay an estate tax. It means they're worth millions of dollars."



That revenue "would go a long way in making up for the devastating cuts the Republican budget inflicts on our middle class," Rep. Bill Pascrell Jr. (D-9th Dist.), a member of the House Budget Committee, said on the House floor during debate. "I think that this bill shows just where Republicans' priorities are. And I'll tell you right now — they're not with hardworking, middle class Americans."

The legislation is unlikely to become law. It would need 60 votes in the Senate to reach President Obama's desk and then a two-thirds majority of vote to override a threatened veto.

"My view is we don't need tax cuts for millionaires and billionaires," Obama said during a visit to Charlotte, N.C., on April 15.

On the same day that the House voted to repeal the estate tax, Obama drew another contrast between his policies and the Republicans when he met with 12 community leaders dubbed "champions of change," including Analilia Mejia of Glen Ridge, executive director of the state Working Families Alliance.

"It's just incredible that there are legislators who really think it makes sense to give more to those who have the most," she said in an interview after her White House visit.

Mejia's group successfully has pushed several New Jersey municipalities to require private businesses to grant paid sick leave to employees.

"The flu should not result in a worker losing the ability to buy groceries that week or make a rent payment that month," she said.

Last month, five of the six N.J. House GOP lawmakers voted for their party's budget, which eliminated traditional Medicare; repealed the Affordable Care Act; and reduced spending on Medicaid, food stamps and education aid in order to bring the spending plan into balance within a decade. Obama's proposed spending plan does not envision a balanced budget within 10 years.

Rep. Frank LoBiondo (R-2nd Dist.).was the only holdout from New Jersey and one of only 17 House Republicans nationwide to vote no on the budget, saying the domestic programs it cut were "vital to the families I represent." This time, he joined his GOP colleagues in voting to repeal the estate tax.

"For too long, South Jersey business owners and farmers have been subjected to additional taxation on family holdings when their loved ones have died," LoBiondo said. "It is reprehensible that the federal government would seek to capitalize on the death of a family member, often times erasing the hard work and dedication of generations."

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.