ST. LOUIS — The verdict is still out about the Avalanche being an above-average NHL team, but the Avs unquestionably have been great against the league’s best division, the mighty Central. After Sunday’s 3-1 victory against the mighty St. Louis Blues at the Scottrade Center — where goalie Semyon Varlamov was stellar in a 42-save performance — Colorado is 6-2 against divisional opponents.

“These division games are so important, and this is not an easy road trip,” said Avalanche captain Gabe Landeskog, who returned to the lineup after missing two games with back spasms. “Whether tonight was an ugly one or not, it was a playoff-type game and I think the guys did a good job. Obviously, Varly was our best player again.”

Landeskog used the word “ugly” because the Avs were outshot 43-18. But after getting first-period goals from Jack Skille and John Mitchell to forge a 2-0 lead for the second consecutive road game, the Blues naturally began to press. Still, Colorado had a handful of glorious chances to blow the game open in the second and third periods.

“It was the first period, the key. Both teams were on a back-to-back (set), and we scored two goals,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “When a team is down by two, they’re pressing. That’s why they had a lot of shots; they opened up the game and certainly put a lot of pressure on us.

“But I thought we defended well and when they had really good chances, obviously our goalie made some great saves. Varly was our best player tonight.”

The Avs, who began their three-game road trip with a 3-2 win Saturday at Nashville, improved to 10-9 on the road during a stretch that has them playing outside Denver in 18-of-25 games.

After Tuesday’s game against Chicago at the United Center, the Avs hope to dramatically improve their 4-7-1 home record with 9-of-10 games at the Pepsi Center.

The Blues got within 2-1 on Vladimir Tarasenko’s power-play goal at 12:55 of the third period. Alex Tanguay was in the penalty box for hooking — Colorado’s first infraction of the game. In the final minute and with Jake Allen on the bench for a sixth attacker, Avs center Carl Soderberg iced the game with an empty-net goal.

Skille and Mitchell scored at 6:09 and 11:50 of the first period, with Mikhail Grigorenko and Tanguay getting the primary assists.

Grigorenko made a slick “area pass” to spring Skille through the St. Louis blue line, and Skille beat Allen with a wrist shot. Tanguay, from behind the net, fed Mitchell, who tapped the puck past Allen while falling to the ice.

Mitchell’s goal came right after Varlamov stoned Dmitrij Jaskin from the doorstep at the other end.

The Avs had a glorious chance to go up 3-0 when the Blues’ Scottie Upshall joined teammate Ryan Reaves in the penalty box, but on the brief 5-on-3 advantage Erik Johnson had a shot clang off the left post.

St. Louis beat Central Division-leading Dallas 3-0 at home Saturday. The Blues are 6-3 in the division.

“We had some great legs early in the first period. It felt good to see every line buzzing. They were a little flat, and we took advantage of it,” Mitchell said. “It’s always a battle when you come in here and play these guys. We knew what we were getting ourselves into and certainly prepared in the first period when we played really well.

“We have to play 60 minutes. Varly, he played a full 60.”

The Avs next face Patrick Kane and the defending Stanley Cup champion Blackhawks on Tuesday. Kane extended his points streak to 26 games Sunday, the NHL’s longest in more than 20 years.

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or @mikechambers