. (Photo: Getty Images/Dorling Kindersley RF)

Political parties have gone too far to the left and too far to the right

I have voted for Democrats and I have voted for Republicans in my lifetime. I vote for the best person who shares my views and I believe will move the country forward. I don’t see a Republican Party anymore. Where did it go?

The parties have moved so far right or too far left. They used to have the American people in their hands, now they have money and a whole lot of it. That could be what is pushing both parties to the positions they take.

Democrats didn’t do well this time around; I do believe it was because people are working long hours and only catch a few things on TV. They hear the Republicans because they are much louder and seem more passionate, so it gets more air time. It is easier to jump on the bandwagon, even if that bandwagon is a smokescreen or a lie.

I am furious that the major networks did not carry President Obama’s address. This has happened before but not with the issues of today’s time. When I was growing up, we sat around the TV and hung on every word of the presidents. It was broadcast on every major channel. Now the networks just put terrible comedy shows on that seem to them to be more important than the president’s address. What are we saying to our children about this country?

The House Republicans having more exposure and doing nothing is a reflection on the president. His appeal is low because things aren’t getting done as he promised. Higher minimum wage, immigration reform, equal pay for equal work, and a registry of some form of gun control — just to name a few. Congress is in turmoil and that is all people know, and that’s a reflection on the president even though they are trying to tie Obama’s hands behind his back. Where are the Republicans that really lead in the House, those who used to create bills and actually bring bills to the floor that the Senate has approved? What about compromising? Republicans in the past would have moved bills forward and certainly would not have held off from voting on the measures because they were afraid of the outcome!

The GOP believes its strategy will ensure a Republican in the White House, and that is to do nothing but just keep shouting about the president over everything he didn’t do and everything he does. Also, they want to make sure to create voter ID requirements and reduce voting locations and times to create long lines in areas where the vote is primarily Democratic.

The Republicans may send us back to the 1930s for women’s issues and separate equality for all except the very rich. They will go after the Affordable Care Act. They yell the loudest and get the exposure. A lot of people are terrified to get insurance because they think it must be terrible because the House Republicans have tried to strike it down 33 times and are continuing to do so. They don’t realize all of the health care benefits and life-sustaining impact for families. Think of the children with terrible diseases who need costly treatments but were dropped by their insurance and another company refused to cover them because of pre-existing conditions. The Affordable Care Act does not allow that to happen.

We say democracy is the best system in the entire world, but when they see what is going on here, what kind of an example are we setting?

Sandy Rosen

Millville

Read or Share this story: http://vineland.dj/1vHBZzI