The White House plans to have more engagement from Michelle Obama in 2014. FLOTUS steps into ACA spotlight

President Barack Obama has struggled to sell his health care law this fall — and until now, he’s largely been without his top seller: first lady Michelle Obama.

The first lady has done little to promote the Affordable Care Act in recent months, marking a shift from her usual role as the president’s middle class messenger — a move that allowed her to sidestep the political battles over the law, and questions about the administration’s trustworthiness.

Story Continued Below

Now, with HealthCare.gov’s glitches mostly fixed, and pressure mounting for the administration to boost enrollment numbers — and the president’s approval ratings continuing to slump — she took on a new level of public involvement Wednesday, co-hosting a group of mothers in the Oval Office, and sitting solo for a round of interviews with African-American radio hosts.

( Also on POLITICO: Microsoft exec to be picked for HealthCare.gov)

“The first lady is the best salesperson” for the White House, senior adviser Valerie Jarrett told POLITICO. She’s getting involved now, Jarrett said, because she’s the right person to convey the message of the moment: that the uninsured — especially young people and minorities — should look for insurance on exchanges and that those with insurance are already feeling the benefits of the law.

As this phase continues, Obama will speak out more on health care, Jarrett said. People familiar with the White House’s plans expect more engagement by the first lady in 2014.

The timing of her involvement, after controversies have eased and ahead of the holidays, is no accident.

“There is no question that they wanted to keep her away from the mess it,” said Maria Cardona, a Democratic strategist who has a good relationship with the East Wing. “Now that things have started to smooth out and they’ve been able to get to a point of focusing more on the benefits and those folks who are able to sign up for insurance, it’s the right moment for the first lady to get involved.”

( Also on POLITICO: Next Obamacare crisis: Small biz costs?)

Obama steered clear of discussing the health care law through the difficult months of October and November — though after the government shutdown ended, she did attack House Republicans for “shut[ting] down our government to try to shut down Obamacare.”

An acknowledgement of the problems with HealthCare.gov was conspicuously absent from that same speech, on Oct. 25, as she offered a reminder to Democratic women of the importance of keeping in mind the people who are benefiting from the law, the “folks who come from all across the country, who come from all different backgrounds and walks of life.”

The first lady and president conveyed a similar, positive message on Wednesday afternoon, as they hosted an Oval Office meeting for eight mothers who have helped their families and their communities tackle health care challenges.

( WATCH: Obamacare timeline)

“What the Affordable Care Act provides and can provide for so many families out there is peace of mind,” the first lady said when reporters were allowed in at the end of the meeting. “This isn’t about politics; it’s about making sure that every family has the peace of mind to know that if a child gets sick, or someone loses a job, or someone has an illness that requires hundreds of thousands of dollars in coverage, that they’re going to have the safety net that they need to make sure that they don’t lose their home, that they aren’t spending the rest of their lives paying off medical fees.”

Authors: