Of the 25 most vulnerable House Democrats, 23 of them voted for Michigan Republican Fred Upton’s “Keep Your Health Plan” bill amending Obamacare that Harry Reid will never allow to be voted on in the Senate and which President Obama has said he would veto.

It is a vote that simply lets the public know that the GOP feels the pain that has hit millions of Americans while also allowing voters to note how many Democrats are still slavishly following the liberal ideology that sponsored the ACA in the first place. The vote is symbolic.

Three Arizonans are on that 25 member short list of the vulnerable - Kyrsten Sinema, Ann Kirkpatrick and Ron Barber. The only one staying aboard for Obamacare was Kirkpatrick whose district extends from the four corners down into northern Pima County. One can give Kirkpatrick points for consistency for not taking the dive her colleagues did.

The question here is, did Barber get scared enough to weasel out on the President’s position on his own or did Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi and the Democrat House leadership allow their folks in marginal districts to cast a vote to cover their butts and allow them to don the phony mantle of “moderation” that too many in the media slobber over?

That 23 of the 25 voted that way doesn’t conclusively prove that Pelosi said “OK to duck this one” but certainly qualifies as circumstantial evidence.

Either way, it’s hardly a portrait in courage for Barber who will now milk that vote in his quest for re-election to prove his “moderation”.

Here’s a hint for lazy political reporters - check voting records. It’s called Project Vote Smart and it collects ratings and votes on not only the US Congress but state legislatures. They give you a laundry list of issue categories from abortion to veterans.

Kirkpatrick has one more term to rate than Sinema and Barber, so we can pass reasonable judgment on her. She gets a 36 percent rating from the American Conservative Union and a 60 percent from the liberal Americans for Democratic Action. Americans for Prosperity and the John Birch Society are a little more hard-nosed but she still bags 20 percent and 25 percent from them. She is apparently the only thing approaching a genuine moderate in the AZ House delegation since Republican Jim Kolbe and the only real moderate Democrat since U.S. Senator Dennis DeConcini.

Sinema and Barber have yet to compile full records but their trends are obvious. Sinema has an AFP of 4 percent, a Competitive Economy Institute of 0 percent and an NRA rating of 0 percent so far. Barber scores zero with AFP, 21 percent with Club for Growth, and 11 percent with the Birchers. Our four Republican House members all rack up high conservative and low liberal records and differ only slightly on most of the big issues. None of them pose as “moderates”.

One swallow does not a summer make. An occasional off the reservation symbolic vote doesn’t change that, Ron, fess up. You are a liberal. Why hide it?

While the Vote Smart folks are providing the great service of clarifying what positions our pols take, we have a bozo movement going down called “No Labels.” Led mostly by liberals who got caught like former Indiana Sen. Evan Bayh, these folks would make the murk even murkier through some mystical process of putting all ideas in some great political blender. They would basically destroy representative government by lowering everybody to a common denominator exemplified by bi-partisan garbage like Common Core education.

Bad politicians love mush like this. We need more labels, not less, in politics as well as supermarkets.

Listen to Emil Franzi’s “Inside Track” every Saturday from 1 to 4 p.m. on KVOI 1030 AM.