This is one hand Harry Reid doesn't want to play.

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid blasted Republican Ted Cruz and the GOP Thursday morning calling his colleague's political tactics "high-stakes" poker. Cruz is trying to end an Obama administration immigration policy before he gets behind any bills that address the growing humanitarian crisis at the southwest border.

"What the junior senator from Texas (Cruz) said (is) we're not going to do this unless we deport all these children who came here before, the so-called Dreamers," Reid said on the Senate floor. "Once again we see there are no substantive solutions being offered by the Republican Party. Instead of doing something about these children who are at the border, they want to deport hundreds of thousands of the people who are already here."

The move could stymie bipartisan efforts to cool the immigration surge with just a few days before Congress adjourns for the month.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, says he will not approve immigration reform until changes are made. (Charlie Neibergall/ASSOCIATED PRESS)

Cruz and other conservatives have blamed Obama's Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals — which holds off deportation for some undocumented immigrants who came here relatively young — for the surge of Central American children crossing the Mexican border unaccompanied and without documents.

The conservative's office didn't immediately return a request for comment. A spokeswoman told Politico on Wednesday that Cruz was drafting legislation that would stop expanded funding toward deferred action.

Until then, Cruz refuses to support any kind of immigration reform, such as amending a 2008 law that current allows minors wait years in the U.S. before seeing a judge. The change, pushed by Texas Democrat Rep. Henry Cuellar and Republican Sen. John Cornyn, would shorten the wait time for an undocumented minor to appear in court.

Immigrants who have been caught crossing the border illegally are housed inside the McAllen Border Patrol Station in McAllen, Tex. The Texas senator and representative are pushing for immigrants to be deported faster. (Rick Loomis/AP)

The bill will likely be merged with the $3.7 billion in emergency funds Obama has requested to speed up the deportation process by sending more immigration judges to the area.

But the clock is ticking for not just the Texans' amendment but the cash influx. Congress officially adjourns next Friday until the second week of September.

It's the second time in a year that the Tea Party powerhouse from Texas has tried ending one of the President's initiatives by tacking it on to a bill.

In September 2013, Cruz rallied Tea Party-leaning members of both chambers to block any budget bill that didn't include repealing Obamacare. Without a budget for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1, the government shut down for 16 days.