Michigan doctors and teaching hospitals received nearly $53 million in payments from drug and medical device manufacturers in the last five months of 2013, according to data released by the federal government.



The payments include speaking and consulting fees, research funds, royalty payments and travel expenses.



This is the first time such a comprehensive look at the relationship between physicians and industry has been released by the federal government. The data is detailed in a report released Sept. 30 under a provision of the Affordable Care Act mandating transparency about ties between physicians and industry.



Nationwide, the report shows drug and device manufacturers paid $3.5 billion to 546,000 physicians and almost 1,360 teaching hospitals.

DATABASE: From $688,000 to 77 cents, search drug, device company payments to Michigan doctors



The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services plans to issue reports annually, covering a full 12 months of data, starting in June 2015.



Patient advocates pushed for the release of the data to expose and prevent potential conflicts of interest that could affect treatment decisions. Physicians and health care providers are divided on whether the data — and the way it is presented — is helpful.



“The saying is ‘Sunshine is the best antibiotic.’ That’s what we have going on here,” said Paul Brand, president of the Alliance for Health, based in Grand Rapids. “By shedding a light and creating some transparency, we expect people who should change their behavior will change their behavior. Already, we see some of that happening.”



Pharmaceutical companies are changing their business models, he said. And physician groups and health systems are changing their business practices.



“Everything is under a magnifying glass, and that’s a positive,” he said.

PAYMENTS Here is the breakdown of payments made from drug and device manufacturers to Michigan physicians and teaching hospitals in the last five months of 2013.



General: $21,839,172.11

Research: $26,407,155.13

Ownership: $4,644,071.71



Total: $52,890,398.95 Source: Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Open Payments database



Doctors get no direct payment for choosing to prescribe one drug over another, yet they are the ones making the decision. Traditionally, pharmaceutical companies have looked for indirect ways to influence physician prescribing behavior.



“It is woven into the fabric of fee-for-service medicine,” he said.



There are valid reasons for a physician to receive compensation from pharmaceutical and medical device companies, Brand added. Pharmaceutical companies have long paid physicians for research, consulting or lectures or funded trips and seminars to educate them about their products, he said.

MORE: 5 Michigan doctors with highest payments explain their work with drug, device companies.



“It’s not fair to demonize the pharmaceutical companies and device manufacturers,” he said. “They are the primary source of knowledge about the best uses for their products.”



Transparency and context



CHE Trinity Health, the parent company of Mercy Health Saint Mary’s, said the release of data “is important and should be taken seriously by every hospital system and individual hospital in the state.

“The release of information and transparency will help the health care industry achieve the triple aim of better health, better care and lower costs.”

SUNSHINE ACT FACTS The Open Payments program by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid is the first comprehensive report to make public the payments made to physicians by drug and medical device makers.



Here are 10 things to know about the data:



• The first data released cover only the last five months of 2013. It is divided into three categories – general, research and ownership.



• The national totals are:



Number of payments: 4.4 million payments

Value: $3.5 billion

Number of physicians: 546,000

Number of teaching hospitals: 1,360

Number of manufacturers and organizations making payments: 1,419



• Few women are in the list of top earners. More than 90 percent of the 300 doctors who received the most for speaking and consulting are men, according to an analysis by ProPublica. Men account for 68 percent of active physicians in the U.S., according to the Association of American Medical Colleges.



• The release of data was championed by Sen. Chuck Grassley, R-Iowa, who led several investigations into the relationships between industry and medical researchers. He pushed for the Physician Payments Sunshine Act, which was included as a provision of the Affordable Care Act.



• A 2009 survey found 84 percent of physicians received some type of relationship with industry – such as drug samples, food and beverages, reimbursements and payments for professional services, according to the Journal of the American Medical Association. • About 40 percent of the records – totaling $2.2 billion in payments — do not identify the name of the physician. CMS “de-identified” the data because it could not match the physician information or the record was not available for a physician to review.



• Physicians were given 45 days to review their data and dispute their claims. The American Medical Association said problems with the website made it difficult for doctors to review their reports.



• More user-friendly: After the database was released Sept. 30 it was criticized for being cumbersome and difficult to use. CMS then released a beta search tool that allows the public to search a doctor by name.



• CMS plans to issue an annual report on physician payments, covering a full year, starting in 2015.



• The database exempts payments to physicians who speak at continuing medical education events, but that exemption has been eliminated for future reports. Manufacturers and group purchasing organizations now are required to report that data.

The American Medical Association said it supported the Physician Payments Sunshine Act – the act that led to the release of the data. But the AMA said it had concerns about the accuracy of the information released. Although doctors were given time to review their data before the report was published, problems with the website at times prevented that.



“Patients deserve to have access to accurate information, yet publishing inaccurate data leads to misinterpretations, harms reputations and undermines the trust that patients have in their physicians,” the AMA said. “It can also discourage research and care delivery improvements that benefit patients.”



With 40 percent of the records, CMS does not identify the physician’s name – either because they were unable to match the record to physician information or because it was unavailable for review.



The Michigan State Medical Society has similar concerns as the AMA, said spokesman David Fox. The report doesn’t provide the context for patients to understand why a physician received a certain payment, he said. In many cases, it involves education or developments to improve patient care.



“Without the specific contexts and the details and more breakdown of the figures rather than the simple categories they have now, it may continue to cause more confusion than clarification,” Fox said. “I guess the bottom line is any of this doesn’t necessarily imply abuse by anyone.”

MORE: See top 5 drug, device companies paying Michigan doctors



Dr. Shantanu Agrawal, director of the CMS Center for Program Integrity, said the database does not try to identify which financial relationships could signal a conflict of interest.



“It simply makes the data available to the public,” he said “So while these data could discourage payments and others transfers of value that might have an inappropriate influence on research, education, and clinical decision-making, they could also help identify relationships that lead to the development of beneficial new technologies.”



Patients asking questions



Fox, of the state medical society, said patients should ask the doctors if they have concerns about prescriptions or a physician’s relationship to a corporation.



“One thing everyone should keep in mind is the patient has the right to ask a physician anytime something is being prescribed if a physician has a conflict with that,” he said. In most cases, he said, the physician receiving payment would be involved with improving patient care of being educated about the drug or device.



Brand advised asking about more than just possible conflicts of interest.



“People should always talk to their physicians about medications prescribed for them, what the side effects are, is there a higher value alternative,” Brand said.



Ultimately, he believes moving away from a fee-for-service model is the best way to avoid potential conflicts of interest.



Under the Affordable Care Act, physicians and hospitals are encouraged to create accountable care organizations, in which they are paid a set amount to care for a group of people. In that system, physicians will have incentive to prescribe the most cost-effective medication, whether it’s a lower-price generic or higher quality and faster acting drug.



“We are not there yet,” he said. “Absent that, this kind of reporting and inspection process is being imposed.



“It is probably overdue that there is some inspection, some accountability process by the federal government because they are the only ones who can do that.”

Sue Thoms covers health care for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her at sthoms1@mlive.com or follow her on Twitter, Facebook or Google+.