Chicago’s Luvvie Ajayi reaches a pop-culture savvy audience of black women and others with her blog Awesomely Luvvie, and some of the nation’s biggest brands have taken notice.

Comcast hired her to host a "Scandal" viewing party during the 2013 Blogalicious conference in Atlanta. McDonald's had her take over its 365Black Twitter account during the Essence Festival in New Orleans in July. This fall, she hosted Rosa Regale sparkling wine's "Empire" watch parties in Houston and Chicago. And on Tuesdays, she live tweets "Being Mary Jane" for BET.

What draws the big names? Her distinct but topically diverse audience, which has dubbed itself LuvNation and is made up largely but not entirely of African-American women.

"It goes across gender, color, sexual orientation, because people relate to what I'm saying," said Ajayi, 30. "The power of my blog kind of transverses culture, and you don't have to be black to understand my writing or to find the value in it."

At her Awesomely Luvvie pop culture blog, she draws 10,000 visitors a day to her recaps of episodes of "Scandal," riffs on style and life choices of celebs and random folks, and weighs in on social issues of the day. She has 140,000 likes on her Facebook page; 24,000 followers on Instagram and more than 65,000 on Twitter.

Celebs have taken note, as well.

"Scandal" creator Shonda Rhimes is a follower. Actress Holland Taylor invited Ajayi to come see her in a Broadway production after the blogger tipped the "Two and a Half Men" star to the slang meaning of "shade” and introduced her to "Basketball Wives." Actor Jeff Perry tweeted out a Scandal Bingo board that Ajayi and YouTube vlogger and MTV "Decoded" host Franchesca Ramsey created for the Season Two finale.

Ajayi began her Awesomely Luvvie blog in 2006, a reboot of a blog she'd run at the behest of friends while a student at the University of Illinois, where she earned a degree in psychology.

She went on to work as a marketing coordinator for Community Media Workshop. In 2009, she and Karyn Brianne Lee began The Red Pump Project, a nonprofit HIV/AIDS awareness and prevention outreach for women and girls.

Every March 10, it encourages bloggers to post a red pump widget and asks people to wear red shoes. The effort has drawn a number of high-profile invitations: to the White House for a summit about the Affordable Care Act; to a reception at the One Campaign, where she met singer Elton John; and to Haiti, where she recently spent a week with the State Department doing workshops on HIV/AIDS and social media marketing for nonprofits.

She was laid off from the media job in 2010. But by then, the brands had started calling.

The first, she said, was Gap, which asked her to host a party to promote a new line of jeans.

"That was really cool because it was the first time I looked at my blog and saw people outside of the people I know paying attention," she said, attributing her audience value to the breadth of what she covers, from Black Lives Matter to hit TV shows.

"That's one thing brands are understanding is, I'm the blogger who's not writing about fashion. I'm not writing about beauty. I'm not writing about gossip. I'm not writing about politics," she said. "I'm writing about all of that. I'm the person they can come to if they just want to reach people who care and have their fingers on pop culture."

That reach caught the attention of Nielsen, which asked her to help launch the February 2014 Conscious Consumers campaign focused on African-American, Latino and Asian-American spending, said Rebecca Roussell, senior director of Nielsen's Diverse Intelligence Series.

"I saw she was very influential. She had a plethora of things in her portfolio. It was not only about "Scandal," but she was also very socially conscious. That was the type of voice I was looking for for this Conscious Consumers campaign," Roussell said.

"We needed to get a recognizable face and a person that the African-American community trusted. And that was Luvvie."

Ajayi partipated in a Twitter chat on black spending power in the U.S. and was featured in a video about The Red Pump Project that was housed on a Nielsen microsite.

"She knows this new ballgame as it relates to being an influencer and working with brands," Roussell said. "She definitely has the business acumen and the brains to eloquently represent a brand."

For McDonald's, Ajayi tweeted about skate jams, concerts and other activities at the Essence festival, one of the premier annual African-American events.

"For McDonald’s to trust me enough to actually hand over the reins, that was a proud moment," she said. "For a brand to have that much faith in my work and the value of my audiences definitely confirmed that I was on the right track."

Last year, she started the Awesomely Techie blog to provide information about gadgets and effective social media use.

She recently tried her hand at another medium, completing the final draft of her book "I'm Judging You," scheduled for fall 2016 release by publisher Henry Holt.

It's a collection of essays touching on culture, social media and fame.

"It's basically making fun of our fame-obsessed culture, and kind of turning the mirror on all of us," she said.

Meanwhile, Ajayi doesn't shy away from weightier topics, such as the police shootings that ignited the Black Lives matter movement.

She took black beauty bloggers to task this summer for not acknowledging the Charleston, S.C., church massacre in which a white man allegedly said he killed nine black parishioners in hopes of starting a race war.

"If we don't challenge each other to use our platforms for better than our niches, or what our quote-unquote brand is, what are we doing as influencers?" she said.

"If we can't activate our audiences at the times it's important or needed, then what do we have these platforms for?"