Everyone’s heard the stories about legendary martial artist and (somewhat less legendary) action movie hero Chuck Norris. When the boogeyman goes to sleep at night, he checks his closet for Chuck Norris. Superman wears Chuck Norris pajamas. The list goes on.

But maybe even Chuck Norris gets nervous about endorsing Texas Sen. Ted Cruz.

Related: Trump Will Try to Be Presidential Tonight – Good Luck with That

Norris had been expected to appear at a Cruz campaign rally over the weekend, alongside retired Lt. General Jerry Boykin and radio host Glen Beck. However, according to Beck’s website The Blaze on Thursday morning, the man famous for dispatching bad guys with a roundhouse kick to the face either got cold feet or never intended to endorse Cruz in the first place.

The Cruz-backing Keep the Promise PAC had announced that Norris would be appearing with Cruz, suggesting that the film star would be endorsing the Texas senator. But on Thursday, the group backed down, saying that it had been informed Norris would not attend.

Norris himself, in a Facebook post and at the conservative World Net Daily website, where he writes a column, debunked the “false information” himself.

“I would like to clarify for the record that I have NOT officially endorsed any candidate for president, contrary to what has been widely reported in the media,” Norris said.

Related: No, Closed Primaries Are Not Donald Trump’s Kryptonite

His announcement came the same day that Cruz actually did receive one relatively high-profile endorsement. Former Republican presidential candidate Carly Fiorina, the one-time CEO of Hewlett-Packard, appeared at a Cruz rally Wednesday to give his campaign her blessing.

The confusion over the Norris non-endorsement marked the second time this week that premature reports of Cruz endorsement had to be pulled back. Earlier this week, when a source close to the campaign told National Review that the endorsements of four senators were about to be announced, the publication was forced to walk its report back after it became clear that the supposed supporters weren’t going to materialize.

Months into his presidential run, Texas Sen. Ted Cruz has still been unable to secure the endorsement of a single fellow senator. That may finally change today, with reports that Utah Sen. Mike Lee plans to announce that he is backing Cruz. But given the campaign’s recent track record on endorsement, it’s probably wise to wait and see.