MADISON, Wis. – As it has been for for much of the past five-plus years, Wisconsin is under the national spotlight again.

On Tuesday, a week before the presidential primary election, candidates schlepped all over the Badger State in a campaign to win the hearts and minds of some of the most stubborn voters in the country.

With hotly contested elections on the line – 96 Democratic Party delegates, 42 for Republicans – the time to be present and accounted for is now.

Even Donald Trump made it to Janesville, Speaker Paul Ryan’s hometown. Although not taking any chances and staying away from the protesters (paid and otherwise) Trump spoke to reporters aboard his jet before he addressed a packed rally at Janesville’s Holiday Inn Express.

RELATED: Feeling the Burn? $15-an-hour minimum wage to protest Trump

The big conservative prize Tuesday went to Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who picked up the endorsement of Wisconsin Republican Gov. Scott Walker.

“After eight years of the failed Obama-Clinton administration, Americans are looking for real leadership and a new direction. Ted Cruz is a principled constitutional conservative who understands that power belongs to the states – and to the people – and not bureaucrats in Washington,” Walker said Tuesday morning in a statement. “Just like we did in Wisconsin, Ted Cruz is not afraid to challenge the status quo and to stand up against the big government special interests. He is the best-positioned candidate to both win the Republican nomination and defeat Hillary Clinton. That’s why I endorse Ted Cruz for President of the United States.”

Trump shrugged off the endorsement from a former presidential candidate who was one of the first to exit it the once-crowded contest. Despite being challenged, if not chastened, by some of Wisconsin’s best conservative talk show hosts Monday, Trump still was playing fast and loose with the facts about Walker and the state of Wisconsin’s fiscal house Tuesday.

Cruz and Trump were running nearly neck and neck, according to the latest polls, with Ohio Gov. John Kasich lagging the field, in the Badger State delegates chase.

Tuesday’s campaign was marked by the surreal and the sublime. The candidates rallied around Wisconsin in advance of Tuesday evening’s scheduled CNN Town Hall in Milwaukee.

“Donald, why don’t you show up and debate like a man?” Cruz said at a rally Monday evening in Rothschild, calling on Trump to debate him one-on-one.

As of this post, it wasn’t certain that Trump would show up to the event. Kasich would. But like Richard Gere in “An Officer and a Gentleman,” Kasich, who has won a single state – his own – really had nowhere else to go.

Kasich reportedly already had begun pulling some of his ads in Wisconsin, training them on congressional districts in the state’s not-so-winner-take all primary system. He hung out in Waukesha on Tuesday, not far from Milwaukee, to be ready for Tuesday evening’s town hall. Kasich basked in the afterglow of his endorsement from former Navy Secretary John F. Lehman Jr.

And just in case no one was listening – and they weren’t – Libertarian White House hopeful Gary Johnson predicted President Barack Obama will reclassify marijuana on his way out of office.

“It’s going to be just like alcohol,” Johnson told The Washington Times on Tuesday. “I’m going to predict that Obama, when he leaves office, is going to deschedule marijuana as a Class I narcotic. I wish he would have done that to this point, but I think he’s going to do that going out the door. That’s a positive.”