For months now, GOP party bosses have tried to deny the reality of Donald Trump.

They dispatched one attack after another — ad buys, criticism from failed candidates, you name it.

But each salvo merely emboldened the Trump army.

And on Saturday that army stormed into Orlando wearing their "Make America Great Again" hats and their "Hillary for Prison" T-Shirts.

About 10,000 of them filled UCF's CFE arena. Even more were turned away.

Think about that for a minute. The only way Marco Rubio or Ted Cruz would find themselves amid 10,000 people is if they walked into an NBA game.

Or the next Trump rally.

Inside the arena, it was vintage Trump. Passion. Fury. Kicking out protesters and berating the media.

Kill Obamacare! Kill the terrorists! Build the wall! I love Hispanics! Bring back water boarding! Or maybe not. No, let's do it. Plus, let's kill the terrorists like they did in the old days — with bullets that have been soaked in pig's blood.

Trump's speeches are a veritable word salad.

He goes from topic to topic without segue or sometimes even breath.

A sentence that begins with blistering criticism of an opponent might end with a shout-out to one of his kids.

Donald Trump attacks his opponents and addresses protesters at a packed CFE Arena Thousands filled the CFE Arena in Orlando on Saturday to attend a Donald Trump rally, where the candidate attacked his opponents and addressed protesters. Thousands filled the CFE Arena in Orlando on Saturday to attend a Donald Trump rally, where the candidate attacked his opponents and addressed protesters. See more videos

In the course of about three minutes, Trump professed love for evangelical Christians, touted the size of his hands, dissed Cruz and knocked Rubio for missing Senate votes.

The crowd liked it all. But perhaps nothing revs up the crowd more than ousting a protester. It happened about a dozen times Saturday.

When one is spotted, the crowd begins screaming until they catch Trump's attention.

"Get 'em out of here!" he roars.

Security does as ordered, and the crowd roars back.

"Go home to Mommy!"

The crowd roars even louder.

Another piece of standard roar-inducing fare at all Trump rallies is media-bashing. At UCF, Trump asked everyone in the arena to look at the camera operators and then told the silent camera crew: "You all are the most dishonest group of people."

He then went directly into talking about a "phenomenal story" about him in the New York Times.

Some view all members of the Trump army as monolithic nuts. They are not.

I walked in with a fourth-grade teacher and sat with a chiropractor. The crowd is overwhelmingly white, but not completely. Not all of them like Trump's coarse ways. The chiropractor confesses that he wished Trump was more polished.

Trying to pinpoint Trump's appeal is a fool's errand. The reasons are complex.

It's his celebrity, his strength, his success, his independence, his bravado.

More than anything else, it's because he's not like everybody else.

I get that.

There's a lot about Trump I don't like — including his divisiveness, fear-mongering and the fact that his crude talk and profane language have made many parents scared to let their children watch democracy in action.

I also fear that Trump's discriminatory talk emboldens others to give voice to ugly sentiments that have more to do with prejudices than public policy.

But I also get why people are so desperate for something different.

And savvy Republicans are starting to realize that rather than fight Trump, they should try to work with him; capitalize on the momentum that no other candidate has created and try to make a deal.

And Trump will deal. He always has. His shift is already starting on immigration. To the left. To the center. To where Trump — a life-long supporter of liberal politics and policies — has always been.

"I'm changing, I'm changing," Trump said during last week's debate in announcing his support for foreign-worker visas.

It will continue. I've long said the people most angered by a Trump presidency wouldn't be the liberals who hate his guts now. It would be the hard-core conservatives who realize Trump's positions are, as he said last week, "flexible."

Of the GOP guys left, John Kasich strikes me as the most serious, contemplative statesman on stage.

But this is not the year of the contemplative statesman. It's the year of penis jokes. And Muslim-bashing. And being sick and tired of the people who have been in office all these years.

And Trump has captured that.

If party leaders haven't figured that out yet, maybe they should go to the next Trump rally and see it for themselves.

And if they still don't like what they see, well, they can say so. Just be warned: You'll probably get booed and sent home to mommy.

smaxwell@orlandosentinel.com