Contribution

Many left wingers and Barack Obama sycophants are fainting over Gov. Scott Walker’s recent comments where he said doesn’t know if Obama is a Christian.

I disagree with Walker. I think we all know for sure Obama isn’t a Christian.

Of course, he only made this statement because some ridiculous reporter at the Washington Post thought it necessary and prudent to ask the governor of Wisconsin about the religious convictions of the president. The media that showed little interest in Obama’s religion during his presidential campaign have now discovered it as a relevant issue — relevant for Republican candidates, that is.

Obviously this was a trap question.

If Walker had said “yes,” then the headline would be something like, “Scott Walker Renounces Conservatism, Calls Obama a Wonderful, Godly Christian,” or if they went the other route, it would be, “Racist Scott Walker Assumes Obama Is a Christian Because He’s Black.”

But if Walker had said “no,” the headlines about his unseemly attack on the president’s faith would be automatic. And, it turns out, they were automatic even though he tried to take the middle road.

This should be a lesson to Republicans everywhere (then again, a million things a week should be lessons to Republicans, yet they don’t seem to learn). You never win, no matter what, under any circumstance, when the liberal media set out to trap you. It doesn’t matter what you say or how you say it.

These are dishonest people, and dishonest people are notoriously unconcerned with what actually happens or what is actually said. The moment they put a camera in front of your face, you’re screwed.

So what can you do? Well, you can stow away in a cave and hope they never find you, but it can be difficult to run a campaign that way, so the next best strategy is to call them on their crap whenever given the opportunity.

The governor lightly scolded the reporter for playing games — progress, I suppose — but If I were him, I would have come down much, much harder.

Here, for the record, is the appropriate way to respond:

Do I think Obama is a Christian? Do I look like his biographer? Why not ask me his shoe size next? Maybe his preferred Sleep Number setting? Truly, sir, this line of questioning is the dumbest thing I’ve encountered since the last time I encountered a reporter from the Washington Post. Why in the name of all that is holy are you quizzing me about the president’s religion? Why don’t you quiz him? Oh, that’s right, you’re a groveling coward and a pathetic excuse for a journalist. You forget that you’re job is to get to the truth and enlighten the people, not to seek out Republicans for cheap gotcha moments. You, sir, are a fraud, a disgrace, and an embarrassment to what’s left of your dying profession. This president has prosecuted, spied on, and stifled the media, yet you still carry his water like a spineless vassal. Why don’t you shine his shoes while you’re at it? You should be questioning authority, not shielding it from scrutiny, you shameless hack. I will not legitimize you by answering this question. Instead, I will pray that the Holy Spirit sees fit to endow you with even a shred of integrity and courage, so that you might one day decide to do something that in some way resembles journalism. Until then, please leave my presence before I become physically ill. Thank you, sir, good night.

I’ll tell you one thing: the first candidate who says this to the media will have my vote.

I don’t blame Walker for punting, but it’s rather sad that “questioning the president’s faith” (even though he didn’t) is somehow considered out of bounds. Why shouldn’t we question it? The president deserves to have his faith questioned. Walker was generous, really. I think we do know a thing or two about his religion, and we know that whatever it is, it isn’t Christianity.

As everyone has heard, Obama came of age in Jeremiah Wright’s church, learning that white people are bad and God hates America. He was indoctrinated into a heresy called Black Liberation Theology, which teaches, among other things, that Jesus was a black man who came to free the black race, and that whites can earn salvation through paying reparations to black people.

We could call this as an open and shut case right here. Yet the matter is significantly more definitive than the fact that Obama merely belongs to a fringe, heretical left wing sect invented in the 60′s by Black Power radicals.

Scripture tells us that we shall know a man by his fruits (Matthew 7:16), and that many who speak His name in public will be told to depart from Him in the end (Matthew 7:23). It’s clear that being a Christian, therefore, is about more than simply declaring it verbally. That faith in Christ, if it is real, must manifest itself like fruit from a tree, and become something tangible and experienceable.

Now I don’t mean to turn this into a homily, but it is interesting to note that Jesus said “by their fruits you will know them.” So far all this talk about how we shouldn’t “judge” others, it seems that Christ is specifically telling us to make judgments about a person based on what they do. How else could we come to know a man by his actions? The insinuation here is that sometimes a person might say one thing but do another, and Jesus wants us to look at what they do and make judgments accordingly. That doesn’t mean we’re omnipotent; it just means we shouldn’t go around like blind idiots (my word, not His) believing everything everyone says, no matter how they actually conduct themselves.

If you declare verbally that you are Christian but then insist that Christ has called you to do any number of atrocious things, it is obvious that you are either lying, or you are adhering to some version of the faith that bears not even the vaguest similarity to anything that might be considered Biblical Christianity. That is an OK judgment for us to make, and more than OK, it’s essential. I am not saying that someone isn’t a Christian if they sin. I’m saying that someone isn’t a Christian if they believe that Jesus endorses, condones, or loves sin.

In the case of Obama, we could look at how he has attacked religious freedom in this country and attempted to force Christians to abandon their beliefs for the sake of his political ideology; we could look at how he has aided and abetted the persecutors of Christians overseas, resulting in the slaughter of thousands of Christian martyrs; we could look at his “evolving” position on gay marriage; we could look at how he excuses Islamic terrorism and draws moral equivalencies between Muslim killers and Christians; we could look at his pathological dishonesty, his cynical exploitation of racial tensions, and his general corruption and unwavering narcissism. But all of these things might be written off as him simply exhibiting the characteristics of a weak man, a crooked politician, an inept leader, and a fool. He could theoretically be all of those things and still a Christian.

Leave all of that aside, then. The thing above all else that really reveals his true faith (or lack thereof) is his undying passion for, support of, and belief in abortion.

There has never been a mainstream politician, much less a president, as vociferous about infanticide as this man. While a state senator, he supported every single piece of pro-abortion legislation he came across, earning a 100 percent grade from Planned Parenthood and NARAL. In his crowning “pro-choice” moment, he opposed a bill to protect infants born alive during an abortion. To be clear: he was, and by all accounts still is, in favor of executing infant children by decapitation or lethal injection if they manage to survive an abortion attempt. Any thought that he might have softened that position vanished during the Kermit Gosnell trial, when he refused to categorically condemn and denounce what Gosnell did.

Meanwhile, Obama has funneled more money to abortion clinics than any president before him, handing out billions (that’s billions, with a ‘b’) to Planned Parenthood during his time in office.

He has tried to legally require that abortifacients be covered by employer health plans, even forcing the mandate on nuns.

He took conscience rights away from hospital workers who might not want to be involved in an abortion procedure.

He’s forced taxpayers to pay for abortions overseas, and overturned prohibitions on international abortion funding in one of his very first acts as president.

He’s appointed pro-abortion judges and officials at every opportunity, and chose a radical pro-abortion feminist to head up Health and Human Services.

He’s said on multiple occasions that a woman’s ability to live a successful life hinges on her access to abortion, even marking the occasion of the March For Life by issuing a statement calling abortion an essential ingredient in a woman’s quest to fulfill her dreams.

He hasn’t been merely pro-abortion; this has in fact been the one cause he’s consistently trumpeted and advanced during the course of not just his presidency, but his entire life as a public official.

And, possibly most damning of all, in what I believe is the quintessential and, though this is saying a lot, the most despicable moment of his horrible, deadly reign, he attended a Planned Parenthood fundraiser (first president to do that) where he wished for God to bless the abortionists in attendance (not bless them that they may repent, but bless them that they may continue their genocidal mission).

Now we are left to look upon these bloody fruits, and as Jesus commanded, figure out what we know about him by them.

Obama is either lying about his belief in Christ or he honestly believes Christ blesses abortion Share:

We know that Obama is either lying about his belief in Christ (my guess) or he honestly believes that Christ blesses abortion and wants to see more of His children ripped to shreds and tossed in medical waste dumpsters. Obama hasn’t just done every conceivable thing in his power to bring about that end, he has done so while invoking the name of God. What sort of Christianity is this? And I hate to think what sort of Christians we are, that so many of us think it impolite to loudly say: “If you believe in a Jesus who celebrates the slaughter of babies, you do not believe in Jesus.”

While many of us try to equivocate and make excuses for men like Obama, it was Jesus who spoke out in terms that, nowadays, would lead to Him being scolded and disowned by many Christians. Christ Himself, who loved children and made it clear that the smallest among us should always be welcomed and protected, said:



If anyone causes harm to these little ones, it would be better for him to have a millstone hung around his neck and to be drowned in the depths of the sea.

Did you catch that? Can we all take a moment to let that one sink in (no pun intended)? You would be better off dead than harming a child. It would be wiser to literally drown in the ocean than do anything that would bring harm, whether physical or spiritual, to a child. That’s God talking. Do we think He was joking? Exaggerating? Just blowing off steam? Does he need to calm down and be reasonable, as pro-lifers are constantly told when they make statements not nearly as strident and damning?

No. This was a direct statement. A command. A promise. When you bring harm to the innocent, you commit a sin so terrible that physical death would be preferable. That’s how much Jesus loves children. He loves them far more deeply and eternally than you love even your own kids. So how could anyone try to turn that Jesus, this Jesus, the Jesus, into a God who blesses abortion? And how could they commit such a heresy and still expect to be considered a Christian in any substantive way?

Whatever small doubts still exist, if the media wanted to do their jobs (an urge few of them have ever felt), they could always ask Obama these questions. They can continue to harass Republican governors about Obama’s convictions, or they could target the inquiries to the person who might arguably be most suited to answer them. I think the president has already made his feelings clear, but if I were in a position where I could pose a question to the commander in chief, I’d ask this:

Mr. President, do you believe that Jesus Christ condones, endorses, blesses, loves, or otherwise supports a woman’s right to choose abortion?

If anyone at any newspaper, news outlet, or cable news station had any guts at all, they’d force Obama to answer this. And if he says anything other than “no, absolutely not,” he would confirm that he either does not believe in Christ, or believes in a Christ who takes no issue with the butchering of babies. Either way, he would not be a Christian. Not by any stretch of the imagination. Not by any definition of the term. Not by any possible reading of the Bible. And this is a judgment we can make. We should make. We have to make. Anyone who believes in a Jesus who condones abortion does not believe in the real Jesus, and therefore is not Christian. Period. Definitive statement. I will confidently meet my final judgement knowing that I will be held accountable for making this judgment.

When that time comes, when I am standing naked before my Creator, I know I will have many faults for which to answer, and I will fall to my knees weeping and begging God to take mercy on my selfish, weak, sinful soul. But I know that this will not be among the misdeeds I will be made to account for. Drawing a line that clearly separates and distinguishes Christianity from pro-abortion zealotry — that is something that no Christian will ever be punished for.

I fear, however, that many millions might be punished for not doing so. I take no pleasure in imagining Christ standing before those polite and pious folks who ignored, excused, and overlooked the mass murder of His children, and saying, “Depart from me, I never knew you.”

Is Obama a Christian? By his words, actions, professed beliefs, policies, and general enthusiasm for baby killing, I think we have very many reasons to assume he isn’t. All the more so when you consider that, according to his closest adviser, Obama used his alleged faith to manipulate Christian voters, only to later turn around and use their support to advance the cause of homosexual marriage. Do you see what happened there? Taking Obama at his word led many Christians to vote a man into office who, it turns out, disagrees rather passionately with many of the Bible’s commandments.

It’s funny, left-leaning Christians will often proclaim that jihadist Muslims aren’t real Muslims, but if anyone suggests that infanticidal pro-abortion fanatics aren’t real Christians, suddenly it’s quite inappropriate to accuse anyone of not being sincere in their faith professions. Nonsense. If you can do it with Islam, I can do it with Christianity. Obama himself has made these delineations with the Muslim faith. I guess that brings us back to the “judging” thing in the Bible. Jesus, despite popular belief, never says “don’t judge.” He says, “in the same way you judge others, so you too shall be judged” (Matthew 7:2).

Well, Obama judges the authenticity of other people’s religious sentiments frequently. I think he deserves to be measured by that same measure. (And before you accuse me of equating abortion with terrorism, please understand that, yes, I am equating the two).

Sure, I suppose there is at some level a chance that Obama believes sincerely in Christ and His precepts, yet he does all of these things and says all of these things and advances all of these satanic causes in spite of that faith. I have to hope for his sake that this very unlikely scenario isn’t the reality. It would be a dark and depraved sin, a moral crime beyond comprehension, for a Christian to know the truth and believe it, and still work tirelessly to, among other things, assist in the massacre of infants.

You see, when I say that I don’t believe Obama is a Christian, I’m coming to a conclusion based on all of the available evidence, but I’m also, in the end, giving him the benefit of the doubt.

Listen to Matt’s latest podcast here. Contact him with general comments and inquiries about speaking engagements at MattWalsh@TheMattWalshBlog.com.

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.