Two new sites launched today will allow consumers to evaluate and compare surgeons based on never-before-available information on complications rates and patient outcomes.

The first, www.surgeonratings.org, released by the nonprofit Consumers' Checkbook/Center for the Study of Services, only lists surgeons that have had better-than-average outcomes based on an analysis of more than four million surgeries conducted by 50,000 surgeons on hospital inpatients.

The ratings, which don't include poor performers, take into account how often the surgeon's patients die in the hospital or within 90 days of discharge, have serious complications in the hospital or are readmitted to the hospital within 90 days of discharge.

The site allows consumers to search by ZIP code for the top-peforming surgeons in 14 high-risk surgeries, including heart valve and bypass surgery and total knee and hip replacement. Ratings are based on federal government records previously not available to the public, the organization announced.

"This is the first time we're doing this and it's going to catch people by surprise," said Robert Krughoff, Checkbook's president, in the announcement. "So we chose this time to focus on the good ones and to tell people who they are."

But the second website, Surgeon Scorecard by ProPublica, does include surgeons that have higher-than-average complications based on infections, clots or infections that call for post-operative care.

The non-profit news outlet calculated death and complication rates for surgeons who perform one of eight elective procedures in Medicare, including gall bladder removal and hip replacements, adjusting for differences in patient health, age and hospital quality.

In an editor's note, Stephen Engelberg said that the publication decided a year ago to publicly compare the performance of surgeons because consumers didn't have access to the information.

"These days, consumers can review ratings on everything from plumbers to hair salons to the latest digital cameras," he said. "The process of undergoing surgery includes some of the most consequential decisions any of us ever make. So we began with the view that the taxpayers who pay the costs of Medicare should be able to use its data to make the best possible decisions about their healthcare."