Police blotter items from Middlesex County. (Photo: ~File photo)

DUNELLEN

ELUDING, 2:21 a.m. March 10. Naldaliss Calderon, 37, of Plainfield, was arrested and charged with eluding after failing to stop for police on North Avenue, police said. The vehicle was swerving and continued to drive east on North Avenue into Plainfield after police activated lights and sirens to stop the vehicle. The vehicle eventually stopped for a red light in Plainfield at Clinton Avenue where it was boxed in. The driver was taken into custody without incident, charged with eluding and later released. Sgt. John Doherty investigated.

DWI, 1:48 a.m. March 8. Eric Cruz, 24, of Middlesex, was arrested and charged with DWI following a motor vehicle stop on North Avenue, police said. The vehicle was stopped for speeding and swerving over the yellow lane dividers on Bound Brook Road. The driver was found to be intoxicated and arrested. He was brought to headquarters where he was processed and later released to a sober party. Sgt. Jeff Del Buono investigated.

MOTOR VEHICLE THEFT, 7:22 a.m. March 7. A 39-year-old Jefferson Avenue resident reported that she started her vehicle and left it running to warm up. When she exited her home to return to her vehicle, it was gone. There were no witnesses. Sgt. Christopher Beenders investigated.

DWI, 2:52 a.m. March 7. Laura Dominguez, 19, of Bernardsville, was arrested and charged with DWI after being stopped on Bound Brook Road, police said. A motorist advised patrol of a vehicle that had been driving on a flat tire in the area. The vehicle was located and the driver was found to be intoxicated. The driver was arrested, processed and later released to a sober party. Patrolman James Daniel investigated.

CONTEMPT OF COURT, 7:08 p.m. March 4. Erin McMahon, 40, of North Plainfield, was arrested and charged with contempt of court following a report of a hit-and-run accident on Prospect Avenue, police said. The suspect vehicle struck a parked vehicle and was located a block away from the accident. The passenger of the vehicle and located a block away from the accident. The passenger of the vehicle was found to have an outstanding warrant for her arrest out of Union Township. She was arrested, processed and later turned over to Union Township police on her warrant. Sgt. John Doherty investigated.

PISCATAWAY

POSSESSION OF MARIJUANA AND DISTRIBUTION OF MARIJUANA, Feb. 26. A lengthy investigation by the Piscataway Police Department Narcotics Unit resulted in the arrest of Matthew Weber, 19, of Piscataway. Police found 86.5 grams of marijuana along with $8,000 in cash. The street value of the marijuana is $1,200, police said. Weber was charged with possession of marijuana, distribution of marijuana and possession of marijuana within a school zone.

NORTH BRUNSWICK

THEFT, 8:29 a.m. March 9. A security officer at North Brunswick High School reported that sometime over the weekend an office was broken into and $676 in cash was removed from a drawer in a side office, police said. A further investigation revealed that a cable adapter was taken from another room. Both rooms were locked over the weekend.

THEFT, between 2:30 p.m. March 7 and 10 a.m. March 8. A Haverford Street resident came to police headquarters and reported that merchandise purchased online and delivered to his front porch was taken. The items, totaling $115, included an LED head lamp/flashlight and two recessed light trims.

VEHICLE RECOVERED, 12:49 a.m. March 3. A vehicle reported stolen out of New York City was recovered on Pond Way and North Oaks Boulevard, police said.

THEFT FROM VEHICLE, CRIMINAL MISCHIEF, March 8. At noon, several residents from three buildings on Pardun Road found their tires punctured with an unknown object. Six tires were slashed on three vehicles. In addition, various pieces of clothing were stolen from a 2001 Honda Accord, police said.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1bbiaJ2