Kellie Gardner of Madrid, Iowa, drives around the ring with her Percheron draft horse named Dan while competing in the Ladies Cart division Saturdayduring the Big Thunder Draft Horse Show in the Ranch-Way Feeds Indoor Arena at The Ranch.

If You Go What: 10th Annual Big Thunder Draft Horse Show. When: 2 p.m. Sunday; pre-show 1 p.m. Where: Ranch-Way Feeds Indoor Arena, The Ranch, 5300 Arena Circle. Cost: $12 adults, $10 seniors, $6 children. Info: Go to BudweiserEventsCenter.com and http://bigthundershow.com.

Loveland resident Angela Walsh got matched with the stylish and very mannerly Shadow, a 10-year-old gelding perfect for the ladies.

Walsh and Shadow, a Percheron from the Flat Rock Draft Horses team, took first place of eight contestants in the ladies cart race Saturday during the 10th Annual Big Thunder Draft Horse Show at the Ranch-Way Feeds Indoor Arena.

"The horse is an incredible athlete, has tons of style and class and has a lot of manners," Walsh said. "A lady's horse need to be a solid driving horse with good manners."

Flat Rock Draft Horses in Bellevue, Ohio, is one of 16 hitches competing in the three-day show that ends Sunday, with teams coming from all over the United States and Canada to show off the power and beauty of their draft horses.

Advertisement

The hitches, driven by one or two drivers, compete in a variety of classes, including the single-horse cart, the unicorn hitch with three horses and the two, four, six and eight-horse hitches.

On Saturday, the classes featured the ladies cart, two chuck wagon races, a show team, a unicorn hitch and the four and six-horse hitches. The horses, including Percherons, Clydesdales and Belgians, pull replica freight wagons painted various colors to represent farms, corporations and family heritage, as stated in the program for the show.

Each race is judged for first- to sixth-place based on the harness and wagon, the conformation of the horses and how well the horses perform and work together as they pull equally to achieve tight traces. The drivers follow the announcer's commands to walk, drive on or trot, back up and line up their horse or horses in the show ring.

"We're judging on action and performance," said Wayne Wareing of Firth, Idaho, the judge for the show. "We want to see them working together as a team. We also like a horse liking what he's doing out there."

The judges are looking for precision in the horses' movements as they work side by side, said Brian Coleman of Eaglesfield Percherons in Didsbury, Alberta.

"It's just the challenge of getting the animals to work to their abilities, the challenge of getting them to work together as a unit," Coleman said.

The drivers want their horses to showcase themselves at their maximum potential, said Kyle Forsyth of Country Lane Belgians in Sunderland, Ontario.

"You want them to have pretty head carriage, enjoying what they're doing, and a fluid way of moving," Forsyth said.

The draft horse show is not a contest for pulling or speed, said Matt Deering of Donnell Belgians in Middlebury, Vt.

"We're out for their action," Deering said.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.