Unless you don’t have a soul (and I know some people like that) you probably have what can only be called feelings. While I was in the feelings line, I got an extra helping, which may explain why some people lack them.

I get waylaid by feelings often, including when I am confronted with stuff in my home I don’t need, use or love, but can’t part with.

Yes, even though I harp on you to let go, lighten up, declutter, and not cling to stuff just because it was your mom’s or your grandma’s or your first love’s or your dog’s, — though I know that life is better and homes more beautiful and functional when they contain only those belongings that support and nurture us right now — I still cling.

I might be hopeless.

Last week I told you about my conversation with Mark Brunetz, co-host of Style Network’s Clean House. We talked about my recent move, which triggered a double dose of guilt about stuff I keep moving from house to house. Stuff that, by my own rules, should not make the cut.

Brunetz, who is also the co-author of “Take the U Out of Clutter” (Berkley Publishing) and who is writing the foreword to my own upcoming book, has taught me that our attachment to stuff is really about the stories around the stuff. So I shared with him the stories behind stuff I was stuck to like wool socks in the dryer.

Cookbooks

The story: I’m just an OK cook. I get the job done. I don’t obsess about the quality of my knives or get all whipped up about a new recipe. But I do have a collection of about 20 cookbooks, which occupy one shelf in the kitchen everywhere I live. I have pared this collection down to only those cookbooks that have at least one recipe I use, but do I really need to haul them around?

Brunetz: “First off, every recipe you like is probably online, but since you like to see your recipes printed on a page, carefully tear out the recipes you like and put them in a Marni’s Cookbook binder by category. You will have streamlined your favorites and freed up a shelf. Donate what’s left of the cookbooks to charity.”

If the idea of mutilating a book that you’re donating pains you? Make a color photocopy.

Other books

The story: Cookbooks are the least of my book problems. Being a writer, reader and book-clubber makes them an occupational/vocational hazard. When packed, my books fill about 15 banker’s boxes. And, yes, I have gone through them. Two moves ago I donated 110 books to charity. This move, I’ve set aside another full box to donate. The rest I cannot seem to release.

Brunetz: “Have you read them?”

“Oh, yes.”

“Are you going to read them again?”

I pause. He fills the silence. “No. You are onto the next book.”

“But they feel like a part of me,” I say.

“Give them to the closest library, which will store them for free, and you can visit them and check them out any time you want.”

I think about this, and decide to meet him halfway, and cut my collection in half.

The red lamps

The story: The two red cloisonné lamps sat on my nightstands when I was a girl. They were originally vases my dad bought for my mom in Kobe, Japan, long before I was born. Mom had them made into lamps. A lamp repair man once told me he thought they were valuable, so I had them professionally appraised. They aren’t. Though nice and well made, the vases were mass produced and aren’t desirable in today’s market. They don’t work with my home décor anymore, so they stay in the garage. I can’t see using them, but can’t seem to part with them.

Brunetz: “Is there any question that your Dad loved your Mom?”

“No.”

“If you dropped and broke the lamps, would that change?”

“No.”

“You’re trying to preserve a symbol of your parents’ love. But their love won’t change if you let the lamps go.”

I know this. I’m working on it.

My calendars

The story: I have used a paper-based time-management system since 1995. Every year, I get a new set of calendar pages and a neat box labeled to archive my old calendar. So I have 20 boxes, each about the size of a hardback dictionary, of calendars chronicling every meeting, phone call, and task. I never refer to them. But … I save them, I guess, because they are literally (kind of) my life.

Brunetz: “Here’s a little gray area. As a writer, you are a chronicler of stories, and may find value in that information and need those archives. But let me ask you, why are you hanging on?”

“In case someone asks me, and I hope no one does, what have I done with my life. I can look at my notes.”

“I could argue for you to keep them, but consider paying an intern to scan them into a digital file so they don’t take up space.”

I am not likely going to scan them, but I will keep them for now.

Diamonds

Story: The two half-carat diamonds came from a long ago relationship dating back to my early 20s. When the relationship ended, I had the diamonds made into earrings. The post on one earring promptly broke — a sign. I did not care to have the earrings fixed. So the diamonds have stayed in a black velvet box for years. I come across them every time I move and think, “I really should do something with these.” This time, I actually did.

I sold the diamonds to a wholesaler diamond buyer. I worried Brunetz would say I made a mistake. I know this is not how to get top dollar, but selling diamonds to a private party online takes time. I got offers from three diamond buyers ranging from $485 to $600 for the pair. Each said the pair would retail for three times that.

But I wanted to unlock their value and move on. I am planning a trip with my oldest daughter after she graduates from college in May. I put the $600 in the travel fund.

Brunetz: What you did was fantastic! Why hang onto something that reminds you of something that didn’t work when you can unlock the value and put it toward a new experience with your daughter and a great memory?

Maybe I have learned something after all.

Syndicated columnist Marni Jameson is the author of two home and lifestyle books, and the forthcoming “What to Do with a Houseful of Memories” (Sterling Press). Contact her at marnijameson.com.