A pair of Democrats trying to succeed U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth tried to establish themselves as champions of the middle class and touted their resumes as why they think they'll catch on with voters.

Schaumburg businessman Raja Krishnamoorthi and Villa Park Village President Deborah Bullwinkel made their cases Tuesday in an appearance before the Chicago Tribune Editorial Board. They're running in the 8th Congressional District, which covers parts of DuPage and northwest Cook counties.

Krishnamoorthi, a former deputy state treasurer and Harvard Law School graduate, is no stranger to the northwest and west district, having lost the 2012 primary to Duckworth, who is seeking the U.S. Senate seat now held by Republican Mark Kirk.

"I'm the only candidate in this race with deep private sector and public sector experience," said Krishnamoorthi, who added that he could bring a "faster, cheaper, smarter way of doing business" to Washington.

Portraying herself as the underdog, Bullwinkel distanced herself from what she called Krishnamoorthi's "wealthy connections" and contacts that help him raise campaign cash. Bullwinkel was elected village trustee in 2009, then president in 2013.

"I'm the regular gal, small-town mayor, middle-class advocate that has stepped forward to run for this position," Bullwinkel said.

Krishnamoorthi and Bullwinkel walked the party line on a number of key issues, including their assertion that the wealthiest Americans aren't paying their fair share in taxes and that the Affordable Care Act needs to be fixed, not thrown out.

Bullwinkel struggled to provide specifics on issues like Social Security, and acknowledged as much.

"I don't necessarily have the answers to everything," she said. "However, what the people appreciate about me is the fact that I sit and I listen."

Krishnamoorthi said he is in favor of raising the earnings limit on Social Security taxes.

As she did when she announced her congressional bid, Bullwinkel emphasized her gender as a factor in the contest.

"When we look at true diversity and providing a voice, it's not going to be the only thing that will hopefully carry me over the finish line," she said. "However, I do feel that having a woman's voice will certainly be a benefit."

For his part, Krishnamoorthi has earned a number of high-profile endorsements, from U.S. Sen. Dick Durbin, House Democratic leader Nancy Pelosi of California and David Axelrod, a longtime adviser to President Barack Obama. Krishnamoorthi also has been able to shore up support within the Asian-American community.

Also running in the March 15 Democratic primary is state Sen. Michael Noland of Elgin, who did not attend the meeting. His campaign attributed the absence to a scheduling error.

The primary winner will go on to the November election against DuPage County Board member Peter "Pete" DiCianni, of Elmhurst. He's the only Republican candidate left standing after the Illinois State Board of Elections removed three others from the ballot.

deldeib@tribpub.com

Twitter @deldeib