CHICAGO — Even as some of their fans were giving up on them, the Chicago Bears wouldn’t give up on the idea of a comeback. Trailing 17-9, the Bears rambled down the field late in the fourth quarter.

Quarterback Jay Cutler, a candidate for NFL comeback player of the year, threatened to provide a whoopee cushion to Brock Osweiler’s stellar starting debut. Down 17-15 with 29 seconds remaining, the Bears needed a two-point conversion to force overtime.

Where most saw frayed nerves, the Broncos saw answers. The way Broncos cornerback Chris Harris explained it, the Bears used their best plays to cover 65 yards in 80 seconds.

“We had an idea of what they were going to do,” Harris said.

With former Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase pulling the strings for Chicago, Denver settled on two options. The Bears lined up with three receivers split left and one split right, leaving the Broncos expecting a pick play with the wideouts or a rush by rookie Jeremy Langford.

Langford had just scored from a similar distance seconds earlier. Safety T.J. Ward filed it away as Langford stood next to Cutler. When the quarterback handed Langford the football, Ward darted into the hole, smashing into the Bears running back.

Review proved unnecessary. The collective groan of the crowd revealed the outcome.

“I am not going to get into schemes and what we are doing schematically,” said Bears coach John Fox, who led the Broncos to four consecutive division titles before mutually parting ways after last season’s home playoff loss to the Indianapolis Colts. “Obviously we came up short.”

Fox became irritated during his news conference. The Bears squandered multiple scoring chances, including a fourth down on the 4-yard line. But the failed two-point try stood out for its lack of success and imagination.

“Yeah if you pay attention to what we do, we have a lot of (options) in our offense in every single down, not just two-point plays,” Fox said. “Sometimes we execute. Sometimes we don’t.”

The Broncos bent again, yielding 347 yards, their second-highest total of the season. Officials flagged the defense for 93 yards in penalties. And yet, when the Broncos needed a stop the defense rediscovered its identity in the 28-degree chill. Danny Trevathan intercepted Cutler and Malik Jackson recovered a fumble for the team’s first takeaways since an Oct. 18 victory at Cleveland.

“I am an honorary member of the ‘No Fly Zone'” said Jackson, whose takeaway appeared to be an interception, but was listed as a fumble recovery in official stats. “I caught the ball like T.J. and I ran like C.J. (Anderson).”

Denver made two sacks, including Derek’s Wolfe first. The Broncos own 34 this season. The rush wasn’t necessary on the final play. The Broncos needed force in the middle. Denver showed a soft underbelly in recent weeks, allowing three of the past four opponents to eclipse 100 yards rushing.

The Bears finished with 86 yards rushing on 25 carries. And little from Langford on the final push.

“They got a good situation to get in the red zone, and when it was time for us to line up, we made a big play,” Trevathan said. “We work so hard, so when stuff happens like that, we know why.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck