ADVERTISEMENT

NEW YORK (MainStreet) – Of the 35 most-watched television broadcasts of fall 2013, only one wasn't a National Football League game: NBC's telecast of the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade.

Last year's parade broadcast drew 25.2 million viewers, or roughly a million more than NBC drew for a Pittsburgh Steelers-Baltimore Ravens game on Thanksgiving night. It's a big deal and is the closest thing to consensus this nation's television viewers have reached on something other than sports.



Before you erupt into a fit of blind rage over stores opening for “Black Friday” sales on Thanksgiving itself, just keep in mind that the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade has not only used Thanksgiving to prime Americans for Christmas shopping, but has trucked out Santa Claus to signal the start of the holiday shopping season for the past 99 years.

While not even the oldest Thanksgiving parade in the country – that honor belongs to the Detroit and Philadelphia parades – the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade may be the most commercial. The annual broadcast on NBC hurls relentlessly cheery Today show cast members and earworm product jingles into U.S. homes and doesn't give up until you swear an oath to cotton as the fabric of your life or vow that, yes, the best part of waking up is Folgers in your cup. Those images all sear their way into the subconscious until well into the first course of dinner or the kickoff of the Detroit Lions game – whichever comes first.

Even attending the parade itself and snagging a spot along Sixth Avenue or Columbus Circle doesn't help. New York is already built to market wares to everyone passing through it. During the parade, however, guerilla marketing teams blitz a captive salient of semi-willing consumers with swag ranging from promotional throwaways for upcoming children's movies or free samples of products you'll soon be baited into buying. Ifis getting ready to unveil a Salted Caramel Twix, the parade route will be the first ground littered by its wrappers.

Read More: 7 Holiday Shopping Apps Stores Hope You Won't Use This Season

Nobody has a monopoly on the event. Though NBC partners with Macy's and has official broadcast rights, CBS fires up the cameras and broadcasts its bootleg The Thanksgiving Day Parade on CBS simply because the parade passes by its studio space anyway and it has nothing better to do. Balloons and floats pass beneath signs and billboards in Times Square and Herald Square that advertise the direct competition of companies that shelled out for their spot on the street.

It's overwhelming, and that's before Idina Menzel or Meghan Trainor sing a note, the cast of On the town breaks into its first number or the first balloon deflates itself on a streetlamp. It's all a bit much to take in the single-digit hours of the morning, but it's exposure that can pay off handsomely for the companies cramming their logos and products into the order of march. With all respect to Macy's, here are just 10 of the corporate giants benefiting most from their walk through Manhattan.