A federal advisory group has released a draft version of its National Pain Strategy, which seeks to redefine the way pain is perceived and treated in the U.S.

The strategy ultimately derives from a mandate in the 2010 Affordable Care Act, which asked the Department of Health and Human Services to "increase the recognition of pain as a significant public health problem."

Michael Von Korff, ScD, of Group Health Research Institute in Seattle, who chaired one of the report panels, said the strategy harbors a "sea change from the way we do things now."

"It's not just another report that says we have lots of people in pain, let's throw services at them," Von Korff told MedPage Today. "It's a call to make sure that what we do with pain is based in evidence and based on the biopsychosocial model, which consensus says is the right approach."

Robert Kerns, PhD, of Yale and the Connecticut VA, who also chaired one of the report panels, said the strategy asserts that pain is a "public health problem -- or, as some say, a public health crisis -- that is in need of a national strategy to transform the way we think about [pain]."

The report was written by the Interagency Pain Research Coordinating Committee (IPRCC), which is comprised of representation from the FDA, the NIH, the CDC, the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ), the Department of Defense, and the Department of Veterans Affairs.

It involved six working groups that tackled various aspects of pain care: population research, prevention and care, disparities, service delivery and reimbursement, professional education and training, and public awareness.

The report does not make specific treatment recommendations; rather it acknowledges evidence gaps and calls for further research to better understand pain in order to treat it more appropriately.

"It's not meant to dive into the weeds and recommend specific therapies," strategy co-chair Sean Mackey, MD, PhD, of Stanford, told MedPage Today. "It's meant to offer recommendations on how we can change the way we care for patients and incentivize that treatment."

Von Korff noted that a focus of the report is to emphasize the biopsychosocial model of pain, and to recognize the need for a multimodal and interdisciplinary approach to its treatment.

It also aims to fill gaps in primary care physicians' understanding of pain and how to treat it, since these professionals are often on the front lines of care, and emphasizes that patients need to be more involved in decision making about their care.

There's also a call for more basic research, as we "need a better understanding of the mechanisms of pain so we can develop new treatments that are better than the ones we have," Von Korff said.

Kerns, who co-chaired the delivery and reimbursement panel, said the report also notes the lack of financial incentives for healthcare providers to promote multimodal and interdisciplinary approaches to pain management.

Opioids have been a focal point of the debate about pain care. The report acknowledges that more liberal prescribing of the drug class has led to a rise in addiction, abuse, and overdose, but it maintains that the drugs are considered medically appropriate for acute and intractable pain that doesn't respond to other therapies.

Still, it notes that there aren't enough data to help tell which patients are candidates for opioid therapy, on appropriate dosing strategies, or on risk mitigation, and there's a need for further research on the safety and efficacy of long-term opioids for chronic pain.

A 2011 report from the Institute of Medicine -- which had been commissioned by HHS following the ACA mandate, and called specifically for a National Pain Strategy -- was criticized because it estimated that 100 million people in the U.S. live with chronic pain.

Some experts said the number exaggerated the problem, and pointed to conflicts of interest between IOM panel members and opioid drugmakers.

Von Korff noted that the draft version of the strategy recognizes that the percentage of patients with life-limiting, severe chronic pain is actually much smaller.

Mackey said the next step once the strategy is finalized will be to implement the recommendations by getting various stakeholders involved.

"It's going to be up to all of us to advocate -- legislators, insurance companies, patient advocacy groups, medical associations -- to enact these goals," Mackey said.

The IPRCC will be accepting comments on the draft guidance until May 20, 2015.

The authors disclosed no financial relationships with industry.