Sioux Falls, SD

Thousands of South Dakotans who bought insurance under the Affordable Care Act will have sticker shock when they get their insurance bill next year.

Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield is asking the state insurance division for a 43 percent hike in premiums for its 14,000 ACA members in South Dakota.

Large medical claims and prescription drug expenses have Wellmark Blue Cross and Blue Shield asking members who purchased ACA policies to ante up.

The insurer says 31 percent more members than it expected had insurance claims of more than $50,000.

"This double digit percent increase in large claims, on top of how we expected folks to use these policies was really quite shocking to us," Laura Jackson of Wellmark said.

Wellmark also says it saw a larger increase in the number and costs of prescription drugs; Add to that 66 members who cancelled their polices after getting medical services.

"Many of these members actually sought services for things like ear tubes, hip replacements and then cancelled their coverage and/or moved to a lower premium if there was a special event," Jackson said.

Wellmark says for every $1.00 in premiums paid by members, it spent $1.44 to pay for the cost of services and it can't afford to lose that kind of money.

But other insurers say they aren't having the same problems in South Dakota.

"So I don't think we're seeing from our perspective some of the large increases some other insurers have had; for us it's been kind of a normal year for a normal price increase year," Jeff Sandene of Sanford Health Plan said.

Sanford Health Plan provides for 5700 ACA participants in the state. Sandene won't give the exact amount, but says Sanford has asked for a rate increase in the low teens. Sanford says it's also looking for other way to offset healthcare costs.

"We can't just always be increasing rates. We have to look at how can we manage the population; how can we keep people healthy?" Sandene said.

Avera Health Plans has 13,000 ACA members in South Dakota. It also says it's asking for a rate hike in the low teens. Health insurance rate increase requests are now before the state division of insurance and will be released in July to go into effect in 2016.

DAKOTACARE has 10,000 ACA Members in the state. It's not releasing its 2016 rate request to the South Dakota Division of Insurance.

Business

Your Money Matters {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.