Brent Brown never would have imagined that he would be introducing President Barack Obama at an event in Milwaukee. He was a Republican voter, and he had, by his own admission, said some pretty awful things about the president. But when Obamacare literally saved his life, everything changed for him.

“My President, you saved my life, and I am eternally grateful,” Brown wrote in a letter to the president.

Brown had been diagnosed with a medical condition that left him unable to get health insurance, because he had a pre-existing condition. He put off going to the doctor until he was in too much pain not to go, because he could not afford it, and eventually, the financial and physical strain left him bankrupt and dying, unable to pay for the surgeries necessary to save his life.

Obamacare clash reaches US high court

However, when the Affordable Care Act was passed, everything changed for Brown, who could now get the insurance that would help pay for the surgeries that helped him to become free of his illness.

Brown wrote his sincerest thanks, along with an apology for saying horrible things about him and about Obamacare, to the president, and that’s how he found his way to a Milwaukee event, introducing the man who saved his life.

Here’s why Justice Scalia would disapprove of GOP’s obstruction of Obama’s SCOTUS nominee

His full letter reads:

To My President, I sincerely hope that this reaches you, as far too often praise is hard to come by. Apologies to people who deserve it perhaps even less so. I did not vote for you. Either time. I have voted Republican for the entirety of my life. I proudly wore pins and planted banners displaying my Republican loyalty. I was very vocal in my opposition to you–particularly the ACA. Before I briefly explain my story allow me to first say this: I am so very sorry. I understand written content cannot convey emotions very well–but my level of conviction has me in tears as I write this. I was so very wrong. So very very wrong. You saved my life. I want that to sink into your ears and mind. My President, you saved my life, and I am eternally grateful. I have a ‘pre-existing condition’ and so could never purchase health insurance. Only after the ACA came into being could I be covered. Put simply to not take up too much of your time if you are in fact taking the time to read this: I would not be alive without access to care I received due to your law. So thank you from a dumb young man who thought he knew it all and who said things about you that he now regrets. Thank you for serving me even when I didn’t vote for you. Thank you for being my President. Honored to have lived under your leadership and guidance, Brent Nathan Brown

Check out the video below.

On Broadway, Obama mocks GOP candidates for ‘occupying a different reality’