Oct. 16, 2013 - Washington, District of Columbia, U.S. - U.S. Senator TED CRUZ (R-TX), a key player behind the U.S. government shutdown, walks through the U.S. Capitol building as the Senate prepares to vote on a compromise deal that will end the government shutdown. (Credit Image: © Allison Shelley/ZUMA Wire/ZUMA24.com)

Republican U.S. presidential candidate and Senator Ted Cruz (L) looks over at rival candidate Senator Marco Rubio (2nd R) after Pope Francis' address before a joint meeting of the U.S. Congress in the House of Representatives Chamber on Capitol Hill in Washington September 24, 2015. REUTERS/James Lawler Duggan

Ray Gonzales, Ph.D., is retired from the California State University system. He was elected to the state Assembly from Kern County in 1972, served on the state Public Employment Relations Board from 1976 to 1980, and as a political officer and labor attache in the U.S. Foreign Service from 1980 to 1990.

Oct. 16, 2013 - Washington, District of Columbia, U.S. - U.S. Senator TED CRUZ (R-TX), a key player behind the U.S. government shutdown, walks through the U.S. Capitol building as the Senate prepares to vote on a compromise deal that will end the government shutdown. (Credit Image: © Allison Shelley/ZUMA Wire/ZUMA24.com)

Republican U.S. presidential candidate and Senator Ted Cruz (L) looks over at rival candidate Senator Marco Rubio (2nd R) after Pope Francis' address before a joint meeting of the U.S. Congress in the House of Representatives Chamber on Capitol Hill in Washington September 24, 2015. REUTERS/James Lawler Duggan

Ray Gonzales, Ph.D., is retired from the California State University system. He was elected to the state Assembly from Kern County in 1972, served on the state Public Employment Relations Board from 1976 to 1980, and as a political officer and labor attache in the U.S. Foreign Service from 1980 to 1990.

On election night of 2012, GOP political pundit Mike Murphy opined that the major reason Mitt Romney had lost the election was, “Latinos, Latinos, Latinos.” The Republican Party seemed to agree with this assessment, and party leaders quickly concluded they had to go to work immediately to reverse the fact that President Obama had received 71 percent of the Latino vote.

But this was not the only shortcoming for the Republicans. The party had lost the female vote by a significant majority, as well as the Asian and the youth vote. And of course the black vote was 91 percent in favor of Obama. The only demographic in which the GOP had done marginally well was among seniors and white males.

Realizing that the party could not likely win a national election unless it improved its standing with Latinos, who now constitute the largest minority and the fastest growing voting block in the country, the GOP went to work in its efforts to increase its appeal to Latino voters. One key to this strategy was to focus on the junior senator from Florida, Marco Rubio, and recently elected GOP Senator Ted Cruz from Texas.

Rubio was tapped to give the GOP rebuttal to President Obama’s State of the Union address. Hopping that Rubio would shine as one of the GOP’s stars, Party leaders and the public in general were amazed that the young senator was clearly not ready for prime time. His awkward gulp of water during his 15 minutes of potential fame was all that anyone remembers of his speech.

The GOP, which has basically become a party dominated by white, male Southerners and evangelicals has worked hard to try to give the impression that it does have prominent minorities in its leadership positions. By focusing on senators Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz, the party believed that it could turn the tide on the loss of most of the 44 percent Latino voters that George W. Bush had won in 2004. They saw Rubio and Cruz as their great (not so brown) hope.

But Rubio and Cruz are hardly reflective of the majority of Latino voters in the country. For one thing, both Cruz and Rubio are of Cuban background. Most Latinos in the U.S. are of Mexican and Central Americans backgrounds. Sixty-three percent are of Mexican decent while only 3.5 percent are of Cuban background. The other 33 percent are from Central America and other countries of Latin America. Cuban-Americans are not typical of Latino immigrants in many respects. For one thing, they tend to be Republicans rather than Democrats as are most other Latino immigrants.

The initial wave of Cuban immigrants fled Cuba when Fidel Castro toppled the long-time regime of dictator Flugencio Bautista in 1959. They were primarily well-to-do white Cubans who had supported the dictatorship and had benefited from the regimes’ abuse of the Cuban masses. Many of these Cubans had for years been placing their riches in American banks and sending their children to private schools in the U.S. When the dictatorship collapsed, they fled to Florida, primarily Miami, where they soon invested their hoarded money in businesses and became financially successful in their new country. These were not the black and mulatto Cubans who later arrived during the Mariel Boatlift of 1980. And certainly, they had little in common with the Mexican and Central American immigrants that have come into the country over the years primarily as laborers in agriculture, railroads and service industries.

The Florida Cubans have produced a number of national political figures, but most have been white Republicans coming out of Florida — Representatives Lincoln and Mario Diaz Belart, Iliana Ros-Lehtinen, and Sen. Mel Martinez among them. Marco Rubio is typical of these white Cuban-American Republicans. He won his U.S. Senate position in Florida in the election of 2010, primarily with the backing of the far-right tea party. Early on he was seen, as Time Magazine declared, “The Savior of the GOP.” While he claims to have very humble immigrant descendant origins, with his father working as a bartender and his mother as an office worker after their arrival from Cuba in 1957, the family is far removed from the Latino immigrant story. He was born in the Catholic faith but spent time as a Mormon and now appears to be a Baptist. And during his first term in the U.S. Senate, he has voted against the Dream Act and opposed almost every issue that is dear to most Latino voters, including Obamacare and the increase in the tax rate for the riches one percent in the country.

Ted Cruz, like Rubio, is likewise far removed from what one would recognize as a typical Latino in the U.S. Born in Calgary, Canada, (where are the birthers on this one?) Cruz describes himself as, “Cuban, Irish, and Italian, and yet somehow I ended up Southern Baptist.” He too was a favorite of the tea party in his senatorial campaign in Texas in 2012. With little more than half a term in office, he has carved out a reputation as not only being extremely conservative, but as his grandstanding in the Hagel nomination hearings demonstrated, he has positioned himself as the new Joe McCarthy in the senate. Like Rubio, he also opposes the Dream Act and Obamacare and has even gone so far, as an extremist, to assert that the United Nations has a plan to eliminate all golf courses around the world.

As the Republican Party struggles to expand its appeal to those groups among which it did so poorly in the 2012 elections, it seems to still be tied to political figures that will do little to attract those voters it wishes to convert to its side. As for the female vote, Sara Palin, Michele Bachmann, and former Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer often appeared in prominent positions at GOP gatherings. These ladies had little appeal to female voters who identified heavily with President Obama in his reelection.

As far as cutting into the strong black Democratic Party vote, the relentless GOP attack against Obama during his years in office can hardly be expected to endear the Republicans to the black community in the next election.

The Obama Administration’s efforts on immigration reform have also been overwhelmingly supported by Asian voters. And young voters have clearly identified with the Democrats on most issues. Climate change, immigration reform, Obamacare, Pell Grant support, ending Middle East wars, same-sex marriage, Planned Parenthood, and a host of other issues that the Democratic Party espouses have for the last two national elections won over the youth vote.

The Republican Party needs to do more than just spotlight its new Latino faces. It has to stop being “the stupid party,” in the words of Republican Gov. Bobby Jindal. It has to stop being the party of no and begin to support those issues that most of the voters in the country, including Latinos, now support. The GOP seems to have been frozen in time by the dominance of tea party thinkers.

The focus on its two Latinos, Rubio and Cruz, as potential presidential nominees will hardly open up the party’s tent to new Latino voters.

Ray Gonzales, a former farmworker who won a seat in the California Assembly in 1972, is a retired longtime college professor.