Perth Amboy Democratic Chairwoman Leslie Dominguez-Rodriguez has resigned from office amid voter fraud allegations outlined in a court case contesting last year’s City Council election results. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights Leslie Dominguez-Rodriguez has resigned as chair of the Perth Amboy Democratic Organization

Her resignation comes on the heels of a judge's ruling related to last year's Perth Amboy City Council election

The judge accused Dominguez-Rodriguez of taking advantage of elderly nursing home voters and ordered a new election

The new election is expected to be held on May 5

A day after a Middlesex County judge's ruling indicated the city's Democratic Party chairwoman had taken advantage of elderly nursing home residents in last year's City Council election, the chairwoman has resigned.

Leslie Dominguez-Rodriguez resigned Friday night, according to Middlesex County Democratic Chairman Kevin McCabe.

In a letter to McCabe, Dominguez-Rodriguez said she was resigning "in the interest of the party."

"This decision will insure that our Democratic Party is not compromised by the allegations against me," she said in the letter. "This distraction could only hurt our party and as a loyal Democrat it is the best thing to do. The reporting in the media was inaccurate as to what the judge stated in her ruling."

She said under the bylaws of the Perth Amboy Democratic Organization, Vice Chair Martin Arroyo is to be designated as chairperson until a new chairperson is elected at the next annual meeting. She said Committeewoman Diane Crawford is Arroyo's choice for acting vice chair. The party reorganization meeting is planned for the week after the primary election in June.

"I believe the resignation of Ms. Dominguez-Rodriguez is a prudent decision and in the best interests of the party," McCabe said. "It's now time for the party to heal and ultimately restore integrity back in the democratic process. The voters of Perth Amboy deserve it."

Earlier this week Superior Court Judge Heidi Currier threw out the results for a City Council seat in last November's general election and ordered a new election. Fernando Gonzalez defeated Sergio Diaz by just 10 votes to win the seat. A former City Council member, Gonzalez, has been serving on council since January. The new election, expected to be held May 5, only will involve Diaz and Gonzalez. None of the other City Council or school board election results were impacted by Currier's decision.

Currier threw out about 13 votes including mail-in ballots from a blind man, a resident who didn't remember her address or voting, and others who testified Dominguez-Rodriguez coerced them into voting for her husband, Jose Rodriguez, who was running for a Board of Education seat. Dominguez Rodriguez also was supporting Gonzalez in the hotly contested Perth Amboy election.

Currier said voter fraud, along with the actions of Dominguez-Rodriguez and Gilfrank Nunez, a relative of her husband's Board of Education running mate "were pervasive and far reaching and likely not just limited to these individuals whose ballots have been contested."

The judge said it was "shameful" residents were taken advantage of by someone who had a direct interest in the election. Currier said the residents were further victimized by having to testify in court where they were nervous, upset and thought they had done something wrong.

Dominguez-Rodriguez sometimes volunteers at the nursing home. Testimony from some of the home's residents indicates Dominguez-Rodriguez may have impersonated a woman named "Linda Ferreira" who allegedly assisted some of the voters in filling out their ballots. In court some of the residents pointed to a photo of Dominguez-Rodriguez as the woman they knew as Ferreira.

"There is no doubt that Ms. Dominguez-Rodriguez was very involved in this election," Currier said.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1CidRoa