DES MOINES, Iowa – You know it’s campaign season when Hillary Clinton is in someone’s backyard and Chris Christie is mingling with the crowd at the Des Moines Farmers’ Market.

Saturday, presidential hopefuls on both sides of the aisle hit Iowa hard with campaign stop after stop. Democratic candidate, Hillary Clinton met with grassroots supporters at a home in Beaverdale, then attended the Third District Democrats Summer Wine Down event in Winterset. Fresh off a spat with the Des Moines Register, Republican candidate Donald Trump held his Make America Great Again Rally and Family Picnic in Oskaloosa. New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, who recently threw his hat into the ring for the GOP presidential nomination, spent the morning at the Des Moines Farmers’ Market, and his evening at the Italian American Heritage Festival near Western Gateway Park. Finally, Democratic candidate and former Maryland Governor Martin O’Malley, finished his two-day swing in the state with events in Des Moines, Knoxville and Winterset.

Clinton has avoided a flashy campaign so far in Iowa, with small roundtable discussions in warehouses and bus trips chosen over fancy flights. Saturday, she continued to court a grounded, down-to-earth image by hosting a meet-and-greet event in the backyard of a young couple’s home in Beaverdale. Of the wide variety of topics touched on in her stump speech, Clinton voiced support for the Affordable Care Act – though she did say it needs several improvements. One of which, she noted, was a greater emphasis on mental illnesses. She then pivoted from that to an attack on Governor Terry Branstad, who vetoed a bill earlier this year that would have kept two of the state’s remaining mental health hospitals open.

“I could not believe your governor vetoed legislation – bipartisan legislation, as you know, coming from the Republican House and by very narrow margins, the Democratic Senate – vetoed legislation to keep open two of the remaining facilities,” she said. “The best numbers I’ve seen, you have 128,000 people in Iowa with mental health challenges. Where are they supposed to go? Well I’ll tell you what Iowans tell me. They go to jails, they go to nursing homes, they go to the streets. They go to somebody’s back room. They’re not getting treated.”

Clinton also championed reform in early childhood education for kids ages zero to five, and applauded the Obama Administration’s nuclear deal with Iran. While Clinton clearly did not want to cast herself as an Obama clone, she did avoid criticizing her former opponent.

“A president alone can do a lot, but not everything that needs to be done,” she said. “In local communities, and in states across our country, we all need to be committed to the kind of positive, forward agenda that will make a difference once again in our country. Building on the good work President Obama, who stabilized our economy, got healthcare passed, saved the auto industry, got bin Laden, and a lot of other really important achievements.”

Clinton also revealed to supporters at the event she would be unveiling her environmental and climate change policy Sunday and Monday while in Iowa.

In Southeastern Iowa, Donald Trump made quite the splash himself. Riding off a high lead nationally in a recent Quinnipiac poll, Trump took aim at a recent Des Moines Register editorial piece that called for him to drop out of the race.

“It’s a super liberal rag not respected around here,” he said. “But they come out with that editorial…I’m rated number one in every poll. Because you know what, people are tired of what’s going on – not because of me. They’re tired. So you’re number one in every poll, and they’re saying, ‘You should drop your candidacy.’ I say, ‘Excuse me, why?'”

At Trump’s event in Oskaloosa, close to 1,200 people gathered for nearly an hour as the businessman took aim at another rival: Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker.

“And I’m being very nice to him, and then today, I read this horrible statement from his fundraiser,” he said. “About Trump. I said, ‘Oh finally, I can attack.’ And he’s the only guy that’s ahead of me. I can’t believe I’m in second place. I’m finally in second place in Iowa, but folks, will you please put me in first place so I feel better?”

Walker is leading Trump in Iowa polls currently.