It's morning, and I'm leaving the office early to go to an appointment.

I enter the basement parking lot of the building where I have been working as an international student and scholar specialist for many years. As I open the door into the parking lot there is plenty of light and I walk through the entrance. Then, I hear the footsteps and shuffles of someone behind me, somewhere I can't see. Normally, I wouldn't pay much attention to the sounds, or I might be aware of them only if it were night-time.

Today, though, in the daylight, my mind flashes immediately to the thought of what I would do or where I would hide if that person were an armed gunman. I know that my thinking is far-fetched even as I prepare for this imaginary event, but I continue to plan how I would hide behind cars and work my way to an exit. I don't bother to turn around and look because I don't want to confirm that the person is not going to harm me and therefore interrupt the serious business of mapping my getaway, even as I am aware of the silliness of my reaction.

Realizing my state of mind, I reach my car, unlock the door, sit down and start on my way, wondering how I arrived at this point of fear. The irony that I'm a fairly well-traveled international educator is not lost on me. Will I always walk into public places and feel this way because of the mass murders that have taken place in the U.S. during the previous month?

Advertisement

No, I should not.

Through my work and my study abroad experience, and because of my childhood surrounded by people from all over the world, I have witnessed many examples of goodness in people of many different backgrounds, and I know I can feel safe almost anywhere.

When I lived in University of Colorado-Boulder Family Housing, we kids all tried our various languages (Indonesian, Arabic, Spanish, and English) to welcome a Thai girl. My junior year of college, when I studied abroad in Seville, Spain, my host mother treated me like her own granddaughter, making sure I was well-cared for and supported. A few years ago, as an adviser for an international peer mentor program, I met international students who would drop what they were doing to help new students with their bags or drive them to look for places to live.

After seeing such horrific shootings in familiar places on TV, I am aware that fear has nested in me. It may be natural to feel like hiding away, or seeking protection from possible danger, but I know that isolation breeds distrust and paranoia. In the coming days and weeks I might continue to have moments where a strong sense of fear comes over me. But I also understand that now, more than ever, it is important for me to immerse myself in other cultures to understand other people better and build a network of community and trust. Rather than running away from some unknown person behind me, I will be walking confidently with the support of new people I have come to know as friends.

Janet Garcia lives in Boulder