President Barack Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran just won the backing of the Senate’s top Democrat.

Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid of Nevada said Sunday that he “strongly” supports the agreement reached by six world powers and Iran meant to curb Tehran’s nuclear ambitions – vowing that he will do “everything in my power” to defend the deal.

Story Continued Below

“At the end of the day, there is no doubt in my mind that the threat of Iran gaining a nuclear weapon — the one outcome we all agree is unacceptable — is far more likely if Congress rejects this agreement,” Reid said in a lengthy statement explaining his support for the nuclear deal.

The backing from the Senate’s most powerful Democrat adds even more momentum on Capitol Hill to protect the nuclear agreement. Reid becomes the 27th Senate Democrat to formally endorse the Iran deal, and Obama needs just 34 votes in the Senate to sustain a veto of a resolution of disapproval that is expected in Congress next month.

No Republicans are expected to vote in favor of the nuclear deal. But in recent days, key Democrats have come out in favor of the agreement – including red-state Sens. Joe Donnelly of Indiana and Claire McCaskill of Missouri, and Jewish lawmakers such as Rep. Jerrold Nadler of New York.

In an interview with the Washington Post, Reid said he was “cautiously optimistic” that there would be enough Democratic support to sustain any veto from Obama. His counterpart in the House – Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi of California – has confidently predicted that Obama’s veto won’t be overridden.

Still, the nuclear agreement has divided key Democrats, including Reid’s top two deputies. Senate Minority Whip Dick Durbin of Illinois has been one of the most aggressive supporters of the nuclear agreement in Congress, but the third-ranking Senate Democrat – Chuck Schumer of New York, Reid’s presumptive successor once the Nevada Democrat retires after 2016 – is opposed.

The fourth-ranking Senate Democrat, Patty Murray of Washington, has not made public her position, though she is expected to back the agreement. Also undecided and in question is House Minority Whip Steny Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 House Democrat.

Aside from Schumer, Sen. Bob Menendez of New Jersey – a frequent critic of the Obama administration’s policies on Iran – is the only other Senate Democrat on record opposing the deal.

The international pact has drawn opposition from those who fear that Iran will still be able to build a nuclear bomb, as well as those who are afraid the lifting of sanctions against Iran will increase its ability to fund international terrorism. In both cases, the fear is that Israel will be the target.

In his statement, Reid made a forceful case for protecting the nuclear agreement, which he argued was the “best path” to halting Iran from developing a nuclear weapon. He dismissed arguments from opponents of the Iran deal that the Obama administration should go back and try to secure a better deal, calling that notion “fantasy.”

“First, this is a good agreement on the merits, imposing the toughest inspections and verification regime in history, and a diplomatic solution is certainly less costly in American blood and treasure than any possible military option,” Reid said. “Second, if the Senate rejects this agreement, the international community will not support an attempt to secure another and they will not support the sanctions regime.

He added: “Those are hard facts. Whether we like it or not, the current sanctions regime depends on other countries.”

Though the deal’s backers are focused on preventing Capitol Hill from getting to the two-thirds majority needed to override a veto, some congressional aides following the process believe it’s possible that there are enough Senate Democratic votes in favor of the deal to prevent a resolution of disapproval of reaching 60 votes – which would halt the measure before it gets to Obama for his veto.

David Cohen contributed to this article.