A new federally issued rule that would double the salary threshold for employees who are exempt from overtime will greatly hinder business growth when it goes into effect Dec. 1, business leaders said.

Last week, the U.S. Department of Labor updated regulations defining which salaried employees are exempt from the overtime requirements of the Fair Labor Standards Act’s minimum wage and overtime pay protections.

The rule increases the salary threshold below which most white-collar, salaried workers are entitled to overtime from the existing $455 per week ($23,660 annually) to $913 per week ($47,476 annually). In other words, those who make less than $913 per week would get overtime pay for hours more than 40 per week.

The updates will affect 4.2 million workers who will gain new overtime protections or get a raise to the new salary threshold, according to the federal agency. Business leaders said it will affect employees not only at for-profit companies but also at nonprofits such as hospitals and higher education institutions.

They said the new rule will cause staffing problems, raise costs and potentially lose promising employees targeted for more prominent roles in the company. Business leaders also said employees would suffer from being demoted to hourly workers with fewer benefits and fewer opportunities to learn, train and advance in the company.

“We’re not at all happy about it,” said Tony Iannelli, president and CEO of the Greater Lehigh Valley Chamber of Commerce. “To double it this rapidly is of great concern; it’s a large jump and yet again an expense to business.

“The hidden component in this is the ability of people working their way to the top. I think it stymies the ability of people to work their way to the top.”

While Iannelli said the new rule could eliminate abuses in terms of employers paying workers too little for working overtime, he said this is far from the case in the Lehigh Valley, where he said the majority of employers do not abuse the system.

This new rule, plus the additional costs to employers from the Affordable Care Act and the potential doubling of the minimum wage, add up to additional expenses to businesses, he said.

While the rule affects all businesses, the overtime rule is particularly troublesome for the restaurant industry, according to the leader of a state trade organization.

“This is the single biggest issue facing our members,” said John Longstreet, president and CEO of the Pennsylvania Restaurant & Lodging Association in Harrisburg. “… It’s far-reaching and it’s going to have a lot of ramifications for people that are currently holding these positions because they are going to be restructured, and I don’t think they will like it.”

Restaurant owners often start as busboys and waiters and work their way up to the supervisor/manager level before becoming general managers or owners, Longstreet said.

With this rule, all restaurant managers would have to become hourly employees and would lose what likely was a better benefits package for salaried employees. Also, managers would not be allowed to work the additional hours they may need to in order to become an effective manager, he added.

“We are going to have to make sure no one does work outside of working hours,” Longstreet said.

Longstreet said the rule is hurting the very people it was designed to help, and with 500,000 restaurant employees in Pennsylvania, “you’re talking about a lot of people,” he added.

Furthermore, a lot of managers are on incentive plans that can sometimes add up to 30 percent of their base earnings. If they become hourly employees, those incentive plans would be eliminated, he said.

Another element the rule does not take into account is locale, Longstreet said, noting that the salary threshold should be based on where the employee works. As an example, a salary range for a restaurant employee in central Pennsylvania is a lot different than one in Philadelphia.

While he said the association does not dispute that the $24,000 salary range threshold is outdated, he said there should be a phased-in approach to raising the threshold, rather than doubling it at once.

Retail in general will be heavily affected, according to a national industry trade group official.

“These rules are a career killer,” said David French, senior vice president for government relations with the National Retail Federation, a Washington D.C.-based trade organization. “The Labor Department is demoting millions of workers.

“In the retail sector alone, hundreds of thousands of career professionals will lose their status as salaried employees and find themselves reclassified as hourly workers, depriving them of the workplace flexibility and other benefits they so highly value. And the one-size-fits-all approach means businesses trying to make ends meet in small towns across America are now expected to pay the same salaries as those in New York City.”

Employers face tough decisions over the next six months.

“What the new law comes down to, for many employers, is a business decision: either give employees raises or change employees’ pay statuses,” said Keely Jac Collins, an attorney who specializes in employment law at King, Spry, Herman, Freund & Faul LLC in Bethlehem. “Changing the employees’ pay statuses may be more difficult than it seems. Many employees who are currently classified as ‘exempt’ are heavily relied upon by the organization, both in and outside the office.”

In fact, many of these employees are so heavily relied upon that they have been given iPhones or other devices that are used to access the employee at all hours, Collins said. If those employees are changed from a salaried to an hourly pay status, all time spent inside and outside of the office must be carefully tracked, including time that the employee spends receiving work-related calls and emails after office hours.

Otherwise, the employer could be exposed to liability under state and federal wage laws, Collins said.

Jacob Sitman, an attorney and shareholder in the employment law and labor relations group at Fitzpatrick Lentz & Bubba in Upper Saucon Township, called the new rule a “huge issue for employers.”

“They [Department of Labor] believe that employees will be treated better and paid more fairly, however you want to define that,” Sitman said.

He stressed the importance of employers becoming aware of the issue and examining their wage base.

The most significant and most talked-about change is the wage base, Sitman said. To be exempt from overtime under the Fair Labor Standards Act, an employee must be paid a fixed salary each week, regardless of how much time he or she spends working during that week.

The rule also will raise questions about telecommuting and how employers would track worker hours. The employer should give serious thought to the most effective means of dealing with telecommuting issues presented by the new regulations and avoid a knee-jerk reaction, he added.