‘NAB nabbed my $500k and gave it to company with criminal links’

A sydney woman is suing National Australia Bank, claiming it handed almost $500,000 of her money to a business associated with a NSW Crime Commission target and refused to pay her back.

Samantha Dionys launched legal action after one of the bank’s Sydney branches allegedly allowed $493,000 to be stolen from her account and transferred to a Queensland-based development business ­associated with John Macris without her authority, the District Court heard.

NAB claims she consented to the transfer.

The allegations were outlined in court on Friday, with Ms Dionys demanding the money be repaid by the bank and seeking to issue a subpoena to the NSW Police.

Ms Dionys claims the bank all-owed her cousin and financial services business owner, Matthew Dimaris, to transfer the money to the company, the court heard.

She also alleged Macris ­intimidated her during a meeting at Mr Dimaris’ office, told her to sign papers and brought a gun that was given to his brother Alex, who earlier this year in another court confessed to being a drug dealer to save his father from being convicted.

NAB’s lawyers denied the claims and told Judge David Arnott SC that Ms Dionys gave permission for Mr Dimaris to act as her agent.

The Macris brothers are sworn enemies of Sydney’s Ibrahim family. John Macris was recently targeted by the NSW Crime Commission in an effort to force him to account for his unexplained wealth.

Ms Dionys had received more than $493,000 from a divorce settlement, the court heard.

The mother-of-two claims Mr Dimaris was not an authorised signatory to her ­account but the bank allowed him to take her money anyway, the court heard. The bank’s barrister Patrick Reynolds told the court Ms ­Dionys signed a “loan agreement” at the March 2011 meeting, which authorised Mr Dimaris to make the ­transaction.

Ms Dionys’s barrister, Sydney Jacobs described the document as “nonsense” and said she was intimidated into signing a “consulting agreement”, which wasn’t legally binding.

He said the loan agreement did not resemble one and was not something any law graduate would recognise as one.

The matter will go to trial later this year.