Remember the good old days when all women had access to no-co-pay birth control under the Affordable Care Act and decisions about which contraceptive method to use were in the hands of a woman and her doctor — full stop? As of last week, the Supreme Court added another person to the equation: her boss. CEOs at closely held corporations can deny their employees insurance coverage for birth control if the CEO has a religious objection. The Court wasted no time confirming that this decision applies not "just" to the four methods called into question by Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood Specialties but to any method of birth control.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

Translation: If any of the following women happen to work at a closely held corporation (like half of the American workforce), they could now find themselves without insurance coverage for birth control — or have to make the case to their boss that they need it.

Women who suffer from medical conditions, including endometriosis

Endometriosis affects more than 5 million women in the U.S. and can cause chronic pain and, in some cases, infertility. Many women rely on birth control to treat this health condition — like Elaine S., who is 29, and has been on birth control pills ever since she developed ovarian cysts and endometriosis at 17. In her words: "If I'm even 12 hours late taking my pill, I experience a lot of pain, and the pill may even be preventing me from needing surgery. Even with insurance I had been paying $400 a year for them. When my pharmacist told me I was now paying $0, I was surprised and thrilled! It's nice to get a break."

Most Popular

Survivors of sexual assault

For survivors of sexual assault, access to emergency contraception is beyond valuable — just ask the 34-year-old Planned Parenthood patient in Dallas who was sexually assaulted and so grateful to know that emergency contraception was not only an option but fully paid for thanks to the Affordable Care Act.

Women who use birth control for acne

Nearly 60 percent of women who use birth control use it — at least in part — for something other than contraception, like the millions of women who take hormonal birth control to manage their acne.

Women with painful or irregular menstrual cycles

We hear from women every day who use birth control to manage painful, even debilitating, cramps. There's Sarah D., who says, "For me, and for many women like me, this is not only a reproductive issue, it's a basic health issue. Before going on birth control to regulate my cycle, I became desperately ill every month with headaches, nausea, and fainting. Birth control makes it possible for me to remain healthy and function in my everyday life, and I need health coverage that makes it available and affordable."

There's Rocky P., who points out: "Birth control is extremely important to my overall health. Birth control allows me to function by regulating my hormones; without it, I am literally unable to leave the bed. It is crucial that I have the ability to plan my life and function as I see fit; there is no alternative."

And then there's Kanisha H., who came to Planned Parenthood at age 16. "I had horrible, painful periods for 10 days each month," she explains, "and I didn't know how to deal with them. The Planned Parenthood doctor was great and provided counseling about all the different options that were available to me. I started on the Pill and then the Depo-Provera shot, and then I wound up getting an IUD."

Women experiencing symptoms of menopause

Meet Lori J., a Planned Parenthood patient in Minnesota: "My ob-gyn has prescribed birth control pills for me, a woman nearly 52 years of age, as part of my treatment for perimenopausal symptoms. It is highly unlikely that I would become pregnant at my age, but it is still physically possible. I appreciate the fact that I have access to birth control for both reasons."

Women who want to prevent unintended pregnancy

Here's the thing about birth control and preventing unintended pregnancy: It works! Birth control prevents nearly 2 million unplanned pregnancies each year — improving women's health and helping them to get an education, finish school, and pursue the careers of their dreams. For example …

Sara B.: "I still remember the day, over a year ago, when I got my first birth control prescription for free at the student health center on campus. I felt relieved — it was one less expense that I needed to stress about. It was like a weight was lifted off my chest, and I'm forever grateful for that. In fact, I think I almost hugged my doctor. The ACA's preventive benefit that requires my insurance company to cover the full cost of my birth control, without a co-pay, means I can spend more time concentrating on my studies and less time stressing about how I'll pay for my next prescription."

Jane S.: "As a self-employed business owner, I don't want to have to worry about an unplanned pregnancy. Every little bit helps with expenses!"

Madeline G.: "I'm a poor college student who's learning to do a whole lot of good in this world! But I cannot do that if I can't plan parenthood!"

Joey F.: "When I was in my 20s, I put birth control on my credit card because I couldn't afford to pay my bills, feed myself, and stay on birth control on my minimum wage income. It took years to pay off the debt I racked up. I don't want to see a younger generation of women have to make those kinds of decisions just because they're trying to be responsible and healthy."

Karen F.: "When I was a military wife, I had free medical care with birth control when I needed it. We had the two children we wanted and could care for when we wanted them and felt we could afford them. I didn't think about the privilege at the time; it was just there when I needed it. Now I think, How absurd that all women don't have this vital medical coverage available to them."

The takeaway: Women use birth control for a variety of health reasons, including preventing unintended pregnancy. For women, the only thing controversial about birth control is that we're still fighting for access to this basic health care. Now, unfortunately, some women will have to take that fight to their bosses.

Cecile Richards is the president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund.

Follow Cecile on Twitter.