ADVERTISEMENT

NEW YORK (MainStreet) — The Disneyland measles outbreak has reignited the vaccination controversy in California and elsewhere, but new research from Kaiser Permanente indicates that those opposed to immunization may be clustered in affluent areas.

According to the newly released report in the journal Pediatrics, researchers at Kaiser Permanente in California used spatial analysis software and electronic medical records to identify “clusters” of underimmunization (meaning one or more of the recommended vaccine doses before age three is lacking) and vaccine refusal. The researchers did so among Kaiser Permanente members in 13 Northern California counties. This allowed them to study health factors in relation to geography. What they learned about the demographics was remarkable. It is not necessarily the progeny of the poor, uneducated or uninsured who are not being vaccinated.

“This research confirms anecdotal reports of underimmunization clusters,” said Dr. Tracy A. Lieu, the study’s lead author, in a release about the study. "We found clusters in places we hadn’t anticipated."

The surprise? Many of these underimmunization or vaccine refusal clusters were located in affluent counties such as Marin - the richest county in the state. They were also found in San Francisco and Sonoma, which are among the wealthiest. The East Bay was another such area. Clusters exist within Alameda and Contra Costa counties - also two of California's most affluent counties. All of these communities also have a highly-educated populace.

“This is consistent with our experience,” said Dr. Paul Offit, director of the Vaccine Education Center and a professor of pediatrics in the Division of Infectious Diseases at the Children's Hospital of Philadelphia. “Generally, parents who choose not to vaccinate their children are typically Caucasian, upper middle class to upper class, invariably college educated, often graduate school educated, professionals, or at least people who have some level of control in their jobs.”