WASHINGTON (WNEW) — The head of the Heritage Foundation ridiculed big government policies in the U.S. and reiterated that “the little guy” representing the American people should take the power back from “the bigs” controlling the country’s government, health care and corporations.

Speaking with Jerry Newcombe on Vocal Point, Jim DeMint, the bestselling author and former U.S. senator from South Carolina, elaborated on the harm inflicted on the American people by big government policies, noting a series of “misconceptions” that people have about the role of government, both historically and today.

“There is this misconception that big government is going to help the little guy,” said DeMint. “In fact the guy in the White House right now talks all about helping the poor, helping the middle class, when in fact all the evidence should be abundantly clear to people that big government does not help the poor, it does not help the middle class, it helps other ‘bigs’ – big unions, big corporations, big banks, big lobby firms.”

DeMint’s elaborated on many points in his new book, “Falling In Love With America Again,” extolling the centralization of power into the hands of “the bigs.”

“When the doors close and legislation is written it’s not written to help the little guy,” said Demint. “The battle to save our country is outside of Washington, over the next few years the House and the Senate are not going to do anything positive for the country given the president we have now.”

DeMint criticized what he says are the many fallacies regarding the benefits of “big government,” noting its absence in the abolition of slavery.

“Well the reason that the slaves were eventually freed was the Constitution, it was like the conscience of the American people,” said DeMint. “But a lot of the move to free the slaves came from the people, it did not come from the federal government.

“It came from a growing movement among the people, particularly people of faith, that this was wrong. People like Wilberforce who persisted for years because of his faith and because of his love for people. So no liberal is going to win a debate that big government freed the slaves.”

DeMint continued, “In fact, it was Abraham Lincoln, the very first Republican, who took this on as a cause and a lot of it was based on a love in his heart that comes from God.”

The Heritage Foundation head also denounced the presentation of Obamacare as something written to help uninsured or lower-income Americans.

“Obamacare was not written to help the uninsured, it was written by the big insurance companies and big hospitals to force people into the health insurance market who didn’t want to be; to enrich ‘the bigs.’”

He said that many Americans have simply been force-fed falsehoods about the benefits of liberal ideologies, saying that some in left-wing circles believe that “the only way to help people is to control them.”

“Our ideas as conservatives unite the country, but they have not been presented in a positive way.”

“Obamacare is not going to help the little guy. They wrote this thing to force a lot of young, healthy people to buy insurance so it would be less expensive for older, more infirmed people. You cannot have one central government determining the healthcare needs of over 300 million Americans,” said DeMint.

He said that many young Americans will eventually realize that large student loans and increased costs of health care are a by-product of excessive government intervention into Americans’ lives. He noted that big government was “enriching the banks” who are holding up massive student loan debts against young Americans.

The Heritage Foundation is a conservative think tank based in Washington, D.C., and their stated mission is to “formulate and promote conservative public policies based on the principles of free enterprise, limited government, individual freedom, traditional American values, and a strong national defense.”