RESTON, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--NCI, Inc. (NASDAQ: NCIT), a leading provider of information technology (IT) and professional services and solutions to U.S. Federal Government agencies, announced today it was awarded a task order valued at $4.9 million with the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) for architecture and engineering services to streamline data processing using big data practices and technologies. The sole-source award is for a 12-month period and falls under NCI’s TIPSS-4 contract.

NCI will perform engineering tasks across multiple programs, such as developing architecture prototypes, interfacing with delivery partners and assisting in engineering documentation for the IRS Return Review Program (RRP). Also, NCI will ensure other programs, such as the Affordable Care Act and the Customer Account Data Engine 2, effectively leverage the RRP platform for fraud detection and compliance needs.

“This award reinforces the value NCI has brought to the IRS through innovative solutions and technologies over the years, and not only continues but expands our scope of work,” said Brian J. Clark, NCI’s president and CEO. “NCI will assist the IRS in implementing their data strategy for several key programs and making the data actionable for taxpayers and agency staff.”

The TIPSS-4 multiple-award, indefinite-delivery, indefinite-quantity contract was awarded in December 2010.

About NCI, Inc.:

NCI is a leading provider of enterprise solutions and services to U.S. defense, intelligence, health and civilian government agencies. The company has the expertise and proven track record to solve its customers’ most important and complex mission challenges through technology and innovation. NCI’s team of highly skilled professionals focuses on delivering cost-effective solutions and services in the areas of agile development and integration; cybersecurity and information assurance; engineering and logistics; big data and data analytics; IT infrastructure optimization and service management; and health and program management. Headquartered in Reston, Virginia, NCI has approximately 2,000 employees operating at more than 100 locations worldwide. For more information, visit www.nciinc.com or email investor@nciinc.com. Like us on Facebook and follow us on Twitter (@nciinc_) and LinkedIn.