Hospitals say they subsidize graduate medical education, but cost-benefit unknown

Medical residents in Michigan The number of allopathic medical residents in Michigan has been steadily growing. Sponsors are the health systems, hospitals, medical schools and other organizations that operate a range of residency programs. Subspecialty and fellowship programs teach further specialization after a residency. 2015 2010 2001 Residency sponsors 31 31 31 Hospital residency programs 191 191 191 Subspecialty programs 200 200 200 Residents 4,438 4,104 3,378 Fellows 801 734 442 Total: Allopathic residents and fellows 5,239 4,838 3,820

Source: Accreditation Council for General Medical Education

Top states for residents, 2015 New York: 13,000

California: 9,000

Texas: 6,500

Pennsylvania: 6,480

Illinois: 5,500

Ohio: 4,900

Michigan: 4,438

Massachusetts: 4,200 13,0009,0006,5006,4805,5004,9004,4384,200 Source: Accreditation Council for General Medical Education

Correction appended

Graduate medical education at teaching hospitals traditionally has fulfilled two goals: training thousands of young doctors and providing lower-cost, front-line daily patient care as part of a medical team that includes higher-paid practicing physicians and nurses.



The goals are still important, but despite more than $1 billion annually in graduate medical education funds supporting those programs, some of the state's 50 teaching hospitals say they're subsidizing the programs.



Changes in accreditation regulations over the past 15 years have reduced work hours for residents, increased their outpatient training opportunities, increased supervision by teaching physicians and added higher osteopathic accreditation costs.



Whether the programs are ultimately costs or moneymakers for hospitals is mostly unknown. Expenses tied directly to the programs are tracked, but overall cost-benefit accounting that would take into account such things as savings or lower medical bills for patients from the use of lower-paid residents instead of practicing physicians isn't done.

Barely covers costs

Leslie Rocher, M.D., chief academic officer of Southfield-based Beaumont Health, said the $56.3 million Beaumont Hospital in Royal Oak received in 2013 for its 395 residents from federal and state sources barely covers the costs of maintaining its residency programs.



"It is pretty close; sometimes we are a little shy," Rocher said.



Of Beaumont Hospital's 395 residents, 91 are not covered by Medicare and so are paid for by Beaumont. The $56.3 million for GME represents 4.6 percent of Beaumont's net patient revenue in 2013, or about $185,000 per resident.



Medicare is the main source of GME funding, about $853 million for Michigan in 2013, and comes in two pots.





In 2013, Henry Ford Hospital received about $86.6 million from federal and state sources for its 569 residents funded by Medicare. The hospital paid for an additional 12 residents to cover service demands.



"We have to pay for faculty, program directors, resident salaries. Everything is going up. The benefits don't remain flat, but Medicare doesn't recognize that," Scher said.



Steven Minnick, M.D., a residency program official at St. John Hospital and Medical Center in Detroit, said GME funding still covers his costs, but increasing regulations have cut into margins the past decade. The hospital also pays for 75 residents over and above the 158 paid for by Medicare to help cover patient care and increase the number of practicing physicians.



"Whatever the numbers (GME funding) are, they will be different next year," he said. "We need to maintain quality, and it becomes more difficult."

GME programs: Profit or loss?

But do GME programs make money for hospitals?



The short answer is nobody knows. That is because a complete accounting of total payments received by and expended by teaching hospitals from federal, state and insurance sources has never been conducted, said Patrick McGuire, CFO of St. John Providence Health System.



McGuire said direct payments can be tracked within a hospital to show expenses paid to residents, teaching physicians and benefits. But indirect payments have not been accounted for because they freely flow through the entire hospital, he said.



"We don't do a profit and loss (statement) on our residency programs," McGuire said. "Our mission (for residency programs) is to provide good patient care and to offer the community" fully trained doctors.



However, the Medicare Payment Advisory Commission, or MedPAC, which advises Congress, has estimated indirect payments may be $3.5 billion higher than actual indirect costs. Overall, federal spending for GME has been increasing for decades and now is at about $10 billion for direct and indirect payments.



But McGuire is concerned about a pending state regulation in 2016 that will require teaching hospitals that accept GME state general funds to conduct cost-accounting of revenue and expenses of residency programs. (See story.)



"It will be relatively difficult, depending on what the state is looking for," he said. "It is producible, but will be more difficult on the indirect side because our residents (and teaching doctors) provide whatever care is necessary" without concern for billing or tracking expenses.



Atul Grover, chief public policy officer for the Association of American Medical Colleges, said there is a feeling by some policymakers that hospitals make money on GME.



"They don't. We don't do a good job to show that the services residents provide, that are getting billed for, would cost more if hospitals had to replace them with someone else to do that service," Grover said.





Reliant on residents

Scher said large academic medical centers like Henry Ford and Detroit Medical Center are heavily reliant on residents for daily patient care.



"Much of that (resident work) is taking care of very vulnerable patient populations that wouldn't really be possible to do" based on current hospital staffing levels, said Scher.



Depending on the hospital service, residents contribute 40 percent to 60 percent of direct care of patients, estimated Tom Gentile, a residency program consultant and former hospital GME official based in Southeast Michigan.



Minnick said residents are a major part of medical safety nets for underprivileged populations at teaching hospitals.



"If you start to cut those, you will weaken those programs," Minnick said. "As part of the team, they interact with nurses and allied health professionals."



If residents were reduced or removed from the patient care equation, hospitals would have to hire additional hospitalist physicians, nurses, physician assistants, nurse practitioners and licensed practical nurses, which would increase costs, Minnick said.



In a larger sense, Scher said, hospital residency programs also are used to recruit top physicians for teaching, patient care and research.



Another practical benefit of training residents at hospitals is the challenge "to stay on top of your game," Scher said. "You have residents or fellows question you every day."



"My dilemma is how you replace (residents') curiosity, their intuition and the extra things they do with great patient care," Minnick said.



The bottom line, said Rocher, is residents are "core parts of the medical team."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325. Twitter: @jaybgreene

An earlier version of this story said Michigan hospitals receive $263 million annually in general medical education funding from the state and federal Medicaid sources. The correct number is $163 million.

Related Links