I arrived at the trailhead into the Buffalo Peaks Wilderness Area as early as I could because I knew it was about a three-mile hike to the beaver ponds that I wanted to fish.

Going into the wilderness area at all was a last-minute decision I made when all the alternatives with shorter approach hikes just didn't seem right. I wanted my one-day window of opportunity to give me the best chance of getting into the Colorado high country and catching some trout before I left for a 20-day trip to Alaska.

There were other considerations, too, such as the cutthroat trout these beaver ponds contained and a weather forecast that predicted only a 20 percent chance of the monsoon "moisture" that had been pounding the Front Range with thunderstorms for the past several days.

The monsoon moisture was the most important factor that tipped me toward the Buffalo Peaks area. I'd heard reports that the streams closer to home could be running high and off color due to the rain. I reasoned that even if it had rained over the beaver ponds, there was a good chance that the streams connecting them might be a little high but still clear.

I've noticed in the past how one or two ponds in a beaver pond system may get muddy after a rainstorm, but the system as a whole tends to filter and clear the water so there are usually a few fishable ponds.

Advertisement

Then, of course, cutthroat trout themselves are always a draw. I knew most of them would be small, probably 6 inches long or less, but you never know, and besides big trout aren't the reason I hike into the high country to fish. If I wanted to catch big fish, I'd head to a tailwater or one of Colorado's trophy trout lakes.

Ed Engle, Great Outdoors

I also wanted to "exercise" one of my split bamboo fly rods that I hadn't fished at all this season. And there was the waterproof daypack I had just bought for the upcoming trip to Alaska that I wanted to try out, and the new wading boots I needed to field test. But mostly I was just anxious to get back into the high country.

The weather was close to perfect when I started up the trail — bluebird skies, great air temperature and when I crossed a creek after a few minutes of walking, it was crystal clear. So from that point on, it was just a matter of traversing the three miles of trail that had started out at about 10,000 feet in elevation to where the ponds were at a little over 11,200 feet.

It took me about an hour to reach the bottom of the high meadow where the first in a chain of beaver ponds began. When I got closer, I saw the telltale rings of rising trout.

I carry just one small fly box when I fish the high country, and I already knew that I was going to start off with a size 14 elk hair caddis. It probably could have been any of the other dry flies in my fly box, but I like the utilitarian simplicity of the elk hair fly pattern, and I optimistically thought the larger hook size might discourage some of the smaller trout from taking it.

I made a point to carefully approach the first beaver pond from downstream so I wouldn't spook the rising trout. When I made it to right below the 5-foot-tall beaver dam, I paused to check things out.

This particular dam had some tall grass growing just to the right of all the sticks and brush the beavers had used to construct it. I headed straight for that grassy patch because it would make a perfect casting position from which I could cover more than half of the pond. An added advantage was my fly line would be a lot less likely to tangle up in the grass when I cast to the trout and then retrieved the fly line.

My first cast landed the fly in the vicinity of some rising trout, but it didn't attract their attention. I made a few more casts to other areas of the pond with similar results until I realized I was rushing things. Fishing a dry fly on a beaver pond can be a little like fishing a deer hair popper for largemouth bass. You want to make your cast, and when the fly lands, wait until all the rings disturbing the water's surface go away before you do anything.

I did that, and a 6-inch-long cutthroat trout nailed the fly and fought hard enough to bend my fly rod. It had been too long since I caught a beaver pond trout, and this one was a beauty.

That was the first of many cutthroats. Along the way, I remembered other dry fly tips for fishing beaver ponds such as, "Just leave the fly sit and let the trout find it, and if that doesn't get their attention, give the fly a little twitch." Or better yet, if nothing happens when you twitch the fly, try retrieving it very slowly so that it causes a rippling wake on the water's surface. That's the way I caught my largest cutthroat of the day — a chunky 10-incher.

A few hours later, clouds began building up and pushing in from the west. I like the way they seem closer to you when you're in the high country. I'd caught and released plenty of trout, but I still found it hard to stop fishing. The air was cooler, almost like autumn, when I finally packed it in and headed down the trail.

I used two artificial flies the whole day. Both were size 14 elk hair caddis imitations. The only reason I needed the second fly was because the trout had pretty much chewed up the first one.

When I got back to my truck, the air was warm and muggy. But the higher country looked socked in and cold from where I stood. I could say it was some sort of sign that autumn is on the way, but I'd be jumping the gun. However, I will say don't wait too long because now's the time to fish the high country.

Check EdEngleFlyFishing.com to see Engle's blog, "The Lone Angler Journal."