Not a single Republican presidential candidate even acknowledged, much less denounced the domestic terrorism at Planned Parenthood today – at least on Twitter – but several did take time to ask supporters to go shopping.

Change the conversation, change the world

Share this

Three people, including a police officer, were shot and killed today during a five and a half hour shooting standoff between one man armed with a "long gun" and several propane tanks, and 123 local, state, and federal law enforcement officers. The man surrendered and was taken into custody. Many Americans talked about his act of domestic terrorism, and in addition to the people who were held by him and hiding in the Planned Parenthood clinic, many are now likely fearful of accessing the important health care and legal services Planned Parenthood provides.

"We don't yet know the full circumstances and motives behind this criminal action, and we don't yet know if Planned Parenthood was in fact the target of this attack," Vicki Cowart, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood of the Rocky Mountains, said in a statement, CNN reported.

"We share the concerns of many Americans that extremists are creating a poisonous environment that feeds domestic terrorism in this country. We will never back away from providing care in a safe, supportive environment that millions of people rely on and trust."

Was it domestic terrorism?

"Domestic terrorism includes acts within the territorial U.S. that are dangerous to human life, violate federal or state criminal laws, have no actual connection to international terrorists, and appear to be intended to intimidate or coerce a civilian population, influence domestic government policy through intimidation or coercion, or affect the conduct of our government by mass destruction, assassination or kidnapping," the U.S. Dept. Of Justice website states.

"Current domestic terrorism threats include animal rights extremists, eco-terrorists, anarchists, antigovernment extremists such as 'sovereign citizens' and unauthorized militias, Black separatists, White supremacists, anti-abortion extremists, and other unaffiliated disaffected Americans, including 'lone wolfs.' Domestic terrorism cases often involve firearms, arson or explosive offenses, crimes relating to fraud, and threats and hoaxes."

Republicans for months have been engaged in a fact-less attack on Planned Parenthood, fed by the debunked and discredited videos that purport to "prove" Planned Parenthood is selling baby parts. They're not, of course, but facts to the GOP are unimportant.

For months, Republican presidential candidates have used those videos and every other opportunity to weigh in on the women's health care provider – except today, when one man committed a horrific act of domestic terrorism.

That – including the deaths of three innocent people – went wholly ignored by every single GOP presidential candidate.

What did the Republican presidential candidates talk about today instead?

Well, while the attack was still in progress, three sent out tweets asking supporters to go shopping.

Stay warm this winter with our new cold-weather bundle. Shop now and save! https://t.co/ciXinNZaIo — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) November 28, 2015

Visit the Rand Paul Store for the best #BlackFriday deals! Shop now and support the campaign! https://t.co/fxoBOgMtkH — Dr. Rand Paul (@RandPaul) November 27, 2015

Lindsey Graham wanted his supporters to go "shopping" for his free e-book:

Learn more about my childhood in Central, SC in my free ebook: https://t.co/lNnwRSGaag pic.twitter.com/u7Qq3levEF — Lindsey Graham (@LindseyGrahamSC) November 27, 2015

Others sent out inane tweets.

This was from the Jeb Bush campaign, during the attack:

Can’t wait for the Egg Bowl tomorrow! Come tailgate with us: https://t.co/61mNHuYEfL pic.twitter.com/f8cOvfK8R8 — Jeb Bush (@JebBush) November 27, 2015

Marco Rubio also sent out this tweet attacking Obamacare:

Republican leaders should make ending Obamacare bailouts one of our highest priorities to end this year. https://t.co/lBxB9Bx1bM — Marco Rubio (@marcorubio) November 27, 2015

Ted Cruz sent this out during the attack:

In Arkansas and getting ready for the game? Look for our @Snapchat filter: https://t.co/AMb7pjrtsC pic.twitter.com/soV1Ja7p8Q — Ted Cruz (@tedcruz) November 27, 2015

John Kasich posted this tweet about terrorism of a different kind:

Here’s a first look at our new TV ad that’ll begin airing tonight, “Defending Our Way of Life” - Watch it here. https://t.co/YMjkL8Rxj4 — John Kasich (@JohnKasich) November 27, 2015

Mike Huckabee promised to never apologize for America:

"I'll never apologize for America. I'll make our enemies sorry they ever attacked us." Watch our TV ad⬇️ #ImWithHuck https://t.co/0sLHOxeSID — Gov. Mike Huckabee (@GovMikeHuckabee) November 28, 2015

Donald Trump posted a tweet about his standing in the polls and several retweets from his supporters.

Carly Fiorina, Ben Carson, Rick Santorum, and Chris Christie haven't tweeted since Thanksgiving.

So, what about the Democratic candidates?

Hillary Clinton posted this tweet of support, linking to a statement by the regional Planned Parenthood CEO:

Today and every day, we #StandWithPP. https://t.co/oifqTQLx1X — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) November 27, 2015

Bernie Sanders posted tweets about crumbling infrastructure and working families – nothing about today's attack.

And Martin O'Malley, hours before the attack on Planned Parenthood began, posted a tweet about shopping.

UPDATE:

Before the end of Friday, both Bernie Sanders and Martin O'Malley responded to the attack at Planned Parenthood:

We proudly #StandWithPP of Colorado Springs and the brave law enforcement personnel who fought to protect it. — Bernie Sanders (@BernieSanders) November 28, 2015

My thoughts and prayers are with those in Colorado. #StandWithPP — Martin O'Malley (@MartinOMalley) November 28, 2015

Hat tip: Charles Clymer/Twitter