WASHINGTON -- Americans for Prosperity is back with its most expensive ad buy in Louisiana's Senate race, as it pours a reported $940,000 in new ads critical of incumbent Democrat Mary Landrieu.

The conservative group doesn't reveal its financial donors, but is known to rely heavily on the billionaire Koch brothers to finance its political ads -- all of which seem aimed at producing a Republican-controlled Senate.

By one count, the conservative, free market Americans for Prosperity has spent close to $4 million in ads attacking Landrieu -- spending more money than the Senate candidates themselves. National Journal, which got an early look at the ads, said Americans for Prosperity has budgeted $94,000 for the two anti-Landrieu ads on TV and online over the next three weeks.

In the latest Louisiana TV ads, Americans for Prosperity uses people identified as veterans to discuss the growing scandal in veterans' health care to criticize Landrieu. The message: how can the Affordable Care Act work for the entire United States when the government can't provide quality health care to 8 million veterans?

It urges Landrieu to fix veterans' health care before forcing "Obamacare" on the nation.

Americans for Prosperity would not identify the people appearing in the ads, or make them available for interviews.

The second anti-Landrieu ad questions Landrieu's clout, arguing that she's been unable to stop environmental regulations the group says will be harmful to Louisiana.

"What we've seen today is a despicable new low on behalf of the shady group Americans for Prosperity, but unfortunately these kind of misleading attacks have become par for the course from the Koch brothers," said Adam Sullivan, campaign manager for the Landrieu campaign. "Senator Landrieu has always been an advocate for the oil and gas industry and has done everything possible to support our veterans and military families. She's been a leader in opposing the Obama Administration's new EPA regulations announced last month and was one of the first Democrats in Congress to call for Secretary Shinseki's resignation after the problems at the VA were brought to light earlier this year."

The Americans for Prosperity ads don't mention the Republican candidates for the Senate, Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, former Entergy official and Air Force Col. Rob Maness of Madisonville and State Rep. Paul Hollis, R-Covington.

Americans for Prosperity also announced Wednesday that it is beginning a new ad campaign against Sen. Mark Pryor, D-Ark., who, like Landrieu, faces a tough re-election race in a state that has grown more Republican and conservative.