With the 2016 campaign in full swing, politicians and political parties are busy searching for wedge issues to distinguish themselves from their opponents and to galvanize voter support to their side. Medicaid expansion, particularly in the states that have chosen not to expand this federal health insurance program for the poor, is proving to be a major such issue.

The Affordable Care Act expands Medicaid coverage to nearly all individuals with incomes below 138 percent of the poverty line. But the 2012 Supreme Court decision that upheld the constitutionality of Obamacare also ruled that the federal government could not compel states to expand their Medicaid programs. So far, 30 of them have done so.

Arguments over whether to expand Medicaid vary slightly by state, but proponents often point to the federal government’s offer to fund almost the entire cost as a major reason to expand. For example, Ohio Gov. John Kasich explained his support of Medicaid expansion as a way “to bring Ohio money back home.”

However, research I just completed suggests that this argument may be flawed because it doesn’t account for associated increases in state and local spending.

Surveying all federal funding to state and local governments finds that each additional dollar of federal money sent to the states is associated with an average increase of 82 cents in new state and local taxes. Across all states, a hypothetical 10 percent increase in federal grants to state and local governments would be associated with approximately $50 billion in additional increased state and local taxes, charges or other revenue sources, amounting to an additional government burden of $158 per person. This finding is in-line with peer-reviewed research that each dollar of additional federal grants is associated with 54 cents to 86 cents in new state and local taxes.

Implementing the ACA’s Medicaid expansion in the remaining 20 states, which would cost the federal government $469.2 billion over 10 years, would, therefore, cost state and local governments an additional $318.4 billion. The fact that 20 states have not expanded Medicaid reflects this realization that “free” federal money can be very expensive, indeed.

Why does federal government spending, which, in theory, should crowd out state spending and taxes, in reality increase spending and related taxes? The U.S. Government Accountability Office suggests two ways. First, federal grants often require matching state spending, which is often paid for by increased taxes or fees. For example, many federal grants require a dollar-for-dollar match in spending by state or local governments.

Second, federal grants often have a maintenance-of-effort stipulation, which requires states to continue the funding after a certain time frame. In this way, Washington ensures that federal money adds to state spending, rather than replaces it.

Yet even when the federal government promises to cover something at 100 percent of the cost, like it has done with Medicaid through 2016, state taxes can still increase because of the increased ancillary costs like additional associated infrastructure and personnel. (Think of the extra hospitals that must be built and staffed to accommodate additional Medicaid users.)

States that chose to expand Medicaid are finding this out the hard way. According to the Associated Press, seven states have had to increase their Medicaid cost projections for 2017, and at least 14 have seen enrollment exceed original projections. Enrollment in California exceeded expectations by nearly 200 percent; Washington State, by over 100 percent; Oregon, by 73 percent; and New Mexico, by 44 percent.

These findings provide added context to the Medicaid expansion debate and shed light on the trade-offs involved with accepting federal funds. While expanding Medicaid may still be a worthy policy priority, federal funding comes with strings attached that make free money very expensive.

Eric Fruits is president of Economics International Corp.