For New Jersey's hospitals, part of the gift of the Affordable Care Act, with its expanded Medicaid and reduced uninsured population, is coming with a pretty big "but" as Gov. Christie proposes a $148 million budget cut to the state's charity care subsidy program.

"We're still poring through the numbers," Kerry McKean Kelly, vice president of communications and member services for the New Jersey Hospital Association, said. "There are obviously significant charity care cuts for some of our hospitals and we need to ensure the overall dollars ... are adequate to support hospitals and their care to patients."

Christie's proposed 2016 budget calls for slashing 23 percent from the $650 million the state had budgeted for charity care this year. The administration calls the reduction palatable because the federal health care law reduced the state's uninsured population, adding 390,000 individuals into Medicaid.

The "fundamental and welcome shift" of uninsured people into Medicaid, called NJ Family Care, still will allow the state to spend $502 million on charity care, it said. It also frees up budget room to add close to $30 million for graduate medical education.

"Providing $502 million in charity care funding will allow for a reasonable transition for hospitals while also giving the state the opportunity to invest in other programs such as investing in the future of our health care workforce, which is necessary to support the changing healthcare landscape," Health Commissioner Mary E. O'Dowd said.

The proposed funding is based on preliminary charity care reported for 2014 of less than $580 million, which represents a 40 percent reduction in care provided to the uninsured in New Jersey, the state Department of Health said.

'SIGNIFICANT IMPACT'

But the cut in charity care funding would "have a significant impact on Jersey City Medical Center," said Joe Scott, its president and CEO. "When we look at Medicaid vs. charity care, we get less for Medicaid."

JCMC-Barnabas Health is one of the state's "safety net" hospitals, facilities that provide a significant level of care to low-income, uninsured, and vulnerable populations. Most of New Jersey's safety net hospitals are in its urban centers, like Hudson County and Newark.

Last year, Jersey City Medical Center received $46.8 million, Scott said. In 2016, it would be cut to $37.5 million.

CarePoint Health hospitals Bayonne Medical Center, Hoboken University Medical Center and Christ Hospital received a total of slightly more than $30 million for 2015, CarePoint Health CEO Dennis Kelly said.

Under the proposed state budget, $10 million in charity care funding would be cut at CarePoint Health facilities, with a $6.3 million loss at Hoboken University Medical Center the sharpest cut.

Because of big increases in graduate medical education funding, Palisades Medical Center in North Bergen and Meadowlands Hospital Medical Center in Secaucus would receive more money in the budget plan despite cuts in charity care _ $950,000 cut at PMC and $645,000 cut at MHMC.

At JCMC, more than 50 percent of patients are uninsured or undocumented, officials there said, while the number is over 20 percent at CarePoint facilities, Kelly said.

Scott and Kelly said they are working with the Hospital Alliance of New Jersey, which Scott chairs, to lobby state legislators and the governor's office on the importance of charity care funding.

JCMC spokesman Mark Rabson said if the drastic cut is approved, safety net hospitals would ask that the funding formula be reworked to ensure they get a bigger share.

Both Scott and Kelly say that if they experience serious cuts, some hard choices will have to be made.

"We would have to look at everything," Scott said.

Sister Patricia Codey, president of the statewide coalition Catholic HealthCare Partnership of New Jersey, agreed.

"Cutting charity care funding would be devastating to our hospitals and ultimately to our patients," she said.

It would be especially devastating because New Jersey still has about 1 million people who are uninsured, Codey said.

"Those most in need should not be sacrificed for balancing the budget," she said.

FEDERAL AID

Cutting now would also leave federal dollars on the table, argued Suzanne Ianni, president and CEO of the Hospital Alliance. The Affordable Care Act, she said, will be reducing payments to hospitals that have large numbers of Medicaid patients in future years.

"We should take advantage of the funds while they're there," Ianni said.

Under the administration's funding formula, a few hospitals, including St. Peter's University Hospital in New Brunswick, would get a boost in charity funding. The budget increases its charity funding by more than $300,000 to $6.8 million and graduate medical education by over $900,000 for a net gain of $1.3 million in state funding.

Additionally, the proposed budget calls for $166.6 million for the Delivery System Reform Incentive Payments program, which rewards hospitals for achieving measurable quality improvements.

"New Jersey is using this budget to support the transformation of the health care system to better serve our communities and buy more of what we want," O'Dowd said.

Jersey Journal Managing Editor Ron Zeitlinger and Tim Darragh of NJ Advance Media contributed to this report.