Obama signs the PACE Act

With help from Brianna Ehley, Rachana Pradhan, Nancy Cook and Sarah Karlin

SIGNED AND SEALED — President Barack Obama signed into law a measure that makes the ACA expansion of the small group health insurance market optional for states. The market had been slated to expand to businesses with between 51 and 100 employees; both the House and the Senate passed the fix last week — a rare quick bipartisan ACA fix.

Story Continued Below

BYE-BYE BOEHNER: WHO'S UP NEXT? — House Republicans hold elections to replace House Speaker John Boehner this morning, and so far, Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy is projecting some sunny confidence, POLITICO reports. Though that was before the House Freedom Caucus injected some drama by endorsing Rep. Daniel Webster.

KY GOV NOMINEE: LET'S DRUG TEST MEDICARE RECIPIENTS — Next month's Kentucky governors race, already shaped by stark differences over the ACA, now has a Medicare twist. Republican Matt Bevins suggested in a recent debate that Medicare beneficiaries are "on the draw" and doubled down on his support for random drug testing for anyone who receives social benefits. Democrats are hitting him hard. DNC Chair Debbie Wasserman Schultz called the drug-testing idea a "new low" for Republicans.

GOOD THURSDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we're not sure what the public health implications of all-day McDonald's breakfast might be — but we can guess it's going to have a pretty big impact on our own attemps to eat healthily. What's better than an Egg McMuffin? Clue me in when you send tips and comments to emershon@politico.com and behley@politico.com.

"Ba da ba ba ba … I'm lovin' PULSE."

HERE WE GO AGAIN: ANOTHER PLANNED PARENTHOOD HEARING — The House Judiciary Committee is holding its second hearing on Planned Parenthood's abortion practices this afternoon. We're not expecting the fireworks that the Oversight Committee got with its interrogation of PPFA President Cecile Richards, but a former Planned Parenthood manager could make waves. Chairman Bob Goodlatte said the hearing is meant to shed light on the "horrific details involved in late-term abortions and what is required in order to harvest baby body parts." Planned Parenthood has repeatedly said the accusations that it profits from the sale of fetal tissue are false.

— The House also voted Wednesday to establish a special committee, with subpoena power and broad authority to investigation abortion and fetal tissue donation practices. It will be overseen by the Energy and Commerce Committee and will have up to 13 members — to be named later. None of the investigations into Planned Parenthood thus far have revealed any wrongdoing. More from Pro's Rachana Pradhan, here.

ARKANSAS PRIVATE OPTION DEBATE CONTINUES — The consultant working for Arkansas’ health reform task force — a group of legislators tasked with weighing the future of its Medicaid expansion model, among other things — on Wednesday released its highly anticipated report. Overall, it’s seeming less and less likely that Medicaid expansion would end altogether after 2016, but the state may make changes to appease conservatives. Some of the highlights from the Stephen Group’s final report: http://bit.ly/1RugjP7

— Interestingly, the firm outlines two different buckets of recommendations to reform the so-called Medicaid “private option,” depending on who is in the White House. The “in the box solution” includes modest changes they believe the Obama administration would be willing to approve, including some enhanced cost-sharing for beneficiaries, a mandated work referral system, ending the existing “Health Care Independence Accounts,” and cutting off enrollees who don’t make required monthly payments. The second “out of the box” solution is outlined with a Republican administration in mind post-2016: enrollees would be subject to a 20-hour weekly work requirement, sliding scale premiums for people below the federal poverty line, and benefit limits similar to TANF. The task force has to make its recommendations to Gov. Asa Hutchinson by the end of the year.

GUN CONTROL PROPOSAL AS SOON AS TODAY — Senate Democrats are expected to unveil a new gun-control proposal today — one week after the latest deadly mass-shooting.

BATTLE BREWING OVER MENTAL HEALTH REFORM — And this one involves the House lawmaker pushing for reform — Rep. Tim Murphy — and groups that receive funding from SAMHSA. Murphy’s reform bill essentially dismantles SAMHSA — and he's now claiming that such groups are “creating a whole cloud of lies” because they fear losing their money. At a Wednesday forum, an audience member told Murphy that she had heard his bill requires states to mandate involuntary outpatient treatment for seriously mentally ill people (It does not.) Murphy suggested SAMHSA is telling the organizations to speak out against his bill. A SAMHSA spokesperson wouldn’t comment on the specific allegations but told PULSE that the agency is monitoring the reform efforts in Congress.

WHITE HOUSE DEFENDS CADILLAC TAX — Just days after Hillary Rodham Clinton backed scrapping the excise tax, President Obama's chief economist called it one of the ACA's "most important tools" for both bringing down costs and improving the quality of care. In a data-filled presentation at the Brookings Institution on Wednesday, Jason Furman called repealing or delaying the Cadillac tax "deeply problematic." He argued that it lowers health care costs, increase workers' wages, and reduces the federal deficit by $90 billion over the next decade (and by half-a-trillion dollars over the next 20 years, according to White House calculations). And, these changes, he argued, will spill out across the health care system and provide employers with a "little more incentive to exercise their market power to slow the cost of health care." You can read an extended version of his remarks here: http://1.usa.gov/1LiV2qE

** A message from the American College of Rheumatology: More than 63 million Americans are living with doctor-diagnosed arthritis, autoimmune diseases or inflammatory rheumatic diseases, and are at risk for chronic pain, disability and even death. Advocates for Arthritis are asking Congress to support policies to ensure access to quality care for America’s rheumatology patients. Learn more at rheumatology.org/Advocacy. **

MOST LARGE EMPLOYERS FEAR THE CADDY TAX — Two new surveys of employers, conducted by Tevi Troy's American Health Policy Institute, show that nearly 90 percent of large employers are trying to ensure they don't trigger the tax in 2018. Some 30 percent said at least one of their plans would be impacted in 2018 — and half of the remaining employers said they'd have a plan that would be affected by 2023. Over two-thirds of the employers that are going to reduce benefits because of the Cadillac tax said they wouldn't offer a corresponding wage increase. The study: http://bit.ly/1Rugh9O

MULTI-PAYER PRIMARY CARE DEMO: NOT SO HOT ON SAVINGS — In its first year, the CMMI program on comprehensive primary care generated just $24 million in savings overall — and that's without counting care management fees. Only one region generated savings in excess of those fees — saving Medicare $10.8 million and earning just $500,000 in shared savings payments. Participants did really well on quality, though — over 90 percent of practices met quality targets for patient experience and utilization measures. All the regions had lower-than-targeted readmissions rates.

WE’RE NUMBER ONE — at spending the most money on health care. The latest Commonwealth Fund international comparison study is out today and once again the U.S. ranked far above its peers in health care spending, despite having the lowest life expectancy. According to the report, the U.S. spent about $9,086 per person on health care in 2013 — the highest of the 13 countries included in the report — while maintaining the lowest life expectancy of 78.8 years. Switzerland, the second highest spending country — spent $6,325 per person on health care and had a life expectancy of 82.9 years. More here: http://politico.pro/1FYQLYW

NEW BOARD CHAIRS AT AHCA, NCAL — Tom Coble and Christian Mason will lead AHCA's and NCAL's boards, respectively, after a Wednesday election.

CONGRATS — to Emily Barson, HHS's Director of Intergovernmental and External Affairs, and the DCCC's Matt Thornton, who welcomed their first child, Asher Harris Thornton on Sept. 24. Thornton tells PULSE that "Mom and baby are doing great; dad may never recover."

WHAT WE'RE READING

House Democrats want to see the footage that anti-abortion activist David Daleiden turned over to Rep. Jason Chaffetz — but they say he won't share it. The Hill reports: http://bit.ly/1Q9iSoT

Everyone in Cuba loves their doctor, observes Bill Frist in Forbes — but that doesn't mean they have the medicines and other resources they need, he writes after his visit there: http://onforb.es/1RugN7J

Bariatric surgery patients are 50 percent more likely to attempt suicide after the operation than before it. The WSJ reports on the new study in JAMA Surgery: http://on.wsj.com/1Q9iuXq

The Center for Health Care Policy's director takes another look at using block grants in Medicaid:http://bit.ly/1Ruh8r9

Modern Healthcare reports on new legislation from Sen. Sherrod Brown that would ban Medicare Advantage plans from dropping doctors midyear: http://bit.ly/1Q9irec

NOW AVAILABLE: POLITICO PRO LEGISLATIVE COMPASS — POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium subscription service, has released a first-of-its kind legislative data analytics and decision-making tool that helps policy professionals manage and act on legislation. Leveraging features such as a personalized dashboard, virtual whip count, bill text comparison and 20 years of data, users will not only save time but benefit from customizing and cross-referencing information, enabling them to make smarter and faster decisions. Schedule your demo today.

** A message from the American College of Rheumatology: More than 63 million Americans are living with doctor-diagnosed arthritis, autoimmune diseases such as lupus, or inflammatory rheumatic diseases such as gout and psoriatic arthritis. Many of these individuals are at risk for chronic pain, organ damage, disability and even death as a result of their diagnosis.

Advocates for Arthritis are visiting Capitol Hill today [this week] to increase awareness about rheumatic diseases and elevate policy issues affecting the rheumatology community. Rheumatology professionals and patients from across the country are asking Congress to support policies to ensure access to quality care for America’s rheumatology patients, including limited patient cost sharing for specialty therapies, increased funding for disease research and less restrictive insurer practices.

The American College of Rheumatology (ACR) is a professional membership organization committed to improving the care of patients with rheumatic disease and advancing the rheumatology subspecialty.

Visit rheumatology.org/Advocacy to learn more. Follow the conversation at #Act4Arthritis. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **