Half a century ago, Americans over 65 were the most likely age group to live in poverty.

The poverty rate for older Americans was more than 35 percent in 1959, while the rate for adults between the ages of 18 and 64 was half that, according to a report from a Brookings Institution economist.

But thanks in large part to Social Security, the poverty rate for older Americans has plummeted. The group in 2013 had the lowest rate of poverty of all age groups in the U.S.



Percent of persons with income below the official poverty line, by age, 1959–2013. Source: U.S. Census Bureau. Forum for Health Economics and Policy

Social Security, of course, has been at the center of political discussion in recent years. With Americans living longer and baby boomers aging out of the workforce, officials have projected its trust funds will be depleted in 2034. Tax income, however, should be able to pay around 75 percent of scheduled benefits for years afterward.

A change in Social Security benefits would certainly affect the poverty rate of seniors. The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities says that the 10 percent of seniors below the poverty line last year would have risen to 41 percent without it. The program lifted 21 million Americans out of poverty in total for 2014, according to the group's calculations, including 1 million children.



Center on Budget and Policy Priorities

Presidential candidates on both sides of the aisle have unveiled plans to reform Social Security. Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, a Republican, favors decreasing benefits for the wealthiest workers, encouraging more seniors to work by eliminating a payroll tax for those who do, and raising the retirement age. Fellow GOP contender Sen. Marco Rubio also supports boosting the retirement age and bolstering the program for low-income seniors. On the Democratic side, front-runner Hillary Clinton wants wealthy Americans to contribute more to the system and to amend the program to better cover some populations.

The Social Security Administration has also detailed possible changes that could help keep the program solvent. Read more on those here.

Without policy interventions, some changes are occurring naturally. Americans are planning to retire later already, with the largest group of 37 percent expecting to retire when they are older than 65. This group has increased from 14 percent in the 1990s, according to a survey by Gallup.