Montgomery, Texas (CBS HOUSTON) — The owner of a large, authentic German restaurant is selling his business of 17 years with the hope of providing a young employee with a brain tumor enough money to pay her growing medical bills.

Brittany Mathis, 19, is an employee at the Kaiserhof Restaurant and Wunderbar in Montgomery. Working alongside her mother and older sister, Mathis is currently unable to afford medical treatment for a brain tumor – the same condition that unexpectedly proved fatal for her father in 2000, KHOU-TV reports.

“I have my good days and my bad,” Mathis told KHOU. “I went to the hospital and found out it was my blood clotting. So, they wanted to keep me and do CAT scans and MRIs and the next day they came in and told me I had a tumor.”

Mathis doesn’t have insurance. Meanwhile, her diagnosis and treatment procedures have come to a halt as massive medical bills have continued to pile up.

However, Kaiserhof owner Michael De Beyer has stepped in to help the Mathis family.

“I just can’t be standing by and doing nothing,” De Beyer told KHOU. “I have to try something because it’s not right. Here’s a family, they really work hard they have a lot of stuff against them in the past and they are not holding their hand open they didn’t even ask anybody for help.”

De Beyer, who has owned the restaurant for nearly two decades, says the 6,000-foot restaurant may be worth as much as $2 million, and profits can help the mass of medical bills amassing for the Mathis family. In addition to Mathis’ medical bills, De Beyer said he wants to spend more time with his own wife and two children.

Mathis’ mother, Barbara, said that the sudden death of her husband from a brain tumor rupture in 2000 is very similar to her daughter’s condition today.

“I guess sort of the same thing Brittany is going through,” she told KHOU. “I just want her to get help.”

But right now, the Mathis’ are feeling blessed for De Beyer’s good will.

“I really think it’s an amazing blessing and can’t thank him enough and his family,” Brittany Mathis said. “Never thought that anybody would do that and he did and it makes me feel really good.”