× Gardner’s first TV ad emphasizes small town roots

DENVER — The first TV ad from Republican Congressman Cory Gardner is a simple introduction, not a scathing attacking on his opponent, Democratic U.S. Sen. Mark Udall.

The 30-second spot, which will begin airing on Tuesday, shows Gardner and his daughter Alyson on Main Street in his hometown of Yuma on the eastern plains.

The basic message: I’m from a place where people have small town values and are forced to get along so I’ll know how to build consensus in Washington, DC.

“It’s time for a new generation of leadership in the Senate,” Cory Gardner said in a press release that also mentions he’s been given the “seal of approval” from No Labels, a bipartisan consensus-focused organization (they’ve said Udall could get the same “implied endorsement” just by agreeing to its principles as Gardner has).

“Growing up in small-town Colorado, I learned that working together and respecting the views of others is necessary for success. Career politicians in Washington have been there far too long, and their failed ideas and policies have left our economy struggling, and countless Coloradans still looking for work.

“It’s time for a new generation of Coloradans to lead the next generation.”

The ad seeks to humanize the relatively unknown two-term congressman from Colorado’s Fourth Congressional District, who’s been the target of a number of attack ads already that have aimed to define him early as too conservative based mostly on his past support for Personhood (he has since disavowed the Colorado initiative but not the general concept).

Udall’s campaign issued a statement on Gardner’s ad Monday afternoon saying that his bipartisan message doesn’t match his record in Congress.

“If there’s one thing that Tea Party radical Congressman Gardner hasn’t learned, it’s how to get along with others,” said Udall’s campaign spokesperson Chris Harris. “You don’t rack up the 10th most partisan Republican voting record in the House and then shut down the government if you’re interested in working together to solve problems. Coloradans know that’s just not how things get done.”