Fremont County District 2 Commissioner Debbie Bell

2014 Election Schedule Jan. 6: Last day to affiliate with the Republican Party, Democratic Party or ACP Party in order to vote in the March 4 party precinct caucuses. (Two months before the precinct caucuses.) Feb. 3: Last day to update voter registration address to participate in the March 4 party precinct caucuses. (Must be a resident of the precinct for 30 days and registered to vote no later than 29 days before the precinct caucus.) June 24: Primary Election Nov. 4: General Election Information courtesy of http://sos.state.co.us/" title="sos.state.co.us">http://sos.state.co.us.

Fremont County District 2 Commissioner Debbie Bell recently announced that she will run for re-election in 2014. Commissioner Bell was elected to her first term in November 2010.

"As much as I think we have accomplished as a board and as a county over the last three years, there still is a whole lot that needs to be done," she said. "I've enjoyed what I've done very much over the last three years; I enjoy helping people and having the opportunity to bring ideas to fruition."

Advertisement

Bell, 54, said the current board, including commissioners Ed Norden and Tim Payne, works really well together.

"We make a good team," she said. "We all have distinctly different focuses, but we all come together for the greater good of Fremont County."

She said that includes other elected officials, department heads and Fremont County employees, as well.

Fremont County has made great strides during the last three years, Bell said, including opening the Public Health Agency clinic in Florence.

"They are getting busier by the day, and they continue to expand the services they provide," she said. "It's in a different part of the county, so it allows people to obtain services that might not have been able to receive those services previously."

She also is proud of the new grant-funded taxiway that is nearly completed at the Fremont County Airport.

"To people who fly in and use this airport, whether they are locals who are based here or someone who flies into it from outside the area, it's going to make a really big difference for them," she said. "It's good in terms of safety, in terms of the comfort for what they're actually using out there. I think it's a really great thing."

Another thing she particularly is proud of is being in a position to help make the right connections for people.

"I really am proud of the relationships that I have built with citizens in Fremont County and the number of people that have called me for help with one issue or another that they were having," Bell said. "I might not always have the right answer at my fingertips, but I work hard to find answers and seek solutions for those who ask for my assistance."

Going forward, Bell said continued economic development is at the top of her priority list.

"There are a lot of things on the burner, that if we can just bring one or two of these projects, it's going to help so much," she said. "I've been involved in the background in a lot of different ways with some of those things."

The county continues to work on a business park at the Fremont County Airport, Bell said, a project that has been in the works for more than 20 years.

"I think we're getting closer every day to being able to get that done," she said.

With prisons that have been closed in recent years in Fremont County, and the potential of two more that may close in the next few years, Bell said the community is scrambling to come up with answers and solutions. She is working through the Fremont Economic Development Corp. and other organizations and groups to come up with a plan for Fremont County, and the community as a whole, to first and foremost save the currently operating prisons.

"If that doesn't happen, we need to diversify somehow, and we need to look at other answers," she said. "There are a lot of us who are working on that."