So you're thinking of maybe making a move to Canada in the increasingly terrifying event of a President Trump, eh? Take it from a Canadian. The political sideshow is not a uniquely U.S. phenomenon.

It's a joke that happens every election cycle, or whenever some other political event happens in the U.S.—like a foreign invasion or Obamacare—but this time around it feels like a joke that more and more Americans are taking seriously. In the event of a Donald Trump presidency, a number of Americans are seriously thinking about packing up and migrating themselves to Canada.

And for good reason, too: Photos of Prime Minister Justin Trudeau's youthful appearance (though he's the same age as Marco Rubio and only a year younger than fellow Canadian Ted Cruz) and think pieces about his lofty goals are plastered all over American social-media news feeds. Canadians apparently won Super Tuesday. Even humble Cape Breton Island is now on the map for worried Americans. Canada has once again appeared as a place of refuge for Americans who disagree with their (potential) government. Hell, even The New York Times thinks Canada is cool now.

We Canadians have become a bit smug about all the new attention we've been getting from the U.S., which seems more holier-than-thou than the typical strain of muted anti-Americanism. Canada is the closest economic and political ally to the U.S., and even though we've apparently made it easier for you to move here, we can get a little frustrated by the average Americans knowing next to nothing about our country. Aside from the things you may have heard from Bernie Sanders about publicly funded healthcare, what do you actually know about Canada that may lead you to a better life than your current one in America? There are a few things you might want to consider before the exodus to the Canadian Promised Land.

For starters, Canada has its own versions—plural—of Donald Trump. Oh, you already forgot about Rob Ford? Toronto's infamous, duly elected, usually drunk, sometimes crack-smoking former mayor? While he's no longer governing Canada's largest city, he's still a Toronto City Councillor. His equally notorious brother, Doug Ford, is also mulling over a run at the leadership of the Conservative Party of Canada and boasting about how the Donald Trump campaign playbook was essentially written by the Ford brothers. And, unlike Trump, these guys have already been elected to political offices.

Another Canadian Trump clone is already a familiar sight in American living rooms. Kevin O'Leary, a character on ABC's Shark Tank (essentially the spiritual successor to Trump's The Apprentice), has also considered making the jump into Canadian politics. He's credited for Trump-esque things like "applauding" increased global wealth inequality and reportedly lying about how rich he is. Like Trump, O'Leary has a long history of business failures, riding mostly on his image and personality to grab headlines. The problem for O'Leary, again, much like Trump, is which team to run with: the Liberal Party or the Conservatives?

Aside from the colorful political characters Canadians could potentially vote for, Canada is also not the racism-free Elysium Americans might imagine. Canada's "cultural mosaic" policy of multiculturalism is definitely a step in a different direction than the American "melting pot," but there are still major issues. Canadians are divided on the government's refugee policy, and some have responded with violence. First Nations people still face all kinds of racism. Racism in Canada isn't just a growing problem; Canada has had a long history of racist tendencies, from literally destroying whole black communities to turning away refugees throughout the twentieth century.

The country has also come across a recent glut of economic problems. Lower global oil prices have wrecked an economy that has become so dependent on the development of cost-intensive oil sands. The Loonie (the Canadian dollar) has dropped to new lows against the U.S. dollar, while the Canadian unemployment rate has reached new heights against the U.S. rate. Government deficits are expected to grow to cope with a slow oil economy running on empty.

And lovely Cape Breton Island? While Americans are being encouraged to move there, population decline has become such a problem on the island with the closure of coal and steel industries that has forced people to move for jobs elsewhere. The country is not exactly a land of opportunity, at least not at the moment.

Now, there are things to like about Canada. We're still working on bringing Syrian refugees to our country. Our rappers are still not Meek Mill. And our Minister of Defence is apparently a "badass."

Canadian politics are definitely not immune to the circus sideshows. Even Justin Trudeau has also earned his fair share of theatrical distractions, like calling a Minister a "piece of shit" in the House of Commons, or debating whether Canada should "whip out our CF-18s and show them how big they are" to fight ISIS. (Measuring dick size isn't just reserved for Republican debates.)

Though the Prime Minister can put on a good show in the boxing ring (a thing that really happened!), he shouldn't be picking fights with one-time Oscar winners.

Now, there are things to like about Canada. We're still working on bringing Syrian refugees to our country. Our rappers are still not Meek Mill. And our Minister of Defence is apparently a "badass."