Defiant nurse anesthetists cite lack of trust, not pay, in labor dispute

The CRNAs are now filing for unemployment insurance benefits. (Photo: Romain Blanquart | Michigan.com)

It has been three weeks since Jessica Mast and 65 fellow nurse anesthetists were sedating patients and earning six-figure salaries in the St. John Providence Health System.

Today, they remain out of their jobs since rejecting the nonprofit health system’s plan to outsource them on Jan. 1 to PSJ Anesthesia, a new outside contractor run by a metro Detroit doctor.

It was a rare act of defiance by a group of non-unionized employees against what has been a nationwide trend in the health care business.

In doing so, they relinquished jobs that pay an average $174,290 salary across metro Detroit, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.

“We’re here for unemployment insurance,” Mast, 38, of Northville told the desk clerk last week inside a Michigan Works! service center in Livonia, where she and her now-former colleagues registered for benefits.

The two hospitals affected — Providence Park Hospital, Novi, and Providence Park Hospital, Southfield — have been trying to absorb the abrupt loss of so many highly trained workers. They are part of nonprofit Ascension Health, a St. Louis-based Catholic health system.

The two hospitals have stayed open since the 66 workers were laid off Dec. 31, and Jean Meyer, president and CEO of St. John Providence, says no surgeries have been canceled, delayed or transferred.

“Every site for anesthesia has been covered and the atmosphere is positive and professional,” she said in a statement. “There is not a CRNA shortage.”

Yet other nurse anesthetists in the area and some staffing agencies have refused to help replace the anesthetists who lost their jobs.

This labor dispute arose in mid-October, when a group of 80 anesthetists received notice that their jobs with Providence were being outsourced to PSJ Anesthesia starting in 2016. They could either sign a contract with PSJ or lose their jobs. After several contract offers, 14 nurses took jobs and 66 refused.

“We have no problem in taking a pay cut, and we as a group have said that multiple times,” said Marie Williams of Farmington, one of the nurse anesthetists who wouldn’t sign with PSJ. “It was the manner in which it was rolled out. It was the take-it-or-leave-it approach. It was the complete and total devaluation of CRNA services.”

Known as Certified Registered Nurse Anesthetists, or CRNAs, they are required to have bachelor’s and master’s degrees and several years of critical care experience; many in the profession consider themselves a third category of hospital worker between registered nurses and doctors.

PSJ Anesthesia was incorporated in September and is run by Dr. Dominick Lago, an anesthesiologist at both the Southfield and Novi hospitals where the anesthetists worked. He is also a member of the more established Southfield-based medical practice Northland Anesthesia Associates, which has provided anesthesiologists at Providence hospitals for years.

Neither Lago nor his attorney returned multiple messages seeking comment.

Meyer said Providence’s leadership “has been respectful, accommodating and transparent with the CRNAs throughout this process.”

“Every employed CRNA was offered a position at the exact same salary rate, with an excellent benefits package, and with the opportunity to work with the same physicians they had been working with for years,” Meyer’s statement said. “It was each individual’s personal decision to accept or reject the offer.”

Meyer’s statement did not specifically address reports that anesthesia departments in both hospitals had been losing money, but she did say that CRNAs’ overtime and on-call costs were unsustainable and the decision to outsource them “was driven by need to create a more efficient way to provide care and better manage costs.”

The new arrangement with PSJ was 100% supported by Providence’s doctors, Meyer’s statement said, and is expected to lead to better experiences and outcomes for patients.

8 contracts rejected

Attorney David Shea, who is representing the nurses, said the initial employment offer from PSJ — ultimately rejected — involved a 35% cut in total compensation because of reductions in overtime, call-in pay and life insurance benefits, among other things.

Subsequent contract offers restored some of those cuts, but kept restrictions on taking temporary CRNA shifts at other hospitals and barred them from working at certain other hospitals for up to a year if they left, according to Shea.

Most of the group ultimately rejected eight different contract offers from PSJ, although some voluntarily signed and others lacked the financial resources to reject an offer.

“For us as a group, the verbiage in the contract elicited such a sense of mistrust,” said Williams, who like many in the group, works a couple days per month on a freelance basis at another surgery center. “When I have to ask permission for a second job, I find that oppressive.”

Virtual picket line

While no one is actually picketing outside Providence’s Novi or Southfield hospitals, other nurse anesthetists have been reluctant to fill in for the laid-off workers and some staffing agencies, including North Carolina-based United Anesthesia, have said they won’t place anesthetists in either hospital.

“Nobody has really jumped to help staff those two hospitals,” said Phillip Lim of Beverly Hills in metro Detroit, a current nurse anesthetist in the Providence system but not among those laid off. “It’s a very small community and the vast majority of the community feel that those CRNAs were treated unfairly.”

Attorney Shea said, “I like to call it a virtual picket line. They feel that this group of Providence CRNAs was dealt an unfair blow and they won’t go and take their jobs.”

In metro Detroit, the Detroit Medical Center and McLaren Macomb hospital in Mt. Clemens have outsourced CRNA services in recent years without sparking labor unrest.

Shea also represented those McLaren Macomb CRNAs. In an interview, he said the main difference between the McLaren outsourcing of about 50 CRNAs and what happened at Providence was that McLaren’s CRNAs felt they were included in the contract negotiation process, which built trust. Another difference was timing.

“The McLaren deal happened over the span of eight or nine months. And this contract happened over a matter of weeks,” Shea said.

Outsourcing on the rise

Management consultant Jason Trudell, CEO of Tampa-based Executive Anesthesia Solutions, said the trend of hospitals outsourcing anesthesia services has been going on for years and has lately picked up.

A number of anesthesia companies that are getting contracts are backed by private equity or venture capital firms, which can help finance the significant start-up costs involved in such businesses.

The outsourcing firms help hospitals hold down costs and get more revenue from insurance companies, Medicare and Medicaid through more efficient billing procedures, he said. A CRNA himself, Trudell said it is common for companies like PSJ to hold a contract for about two or three years and then sell to another company.

“Hospital billing is notoriously inefficient ... they leave a lot of money on the table,” he said.

Some in the health care industry have blamed the rush by hospitals to cut costs and outsource workers to the Affordable Care Act, which brought smaller increases in hospitals’ Medicare reimbursement rates and new penalties for patient re-admissions, However, hospital lobbyists long ago agreed to those measures in return for more newly insured patients under the health care law.

The 66 CRNAs were unanimous in their rejection of the contract offer, but they now appear split on their willingness to again work for the Providence hospitals. Some anesthetists still hope the hospital system will come around, perhaps drop its outsourcing plan, and offer them employment on agreeable terms.

“There is still a very large group of us who want to go back to Providence and work,” Williams said.

But others, including Greg O’Dell, 52, of Commerce Township, are already interviewing for CRNA positions at other systems and doubt they will make a return to St. John Providence.

“The window of opportunity for them to take us is rapidly closing,” he said.

Read or Share this story: http://www.hometownlife.com/story/money/business/2016/01/18/nurse-anesthetists-say-disrespect-led-resistance/78969368/