Three days of packing. Nine hours of bonding with three movers. Two days of unpacking and furniture arranging (uhh, before you put that down, could we try the armoire upstairs?). Ten broken fingernails, two Band-Aids, 12 Advil and one ice pack.

And I’m in my new home.

Not only that, the new place — another home I’ve staged to sell — was show-ready 48 hours after the movers drove off. It’s detailed down to the vegetable bin. I have the circles under my eyes to prove it.

If I’ve done my job right, the buyers will never suspect the sweat and swearing that took place offstage. To them, the place will look as if it fell into place as effortlessly as snow on a winter’s evening.

Except it didn’t.

Like every home, this one had its decorating challenges. The 100-year-old Southern-plantation-style house came partly furnished.

Certain rooms, I was instructed, were to stay furnished as they were. Others I was to decorate with my stuff. Thus, my skills were tested as I tried to make two styles, as different as New York and southern France, blend.

The home came with midcentury-modern pieces, sleek black and clean-lined, and accents of deep chocolate brown and aqua.

My décor leans Old-World European, and mixes warm wood tones with golds, burgundies and peacock blue.

I like both looks and color palettes a lot. I just wasn’t sure how well I would like them together. How would my brown dining table’s curved, carved legs appear alongside black, straight-lined pieces?

I was about to find out.

I knew I was in treacherous waters. Many designers have told me that the hardest design style to pull off is not contemporary, traditional, ethnic or rustic. It’s eclectic.

“Why is this so hard?” I asked Chicago designer Bill Godley, who’s been pulling together sophisticated eclectic looks for decades.

“Because it’s easy to make an eclectic interior look like a mishmash,” said Godley. “But it’s also my favorite style, because you can create a look that no one else can imitate.”

Getting my space to work took more trial and error than usual, but when a combination worked, it made each of the pieces involved look more interesting.

Syndicated columnist and speaker Marni Jameson is the author of “House of Havoc” and “The House Always Wins” (Da Capo Press). Contact her at marnijameson.com.

8 ways to make it work

Though tricky to pull off, eclectic interiors work with these guidelines, says Chicago designer Bill Godley.

1. Watch the scale. Key in every interior, getting scale and proportion right is especially important in eclectic rooms. Scale matters both in how the pieces relate to the room and to one another.

2. Play up contrasts. It’s better to be really different in feel, time period or style than just a little off. For instance, under a slick, black-framed contemporary mirror, I put a distressed, white wood table with curved legs. Godley agreed it was a good move. “Clean lines in contemporary pieces mix very well with more ornate pieces.” He gave the example of a cabinet he got in Thailand. It’s heavily carved, embedded with shiny stones. He also has a mirror in a similar style. “I would never, never put that mirror with that chest,” he said. Instead, he pairs the chest with a contemporary Venetian mirror.

3. Blend pieces throughout the house. Mix it up in every room. “Otherwise, you look like a furniture store — and that’s a disaster,” said Godley.

4. Balance the mix. You can have three pieces of Chinese furniture, three modern and three Italian provincial, as long as the mix is balanced. “You have to really feel the overall ambience, and be sure the mix is evenly distributed,” Godley said. In other words, don’t cluster pieces from each style in their own area. Pile the Chinese brocade pillows on the black, boxy sofa next to the Italian end tables.

5. Find the common thread. This is often color, which can be a great equalizer. The existing décor I moved into had a lot of aqua tones; much of my furniture has greenish-blue tones, too. I played up those shades with art and accessories to help unify the space.

6. Pull back. Though it’s always important to have well-edited accessories, it’s even more important in an eclectic interior to have fewer pieces that make a big statement, that emphasize lines and that don’t just fill spaces. Mix looks in accessories, too. Put modern beside rustic.

7. Build bridges. Leather works in almost any interior and is a great transition fabric, said Godley. “And there’s nothing wrong with putting leather on a period piece once covered in velvet to create contrast within the piece itself.” Pillows can also work as glue in a room. “I’ve done rooms where pillows are the main item that pulls the space together,” he said.

8. Break out. “You see these cookie-cutter rooms all over suburban America, where those doing the interiors would never deviate from one style, because it’s so much easier,” said Godley. “I know that sounds harsh, but it’s just so boring.” At least no one can say I’m boring.