Eight years ago, Nathan Adams was one of the first developers to get into the super-hot Highlands market, doing remodels; then turning a historic Italian market on Osage Street into trendy row homes. As prices in Highlands and LoHi head for the stratosphere, Adams’ home sales arm, Real Estate Denver Team, is offering new routes into the Highlands area with much lower pricing – a row home concept at Sloan’s Lake, with 2-car attached garage, rooftop deck, and the contemporary styling that Highlands projects have, from the $390s.

“It’s like buying into LoHi seven years ago,” said Adams, as we took the hardhat tour you’ll get today at 1700 Irving Street Rowhomes, W. 17th at Irving Street, four blocks from Denver’s largest lake and its second biggest park. “Anybody coming in now has the potential to make phenomenal money.”

The Denver Team has 5 projects totaling 43 units near the St. Anthony’s redevelopment project, centered on Raleigh Street a few blocks further west along Sloan’s Lake. St. A’s is generating headlines – Alamo Drafthouse Cinema coming as part of a dining/retail component, along with apartments that are drawing major investors. Some 60 percent of the Denver Team’s next three projects here are presold; often to urban buyers that had been priced out of the Highlands market, now getting out of apartments and into ownership, says Linda Kukulski Miller, managing broker. She’s seen 23 of Real Estate Denver Team’s Highland area units pre-sold this spring months prior to completion.

“Buyers are very receptive to our value and location,” she said. “They’re getting into a quality home for thousands less than what they’re seeing in central Highlands, and still getting the latest look and urban lifestyle.” All of these new development homes have two-car attached garages and rooftop decks with an outdoor fireplace – along with larger windows, wood flooring, and quartz countertops.

You can also tour a Denver Team duplex just completed in LoHi, at 3731 Lipan Street by Franco Park: 4-bedroom/4-bath sizing from $675,000. Both projects show the Denver Team’s approach to building – using seasoned custom builders like Carter Custom, Malibu Homes and Augusta Homes to get higher quality in a very busy market.

At either location you can sign up to win an iPad mini to be given away this week – and find out how to finance your new home from Peyton Fullerton of Starkey Mortgage, Denver Team’s preferred lender (NMLSR 492643, LMB 100048773) – offering discounted closing costs, competitive rates and long-term rate locks with float down options for qualified new construction buyers; apply at PeytonFullerton.com. The duplex is just south of W. 38th, three blocks west of I-25; the row homes are on W. 17th three blocks west of Federal.

Two Highlands area open houses by Real Estate Denver Team; 1700 Irving Street Rowhomes at Sloan’s Lake, 2-bed plus 2-car garage, rooftop deck; also 3731/3733 Lipan St. in LoHi, luxury 4-bed/4-bath duplex, 2-car garages, rooftop decks; drawing for iPad Mini; refreshments. 1700 Irving St., Denver; from central Highlands take Federal Blvd south 1 mi. to W. 17th, west 3 blks. Also 3731 Lipan St., Denver; from W. 32nd in LoHi take Pecos St north to W. 37th, east 4 blks to Lipan St., left

From $395,000, LoHi duplex from $675,000

303-997-4001

Mark Samuelson writes on real estate and business; you can email him at mark@samuelsonassoc.com.You can see all of Mark Samuelson’s columns at DenverPost.com/RealEstate. Follow Mark Samuelson on Twitter: @marksamuelson