The conference “Finding Hope, Humor and Heart in Caregiving,” 8:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. May 5 at Manzanita Place, 1705 Manzanita Ave. Elaine Sanchez, author and speaker, facilitates. • 9:15-10:15 a.m.: Managing Dementia-related Surprising and Challenging Behaviors. • 10:30 a.m.-noon: Understanding and Coping with Caregiver Anger. • 1-3 p.m. Depression, Grief and Survival Tips. $20 general, $65 professionals. Includes lunch. Sponsored by the Alzheimer’s Association. Register by May 2: 895-9661 or educonference.kintera.org/Chico2016

Chico >> Nobody really thinks about it until it’s personal. But there are ways to survive being the primary caregiver for a person with a progressive, degenerative, long-term disease.

“You need to develop an attitude of creative indifference toward the emotional stress of caring for someone who is elderly, chronically ill or disabled,” said Elaine K. Sanchez, author, speaker and cofounder of CaregiverHelp.com, a video-based caregiver support program.

Sanchez will share her ideas during “Finding Hope, Humor and Heart in Caregiving,” the annual education conference for families and professionals May 5, sponsored by the Alzheimer’s Association.

During a phone interview Tuesday, Sanchez gave a preview of what participants will learn. An attitude of “creative indifference,” she explained, can help caregivers cope with the anger, guilt, depression and grief they experience.

“So many times, especially with Alzheimer’s patients, what is so difficult is that people are grieving the loss of a person they used to know. They get angry, from here to the moon, with the receiver, the disease, the family member who doesn’t show up, the medical team, insurance, the Veterans Administration.”

And anger with all of that is justifiable, she said. “So I will talk about a strategy for dealing with those things. I will talk about the ‘Three Fs of Flipping Out’: Fear, frustration and fatigue.”

Personal experience

Sanchez knows of what she speaks. She watched her aging mother care for her father, who had stroke-related dementia.

“First, you don’t want to take your frustration out on a person who can’t help it. So many things are out of the caregiver and care receiver’s control.”

She said there are ways make the situation more tolerable:

• Become aware of the issues that cause the most stress. Name them and write them down.

• Accept that your lives have changed, and there is no going back. This could be a long road ahead, with an outcome no one wants and many complex and complicating issues to deal with.

• Take action. Figure out a plan, something you can actually do, and execute it. Or, she said, realize something is beyond your control to fix or improve. “It’s a matter of releasing your emotional attachment to it,” she said.

The “biggest piece” to successful caregiving, Sanchez said, is “learning how to cope with emotions.”

Advertisement

When her father was ill, Sanchez said she and her mother watched him change in ways they never anticipated.

“In the second part of my talk, I will discuss managing dementia’s challenging behaviors with an emphasis on inappropriate and surprising sexual behavior ... This is not surprising in stroke survivors, people with Alzheimer’s, or people who take Dopamine to control the symptoms of Parkinson’s Disease.”

She also said caregivers should be aware of the “three don’ts of dementia: Don’t argue. Don’t try to talk them out of something. And don’t force them to remember.”

There are better, more effective strategies to manage behavior, which will reduce stress for the caregiver and care receiver.

The third portion of Sanchez’ talk on May 5 will be about depression, grief and survivor tips.

Looking ahead

Being a family caregiver is becoming more and more typical. “Almost a third of adults in the U.S. are involved in caregiving — some for a couple of hours a week, and full time for others.”

Sanchez said the problem is becoming more understood on numerous levels — important because of the advancing age of baby boomers.

“The Affordable Care Act has had an impact on this because hospitals reimburse on readmission and patient satisfaction. What they are realizing is if you keep a caregiver healthy and supported, you are more likely to reduce readmissions and increase patient satisfaction. Also, the government is realizing the economic benefit of unpaid caregivers.”

Sanchez’ mother had written her letters about her experience caring for her husband. “She wrote to me for over six years. I edited her letters into a book, which I finished and self-published in 2006.”

Sanchez said her mom’s letters “were like an episode of ‘MASH’ — you’d laugh, cry and have hope for humanity.”

The second edition of “Letters from Madelyn: Chronicles of a Caregiver” will be released later this month.

Contact reporter Mary Nugent at 896-7764.