Mixed messages: Even the day’s highest-profile speaker, Martin Sorrell, was in two minds about investing in Iran. Bloomberg News

Iran is creeping back onto the radars of Western businesses and investors, but not without controversy.

London’s plush Marriott Hotel is this week playing host to the first Europe-Iran Forum. The gathering, which ends on Thursday, has been organized by Brussels-based business newspaper and events company the European Voice. Its aim is to capitalize on growing interest in the Iranian market following last year’s interim agreement with leading world powers over the Islamic Republic’s nuclear program.

Staff from several high-profile companies have attended, including representatives from U.S. firms such as telecoms equipment giant Cisco Systems and Citigroup, according to a list distributed at the conference. France’s oil giant Total and cosmetics maker L’Oréal, along with European aerospace company Airbus Group and Swedish automaker Scania Group were at the event.

Mohammad Nahavandian, the chief of staff of Iran’s president Hassan Rouhani sent a message of support for the forum in an official letter.

But even though the event was packed, some attendees still seemed in two minds about dealing with Iran. That’s hardly surprising given the legal and reputational difficulties that remain. Despite exemptions on goods such as food, medicine or sales of car and aircraft parts to Iran, the most stifling sanctions on its banking and oil sectors remain in place.

Ahead of the conference, the U.S. Treasury warned participants not to breach continuing economic sanctions against the Islamic Republic. A group of Israeli protesters filmed attendees at the entrance of the hotel.

Even the forum’s most high-profile business speaker on Wednesday, Martin Sorrell, the head of advertising giant WPP, appeared conflicted about his involvement. “I have mixed emotions about being here” Mr. Sorrell said in his speech. At a personal level, he said, he would be against dealing with Iran until it “recognizes the legitimacy of Israel.” Most countries in the Middle East don’t recognize Israel.

The U.K.’s Zionist Federation had asked Mr. Sorrell to reconsider his attendance in a letter sent on Monday.

Still, Mr. Sorrell said, the opportunities in Iran are “immense.” He cited Iran’s huge oil and gas reserves and its highly educated, young population. “Apart from Mars and the Moon” there are not many untapped opportunities left of that scale, he said.

Aside from WPP, very few U.K. companies turned up to the conference. The reasons for their absence were unclear, but British firms frequently complain that the U.K. government has been among the most cautious in allowing any renewed trade with Iran.

Write to Benoît Faucon at benoit.faucon@wsj.com.