In the health care business these days, it’s all about the networks.

Spurred on by competition on the new Affordable Care Act exchanges, health insurers are moving to pare down their provider networks, promising participating hospitals and doctors more patients in exchange for lower payments.

Docs are busy selling out their practices to hospitals that can negotiate better rates for their services, giving up their independence to become salaried hospital employees.

And together, hospitals and large medical groups are joining “accountable care” networks in which, like insurers, they agree to provide all of a family’s medical needs for a fixed annual fee.

It’s one reason — perhaps a big reason — why medical costs have begun to level off in recent years. But it’s not without its trade-offs. Lower rates and higher volumes at hospitals and doctors’ offices often translate into inferior service for patients — longer waits, rushed appointments, less help from the staff. And if you find yourself outside the network, it’s apt to be very expensive, whether you intended to go out of network or not.

There have been numerous stories in the news recently about people who carefully take the time and effort to arrange for an in-network surgeon to perform an operation at an in-network hospital — only to find a bill in their mailbox a few weeks later for thousands of dollars from the out-of-network anesthesiologist, or pathologist, or assistant surgeon who were brought in on the operation without their knowledge and approval.

Or the people who, even in the ambulance, have the presence of mind to request to be taken to an in-network hospital, only to find out later that the entire emergency room operations has been contracted out to an out-of-network provider who bills at three, five, even 10 times the in-network reimbursement rate.

There’s no data on how often this happens, but as networks have tightened, industry experts say, it’s happening more and more. A recent study ordered up by the Texas legislature found that half of the hospitals that participated in the networks of that state’s three biggest health plans had no in-network emergency room doctors. And nationally, an estimated 65 percent of hospitals contract out some or all of their emergency room functions. Many of the largest ER contractors do not participate in any insurance networks.

Hospitals say they often have no choice but to rely on non-staff doctors because there are not enough willing to work on a hospital salary — or to put it another way, some hospitals refuse to pay the market rate. Hospitals also argue that scheduling of surgery is often so fluid and last-minute that there is not enough time to inform patients in advance that they will be treated by out-of-network specialists.

Several states, including Maryland, California, Colorado and most recently New York, have passed laws restricting “balance billing” by non-network providers for genuinely emergency services. In most cases, those laws leave it up to the hospitals and the patients’ insurers to negotiate the payment. A similar restriction is contained Obamacare, although initially it only applies to newly established health plans.

As for those non-emergency surprises, a few states now require that hospitals notify patients in advance if non-network docs are going to be used, along with the estimated charges. But industry officials acknowledge they haven’t yet found a workable solution.

There are times, of course, when people knowingly and willingly decide to go out of network to use a particular doctor or hospital, as I did last year when I needed an operation to repair my torn Achilles tendon. I had paid an extra premium each month to Anthem Blue Cross, Virginia’s largest insurer, so I could have the choice of going out of network, with Anthem promising to pay 75 percent of the “allowable charge” for that particular operation. My naïve assumption, based on past practices, was that the “allowable charge” bore some resemblance to what doctors were typically paid for such operations in the Washington area, either by Anthem or by other private insurers.

As you can see from the accompanying chart, that was not the case. My out-of-network surgeon billed just over $10,000 for the operation, which involved cutting and reattaching the tendon and sawing off a portion of my heel bone. Given the game that is medical billing these days, I knew that the bill was inflated and that Anthem’s allowable charge would be significantly lower than that. But even I was surprised at how low. And so began a months-long journey to discover exactly how Anthem had arrived at a figure that was:

●Only 20 percent of what the typical surgeon billed for the operation in suburban Maryland, as determined by FAIR Health, an independent research group;

● less than half of the average of in-network rates paid by private insurers at one leading hospital chain in the region; and

●17 percent below what is paid by Medicare, which even Medicare acknowledges doesn’t cover actual costs.

In searching for my answer, I sat for hours on hold at the 800-number to talk with a customer service specialist and her supervisor, whose patronizing message was that it was all my fault for going out of network in the first place. I filed numerous written appeals with two layers of hearing officers who explained that Anthem calculated its allowable charges based on Medicare’s estimate of how much time, cost and expertise were involved in my operation, known in the industry as “resource based relative value scales.”

The office of the state insurance commissioner pointed me to page 59 of Anthem’s annual “certificate of coverage” filing which stated that allowable charges are based on one of five data sets, specifying which one or what formula would be applied to such data. It was only after speaking with a top official at Virginia’s Department of Human Resource Management, which manages the health benefits for state employees (I am a professor at George Mason University) that the real answer was revealed:

The formula used by Anthem to calculate allowable charges is a proprietary trade secret. Or to put it another way, allowable charges are anything Anthem says they are.

As it turns out, Anthem is not alone in its effort to reduce payments to customers who exercise their option of going out of network. According to a study by Milliman, the benefits consultants, lots of other insurers have made the switch to calculating out-of-network reimbursements using Medicare rates as the benchmark rather than actual market rates. With doctors’ bills averaging more than double the Medicare rates, the shift in benchmarks has resulted in a “significant” reduction in out-of-network payments, Millman concluded. But even Rob Parke, one of the authors of the study, said he’d never run across a plan such as Anthem’s that sets allowable charges below Medicare rates. Typically, he said, they are 20 to 80 percent above.

In the competition to hold down health insurance premiums, out-of-pocket costs are on the rise. In general, that’s a good thing because it will finally force us consumers to be more cost conscious in our health care decisions. But it only works — and it will only be fair to consumers — if those prices are reasonable and transparent, rather than part of a sneaky effort by insurers to shortchange their customers. By that standard, Anthem Blue Cross, Virginia’s largest health insurer fails the test — as does a state’s insurance commissioner who seems to be more interested in defending the industry than protecting consumers.

Postscript: I settled up with the surgeon for an amount less than his full bill, but several times Anthem’s made-up allowable cost. I’ve also switched to a high-deductible health plan with Aetna, which still uses market rates as its benchmark and has a Web site that allows customers to look up allowable charges for any procedure in advance.