Two Hudson County freeholders praised fellow Freeholder Jose Munoz yesterday for cooperating with the FBI after court documents revealed Munoz has been a confidential federal informant since 2011.

“I full support any investigation by our law enforcement agencies,” said Freeholder Chairman Anthony Romano, who is a Hoboken police captain. “I’m a public servant and a police officer, and my badge means the world to me.

“We as a board, and myself as chair, will always cooperate with any investigation if called upon.”

Munoz is at the center of federal charges against West New York Mayor Felix Roque and his son, Joseph. The mayor and his son are charged with hacking into and bringing down an anti-Roque website — recallroque.com — that was created by Munoz early last year. The hacking trial is scheduled to get under way Thursday.

A court document related to the case that was released Wednesday says “from February 2011 to the present Jose Munoz was a confidential source of information to the FBI” and “during that time, Mr. Munoz provided information on other matters.”

Romano said the revelation will have no impact of the board, which operates in an open and transparent manner and with the consent of counsel.

“It’s not something that would even come before the board,” said Romano, adding that he did not know Munoz was a confidential informant for the FBI.

Freeholder Bill O’Dea said he too was unaware Munoz was working with the FBI until it was published in The Jersey Journal and that he thinks of him as a whistleblower.

“Elected officials take an oath that if they know about corruption or illegal activity, they have an obligation to report it,” O’Dea said. “The truth of the matter is we are held to a higher level of responsibility than the average citizen.”

Authorities say that on Feb. 8, 2012, Joseph Roque hacked into online accounts connected to the website and used that access to disable the website. Mayor Roque then harassed and attempted to intimidate several people associated with the website, according to a criminal complaint.

Roque declined to comment on the new information regarding Munoz. Freeholder Tilo Rivas declined to comment on Munoz.