HARTFORD — Gov. Dannel P. Malloy on Friday nominated Katharine "Katie" L. Wade, a former Cigna Corp. vice president and daughter-in-law of a major Democratic fundraiser, to be the state's next insurance commissioner.

Wade, 49, of Simsbury, would oversee an agency that regulates the insurance industry on everything from the solvency of large companies such as The Hartford Financial Services Group to the price of health-insurance plans.

She is scheduled to begin Tuesday as acting commissioner, and she will be paid $160,000 annually, if her nomination is approved legislators.

At Cigna, Wade oversaw government affairs for the company in all 50 states and before the executive and legislative branches of the federal government. She also supervised the implementation of laws and regulations, including the Affordable Care Act, in Cigna's product filings, regulatory reporting, market conduct examinations and producer licensing.

Wade's father-in-law, Hartford attorney James A. Wade Jr., is a self-described "pal" and sometime lunch companion of Malloy who has been involved at the highest level of Connecticut Democratic politics. Wade established a political action committee called Prosperity for Connecticut in 2011, Malloy's first year as governor, and Malloy has helped it to raise hundreds of thousands of dollars for the Democratic party, candidates and causes. The governor has served as speaker at Wade's fundraising events. Wade was close with Democratic Gov. William A. O'Neill in the 1980s.

Katie Wade Peter Casolino / Special To The Courant Gov. Dannel P. Malloy shakes hands after he introduces his appointee for insurance commissioner, Katie Wade, during an afternoon press conference at the state Capitol. Gov. Dannel P. Malloy shakes hands after he introduces his appointee for insurance commissioner, Katie Wade, during an afternoon press conference at the state Capitol. (Peter Casolino / Special To The Courant)

James Wade is an attorney at Robinson+Cole, the lobbying law firm for the health insurance trade organization Connecticut Association of Health Plans.

When asked if he was concerned about any perceived impropriety in Wade's appointment, given her relationship to James Wade, Malloy said simply, "No."

The commissioner's position was left vacant by Thomas B. Leonardi, who led the department for almost four years and traveled frequently abroad as an industry expert. Leonardi stepped down in December, taking a job at Evercore Partners Inc., a New York-based global investment banking advisory firm.

Since December, Deputy Insurance Commissioner Anne Melissa Dowling has served as acting commissioner. Malloy said Dowling was considered for the position.

When asked why Dowling wasn't chosen, the governor said: "I don't dissect decision making. I'm not going to answer questions about any of the other candidates I interviewed. I interviewed a number of candidates personally, and I was very much personally involved in this decision making process. I think that the acting commissioner has done an outstanding job, and I thank her for her service."

Katharine Wade has served several positions with state and national trade organizations representing health insurers, according to her LinkedIn profile. Those positions include being an officer in the Connecticut Association of Health Plans from 2005 to 2013; a state government relations committee chair from 2006 to 2011 for America's Health Insurance Plans, or AHIP; and a state government relations committee vice chair of AHIP in 2005.

"It's an honor to serve the state of Connecticut," Wade told reporters after Malloy introduced her. "Insurance provides important protections and benefits for our citizens."

She said she will do her best to meet the department's regulatory obligations ensuring that policyholders, both consumers and businesses, receive what they are promised.

Secondly, Wade said she will oversee the financial condition and market practices of insurers headquartered and licensed in the state.

Third, Wade said she will keep Connecticut's insurance regulation relevant in a global economy by maintaining a national and international regulatory profile.

"I look forward to working in this administration, with the General Assembly, and policymakers, to protect consumers, and to provide a business climate so insurers can embrace innovation, invent new products and services and grow Connecticut's economy," Wade said. "I'm very excited to work with the talented team of professionals at the Connecticut Insurance Department."

Wade worked at Cigna from 1992 to 2013, according to her LinkedIn profile, and held various positions, most recently vice president of Public Policy, Government Affairs and U.S. Compliance.

After Friday's announcement, Cigna spokesman Joe Mondy said in a written statement: "Katie Wade is a professional with deep knowledge of the insurance industry, which makes her eminently qualified for this position. We wish her the best in this latest chapter of her career and we know she will serve the state of Connecticut well."

Wade will oversee a department of 159 employees and an annual budget of $28 million. The state department's budget is funded exclusively by an assessment on insurers based on their premium revenue.

Her nomination must be approved by the Executive and Legislative Nominations Committee, and then it will have to be approved by either the state House or the Senate depending on whether her nomination becomes a House or a Senate bill, which is yet to be determined, said Malloy spokesman David Bednarz.