Tom Piccirilli of Loveland was a renowned author and poet. He died July 11 from brain tumors. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Tom Piccirilli's last complete sentence was, "Did my Stoker get to the house yet?" said his wife, Michelle Scalise-Piccirilli on Wednesday.

"I said yes, 'I have it sitting on the dining room table,'" she said.

Piccirilli won his fourth Bram Stoker Award for excellence in horror fiction writing just weeks before he died on Saturday, July 11.

Piccirilli had been cancer-free since treatment for brain tumors, revealed by an MRI in September 2012.

In a 2013 Reporter-Herald interview about the release of his latest book, "The Last Whisper in the Dark," he said that the doctors removed 98 percent of a golf-ball-size brain tumor. He was in remission after that and went in for scans every three months.

When he went in for a checkup in May, doctors discovered several new tumors. They said there was nothing they could do.

"He had no health problems, no warning signs it had come back," Scalise-Piccirilli said. "We were completely in shock. We were supposed to leave a couple weeks after that because Tom was supposed to be the guest of honor at the World Horror Convention in Atlanta."

The Horror Writers Association was hosting its banquet for the Bram Stoker award, of which Piccirilli was nominated. He won.

Scalise-Piccirilli said that until this MRI, he had continued to write.

Advertisement

His last complete novel was "The Last Whisper in the Dark" and he was working on his next book, a standalone called, "Blue Autumn." Random House had already bought it. Piccirilli never let his wife see his work before it was complete, so she isn't sure how far along he was or what it was about.

"If it would be worthwhile to allow someone else to finish it... It would have to be pretty far for me to let someone else finish it," she said. "I don't think his last book will ever be released."

Scalise-Piccirilli said that his last couple of years were a gift. "We traveled. We had a really full life."

They liked to go to Montauk on Long Island, which is where they got married at the top of a lighthouse 11 years ago.

Piccirilli was nominated for the Mystery Writers of America Edgar Award twice. His book, "The Last Kind Words" made the USA Today Best-seller list.

Scalise-Piccirilli said that people who wish to honor her husband can make a donation in his name to the National Cancer Society.

Tom leaves behind his wife, three stepchildren (who live in Loveland), one brother, a sister-in-law, a niece and nephew and his "beloved" three dogs — who live in Long Island — and numerous other relatives.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes