CALABASAS, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Marcus & Millichap (NYSE:MMI) is pleased to announce the expansion of its Institutional Property Advisors (IPA) division—which specializes in serving institutional and major private real estate investors—into the office and industrial properties sector, according to John J. Kerin, president and CEO of Marcus & Millichap. IPA’s office and industrial division specializes in providing office and industrial property advisory, brokerage and capital markets through highly experienced brokerage teams across the country. Alan L. Pontius, senior vice president and national director of Marcus & Millichap’s National Office and Industrial Properties Group, will serve as national director.

“Over the years, our team has conducted business with numerous major private and institutional investors and by organizing our teams and brand within IPA, we aim to further enhance our major client services by combining our sales expertise with our industry leading research and capital markets capabilities,” said Kerin. “Our institutional and major private clients will benefit from the depth of Al Pontius’s office and industrial property investment experience and from his long-standing relationships with so many key industry players.”

“The time is right to extend IPA’s network of advisory services to major office and industrial property investors,” said Pontius. “Recent gains to payrolls nationwide and continuing limitations on new supply have begun to translate into a faster pace of recovery for the U.S. office sector. The rapid expansion of online retail transactions have structurally changed the dynamics of industrial demand. Additionally, demographic trends combined with the impact of the Affordable Care Act have generated consistent demand for single- and multi-tenant medical office buildings.”

“By creating the IPA division, Marcus & Millichap is positioned extremely well to bring together private capital and the institutional market place while serving the unique needs of each investor group,” added Hessam Nadji, senior executive vice president in charge of overseeing Marcus & Millichap’s specialty divisions. “We are excited to build on our success with IPA by expanding into the office and industrial sectors.”

About Marcus & Millichap (NYSE:MMI)

With over 1,500 investment professionals located throughout the United States and Canada, Marcus & Millichap is a leading specialist in commercial real estate investment sales, financing, research and advisory services. Founded in 1971, the firm closed over 7,600 transactions in 2014 with a value of approximately $33.1 billion. The company has perfected a powerful system for marketing properties that combines investment specialization, local market expertise, the industry’s most comprehensive research, state-of-the-art technology, and relationships with the largest pool of qualified investors. To learn more, please visit: www.MarcusMillichap.com

With a network of senior-level investment advisors located throughout the United States, Institutional Property Advisors (IPA) is qualified to meet the needs of institutional and major private investors. IPA’s combination of real estate investment and capital markets expertise, industry-leading technology, superior support services and acclaimed research offer customized solutions for the acquisition and disposition of institutional properties and portfolios. www.IPAusa.com