The economy might be improving, but this doesn’t mean all companies have put the brakes on laying off employees. In just the past year, the Dallas-Fort Worth area had hundreds of layoffs.

For those affected — and any who fear their jobs might be in jeopardy — there’s no time like the present to consider other career opportunities. And while there’s no such thing as true job security, the medical field can offer better security and stability than many other fields, as well as higher salaries.

If you’re living in Dallas or thinking about moving to the area, a career as a physician assistant or physical therapist is worth considering. Not only are these career choices rewarding and fulfilling, but you can also potentially earn more money working for a Dallas-based company than a company in another U.S. city, according to GOBankingRates’ study of the best- and worst-paying cities for America’s 20 hottest jobs.

According to the job study, Dallas ranked as one of the best-paying places for physician assistants and physical therapists. The city employs 2,630 physical therapists and 1,220 physician assistants.

Physical therapists work in medical facilities to help decrease pain or improve mobility in patients after an injury or surgery. Physician assistants aren’t full-fledged doctors, but they’re licensed to practice medicine under the direction of a doctor.

Given the complex nature of both occupations, it’s not surprising that compensation in both fields is higher than other fields. The national median wages for a physical therapist and physician assistant are $81,853 and $96,732, respectively.

But if you feel you can do better or that your skills command a higher salary, there’s good news if you’re thinking about moving to or working in Dallas: Physical therapists in this city earn a median annual salary of $93,840, and physician assistants earn $101,910.

Not only is Dallas one of the best-paying cities for physician assistants and physical therapists, but it’s also one of the best-paying cities for occupational therapists ($93,780) and occupational therapy assistants ($73,820). And it looks like more and more jobs in these two professions will become available every year.

The Bureau of Labor Statistics predicts that the job outlook for occupational therapists will grow 29 percent from 2012 to 2022. For occupational therapy assistants, that growth will be even higher at 41 percent from 2012 to 2022.

It’s impossible to predict the future with 100-percent accuracy, nor can you control whether employers decide to shut their doors or lay off dedicated workers. So if you feel it’s time for a career change, you question the stability of your job or you want to earn more money, now’s the time to explore a new career in the medical field.

Daniel Cross,

GOBankingRates.com