CSN TO HOST MASTER PLANOPEN HOUSE MARCH 26

The College of Southern Nevada plans to host an open house from 10 a.m. to 6 p.m. March 26 in the C Building lobby on the Henderson campus, 700 College Drive, to answer questions and collect feedback on the campuses’ proposed physical master plans.

The college is in the process of developing the plans, and once finalized, they will provide college officials with a blueprint to maximize space at each of CSN’s campuses and identify where potential new buildings, parking and student spaces are desired.

To ask questions or provide input by email, contact csnmasterplans@csn.edu. For more information, visit csn.edu.

COX SCIENCE CHALLENGE TO AWARD FUNDS

Cox Las Vegas hopes to discover Clark County School District high school students who are Stars of Science through its Science Challenge 2015. Students can participate in the challenge by creating a 2-minute digital story (video) that shows science at work in one of three categories: applied science, natural science and health science.

The first-place participant in each story category will receive $1,000 plus $1,000 for his teacher and $1,000 for their school. Second- and third-place winners, their teacher and school also will receive cash awards. Winners will be announced May 2 during the 2015 Las Vegas Science and Technology Festival at Cashman Center.

The entry deadline is 11:59 p.m. April 15. For more information, visit coxstarsofscience.com.

UNLV LAW SCHOOL HOSTS KIDS’ COURT SCHOOL CELEBRATION

The Kids’ Court School at the UNLV William S. Boyd School of Law recently celebrated the milestone of assisting 1,000 children. The Kids’ Court School, a 2012 Harvard University Bright Idea Award winner, is a nationally recognized program that educates children and youths about the judicial process and teaches strategies to reduce system-related stress.

An educational celebration was held March 13 at Thomas & Mack Moot Court, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway. Judges, lawyers, mental health professionals and others who work with children and youths involved in the judicial process attended, and the event featured an overview of the Kids’ Court School and a demonstration of the program, including a mock trial. Speakers included Daniel Hamilton, Boyd School of Law dean; Anne Traum, associate dean and director of Thomas & Mack Legal Clinic; Rebecca Nathanson, James E. Rogers Professor of Education and Law and director of Kids’ Court School; Brittnie Watkins, Boyd School of Law graduate; Jane McCarthy, associate dean of the College of Education; and Candace Barr, Legal Aid Center of Southern Nevada.

For more information, visit law.unlv.edu/kidscourt.

NEVADA NATURALIST PROGRAM TO BEGIN APRIL 6

The University of Nevada Cooperative Extension’s Nevada Naturalist program is set to start its spring semster April 6 and to continue from 6 to 9 p.m. Mondays and Wednesdays. The program educates and trains adults interested in learning about Southern Nevada natural resources. Participants study natural resources, environmental education and interpretation, laws and regulations, and environmental issues.

Field trips are scheduled for Saturdays at various times and locations. The cost is $195 per semester, which includes all program materials, refreshments and some field trips. The second semester is planned for fall.

For more information or to register, contact Denise Parsons at 702-948-5906 or parsonsd@unce.unr.edu. For more information, visit tinyurl.com/nevadanaturalist.

CULINARY WORKERS UNION DONATES HISTORICAL PHOTOS TO UNLV

The Culinary Workers Union, Local 226, recently donated thousands of historical photos, film negatives and slides depicting strikes, rallies and other union member activities spanning several decades to the UNLV University Libraries. The collection will be curated, digitized and preserved, and a wide selection of images will be made available online.

For more information, visit https://www.library.unlv.edu/speccol.

PBS KIDS WRITERS CONTEST UNDERWAY THROUGH MARCH 27

Children in kindergarten through fifth grade are encouraged to submit original stories for Vegas PBS’ annual PBS KIDS Writers Contest. First-place winners in kindergarten through third grade will be forwarded for judging in the national competition.

Submissions will be judged for creativity and originality of plot and/or themes, story structure and use of literary devices, and relevance, quality and originality of illustration.

Entries can be mailed or delivered to Vegas PBS Ready To Learn, 3050 E. Flamingo Road, Las Vegas, NV 89121 and must be received by 5 p.m. March 27. Local winners are set to be selected in the spring, and prizes for first-place winners include free tuition for contest partner Southern Nevada Writing Project’s annual summer writing camp.

For more information, visit vegaspbs.org/writers-contest.

STUDENTS INVITED TO ENTER EARTH DAY ART CONTEST

The city of Las Vegas’ Keep Las Vegas Beautiful program, in partnership with the Clark County School District School-Community Partnership Program and Republic Services of Southern Nevada, plans to host its fifth annual Earth Day Every Day Art Contest for Clark County students in elementary, middle and high schools.

The contest will culminate at an award ceremony for the finalists and their teachers during the Earth Day event planned for April 18 at Town Square Las Vegas, 6605 Las Vegas Blvd. South. Cash prizes, sponsored by Republic Services of Southern Nevada, will be awarded to the top three winning students of each age group and their teachers. Artwork submitted by both winners and runners-up will also be part of a Youth Earth Day art display at the Town Square event and later displayed at Las Vegas City Hall, 495 S. Main St.

For submission guidelines, visit tinyurl.com/ndb26p6.

Contest entries must be received by 4 p.m. March 27 and can be sent to The School-Community Partnership Program No. 145, Western High School, Attention: Cheryl Wagner, 4601 W. Bonanza Road, Las Vegas, NV 89107.

MINING ASSOCIATION TO HOST WORKSHOP FOR TEACHERS

The Nevada Mining Association and the Nevada Division of Minerals plans to host the 26th annual Earth Science Teachers Workshop for Southern Nevada educators March 31 and April 1 at Faith Lutheran High School, 2015 S. Hualapai Way. The free workshop is open to kindergarten through 12th-grade teachers, and attendees will receive one Professional Development Education credit.

Hands-on seminars are planned to enhance teachers’ understanding of earth sciences, the importance of mined materials and the role mining plays in Nevadans’ lives. The goal is to provide educators with creative ways to implement such studies in the classroom. The first day will focus on seminars and methods of teaching earth science to specific grades. The second day will feature guest speakers from the mining and minerals industry. The workshop will wrap up with a tour of various mine locations and Southern Nevada points of interest, including the Lost City Museum and the McCaw School of Mines.

Sessions are set from 7 a.m. to 5:30 p.m. Breakfast, lunch, dinner, beverages, snacks, safety equipment and travel arrangements will be provided by the association and Nevada Division of Minerals. Tour attendees should be prepared for a moderate amount of walking and wear closed-toe shoes, long pants and long-sleeved shirts.

To register, visit amiando.com/PFKATKA.html.

HARD ROCK CAFE, CIS OF NEVADA TEAM UP FOR INSTRUMENT DRIVE

In honor of Music in our Schools Month, the Hard Rock Cafe is partnering with Communities In Schools of Nevada to host an nstrument drive and fundraiser through March in support of local students and music programs across the valley.

Throughout the month, both Hard Rock Cafe Las Vegas locations, 4475 Paradise Road and 3771 Las Vegas Blvd. South, Suite 120, will collect donations of new or gently used instruments. Those who donate will receive 20 percent off their total check that day.

Both locations also will allow guests the option to Round Up for Charity on their bill, with donations going to CIS of Nevada.

For more information, visit hardrock.com/las-vegas. For more information about CIS of Nevada, visit cisnevada.org.

NEVADA CONNECTIONS ACADEMY PLANS INFORMATION SESSIONS

Nevada Connections Academy, a virtual public charter school for students in kindergarten through 12th grade, plans to host information sessions regarding enrollment for the 2015-16 school year. Sessions are planned for: April 1, 4 to 5 p.m., McDonald’s, 8120 S. Eastern Ave.; April 13, 5:30 to 7 p.m., Las Vegas Library, 833 Las Vegas Blvd. North.

For more information, visit connectionsacademy.com.

UNLV LAW STUDENTS TO TEACH FREE INCOME TAX CLASS

UNLV law students are set to teach free income tax education classes during a Low Income Taxpayer Clinic scheduled from 2 to 4 p.m. April 16 at the West Charleston Library, 6301 W. Charleston Blvd. Under the supervision of a Boyd School of Law professor and a Nevada Legal Services attorney, UNLV law students will discuss filing status, earned income tax credit, child tax credit, premium tax credit and penalties for not having health coverage under the Affordable Care Act. An open question-and-answer session will follow.

For more information, visit tinyurl.com/nqkejqm.

SONS OF NORWAY OFFERS SCHOLARSHIP

Norwegian-American students who are at least high school seniors living in Clark County can apply for a scholarship from the Vegas Viking Lodge of the Sons of Norway.

Applications must be postmarked by April 10 and are available at vegasviking.com. The scholarships are worth at least $500 each and must be used for full-time, post-high school studies. Winners are chosen based on grades, financial need, involvement in extracurricular activities, and the content and quality of their essays, including how they express appreciation for their Norwegian heritage.

Tax-deductible contributions to the scholarship fund, including naming gifts, are welcome. If preferred, a donor’s name may be kept confidential. To donate, a check payable to the Vegas Viking Sons of Norway Scholarship Fund should be mailed to treasurer Warren Halvorsen, 830 Kingston Springs Way, Las Vegas, NV 89123-3643.

For more information, call Suzan Sibert, co-chairwoman of the scholarship committee, at 702-645-6666.

UNLV TO HOST FESTIVAL OF COMMUNITIES APRIL 11

The Festival of Communities, a celebration of cultural traditions, is set from noon to 5 p.m. April 11 at the Alumni Walk at UNLV, 4505 S. Maryland Parkway. Live music, dancing, readings and performances are planned, along with international food tastings, booths with displays of art and culture, balloon art, face painting and more.

The event is free and open to the public. For more information, visit tinyurl.com/ly7uezr.

REBEL PREVIEW TO OFFER LOOK AT COLLEGE LIFE

Prospective students are invited to learn about life as a UNLV student at Rebel Preview from 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. April 11. Students and families can get questions answered and tour the campus at 4505 S. Maryland Parkway, along with residence halls and specialty areas. Activities and informational sessions are planned, including discussions of degree programs and qualifying for scholarships and prizes and meeting current UNLV Rebels.

For more information, visit unlv.edu/event/rebel-preview.

LEADERSHIP TRAINING SET FOR PEOPLE WITH DEVELOPMENTAL DISABILITIES

Partners in Policymaking plans to offer leadership training for people with developmental disabilities, parents and family members. The training is designed to teach the power of advocacy and change the way people with disabilities are supported, viewed, taught, live and work. The program will provide information about issues and policies related to disability and develop participant competencies to become more effective in influencing policy development at all levels.

Parents of children with developmental disabilities and adults with developmental disabilities are encouraged to apply. Classes are planned from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. once a month through August at the University of Nevada Cooperative Extension’s Lifelong Learning Center, 8050 Paradise Road. Participants are expected to commit to all classes or complete make-up assignments. Remaining dates are: April 18, May 16, June 20, July 19 (in Reno) and Aug. 15. Participants will receive a stipend to help with child care and transportation costs.

For more information or to apply, visit nced.info/pip.

SPLASHDOWN FOR KIDS TO RAISE FUNDS FOR NONPROFIT GROUPS

Communities In Schools of Nevada and After-School All-Stars Las Vegas announce that tickets for the second annual Splashdown For Kids are on sale. The event is planned for April 25 and 26 at Wet‘n’Wild water park and offers a preview to summer with proceeds benefiting both local nonprofits.

Tickets are $25 and include entry to Wet‘n’Wild. For tickets, visit shop.omniticket.com/WWL/index.cfm and use the promo code “CISASASDAY.” Select general admission tickets, enter the code, and ticket options will become available.

For more information about Communities In Schools, visit cisnevada.org.

For more information about After-School All-Stars, visit asaslv.org.