Picking RBs early in draft. Do you think the lack of success with picking running backs early in the draft will scare Broncos general manager John Elway from taking somebody like Derrick Henry of Alabama?

A.C., Parker

Kiz: Want a fun NFL fact to know and tell? Go back through every draft since 2011. Look at the top 125 players selected in those five drafts. The 625 choices have produced six running backs who have earned a berth in the Pro Bowl, but only two offensive tackles who have been invited to the league’s all-star game. Maybe something to consider for folks who believe it would be safer and smarter for the Broncos to select an offensive tackle in the first round rather than a running back. So if not Henry with the 31st pick overall, expect the Broncos to beef up the running attack later in the draft, because the run is what makes coach Gary Kubiak’s offense go. How about Alex Collins of Arkansas or C.J. Prosise of Notre Dame?

Suspend Reyes. The Rockies should be hoping shortstop Jose Reyes is suspended for a long time without pay.

Michael, Denver

Kiz: Although none of us here at Kickin’ Headquarters is a threat to be nominated for the Supreme Court, we do believe in that quaint, old notion of innocent until proven guilty. So we’ll let a judge and jury determine the truth during Reyes’ criminal trial in Hawaii. At the time the trade went down last summer, I thought sending Troy Tulowitzki to Toronto in exchange for Reyes, whose defensive range seems to be weighed down by his $22 million salary, and young pitching prospects was a bad deal. Now it has a chance to be among the worst trades in Denver sports history.

Oops, wrong guy. I am so sorry, Kiz. You were not the one I was angry with. I should have checked the e-mail address used by my secretary. My e-mail was not supposed to go to you, but to Mike Klis of KUSA.

Richard, master of social media

Kiz: No worries, my friend. It happens all the time. An irate sports fan composes some clever phrases, calling me a freakin’ IDIOT (yes, in all caps) and suggesting I quit my job to get in the garbage business, because all I do is deal in garbage. But then, a few days later, in a moment of quiet reflection, there’s that oops! moment. Hint: Klis is the handsome one. He works in television. By the way, I know Klis always appreciates being lambasted by folks who are actually mad at me.

Trump a redhead? And today’s parting shot teaches me something I did not know: Donald Trump’s hair is red?

Kiz, you’re quite the provocateur, better even than a redheaded presidential candidate.

Gary, Denver

Mark Kiszla: mkiszla@denverpost.com or @markkiszla