Topics: Editor's Picks, Fox News, josh duggar, Megyn Kelly, Innovation News, Entertainment News, News

Two of the Duggar sisters who were molested by brother Josh Duggar told their stories to Megyn Kelly last night, in an interview that was often heartbreaking — but also filled with forgiveness and a strong defense of their brother and the way their parents handled the situation in the home.

The sisters told Kelly that they did not know what was had happened until their parents later told them about. Jessa Duggar said that while her brother’s actions were “not permissable,” that he was not a child molester or a pedophile. Jill Duggar said they were speaking out to set the record straight. And both were critical of tabloid media coverage and angry about the invasion of their privacy.

Here are the seven most crucial exchanges — six between the Duggar sisters and Kelly, and then one from Fox’s post-interview analysis with “media critic” Howard Kurtz.

1. Josh was “a little too curious about girls”

MEGYN KELLY: You are going on the record as being two of Josh’s victims. JILL DUGGAR DILLARD: Uhm. KELLY: It feels strange to you, that word? DILLARD: You know, I think we didn’t choose to come out and tell our story. This wouldn’t have been our first choice. But now that the story has been brought about, we really feel like as we’ve been seeing these headlines, as we’ve been seeing things that people are saying about our family, we feel like as victims we have to come out and speak. This is something like we chose to do. Nobody asked us to do this. Jessa and I were talking and we were like, oh, my goodness, most of the stuff out there is lies, it’s not true. And so for truth sake, we want to come out and set the record straight. KELLY: When I said, you know, “victims,” you furrowed your brow a little bit. Do you feel like the victim of a molestation? JESSA DUGGAR SEEWALD: Well, I think in the case of what Josh did, it was very wrong. I’m not going to justify anything he did or say it was okay. Not permissible. But I do want to speak up in his defense against people who are calling him a child molester or a pedophile or a rapist some people are saying. That is so overboard and a lie really. I mean, people will get mad at me for saying that but I’m like I can say this. You know? I was one of the victims, so I can speak out and I can say this and set the record straight here. Like in Josh’s case he was a boy, young boy in puberty and a little too curious about girls and that got him into some trouble. And he made some bad choices but really the extent of it was mild inappropriate touching on fully clothed victims. Most of it while girls were sleeping.

2. “He’s very subtle anyway … he was very sly”

KELLY: You said you were feeling angry. But do you get the chance to express that anger to him? Did you fight? SEEWALD: No. I think for us our situation is so different than most girls in that he was — he’s very subtle anyway. Like he knew in his mind my actions are wrong and I have bad intentions but he was very sly, like the girls didn’t catch on, you know. It was like, okay, if you catch the girl sleeping, you know, like a quick feel or whatever. Or it’s like, you know, if you’re just not really aware, you know, in the situation that happened when the girls were awake, it’s like they weren’t aware what was happening. It was very subtle. And so I think that for us it’s like, okay, we realize this is serious — but at the same time it wasn’t like a horror story or like this terrible thing. KELLY: That’s one of the headline covers, “House of Horrors.” SEEWALD: Ridiculous. KELLY: That is not how you view it? SEEWALD: No. And I think my parents, they acted, I can see looking back as an adult, now they handled the situation very well. They set up safety guards in our house. And, you know, they sent Josh away.

3. “We’re not going to do this hide and seek thing where two people go off and hide together”

KELLY: Did you feel scared at all that he might resume? DILLARD: You know, when this happened, when my dad and mom sat down with us and shared what happened and Josh asked us to forgive him, we had to make that choice that I think everyone has to make and my dad explained to us, he said you know there’s a difference between forgiveness and trust. That’s not the same thing. You know, you forgive someone and then you have boundaries. Forgiveness with boundaries and so trust comes later. You know, Josh destroyed that trust at the beginning, and so he had to rebuild that. And so I think when he came back, that was his — that was his point of, okay — well, actually, when he asked us to forgive him, that was the point of rebuilding. KELLY: That was the beginning. What were the safeguards that were put into place just to make sure? DILLARD: I was going to say not, you know, being alone. My parents said, okay, we’re not going to do this hide and seek thing where two people go off and hide together — and not baby-sitting the girls. KELLY: At night in your room? DILLARD: Locks on the doors, you know, everybody’s in bed, girls in the girls’ room, boys in the boys’ room. And so, yes. And as a mother now, I look back and I think, you know, my parents did such an amazing job. For me, even when we went through the DHS investigation, they complimented my parents on what an amazing job they did through that process. And so, I think not only taking the legal actions that they did and then going the extra mile and I see as a mom I hope that I can set the same safeguards in my family that they did and, you know, reaching the heart of their children. And not only trying to take care of Josh but us girls.