The Eye

'Shahs Of Sunset' Star Reza Farahan Talks Season 4 Drama, Claims 'I Don't Care Where Mike Sticks His Dool'

SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

(Photo : Getty Images/Vivien Killilea) "Shahs of Sunset" star Reza Farahan recently revealed that his wedding is back on.

Rumors have been taking center stage in the latest episodes of "Shahs of Sunset." After Golnesa "G.G." Gharachedaghi revealed to her fellow cast members that Mike Shouhed had tried to make a move on her during their trip to Turkey, Asa Soltan Rahmati and Reza Farahan reacted on their respective blogs.



"I was dying on the inside when Golnesa dropped the nuclear bomb on Mike right in front of everyone," Asa wrote. "My heart broke. The whole thing was like a toxic bomb that was bound to burst, because it was ignored for so long. From here on it's damage control."



Even Reza, who is a close friend of GG, believes that her friend could have handled the situation a little differently. "G.G.'s decision to confront Mike at Shervin's party was truly disastrous because of how it affected Jessica," Reza stated.



Reza went on to say, "This was information that was dropped in my lap, I wasn't involved, and I wanted G.G. to address Mike directly. I know Mike very well, and I truly don't care where he sticks his dool, as long as it's outside of our circle. His actions, and by actions I mean the blame game, created a painful wedge between "us" and Mike."



"Mike and G.G. are both in the crew, they can deal with one another as they see fit in the heat of the moment. But including Jessica was a mistake and ultimately made the situation bigger and worse than it needed to be."



G.G. tried to justify spilling the news in the manner that she did by saying that Mike treated her badly after she denied his advances. From then on, things between them kept growing until it reached an uncomfortable level, not just for Mike and G.G., but for all the stars of "Shahs of Sunset."



For her part, Jessica wasn't happy about hearing the news at the party. She screamed at Mike and demanded that they leave. Luckily, the pair worked things out in the months following the filming of the scene. In fact, the two recently tied the knot in Los Angeles.



New episodes of "Shahs of Sunset" air Monday nights on Bravo.



Tell us! Whose side are you on? Do you believe Mike or G.G? Was G.G.'s way of attacking Mike with the allegations right or wrong? Let us know in the comments below.







SIGN UP TO RECEIVE THE LATEST NEWS FROM FASHION&STYLE

© 2015 Fashion & Style.com All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.