Buy Photo Robbie Sebastien, owner of Sebastien-Dupre Fine Jewelry, displays handmade Mardi Gras masks and headgear at his store, located at 822 S. Main St. in Opelousas. He says that after he posted photos of the masks on the store’s Facebook page, he received “a lot of phone calls.” (Photo: Freddie Herpin, Daily World)Buy Photo

Around here, one winter holiday season spills right into another.

If you don’t believe that, you haven’t traded out the Chirstmas ornaments on your tree for purple, green and gold Mardi Gras bling.

The spirit of carnival doesn’t only spice up households and parties. It’s a major selling season for local suppliers to parade krewes, formal galas and every kind of revelry in between.

“I sell Mardi Gras before I sell Christmas,” said Mona McMurtry, co-owner of P&M Flowers and Gifts on South Union Street in Opelousas. “People who are doing Mardi Gras plan ahead.”

Before Thanksgiving, she said, the people who sew beading onto costumes and sequins onto ball gowns are already getting to work. Her store sells those adornments, along with garlands, feathers, wreaths, ribbons, doubloons and throw beads by the gross.

“It’s not just the parades in town,” said McMurty, the “M” in her company’s name. “There are parades at the schools, lots of parties...(People) buy a lot of supplies for centerpieces to decorate the tables, then have contests for the best-decorated tables.”

Although carnival season begins on the 12th day of Christmas — Jan. 6 — the final few weeks before Mardi Gras are prime time for small business owners like McMurtry.

Affordable Special Events on north La. 182 in Opelousas sees a bump in its tuxedo rentals this time of year.”We have a lot of last-minute customers for the tuxedos,” said saleswoman Felecia Semien. “They like the Mardi Gras vests and ties” in traditional purple, green and gold, along with mask, plaid and fleur-de-lis prints.

“The men try to match it to what the women wear — she gets the dress first,” Semien said. This season, she added, length matters: tailcoat tuxedos and gowns with mermaid trails are popular.

There’s also extra demand for catering services, fresh floral arrangements, costumes and masks, like the ones on display at Sebastien-Dupré Jewelers on South Main Street in Opelousas.

Each is a distinct assembly of similar elements: screen door mesh, gaudy fabric, painted embellishments and oversized features. These hand-crafted masks perch amid the fine jewelry cases and gifts like grotesque visitors.

They don’t stay for long, owner Robbie Sebastien said. The masks by artist Gerry Soileau, who calls herself Seaux and Seaux, are so popular they’ve sold steadily each of the two years he’s carried them.

She also creates traditional Mardi Gras costumes and capichons — the distinctive pointed caps. After Sebastien posted a few on his store’s Facebook page, he said, “I’ve had a lot of phone calls about them.

“The masks and the capichons are the biggest sellers,” he said. Those items range from $20 to $35 and “cater to more of a country Mardi Gras for people in Washington, Eunice and Mamou,” Sebastien said.

City customers also make special purchases during carnival time, he said. “The debutantes are looking for pearl earrings and necklaces to go with their ball gowns,” and their parents, escorts and others who attend fancy dress balls freshen their looks with new jewelry.

Sebastien is a veteran of the cotillion scene. For the fifth consecutive year, he’s captain — in effect, master of ceremonies — of the Opelousas Garden Club’s Mardi Gras Bal Masque.

He said he loves the season for its intrigue, “just the feeling of being outside and unknown with masks on,” and for the atmosphere in his shop.

“It’s not as stressful and deadline-oriented as Christmas,” Sebastien said. The overlap of carnival season and Valentine’s Day is also good for business.

Once Ash Wednesday arrives and the 40 austere days of Lent set in, he and others expect a quiet spell until Easter.

Although the pause is brief, business owners do look forward to winding down.

“Let’s just say,” McMurtry laughed, “I’m closed Mardi Gras Day.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/02/07/carnival-delivers-beads-baubles-bounty-businesses/23067927/