With hairspray fumes and the whirr of razors in the air, the arena was just like any other hair salon, except the clients were on four legs and had no say in what they would look like.

One dog ended up sporting Ninja Turtles nails. Its neighbour became Daisy Duck, dyed many colours with its pre-tinted forelock teased into a pink bow.



Creativity was critical at the national dog grooming competition, where cuteness and balance ruled over all.

'Akermanis', the Stylish Standard Poodle, at the 2014 Pet Industry Expo. Photo: Dallas Kilponen

"It is an art, and art has to please and catch your eye," said Irina Pinkusevich, who was flown from the US to judge the annual event at the 2014 Pet Expo. "Cuteness is one of the aspects because it has to be pleasant to the public's eye."

Advertisement

The prize is partly about the impact of the finished design, but also the workmanship that conjured it.



"I look for a really sharp colour that doesn't bleed one into another and, of course, grooming skills, which is scissoring and clippering done smoothly and technically well and sound," Ms Pinkusevich said.



Dog groomer Alyssa Ward works on the nails of a Standard Poodle named Lamorre. Photo: Dallas Kilponen

The pet industry event was held at Redfern's Australian Technology Park on Friday and Saturday. The grooming competitions involved 52 dogs competing in categories ranging from creative and nail art, as well as a new round: Asian influence.

Groomers had spent months preparing their dogs for each event, growing and dying their fur. They had two hours to cut their dog's fur into elaborate designs.



NSW north coast groomer Tamara James, took first prize for transforming her poodle Akermanis into a surfer riding a wave, complete with a seagull-shaped tail and a tropical fish cut from his hind leg hair. For her, the win was the end of a long road of preparation.

Ms James had spent two years turning her dog's fur into dreadlocks and the past few months dying his coat in slabs of black and swathes of blue.

"We used hairspray, gel, hair colour and lots of product," Ms James said.

Stylist Joanne Davis, who entered the nail art category with dog Oscar, said grooming was becoming more popular in Australia.

"We want the dog to look their best," she said. "The clients love it and it certainly gets the dog a lot of attention. The options for dogs now are just endless."