Following the deaths of three local young adults in a collision with a wrong-way driver on Interstate 80, friends and former co-workers at the Granite Bay Chick-fil-A organized and put on a fundraiser for the victims’ families.

20-year-old Matt Azar – a former Chick-fil-A employee – was driving the 1994 Buick Regal with which the wrong-way driver collided.

Azar, along with his passengers, Kendra Langham and Mathew Beardwitt, both 18, were pronounced dead at the scene. All had lived in the Granite Bay area.

From 5 to 9 p.m. Wednesday, patrons made donations while the establishment contributed all revenue generated during those hours to support the cause.

Families of all three victims were present.

The event, promoted by Chick-fil-A employees and on Facebook, garnered hundreds of customers, as drive-through and cash register lines wrapped around the establishment and throughout the shopping center parking lot.

Local businesses have agreed to make donations, with at least one agreeing to match the amount generated by the fundraiser.

Gage Bergstrom, shift manager at Chick-fil-A, had followed and reported a 2006 Chrysler 300, the driver of which was later found to be 24-year-old Roseville resident Aaron Jordon Caudillo.

Bergstrom called to report Caudillo as a suspected drunken driver. The California Highway Patrol has stated that police suspect that drugs and/or alcohol were involved, but no test results have been made public. Caudillo was hospitalized after the accident with major injuries.

“I came in the next day and said, ‘We need to do this (fundraiser),’ mostly because I reported the driver,” Bergstrom said. “I saw them that night before it happened, and I saw the accident after it happened. … It was a weird day.”

Nearly every staff member at the Granite Bay Chick-fil-A location had known Azar. Several had met Langham through her sister, who also worked for Chick-fil-A.

“My friendship was with Matt Azar, because he used to work here,” said Timmy James, kitchen director. “I knew him really well and able to get to know him more outside of work, too. Kendra I had met a few times from her sister.”

James said that each of the families had spoken with Chick-fil-A staff members, expressing that they “really appreciated” them organizing the fundraiser.

“We had to get permission from all three families first,” Bergstrom explained. “We called each family. We had to hunt down Matt Azar’s mom’s number, but once we did that, we got it going.”

Bergstrom said there was no trepidation on the organization’s behalf.

“Each store is run by its one owner,” he said. “We have to be careful what we put Chick-fil-A’s logo on. … Right now, this is a good thing. We’re helping support a community family and that’s what Chick-fil-A is all about, so it was no problem getting Chick-fil-A’s name on it.”

Chick-fil-A did not disclose how many patrons it served or how much money it raised, but the Roseville location on Pleasant Grove Boulevard shared numbers from a similar event with Granite Bay staff.

“Pleasant Grove told us they did this once before and that was just for one family,” Bergstrom said. “They had, in one hour, $3,000 come in; the second hour, $4,000; and one after that, $3,000.”

Bergstrom said that a typical weekday evening hour would generate about $800 in revenue.

“The event was short, but in that short period of time, so many people were able to come, see the families and pay their respects,” said franchise owner Wade Roepke. “It was really, really cool to be able to see the community come out and support the families like that.”