Please enable Javascript to watch this video

FAYETTEVILLE (KFSM) - The Fayetteville Police Department responded to 20 calls of break-ins Friday morning (Dec. 26), according to the department's online call log.

Police said unlocked vehicles on several streets were broken into, but they said no one was injured in the incidents. They said the calls began at 3:56 a.m. and continued through 7:46 a.m. To see a list of the homes affected, click the image below.

Linda Cotterman lives on Woolsey Avenue, and said someone broke into her car around 6:45 a.m. She said it couldn't have come at a worse time.

"It's very disheartening," she said. "It was just in disarray. They took a lot of stuff out of the console and the glove box was open."

Cotterman said she lost her husband to lung cancer three weeks ago and is worried about his blank checks, which were stolen out of her car.

"The bank put an alert on our account so if any checks come through they can check the signatures on them," Cotterman said.

Scott Caldwell lives on Greenvalley Avenue, one of the streets where cars were broken into. He said he thinks the suspects are teenagers.

"There was a bunch of car trash out in the middle of the street," Caldwell said. "I talked to a neighbor down the street. [The suspects] had just gone car to car and whatever they found they were just running down the street and letting it go. Hair clips and receipts and stuff like that."

Of the 20 breaking-and-entering calls made Friday morning, 16 of them were concentrated on the east side of North Gregg Avenue in a neighborhood that includes North Woolsey Avenue, West Miller Street, North Yates Avenue, West Poplar Street and North Greenvalley Avenue, according to the police call log.

The other four breaking-and-entering calls made Friday morning came from residences on the west side North Gregg Avenue, according to the police call log. Three of them came from North Janice Avenue and one was made from West Sycamore Street, the log shows.