CONTACTS:

Paola Torres, AARP, 202-434-2555, ptorres@aarp.org

Carla Clunis, Coburn Communication, 646-633-4971, carla.clunis@coburnww.com

WASHINGTON, DC — Looking Ahead to 2015: With the year soon coming to an end, the December issue of AARP Bulletin takes a look at what’s next for 2015. Inside the 7-page guide are featured trends in health and wellness, technology, fitness, work and money, fashion, jobs, travel and more. (Page 19)

Jim Cramer’s stock picks: Stock-market headwinds aside, in­cluding the probability of rising in­terest rates and potential geopolitical unrest, AARP Bulletin highlights Jim’s favorite sector-and-stock themes for the coming years. (Page 22)

Stock-market headwinds aside, in­cluding the probability of rising in­terest rates and potential geopolitical unrest, highlights Jim’s favorite sector-and-stock themes for the coming years. (Page 22) Dr. Francis Collins on possible biomedical breakthroughs in 2015: From brain health to cancer treatments to promising new vaccines. (Page 19)

From brain health to cancer treatments to promising new vaccines. (Page 19) Tech expert, David Pogue on next year’s tech innovations: In this issue of AARP Bulletin find out about the explosion of home products connected to the internet, the revolution of health monitoring with wearable tech and smarter smartphones. (Page 23)

In this issue of find out about the explosion of home products connected to the internet, the revolution of health monitoring with wearable tech and smarter smartphones. (Page 23) Jane Bryant Quinn on Market and Rate Swings: AARP Bulletin personal finance columnist delves into what Americans should and shouldn’t be worried about as New Year stories hit about interest rates and stock market predictions. (Page 23)

personal finance columnist delves into what Americans should and shouldn’t be worried about as New Year stories hit about interest rates and stock market predictions. (Page 23) Scam Alert columnist Sid Kirchheimer on Medical ID Theft: As the government continues to push for digital medical records, Kirchheimer provides insight on what you should know to keep scammers at bay in this issue of AARP Bulletin. (Page 22)

Jo Ann Jenkins Toasts to the Future: As the last of the Baby Boomers turned 50 in 2014, next year will mark the first of the Generation Xers to celebrate the 50th birthday milestone in 2015. 2015 also marks the 50th anniversaries of Medicare, Medicaid, and the Older Americans Act as well as the 80th anniversary of Social Security. AARP CEO Jo Ann Jenkins acknowledges these celebrations in this month’s issue of AARP Bulletin and shines a spotlight on the need for these programs to remain strong for both current and future generations. (Page 34)

A Conversation with George W. Bush: The former president talks to AARP Bulletin about his new book, 41: A Portrait of My Father, the lessons he learned from George H.W. Bush, the 41st President, and his blind date with Tricia Nixon. (Page 6)

Top 10 Most Dangerous Cities for Pedestrians: Every two hours, a pedestrian in America dies in a traffic accident. Accounting for 21 percent of these deaths are seniors aged 65 and older. The December issue of AARP Bulletin ranks the top 10 most dangerous cities in America for pedestrians alongside a special report that details what the threats are and solutions on how to alleviate these perils. (Page 12)

Special Safety Report: While people 65 and older make up only 13 percent of the nation’s population, they account for nearly 65 percent of all fatalities associated with products under the Consumer Product Safety Commission’s jurisdiction. From bedding and ladders to appliances and electrical fixtures, this month’s issue of AARP Bulletin takes a look at the top hazards for seniors to avoid and the CPSC’s new Senior Safety Initiative. (Page 8)

Wanda Sykes and Her Many Mistaken Identities: In this issue of AARP Bulletin, Wanda Sykes shares a few run-ins with enthusiastic fans who were convinced she was another one of their celebrity favorites. Wanda has heard it all – from Florence from The Jeffersons, Willona from Good Times, to even famed singer/songwriter Lenny Kravitz (Page 42).

For exclusive online features and original daily content, visit the AARP Bulletin (www.aarp.org/bulletin) website, the only daily, go-to news source for people 50+. Features include exclusive online columns such as Ask Ms. Medicare, Financially Speaking, Scam Alert, Save a Buck and more.



To schedule interviews with an editor from AARP Bulletin or to receive a complimentary issue, please contact Carla Clunis at 646-633-4971 or carla.clunis@coburnww.com or Paolo Torres at 202-434-2555 or ptorres@aarp.org.

###

About AARP Bulletin

The definitive news source for AARP’s members, AARP Bulletin (www.aarp.org/bulletin) reaches more than 23.5 million households each month in print, with additional news and in-depth coverage online. Covering health and health policy, Medicare, Social Security, consumer protection, personal finance, and AARP state and national news developments, AARP Bulletin delivers the story behind the key issues confronting 50+ America. The monthly consumer-oriented news publication has become a must-read for congressional lawmakers and Washington opinion leaders, and it provides AARP members with pertinent information they need to know.

About AARP



AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.