How to help To volunteer at Colorado Reptile Humane Society, visit corhs.org and contact Teri Moody at moody@corhs.org.

LONGMONT -- Sarah Sumler understands why some would struggle to cuddle a legless, furless animal that feels chilly to the touch and rarely blinks.

She grew up fearing snakes and first held one -- a sheltered ball python named Pyxis with a girth as thick as a paper towel tube -- only after volunteering in August at Colorado Reptile Humane Society in Longmont.

Working as a reptile care assistant gave her the exposure she needed to get over her common phobia.

Really, though, her change of heart began when she read the job description recently floated again by the nonprofit organization to attract more help.

The listing reads that, besides cleaning enclosures, feeding the animals and checking on hibernating pets, successful volunteer applicants must "provide socialization" for the reptiles.

Sumler and CORHS' 15-member volunteer corps call negative perceptions -- along with the belief that reptiles come with a pet rock's personality -- stigmatizing and untrue.

No one would compare the ball python Pyxis to Fido, a dog who wags his tail, responds to his name and fetches.

But hold up on ruling out reptiles, because they do not fit our society's "mammal-centric" world, said A.

Advertisement

E. Nash, the executive director who established the nonprofit Colorado Reptile Rescue in 1999 and in 2003 changed its name.

"It's OK to be scared of these guys, because most of us didn't grow up with them," she said. "But remember that what we decide is a companion animal is highly personal. You could have a goldfish that is a companion animal. It's about sharing time."

Where the magic happens

Nash philosophizes about reptiles at her table while picking meal worms from a bowl of dry oatmeal to feed to Darryl, a bearded dragon who stands about as tall as a soup can.

A.E. Nash, executive director of Colorado Reptile Humane Society, shows a blue-tongued skink at her facility Wednesday. Colorado Reptile currently has more than 100 reptiles. ( LEWIS GEYER )

She said that 15 years ago, she adopted an iguana named Widget, her fourth adopted iguana in six months.

"That sort of put the light bulb on for me that we needed a reptile shelter," she said.

So, Nash repurposed most of the 1,850-square-foot home she shares with her husband to shelter up to 100 reptiles.

Turtles consistently make up half of that population and live, depending on their size, in various parts of the house.

For instance, two of the three bedrooms double as small habitat rooms for turtles, iguanas, geckos and bearded dragons.

Larger turtles also live in glass enclosures on the flagstone fireplace hearth in the living room.

A bearded dragon rests at Colorado Reptile Humane Society on Wednesday. ( LEWIS GEYER )

A zoo of more reptiles -- including a 22-pound, 4½-foot long Asian water monitor that splashes in and out of a near-full circular livestock tank -- roost and crawl in spacious pens with floor-to-ceiling glass walls that allow full southern-exposure sun.

"The animal welfare world says that they shouldn't be pets," said Nash, a doctoral candidate in biology at the University of Northern Colorado in Greeley. "But our focus needs to be on any animal allowed to be in our community, and these animals are often underserved and overlooked."

What's in it for you

Nash owns a dog and cats and loves snuggling on the couch with them to watch television.

But having sheltered hundreds of reptiles over the years, she knows she can form relationships with reptiles and that they come with different personalities.

Bearded dragons such as Darryl enjoy propping on the kitchen table and eating hand-fed meal worms.

A green iguana, such as Mel, flattens her back and opens her mouth at human interaction -- her way of raising her hackles and hissing.

Volunteers who appreciate the complexity and diversity of this type of animal stand the best chance of providing the socialization that completes a reptile's picture of health as much as a dog's, Nash said.

"I do think it's good to ask, 'What's in it for me?'" she said. "I mean, everybody has something else to do with their Saturday."

But many volunteers undergo the two-hour orientation and commit to more than the minimum four-hour Saturday shift every month because of the intrigue factor and the ongoing learning curve.

"Cats and dogs are bred to like us. But for a smaller group of people, birds and reptiles are very intriguing," Nash said. "I will never be able to teach an iguana how to herd sheep. But caring for them expands your mind, and that interests people."

That was true for Teri Moody.

The Broomfield resident began volunteering in 2009 to learn more about reptiles before buying a pet snake.

"I learn something new every time I volunteer, which inspired me to go back to school at night to study biology," said Moody, who works the day shift at a Boulder post office.

"Did you know that the best way that you can handle a snake is to be a tree? That is because normally anything that would pick up a snake in the wild is going to be a predator," she said.

Sumler, a writer living in Boulder, got interested in learning more about snakes after she spotted a tangle of garter snakes by Boulder Creek this spring.

"They are intriguing, and caring for them is so science-oriented as compared to (volunteering) at a dog and cat rescue," she said. "Many reptiles can't thermo-regulate. They have lighting issues. So, a lot of their care has to be very precise. And working here, I get to see the behavior, and seeing the behavior helps me get to know each reptile's mode of being, which is very different than what I thought."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.