Recently, NETWORK staff members accompanied three young women to Capitol Hill so they could describe how the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) and Child Tax Credit dramatically impact their families.

One told congressional staffers about her single mother, who was able to repair her old car so she could drive to work and help finance her education. One was able to buy clothes and food for her own children, and another talked about how the credits helped ensure that her family’s basic needs were met so she could go on to college and get a better job.

ADVERTISEMENT

The mothers in all three families were employed and two also had husbands with jobs. However, their families’ earnings were insufficient to meet all of their basic needs. In order to repair the car or pay for school they needed the EITC and Child Tax Credit.

One would think that Congress would pay attention to these women’s real-life stories, especially since there is already bipartisan agreement that the EITC and Child Tax Credit are powerful tools to alleviate poverty throughout our nation. Inexplicably, however, legislators have not yet prioritized them during their current tax deliberations. Instead, they voted in April to repeal the estate tax for families at the very top of the economic ladder, which would cost our country $270 billion over the next ten years. And in May, they voted to make permanent an expanded pro-business tax credit – while more business-friendly tax credits are already in the pipeline.

It’s time to re-prioritize our tax goals for the good of our nation.

Groups across the ideological spectrum understand that EITC and the Child Tax Credit are pro-work and pro-family. The American Enterprise Institute agrees that the “EITC lifts millions of people, including children, out of poverty” while the U.S. Census Bureau backs that up with statistics.

And the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities (CBPP) notes that both tax credits:

Reward work while reducing poverty

Result in improved health of babies and their mothers

Improve education outcomes for children

Increase college enrollment of students from low-income communities

Lead to increased work and earnings as the children reach adulthood

Boost employment and earnings, which results in higher Social Security benefits after retirement.

CBPP further points out that more than 16 million people – including 8 million children – would either fall into poverty or deeper into poverty if Congress fails to make permanent important provisions of the two tax credits.

On May 13, Rep. Paul Ryan Paul RyanHouse passes resurrected LGBT measure Ryan seeks to put stamp on GOP in Trump era Overnight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns MORE (R-Wis.), who chairs the House Ways and Means Committee and who supports the EITC, wrote in a letter to the Catholic-Evangelical Leadership Summit on Overcoming Poverty that the “best type of aid encourages work, builds up families, and connects people with their communities.” The EITC and the Child Tax Credit serve all those purposes.

I trust that Ryan and the rest of Congress will act quickly to make permanent key provisions of the EITC and Child Tax Credit that expire in 2017. They should also vote to expand the small EITC for low-income workers not raising children so this group does not continue to be the only one taxed into poverty.

On June 3, Pope Francis said to an audience in St. Peter’s Square that “we must always look for ways to strengthen and support families, especially poorer ones.” The EITC and Child Tax Credit help low-income workers meet their families’ basic human needs, alleviate poverty, and strengthen the communities in which they live. In short, they make good economic and moral sense. It’s time for Congress to act.

Campbell (@sr_simone) is executive director of NETWORK, A National Catholic Social Justice Lobby, and author of A Nun on the Bus: How All of Can Create Hope, Change, and Community.