A National Labor Relations Board (NLRB) judge has ruled that LA based Cedars-Sinai Medical Center must stop using its mandatory arbitration agreements to bar employees from bringing class action lawsuits and needs to fix provisions in its agreements that could lead employees to think they cannot file unfair labor charges.

Administrative Law Judge Ariel Sotolongo, ruled that the major hospital system violated the National Labor Relations Act (NLRA) by requiring its employees to sign an arbitration agreement that workers believe hampers their right to file NLRB charges, and by enforcing the agreement in court to preclude class or collective action by its employees.

“Cedars-Sinai must rescind the mandatory and binding arbitration agreements in all of its forms, or revise them in all of its forms,” Judge Sotolongo says.

The hospital is currently a defendant in a class action lawsuit in a California state court, in which it has moved to compel arbitration against the plaintiff. Judge Sotolongo says the move to compel arbitration violated the NLRA. Judge Sotolongo also says the hospital must tell the court that it no longer opposes the plaintiff’s claims on the basis of the mandatory arbitration agreement, which has been rescinded or revised because it was found unlawful.

Judge Sotolongo’s decision is based on decisions in other cases which says its illegal for companies to force individual arbitration on employees seeking class labor law claims. Even though the Fifth Circuit has scrapped the decision in these cases, Judge Sotolongo says they’re both still in effect, for now. “I am compelled to follow the board’s decisions unless the Supreme Court overrules the board,” the Judge says.

A Cedars-Sinai spokesman said it believes its agreements are legal and that the NLRB judge rendered his decision without all of the facts. “We believe that our agreement fully protects employee rights and complies with the law, and we are examining our options regarding the judge’s decision,” the spokesman said. “We are particularly disappointed that the administrative law judge would not permit us to introduce factual and expert evidence demonstrating the ability of Cedars-Sinai employees to understand our agreement, and that he made his determination without the benefit of that important information.”

Arbitration agreements can eliminate unnecessary trials and significantly lighten a heavy court docket. However, an arbitration agreement that says this is the only remedy an individual has robs a person of their day in court. There is nothing wrong with arbitrating first to determine if a resolution can be reached. But when arbitrating is the “only” option at a resolution, that is when arbitration becomes unfair.

Source: NLRB Judge Orders Cedars-Sinai To Change Arbitration Pacts

Join the Discussion