By

After 15 years as a Certified Public Accountant, Carrie Caan decided to get her real estate license in March 2014. She has been selling real estate for more than a year. “So far, so good. I worked as a CPA in the estate and gifting specialty. I got my undergraduate degree at UW-Milwaukee, earning my CPA license shortly after graduating. I made the switch because I wanted the flexibility of schedule real estate offers as well as more contact with people,” she said in this edited interview.



What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

I enjoy meeting people and helping them, whether it’s selling their home and navigating the process or assisting buyers in finding their home and working through the offer and negotiations. Real estate actually uses some of my skills, including the desire to assist in the process and negotiating with other agents.

How do you consider yourself to be different than other agents?

I work to be different than when I’ve worked with realtors as a buyer or seller myself, by really listening to my clients rather than just telling them what I think. I work to honor what they like and want.

What role should an agent play for a client?

A guide. People are very smart and they don’t need a realtor to tell them what to do. Rather, get advice about the home they’re trying to buy or sell. We provide guidance in terms of what’s happening in the market or guidance regarding how the other side might view a particular challenge which might arise. Also, provide advice when working with lenders to help them find the right one to make the closing process so much easier.

What qualities make for a good realtor?

The ability to maintain communication between buyers and sellers when issues arise, and having the true desire to help buyers find a home, which can require many home showings.

Have you had any mentors?

I’ve met people I enjoy working with and who inspire me, such as my office manager, and I look to her for guidance.

What have you learned from your clients?

To be understanding with buyers and sellers and, at times, this can be an emotional business. Buyers and sellers may not remain calm when an offer doesn’t go through, at times. We must assure them another buyer will come or another house will be found.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

Not to get disheartened if it takes a while to sell a house or if it takes some time to build my business.

What’s the best advice you give to clients?

I tell buyers to make sure they are pre-approved for financing and to let me help them understand the market for the types of homes they’re looking for and the location. Sellers should try to take an honest look at the market when pricing the home so it sells, versus sitting on the market.

How have you developed as a realtor since the beginning?

For both my buyers and sellers, I’ve changed the way I look at a house. Now, I look at a house more from the perspective of whether it has a good foundation, roof or mechanicals rather than mostly the aesthetics of the home.

What’s your favorite part of the process when working with clients?

I really like selling houses, learning what buyers are looking for and then going out and finding it for them. What I really like is when either my buyer or seller gets an accepted offer, which is a really nice feeling. There is still work to be done afterwards, but everyone is happy.

What is the biggest challenge clients face in today’s market?

As prices go up, updated homes increase in price and generally sell faster. Houses which haven’t been updated tend to sit a bit more on the market and don’t show very large price increases.

What’s your business philosophy?

To be honest and act with integrity

What role does technology play in selling homes?

It’s extremely important. Technology is used for everything – communication, listings and photos. When you list a home online, it’s like the first showing, and it might be the most important factor after setting the price.

How do you relax in your down time?

I like to cook, explore museums and read.

What professional/charitable organizations are you involved with?

Right now, I’m working to get my schedule set so I can set time aside to volunteer. I’d like to work with the Wisconsin Humane Society or something involving animals.