Topics: Advertising, new york advertisting week, under armour, Video, Media News, Life News

Recently, at New York’s Advertising Week, a hedonistic celebration of all things commercial, a half dozen panels focused on women. Discussion topics ranged from the instructional, namely how to avoid insulting women when you’re trying to sell them stuff, to the philosophical, which asked tough questions to the tune of, essentially, “Could it be women’s fault they’re not being promoted?” Panels with titles like “Women Aren’t Creative?” readily recognized that women make 80 percent of household purchasing decisions. What the smiling executives at center stage were a little slower to acknowledge is that women are only 3 percent of the creative directors making decisions about how to best sell things to these millions of shopping ladies. The word “femvertising” was thrown around a lot, but never the word “feminism.” Perhaps that’s because in an industry famous for being sexist, feminism is scary even if it sells.

On Friday, during the “Women Aren’t Creative?” discussion, an advertisement from Under Armour’s “I Will What I Want” campaign played on a movie screen for hundreds of ad industry veterans and hopefuls, most of us women. In the ad, ballerina Misty Copeland dances a stunning solo as a child’s voice narrates a rejection letter telling Copeland that she’s not cut out to be a ballerina.

At the end of the ad, the crowd cheered: for femvertising, for Copeland, and for an ad that gets it right when it comes to women, never mind that the creative team who made the Misty Copeland ad at Droga5 was comprised of 56 human beings, only 11 of them women, and was, in essence, a lot of men telling women what they think women probably want to hear. And never mind the fact that the campaign features three women: Copeland, a ballerina, Gisele Bundchen, a supermodel and Lindsey Vonn, a skier and swimsuit model. Accomplished women, absolutely, but also very attractive ones who have succeeded in ways that most men probably don’t find particularly threatening.

And it’s okay that “I Will What I Want” features virtually flawless women succeeding in entertainment. This is an advertisement for overpriced running shorts, after all. We all understand that advertisements are glossy lies, right?

Well, no.

The real problem with ads like “I Will What I Want” is that the industry has been able to sell these idealized snapshots as legitimate feminist commentary to the media at large. Another problem is that the ad industry, which has one of the worst track records around in terms of equality, seems to be falling for its own spin.

At a later session called “Women Aren’t Creative?” Charlotte Beers, former CEO of Oglivy and Mather, explained that one of the biggest challenges women face in the workplace is their “womanly” nature, which she described as a female tendency to be cooperative with co-workers and collaborative on teams. To put it simply, the women around her just aren’t willing what they want hard enough.

As an alternative, she suggested that women be more “leaderly,” a trait she sees in the men around her office. Leaderly men are assertive and persuasive, willing to insist that they’re right in the face of opposition.

A few hours after that session, I was treated to a firsthand view of that leaderly attitude. After a closely packed panel on how to win Instagram followers, limited space and an excess of bodies created a bottleneck near the exit. I was waiting in line between a middle-aged man in a business suit and a techy-type guy in khakis and flannel. Since we weren’t moving, I glanced down at my phone. I was pressing the home key to put it away when an older man on my left, trapped in a row of chairs by the standstill yelled at me to “Stop texting and move.”