Wisconsin running back Melvin Gordon stiff arms Auburn defensive back Jermaine Whitehead on a 53-yard touchdown run during the third quarter of the Outback Bowl on Thursday in Tampa, Fla. Gordon rushed for 251 yards on 34 carries and three TDs. Credit: Associated Press

By of the

Tampa, Fla. — Barry Alvarez, Wisconsin's full-time athletic director and two-time interim head coach, passed the baton to new head coach Paul Chryst in style Thursday.

UW entered the 2015 Outback Bowl a 6 1/2-point underdog against Southeastern Conference power Auburn.

Yet the Badgers erased the memories of an ugly 59-point loss in the Big Ten title game thanks to another remarkable performance from Melvin Gordon, a tying field goal in the final minute of regulation and the winner in overtime by freshman kicker Rafael Gaglianone, and finally a huge defensive stand.

The result: UW rallied to stun Auburn, 34-31, in overtime in front of a crowd of 44,023 at Raymond James Stadium.

"Let me just first say I couldn't be more proud of a group of guys," Alvarez said after UW finished 11-3 and snapped a four-game bowl losing streak. "They have gone through so much....

"The last month for these guys has been very hectic, yet they bought in. I think they've learned lessons in their tenure at Wisconsin. They're very resilient.

"But I thanked them for believing in me and the plan....

"I'm very happy also for the fans of Wisconsin. We got a dry spell in bowl games. We went awhile there where we won every year, and we hopefully can get the ball rolling that way now."

Led by Alvarez and the assistants brought on board by Gary Andersen, who left for Oregon State four days after UW's 59-0 loss to Ohio State in the Big Ten title game, UW rallied from four deficits before subduing Auburn (8-5) in overtime.

This turned into a 15-round bout, with both sides trading big plays.

UW prevailed because it got plays from players up and down the roster, led by the incomparable Gordon.

The redshirt junior from Kenosha Bradford High School, playing in his final college game, rushed 34 times for an Outback Bowl-record 251 yards and three scores. He was named the game MVP.

"When you give up that many yards to a running back," Auburn coach Gus Malzahn said, "it's not a good feeling."

Get in line, Coach.

Gordon broke the Outback mark of Terrell Fletcher, who rushed for 241 yards for UW against Duke in 1995. Gordon scored on runs of 25, 53 and 6 yards. He finished the season with 2,587 yards, the No. 2 Football Bowl Subdivision mark of all time behind only Barry Sanders of Oklahoma State (2,628 in 1988).

Gordon carried 16 times for 87 yards in the first half, an average of 5.4 yards per carry. He added 164 yards on 18 carries, an average of 9.1, in the second half and overtime.

He finished as the NCAA leader for overall yards per carry, with a minimum of 415 carries, with a 7.79-yard average.

With Corey Clement adding 105 yards on 15 carries, UW finished with 400 rushing yards on 54 attempts.

Gordon could have turned pro after last season but he had no regrets.

"Looking back, a lot of people probably thought it was the wrong decision and a lot of people thought I should have left," he said. "I feel I got better every year and I felt like I was going to be a better player than I was last year.

"There were some things I wanted to achieve. I didn't get the Big Ten Championship, but I got the bowl game out of it. I think I became a better player overall, so I did the things I needed to do and I feel like this year was a success."

UW's defense had a huge hand in that success.

Gaglianone drilled a 29-yard field goal attempt with 7 seconds left to forge a 31-31 tie and cap a 13-play, 64-yard drive. He then hit a 25-yarder in overtime to give UW the three-point lead.

UW's defense, which gave up 558 yards in the Big Ten title game and 17 second-half points to Auburn, then rose up to make its biggest stand of the season.

"We said to not worry about the previous four quarters and just focus," safety Michael Caputo said. "That is all that mattered — those plays in that red zone. That was the only thing that mattered.

"We just focused on executing and being in the right position to make plays. Then we came out and made plays."

Auburn tailback Cameron Artis-Payne (26 carries, 126 yards, two touchdowns) was tackled for a 2-yard loss on first down by linebacker Joe Schobert.

Schobert and linebacker Derek Landisch combined to tackle wide receiver Sammie Coates for no gain on a quick screen.

Schobert then drove quarterback Nick Marshall (15 of 22 for 217 yards and two touchdowns) out of bounds for a 1-yard loss after he was on the end of a double pass from tight end C.J. Uzomah.

"We just did a good job being disciplined on that trick play," Landisch said.

That left the game on the foot of Daniel Carlson. The Auburn kicker entered the day 17 of 21 on field-goal attempts. He was 1 of 2 in regulation, hitting from 51 yards but pushing a 44-yard attempt to the right.

He pushed the 45-yard attempt in overtime to the right and the ball bounced off the upright and to the ground.

The UW sideline emptied as if the players were streaming into a store on Black Friday to get a jump on their Christmas shopping.

And why not? Thursday was a belated Christmas present for Alvarez, who lost to Stanford in the 2013 Rose Bowl after Bret Bielema left for Arkansas, and for the seniors who had yet to win a bowl game.

"It was unbelievable," fifth-year senior offensive tackle Rob Havenstein said. "I whipped my helmet off. ... I was just kind of running around. I wanted to see my parents and all the fans that came out to support us.

"We went out on top."

So did Alvarez, who first got an unexpected Gatorade bath from the players and a ride on their shoulders.

"You know what, I've had a couple of those, and I like them," Alvarez said of the bath. "It's a little uncomfortable afterwards, but I like them.

"And it's special for those seniors. It meant a lot to them. They've won a lot of games here. They haven't won a lot of bowl games. So they put a lot into it, they bought into it, they gave us strong leadership when it was needed, so now they can enjoy it."

Quarterback Joel Stave also enjoyed a comeback of sorts. He threw three interceptions and finished only 14 of 27 for 121 yards and a touchdown to Clement. But he had several critical throws on UW's game-tying drive and in the overtime.

"Just knowing that your team is counting on you and your coaches are counting on you," Stave said, "you just have to put that stuff behind you."

Every UW player who met with reporters after the victory raved about the leadership provided by Alvarez, who in turn credited the assistants for their work.

"We're so much more confident," Landisch said when asked about the feeling of playing for Alvarez. "Coach Alvarez is a winner. He doesn't take any nonsense. He makes the right calls. He makes the gutsy calls."

Alvarez made the call to bring Chryst back after Andersen left. But on the final play Thursday, Alvarez and the UW players could only watch as Carlson missed from 45 yards.

"I just couldn't believe it happened," fifth-year senior linebacker Marcus Trotter said. "I was waiting for five years for this. Finally when it happened I (said): Thank God.

"I watched it. I thought it was going to be good and then I said: 'Oooooh, it's not going to be good.'

"I was pumped. I ran on the field and threw my helmet up. Game over."