DENVER NUGGETS AT LOS ANGELES CLIPPERS

When: 1:30 p.m. Sunday

TV/Radio: ALT; 950 AM

Spotlight on Chris Paul:

With the continued absence of star forward Blake Griffin, the Clippers’ star point guard has had to take on a bigger burden of the scoring — and he has picked it up. The Clippers have lost five of their past seven games, but Paul is averaging 20.1 points, 9.7 assists and 4.7 rebounds in that stretch. He is one of just four Clippers averaging double- figure scoring over the past seven games.

NUGS VS. CLIPS NOTEBOOK

Nuggets:

Their bench played a lead role in the 116-105 victory over the Lakers at the Staples Center on Friday, contributing 71 points. Coach Michael Malone liked what he was seeing from the backups, so he played them nearly the entire fourth quarter. Gary Harris was the only starter who played in the fourth quarter, and that was only about two minutes. Denver’s bench will have to play well again Sunday for the Nuggets to beat the Clippers at the Staples Center. Kenneth Faried will be available if Malone chooses to play him. Faried was in uniform Friday after missing four games because of a sore back. He is averaging 12.9 points and 8.8 rebounds.

Clippers:

They won their most recent game, Thursday at home against Portland, but it was just the second victory in seven games for a 44-27 team that has had a relatively rough March, going 5-7. Spotty defense has been the problem — even with DeAndre Jordan, one of the NBA’s premier shot blockers, protecting the rim. Opponents are averaging 105.6 points and shooting 45.7 percent from the field. … Blake Griffin remains out with a fractured hand.

Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post

NBA Spotlight on:



Karl-Anthony Towns, C, Minnesota

When: This week’s Post player of the week takes us to uncharted waters — to a rookie. Minnesota’s Karl-Anthony Towns rose to the top and takes home the award for the evaluation period of March 19-25.

What’s up: In three games, Towns averaged 25.7 points, 10.7 rebounds, 3.0 assists and 1.7 blocks per game. He shot 59.6 percent from the field and was dominant all week, leading the Timberwolves to wins in two of the three games.

Background: The only thing more impressive than the numbers themselves was the consistency at which he arrived at them. Towns scored 24, 26 and 27 points in the three games. He grabbed 11, 11 and 10 rebounds in the three contests. He shot 57 percent from the field twice and 64.7 percent in the other contest. There haven’t been wild swings in his play all season long as he has done nothing but validate over and over again why he was the No. 1 overall pick in last year’s NBA draft.

Dempsey’s take: With all due respect to those sifting through numbers to make the rookie of the year race somewhat close, it isn’t. Towns is the runaway leader and essentially has been from Day One. We just all needed to see him blossom to etch it in stone. Towns has dazzled this season, and there’s no reason to think that he won’t follow up this season’s rookie of the year award with All-NBA teams and maybe even a league MVP in future seasons. He’s that good. And he’s only getting better.