Obama's Biggest Lie and What It Means

Unlike Nixon and Clinton, who lied in self-defense, Obama lies proactively, which is decidedly more dangerous. He will say practically anything to achieve his goals without regard to the truth. The repeated assertion about keeping your doctor and your health insurance under the Affordable Care Act is just one famous example. But only a few days ago on Fareed Zakaria's show the president made a statement that dwarfed his claims about Obamacare. When asked if we were in a war with radical Islam, the president replied:

....I reject a notion that somehow that creates a religious war because the overwhelming majority of Muslims reject that interpretation of Islam. They don't even recognize it as being Islam, and I think that for us to be successful in fighting this scourge, it's very important for us to align ourselves with the 99.9 percent of Muslims who are looking for the same thing we're looking for -- order, peace, prosperity.

99.9 percent?! I will bypass for the moment Obama's rather self-serving definition of Islam and focus on that outrageous number, which is absurd on the face of it and not remotely supported by any of the numerous polls on the subject. Although the data is somewhat fluid, we can assume that out of 1.7 billion Muslims world wide, at least 200 million are sympathetic to the goals and means of the Islamists, many of them, undoubtedly many millions, willing to put their scimitars where their mouths are. By way of comparison, of the approximately 66 million Germans at the beginning of World War II, some 850,000 were card-carrying Nazis. Daniel Pipes points out the Islamist numbers are diminishing, but the raw totals are still huge and nowhere remotely in the vicinity of Obama's risible point 01 percent. No matter how you count it, we've got a problem that is not going away anytime soon, possibly not before everyone reading this article has passed from the scene, I'm sorry to say.

So why did Obama lie and what does that mean? To begin with, he is a moral narcissist. That means because he knows he's right and knows what we should do, he's free to say anything he wishes that he believes will achieve those goals, especially if he thinks he can get away with it. And Fareed Zakaria would be the last person to question him. (The CNN commentator has problems of his own.) If all this reminds you of the ends justify the means, it's not accidental. Marx was a moral narcissist too -- one of the greatest.

Now let's get back to Obama and Islam. Is he a Muslim? Not really. He's not religious, but he does have an Islamic childhood with which he identifies, undoubtedly on a more profound level than he does with Christianity, which he joined for expedient reasons. Therefore, he can't acknowledge to himself and others that Islam is severely sick and in need of serious reformation. No talk from Obama ever about all the extreme misogyny and homophobia that pervades Islam, nor of Shariah law. Nothing like this ever passes his lips -- at least I've never heard it. To do so would be to say there is something wrong with him. So he says that 99.9% of Muslims reject the Islamists, which is literally impossible because if it were so, the Islamists wouldn't be wreaking havoc everywhere from Sydney to Sanaa.

Complicating this psychological disturbance on the part of our president is his overweening desire to make a deal with Iran, almost at all costs. Bizarre as it sounds, a deal with Iran would prove to Obama that Islam -- at least in its Iranian shiite form -- is capable of modernity. To the rest of us, it means they're capable of nuclear war. (I guess that's sort of modernity.) In any case, Obama's greatest lie is designed to include Iran and its leaders in the good 99.9%. I can't imagine a scarier thought.