Cesar Chavez is running for Congress.

This would normally be big news, as the legendary human rights leader, the one revered in Latino communities, died some 20 years ago. But of course, it’s not the real Chavez who is running – it’s a guy whose given name is Scott Fistler, and who has figured out that voters in the Hispanic Arizona district aren’t that warm to him. So he’s becoming someone else, at least on paper.

As the Arizona Republic has reported, Fistler the Republican political wannabe wasn’t having such success just being who he is. As a GOP write-in candidate, he lost a congressional race to Democratic Rep. Ed Pastor (who is retiring this year), and later, failed to win a seat on the nonpartisan Phoenix City Council. So he decided to change. He changed his party affiliation to Democratic (something voters don’t always respond to well, as party-flipper Sen. Arlen Specter learned when he lost the Democratic primary to Joe Sestak in 2010). But Fistler figured that might not be enough. So he changed his entire identity, legally changing his name to Cesar Chavez.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Fistler/Chavez told the Republic that he changed his name to “step up my game,” and felt that the name “Fistler” just wasn’t resonating well with people. As for the party flip, he told the paper: “There is a higher registration of Democrats in the 7th District. When (you) run as a Republican, the odds are against you.”

Well, yes, of course the odds are against you, and it’s not just the word “Republican,” it’s the policy ideas behind it. While The Congressional Candidate Formerly Known as Fistler believes in such Democratic ideas as gay marriage and raising the minimum wage, he also opposes a path to citizenship for undocumented immigrants, calling it “amnesty.”

[SEE: Cartoons on Immigration]

Changing one’s name can make sense in certain contexts. Reginald Kenneth Dwight probably was a more marketable singer as Elton John. And Marilyn Monroe sounds so much more sultry than Norma Jeane Mortensen (or Norma Jeane Baker, as she was quickly renamed). But both were talented to begin with, so the name was just a tweak. Nor do entertainment-related names changes tend to mask who someone really is. Stefani Joanne Angelina Germanotta might have been a very popular singer, but Lady Gaga just sounds more edgy – and it’s not as though fans believe she was born that way.