Topics: Chronic Pain, Drug Addiction, Editor's Pick, Life stories, Life News

I started taking opioid painkillers not long after my third and last child was born. Despite having had nearly four dozen broken bones in childhood due to a genetic bone disorder (osteogenesis imperfecta or OI), I struggled little with pain or functional limitations in my young adulthood. I limped and tired easily, but every day I climbed up and down stairs, cleaned and cooked, walked with a baby or two in a stroller to do errands, and cared for my young children without any more severe consequence than sore muscles and joints at bedtime.

But around the time my son was born, things started, literally, to fall apart. Eight months pregnant, I sustained a meniscal tear in my left knee that would ultimately be surgically repaired twice but never really fixed. Today, at 47 years old, I have no cartilage left in either knee; sometimes when I change position, the joints emit an audible crunch. A stress fracture in my femur has bothered me on and off for a year. My orthopedist reports that the balls of my hip joints are embedding themselves in the too-soft bone of my pelvic sockets. My right wrist aches and throbs at night, particularly if I did a lot of writing or housecleaning that day.

To continue to climb up and down stairs, clean and cook, do my work, and care for my family, I rely on long-acting opioids, combined with high doses of Vitamin D, ibuprofen, hot baths, low-impact exercise (especially swimming), a produce-heavy anti-inflammatory diet, and rest.

In the years that I’ve been using opioids, their use has become more restricted and controversial. A surge in heroin addiction and overdose is directly related to painkiller abuse. People get hooked on the Vicodin or Percocet prescribed after surgery or an injury. When they find that buying pills on the street is prohibitively expensive, they turn to heroin, which gives the same high for a much lower price. Recently, a study by Nobel Prize-winning economists of startlingly high death rates for white, high-school–educated, middle-aged Americans concluded that this trend is linked to substance abuse and addiction, including opioid abuse and alcoholism. Meanwhile, few data are available defining to what extent and in what doses and formulations opioids are effective in treating chronic pain, and opioids are likely not the right treatment for many chronic pain patients. Research further verifies that doctors perceive chronic pain patients as among the most time-consuming and difficult patients to treat. In a recent Boston Globe Op-Ed, Judy Foreman related this anecdote: When professors at one medical school asked graduating medical students what they would do when faced by a pain patient, one student spoke for many: “Run!”

While opioids may not be the right treatment for all, or even most, chronic pain patients, these medications work well for me with few side effects. The simple fact that I’ve found an effective treatment allowing me to live an active life with significant disability, however, is obscured by the controversy, fear, stigma and caution that surround opioid prescribing. Getting my medication has become steadily more difficult—a development I’d find easier to accommodate if it didn’t come packaged with shame and fear that stricter prescribing rules, and practitioners weary of following those rules while second-guessing patient intentions, might ultimately mean that I can’t get this medication at all. I’ve begun preempting such a situation by proactively tapering down my prescription painkillers, and may ultimately go off them altogether.

Several months ago, I had to call my doctor’s office four times and the pharmacy three times in a matter of hours (during my workday) to get my prescription filled. My doctor’s less-than-pristine handwriting made the pharmacy—where I’ve had my prescriptions, prescribed by the same doctor, filled for about six years—suspicious that the prescription had been tampered with, so they wanted to call the doctor’s office to verify it. My doctor’s medical assistant left for the day at noon without returning the pharmacy’s call. Having taken my last pill of the previous prescription that morning, I knew that if I didn’t get the prescription filled that day, I’d be up all night with pain and the effects of opioid withdrawal. With each call I made, the anxiety and urgency in my voice ticked upward. Another of my doctor’s staff members eventually verified the prescription so I could get it filled. The pharmacist was angry about so much time spent on a single prescription. My doctor’s staff member was annoyed that she had to step in to do a job that wasn’t hers. I got my prescription, and I also got a hefty dose of shame that I have become the anxious and demanding time-suck known as the chronic pain patient.

In the years that I’ve been on opioids, rates of painkiller abuse and heroin addiction have exploded, as have articles, blog posts and Op-Eds about these trends. In an effort to make informed decisions and make sense of my mixed feelings about opioid therapy, I’ve read dozens of articles and books, including Melanie Thernstrom’s “The Pain Chronicles,” Judy Foreman’s “A Nation in Pain,” Barry Meier’s “Pain Killer” and Sam Quinones’ “Dreamland”—most of which tell the same basic story.

In the 1990s, prominent pain specialists claimed that chronic pain was massively undertreated. Based on a study that critics have since said was limited and misinterpreted, these specialists argued that there is statistically a very small chance of someone on opioids for chronic pain becoming addicted, particularly if they have no previous substance abuse problem. They argued that opioids such as hydrocodone (e.g., in Vicodin) and oxycodone (e.g., in Percocet) could be effectively and safely used long-term for non-malignant pain. Purdue Pharma developed a timed-release form of oxycodone called OxyContin, aggressively marketing it to primary care physicians for use by patients needing steady around-the-clock pain relief. Purdue stated that OxyContin’s slow-release formula would make it unattractive to addicts who want a quick, substantial high.

Drug addicts soon figured out that by crushing OxyContin to destroy the timed-release mechanism and snorting or injecting the powder, they could get the entire dose—meant to be parceled out over eight or 12 hours—at once. Only after towns in places like Ohio, West Virginia and Kentucky were overwhelmed with people addicted to opioids and dying of overdoses did Purdue admit that they had misstated OxyContin’s non-addictive nature. Some pain specialists have since backed off their call for aggressive opioid treatment, though some still believe that pain is undertreated and that opioids work well for some patients. Furthermore, there is simply not much good research on how effective opioids are or could be in treating different types of chronic pain.