SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL) is blasting the Trans Pacific Partnership (TPP) trade deal that was made public Thursday. Sessions tells Breitbart News Daily on SiriusXM that the deal is “an erosion of sovereignty.”

“They’re not even asserting that it will create jobs in America, raise wages in America or reduce our trade deficit because these agreements in the past have been bad for all three,” Sessions told Breitbart News’ Stephen K. Bannon.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Bannon asked Sessions about a commission that is formed through the TPP that could potentially have an effect of global governance.

“I think for President Obama, I do believe the driving force behind this is a belief that this is some sort of a one unified governmental structure. It creates judicial bodies. The language of it confirms what I’ve been saying,” Sessions said, affirming the creation of an oversee commission that will have control over the parties and interpretation of this agreement.

On the commission’s control and oversight, Sessions said, “It’s really breathtaking and it’s an erosion of sovereignty.” He added, “particularly an erosion of congressional power.”

“The president can participate in some of these things and advance what he’d like to see, but it takes the people out through their elected congressional representatives,” he explained.

“It is a contract,” Sessions stated of the TPP. “These trade agreements have been one sided over and over and over again. I believe in trade. I voted for most of the trade agreements in the past, but I am particularly concerned about this one on substance and even more concerned about this commission because of this delegation of power.”

Russian media outlets recently reported that China and Russia had been invited to join the TPP, something the State Department said wasn’t being negotiated at the moment.

“China is ruthless in the way they do trade and it’s given them an advantage over us,” Sessions reacted to the Russian news reports.

“The most dangerous part of it to me is the long-term establishment of an international committee that overrides American will,” Sessions reiterated about the commission.

“The Republican candidate for president cannot run in favor of Obamacare, cannot run in favor more taxes, more spending and more debt – goodness gracious,” Sessions added, weighing in on the 2016 presidential race. “I don’t think a Republican candidate should be running for president that says they’re for amnesty, or even more immigration and for trade agreement that don’t serve the national interest.”