OAKLAND, Calif., Jan. 11, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- A. Eugene Washington, MD, MPH, chancellor for Health Affairs at Duke University and president and CEO of the Duke University Health System, has been named to the boards of directors for Kaiser Foundation Health Plan, Inc. and Kaiser Foundation Hospitals.

"We feel privileged to have Dr. Gene Washington join our boards of directors," said Chairman and CEO Bernard J. Tyson. "Amongst his many contributions in the health care industry, Dr. Washington has played an important role in shaping national health policy and health care practice to improve public health."

Prior to joining Duke University, Dr. Washington served for five years as vice chancellor of Health Sciences, dean of the David Geffen School of Medicine at the University of California, Los Angeles, and chief executive officer of the UCLA Health System. He was also a distinguished professor of Gynecology and Health Policy at UCLA.

Earlier in his career, Dr. Washington served as executive vice chancellor and provost at the University of California, San Francisco. He co-founded UCSF's Medical Effectiveness Research Center for Diverse Populations and served as its director for 12 years. He also served as chair of the Department of Obstetrics, Gynecology and Reproductive Sciences and co-founded the UCSF-Stanford Evidence-based Practice Center and served as its first director. Dr. Washington also worked at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.

"Serving on the boards of these two pioneering organizations is quite an honor to me," said Dr. Washington. "I am delighted to be joining these boards and look forward with excitement to working with Kaiser Permanente colleagues to continue improving health in communities across the nation."

As a clinical investigator and health policy scholar, Dr. Washington has been a national leader in assessing medical technologies, developing clinical practice guidelines and establishing disease prevention policies, particularly for women's health. Dr. Washington was elected to the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of Sciences in 1997, where he served on the executive committee of IOM's governing council, and to the American Academy of Arts and Sciences in 2014.

Dr. Washington currently serves on the board of directors of Johnson & Johnson. He has served on a number of professional and government boards and committees, including on the board of trustees of the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, the Scientific Management Review Board of the National Institutes of Health, and the board of directors of the California HealthCare Foundation and the California Wellness Foundation, where he was chair of each board. Dr. Washington is founding chair of the board of governors of the Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute, a national research organization dedicated to the support and promotion of comparative clinical effectiveness research, which was authorized by the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

About Kaiser Permanente

Kaiser Permanente is committed to helping shape the future of health care. We are recognized as one of America's leading health care providers and not-for-profit health plans. Founded in 1945, Kaiser Permanente has a mission to provide high-quality, affordable health care services and to improve the health of our members and the communities we serve. We currently serve more than 10 million members in eight states and the District of Columbia. Care for members and patients is focused on their total health and guided by their personal physicians, specialists and team of caregivers. Our expert and caring medical teams are empowered and supported by industry-leading technology advances and tools for health promotion, disease prevention, state-of-the-art care delivery and world-class chronic disease management. Kaiser Permanente is dedicated to care innovations, clinical research, health education and the support of community health. For more information, go to: kp.org/share.

For more information, contact:

marc.t.brown@kp.org

office: 510-271-6328

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160111/320994

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20130718/SF49717LOGO

SOURCE Kaiser Permanente