SHARE Thomas Kunkel, president of St. Norbert College. Journal Sentinel file "Man in Profile" by Thomas Kunkel St. Norbert College

By of the

De Pere — On May 24, 1996, Joseph Mitchell of The New Yorker died of cancer at age 87.

Through his nearly half-century with the magazine, Mitchell chronicled the unsung, or, as The New York Times put it in a sweeping obituary, "he pursued the generals of nuisance" everyone from "flops, drunks and con artists" to "a fast talker who claimed to have written nine million words of 'An Oral History of Our Times' when, in fact, he had written no words at all."

At the heart of Mitchell's personal story, though, was a mystery. Mitchell produced no new work for the magazine in the last 30 years of his life even though he dutifully showed up to the office.

There, the story of Mitchell's greatness and the literary silence of his final years might have receded in a slow fade of memory and relevance.

But now, it has all come back. St. Norbert College President Thomas Kunkel has retrieved Mitchell's story from journalism's "morgue."

Kunkel's book, "Man in Profile: Joseph Mitchell of The New Yorker" is being published April 28. It's the first full-length biography of Mitchell.

The book is the result of years of digging through old files, interviewing those who knew Mitchell and taking a fresh look at Mitchell's work.

Kunkel began the project in late 2001 when he was dean of the Philip Merrill College of Journalism at the University of Maryland. The work followed Kunkel around like an old steamer trunk when in 2008 he assumed the presidency at St. Norbert, a Catholic liberal arts college on the banks of the Fox River.

And the work was still hanging over him in 2010 when three of his four daughters participated in a rare triple wedding.

"I tell people all the time that writing is one of those things it's nice to have done," Kunkel said during a recent interview in his office.

A former journalist, Kunkel, 59, has produced a compelling book on one of the more revered journalists of the 20th century, warts and all.

In the buildup to publication, there has been interest in some literary and journalistic circles on what Kunkel discovered.

Kunkel said Mitchell's life and times provide a great story.

"The most important reason anyone should care about Joseph Mitchell is because his work was and remains extremely influential in the context of American letters," Kunkel said.

"He was a path finder, especially in the realm of nonfiction. He was one of the people who proved you could make real people and their stories into literary art, thereby inspiring a whole generation of writers," from the likes of Tom Wolfe and John McPhee to journalists working today.

David Remnick, editor of The New Yorker, said Mitchell continues to fascinate for many reasons, not just for his imaginative writing, the topics he covered and the romance of his work, but also for "the use of fictional techniques in nonfiction and how the rules have changed. What you can and can't do and how those notions have changed."

Colorful characters

Mitchell came from rural North Carolina to New York in 1929, as the stock market crashed, and worked in the rough-and-tumble world of city newspapers for 10 years, before landing a job at The New Yorker in 1938.

There, he produced some of the magazine's great works, writing about such people and places as McSorley's Old Ale House, Staten Island oystermen and Joe Gould — the Greenwich Village Bohemian who claimed he was creating a nine-million word "Oral History." The truth at the heart of what may be Mitchell's most famous work, "Joe Gould's Secret," was that the "Oral History" did not exist.

The 1992 publication of "Up in the Old Hotel," an anthology of his greatest works, gave Mitchell a last burst of prominence.

Kunkel, who wrote a biography of The New Yorker's founding editor, "Genius in Disguise: Harold Ross of the New Yorker," was perfectly placed to write Mitchell's biography. He had met and interviewed Mitchell while researching the Ross book.

Kunkel is a longtime admirer of The New Yorker, which he began reading as a teenager back in his hometown of Evansville, Ind. The pages of the magazine opened a wider world. Married for nearly 40 years to his childhood sweetheart, Debra, he worked for newspapers in Evansville, Cincinnati, Miami and San Jose and a magazine based in Phoenix before entering the academic world at the University of Maryland.

He took on the Mitchell project, figuring that as an academic leader in a journalism school, he should be immersed in an intellectual project.

Little did he know how long it would take to complete. For one thing, Mitchell was a pack-rat who kept everything from newspaper clippings to old receipts. For another, only some of the files were organized. Many more, some 70 boxes worth, were in storage.

Searching for next piece

Kunkel went over the documents with Sheila McGrath, Mitchell's former New Yorker colleague and companion who oversaw his literary estate.

The research helped Kunkel discover just what Mitchell was doing all those years when he showed up to work and didn't publish.

"He was searching for what his next piece would be," Kunkel said.

Kunkel said Mitchell researched old characters, thought about revisiting McSorley's or using the Fulton Fish Market "as a springboard for a bigger book on New York."

"He never thought any one of those were exactly what he wanted," Kunkel said. "That's when he started thinking about writing about himself," and began to re-report his life, beginning in North Carolina.

Kunkel said in the early 1970s, Mitchell started in on an autobiography but "was never comfortable about writing about himself." Mitchell wrote three chapters.

"One was this sweeping take on 'My New York,'" Kunkel said. "Another was his life in North Carolina. The third, very short chapter was going to be his segue, to talk about how it was that he came to live in the past."

In recent years, The New Yorker published the autobiographical fragments.

Why couldn't Mitchell move on a project? "It was inertia, the gears rusting up, fatigue, he was always prone to depression," Kunkel said.

Kunkel doesn't want readers to lose sight of Mitchell's deft touch and the scope of his work.

"Just for anyone who loves language, anyone who loves literature, Joseph Mitchell is a great writer," Kunkel said. "He truly wrote some of the most important nonfiction stories in the American canon. Not all of it was nonfiction, as we know.”

In the preface of one book, Mitchell admitted that he condensed the stories of several men to produce “Old Mr. Flood.” Through his research, Kunkel also found that Mitchell created a “composite profile” of a gypsy in the story “King of the Gypsies.” Mitchell used either a pseudonym or a composite for one of the main characters in a story about construction workers, “The Mohawks in High Steel.” Kunkel also delved into Mitchell’s technique of having people speak in long monologues that went on for pages.

“It seems to be the case he took a certain amount of latitude with how things were said,” Kunkel said.

In his research and writing, Kunkel said he sought to view Mitchell “through the context of the time, the context of accepted (journalism) practices.”

Kunkel said he didn’t want to come across as an apologist for Mitchell but as someone who objectively viewed a man’s life and work.

“I was a huge Joe Mitchell fan boy when I started,” he said, “and I’m a huge Joe Mitchell fan boy when I ended.”