Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, Louisiana, Mary Frances Berry, New Orleans, Race, Vote buying, Voter Fraud, Voter ID, News, Politics News

Mary Frances Berry is one of America’s most prominent civil rights and social justice activists, as well as a distinguished historian, author and academic administrator. Although she has played many roles and written many books, her longest, most prominent tenure was at the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, where she served from 1980 to 2004, presiding as chairwoman for her last 11 years.

Perhaps no one else has could pull off what she has done with her latest book, “Five Dollars and a Pork Chop Sandwich: Vote Buying and the Corruption of Democracy.” She takes on a long-neglected, yet deeply corrosive problem of American democracy at its most intimate, local democracy — vote-buying — which superficially might seem to support decades-long GOP accusations of voter fraud in national elections, and clearly establishes it as a major problem in its own right. What’s more, she does so based almost entirely on the struggles of local activists, and the diligent efforts of a single Louisiana lawman.

It’s a genuine David-vs-Goliath story, as well as an urgent wake-up call. Salon spoke with Professor Berry about her book on the eve of its publication. The interview is edited for length and clarity.

Your book engages with an issue that’s drawn far less attention than the battles over alleged voter fraud waged by the GOP and the fight against voter suppression that Democrats and progressives have waged in response. Given your long history of involvement in voting rights issues, and your involvement in such battles in the past, I wanted to begin by asking what brought you to write about this issue at this time?

I was in New Orleans and I happened to be spending some time down there doing some research on another topic. I was trying to get a parking sticker for my car, so I could park in the neighborhood where I was staying, and I went down to City Hall, and I was having all kinds of trouble figuring out how to do it, and a young man walked up to me and said oh Dr. Berry, I remember all your work on the Civil Rights Commission and introduced himself. He worked for a council member, and he said, “What are you doing?” And he said, “Oh I can help you.” So he helped me figure out how to get the parking sticker.

Then, after he did that, he said, “I have big boxes of material that I’d like you to read, because I collected it when I was in the state fraud division, on voting, and I had found all these cases where people were engaged in vote buying and vote selling in state and local elections.” And I had never thought about any such thing, to tell you the truth. My whole emphasis had been on denouncing people who talked about voter fraud, because most of them, when I was on the [Civil Rights] Commission and afterwards they were just Republicans trying to do a huge smokescreen over the issue of voter suppression.

So I said, “Well, I’ll look at it,” and I thought it was one box, but indeed it turned out to be many, many boxes. And they contained things like wiretaps and wires of people who had volunteered to go talk to other people, and affidavits, and all kinds of evidence in these little towns, and in these urban areas where poor people live, in housing projects where there were old people, or whatever. And then I got interested; I said, “Well, what are these politicians doing for these poor people who they get to vote for them, and how do they do it?”

An old lady had told him, and he related it to me, that the way they do it is they take you somewhere to vote, and they give you some numbers, and tell you to vote for those people, and the clerk tells them that you did it, and then they haul you down to the daiquiri shop — which is drive-in daiquiri shops here in Louisiana — where you get a drink and get five dollars and a pork chop sandwich, and then you go home. And I said, “Well, I’ll be doggone! I never heard of such a thing in my entire life!”

So I got really interested. At first I was going to write about how these poor people shouldn’t be selling their votes. You know, I took great umbrage at that. And then I decided that that didn’t make any sense; the poor people didn’t have anything anyway. What they were doing was being victimized. I discovered it didn’t matter whether people were Democrats or Republicans, and these were all local and state elections. We’re not talking about presidential elections, none of this covers presidential elections. I found out that these poor communities were the places where their representatives were less likely to support issues that would help the people who are living there, who they had gotten to vote for them, whether it was Medicaid expansion, whether it was fixing the roads or houses, or making sure the water didn’t have lead in it, or whatever it was. They couldn’t get anybody to do anything, because every time they asked somebody to do something, they said, “Why, I gave you five dollars and a pork chop sandwich, so why are you complaining?”

Why is it difficult to even begin uprooting it?

I got interested in looking at the campaigns that engaged in this kind of activity, and trying to figure out why we couldn’t get them prosecuted. I talked to this young man, his name is Greg Malveaux, and he said he discovered, he got all this evidence, you couldn’t get prosecutors to prosecute anybody, and that was because they [prosecutors] were getting elected in the same way by the same people. I hadn’t thought about that. I checked with the national organization of prosecutors, whatever they’re called, and they told me that state and local prosecutors are generally elected. So I knew that by the time that Ferguson happened.

So then I decided that campaigns, maybe just in Louisiana they were doing this. So I wrote the stuff about what was happening in Louisiana, and then I decided to look across the country, and see if it was happening elsewhere. I went to Chicago, and I talked to some campaign people there that I know, and they told me, yeah, we call it, I think, street money or walking-around money, and we go to the nursing home where the old people are, and we get absentee ballots and we haul them — mainly it’s absentee ballots in Chicago. In Baltimore, even the state courts found that having walk-around money was legal.

How did your understanding of the problem change?

I decided that the real problem is not that the votes are bought; it’s just a way of voter suppression I call it — that’s to get people to vote for you, okay, so you can get elected, and it’s voter suppression on the cheap, and then you don’t do a doggone thing for them. They’re still poor, they still got problems, and that in fact if you had candidates who did something for people, and if people were organized, by the organizations are supposed to be activist organizations to understand all this, they might join together and get something done for themselves. So that’s how it happened.

Part of the problem people may not realize, which is the difficulty of distinguishing illegitimate activity from what’s a legitimate way of simply getting people out to vote, particularly when it comes to just transporting people. Could you clarify that?

Oh, let me talk about that. It is clearly legal. When I looked into this I started studying it and talking to people that I know actually working campaigns, around the country, people I’ve known a long time. There’s nothing wrong with walking-around money or street money, if it’s used to carry people to the polls, or to encourage people to go to the polls. There’s nothing wrong with that. That’s fine. What’s wrong is when you tell people to vote for certain people and then you give them money based on whether or not they vote for those people. That’s the part that goes over the line. So I’m not trying to root out campaigns having walking-around money, or street money to validly transport voters, put out their material and do all those things.

What I’m saying is to exchange for a vote — an actual vote for an actual person for office — and then to collude, sometimes work with the clerks, to get the clerk to tell them whether you actually voted for those people, or take the absentee ballots and check them off and then to give people what I call chump change — whether it’s people getting sandwiches in a nursing home, or whether it’s like the one woman down in Louisiana getting her five dollars and a pork chop sandwich and a daiquiri — and then doing nothing for them, that’s the part that really galls me. You don’t do anything else for them.

So I’m not trying to interfere with campaigns. My good Democratic Party friends, when I told them I was going to write this book, they first said don’t write it, because people will think you agree with Republicans that there’s massive voter fraud going on the country, in every kind of election. And I said no, that’s not what I’m going to write. What I’m going to write is that vote buying, what they’re doing, is undermining democracy.

You wrote about a number of parishes in Louisiana where this was rampant. In Vermilion Parish you quoted a trial judge saying, “Vote buying, for the most part, has been readily accepted in our society for many years.” So obviously the evidence presented in that case was not new to him. How typical was that of the political culture throughout parishes in Louisiana?

It was typical, and most of the judges, the local judges, are also elected. One of the principal problems is that no matter how much evidence you ever collect, if you have judges, as well as prosecutors, who are elected, if you keep ever get anybody to prosecute, the judge, as you might notice — over in St. Martinsville Parish, one judge said, “You don’t understand how we do things here. You know, people are always, they don’t know where they live, or they all be living in one house. Who are you people coming over here trying to tell us what to do?” And the old woman who told us she was up in her 90s then, she said, “I’ve been doing this since I was a girl. They do this all the time.” So it’s a way of life.

In Chicago, the alderman that I talk about, those aldermanic districts and the people who were involved, they say they do that all the time. If you want to get the snow removed from your streets when the storm happens, and not be last on the list, you’d better be some of the people who’ve been known to go down and vote right. So I just think it’s widespread, in West Virginia, those other places — Texas, it happens in Texas, with the politiqueras, but I spent a lot of time in Louisiana because I had primary sources.

You spoke about family fiefdoms controlling politics there in Louisiana, in many instances, and St. Martinsville I guess was exceptional because it actually rose to the level of federal prosecution. What happened there to set it apart, and why was it still not able to be really fixed?