Chelsea Clinton, daughter of presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, delivers a speech in support of her mother at the Senate Garage on North Front Street in Uptown Kingston on Sunday afternoon. Ulster County Executive Mike Hein can be seen sitting at left. Brian Hubert — Daily Freeman

KINGSTON, N.Y. >> Chelsea Clinton, on the campaign trail for her mother Hillary Clinton, touted the Democratic candidate for president’s record on healthcare, education, women’s rights and gun control in an approximately 40-minute speech at the Senate Garage Sunday, ahead of Tuesday’s primary.

Among the crowd were several prominent area Democrats, including Ulster County Executive Michael Hein, Kingston Mayor Steve Noble, who was there with his wife Julie and their son, and State Assemblyman Kevin Cahill, D-Kingston.

On healthcare, Clinton said her mother was the best choice to continue the momentum gained under the Affordable Care Act passed under President Barack Obama.

Advertisement

“Now 90 percent of Americans have health insurance,” she said.

“We can’t throw that momentum out and start from scratch,” she said, referring to plans by Clinton’s opponent, Democratic Presidential candidate Bernie Sanders, to scrap the Affordable Care Act in favor of a Medicare-for-all program.

VIDEO: Chelsea Clinton speaks at the Senate Garage in Kingston

The audience roared as Clinton discussed how her mother has fought for universal health coverage since the early 1990s.

“It was Hilary Care before it was Obamacare,” she said. “I think she really knows how to take us from 90 percent healthcare coverage to 100 percent coverage.”

She said if elected, her mother would work to bring down prescription drug prices by having medicare negotiate with drug companies.

“We could reduce costs 60 to 80 percent that way,” she said, as the audience cheered.

VIDEO: Chelsea Clinton lays out her mother’s plan for healthcare

On overturning the Citizen’s United decision in the Supreme Court, she said no one has worked harder than her mother on seeing it overturned.

“Overturning Citizen’s United is ethical and personal for my mom,” Clinton said during a large portion of her speech devoted to the Supreme Court.

“Based on the average retirement ages of Supreme Court Justice, the next president will appoint two to three justices,” she said. “That could have an impact for generations.”

She said her mother can work with unlikely allies, citing her work with former Republican Texas Representative Tom DeLay on the Child Health Program that ensures over eight million low income children.

Clinton said her mother will be the best candidate to stop a tide of laws restricting women’s reproductive rights.

In 2016, she said 300 such laws were passed at the state and local level.

“I find it challenging that my mother’s opponent sees women’s issues as a distraction,” she said.

She cited her mother’s efforts to create a position within the U.S. government that advocates for women’s rights around the world when she was secretary of state, a program she said has continued under John Kerry’s tenure.

When asked by a 10-year-old boy during a question-and-answer session if she wanted to be president, she said no, but she encouraged him to consider getting involved with politics to make changes on issues he really cared about.

A young girl told Clinton she’d be excited to see there be a “girl president.”

After her speech, she spent several minutes with smartphone-wielding well-wishers who were taking selfies, and then she spoke briefly with reporters.

When asked what distinguishes Hillary Clinton from Senator Bernie Sanders, she said there were several strong distinctions.

“I think she has a stronger record of being able to make change, rather were talking about healthcare reform or early childhood education or fighting climate change,” she said. “She’s the one that’s been able to be deliver real progress.

“And she’s the only candidate on either side of the aisle that tells you how she’s going to pay for everything,” she said.

She said her mother has what it takes to have realistic enforceable gun control and has much stronger record than Sanders. “She believes, given the strong support, even among gun owners, for child safety locks and universal background checks, that we should be able to get there.

“We need to strip the gun industry of the unique protections the gun industry enjoys,” she said, adding that her mother during a recent debate pointed out that the toy gun industry has more regulation than the gun industry has.

She attacked Sanders record on gun control.

She said he supported these protections for gun makers.

When asked by reporters about healthcare, she said her mom has the clearest plan to get 100 percent of Americans insured and a plan that would incentivize governors who haven’t expanded medicaid to lower health care costs.

She said her mother’s plan would cap premium and out of pocket costs in any month or any year.

“That was part of her original plan back in ‘93-’94,” she said.

“I hope whether voters care about finishing on the work of the Affordable Care Act or building on the progress President Obama has made on gun control, or building on the progress President Obama has made on rebuilding our standing around world, they’ll support my mom.”

VIDEO: Chelsea Clinton Tout’s her mother’s record on Healthcare, gun control and foreign policy