An “atheist cafe” in Cairo, Egypt, has reportedly been raided and closed by security forces after locals have accused it of being a hub for “Satan worshippers.”

Cairo Post reported Sunday about the cafe, located on Falaky Street in downtown Cairo, which was “destroyed” by local authorities after residents have accused patrons of spreading “wrong thoughts about religion.” Police chief Gamal Mohi Mohi told the Arabic language newspaper Sada Al-Balad that the cafe’s forced closure was prompted by local suspicions that the place is being used to encourage satanic practices.

“We have destroyed the café of the devil worshippers in Falaki Street for being illegal and for having a number of atheists spreading their thoughts.”

According to Mada Masr, Mohi admitted that there were no clear indications that the establishment was actually an “atheist cafe.” However, he maintained that there were evidences for satanic practices found on the entrance of the cafe.

“There was no sign reading ‘atheists’ café’ outside, as nobody would put up such a public announcement. However, it was popularly known as a place for Satan worship, rituals, and dances. There were also Satanic drawings at the entrance.”

Human rights and humanist circles in Egypt have criticized the atheist cafe raid. Ali Atef, lawyer for the Arabic Network for Human Rights Information, told Cairo Post that it was illegal to have the cafe closed on grounds of its customers’ alleged atheism, adding that the only way it could have been illegal in Egypt is if the cafe began discriminating against people belonging to other religions.

“If the café were legal and has its papers in order, then the police storming for the café then would be the wrong or criminal action, as no one has the right to arrest someone for his thoughts. And to be fair and honest, usually these incidents happen for arresting atheists, and later they explain that the café papers were illegal, which is usually wrong.”

Middle East Eye reported that at least one person, the cafe owner, has been arrested during the raid.

Atheism is currently not listed as a crime in Egypt. However, blaspheming or defaming any of the Abrahamic religions can result to six months to five years imprisonment and a fine of LE 500 to 1000, or 88 to 140 U.S. dollars.

Unofficial polls claim that there are at least three million atheists out of 84 million people living in Egypt. Western media outlets, including the BBC, have put the numbers in question, noting that because of the current socio-religious struggles in Middle East, establishing statistics for the actual number of atheists in the country would be unreliable at best.

It has not been confirmed if the atheist cafe will be back in business.

[Image from C. Elle/Flickr]