With one in five young adults uninsured in the U.S., one of the more popular provisions of the Affordable Care Act allows parents to add children under age 26 to their health plan. Children can join or remain on a parent’s plan even if they are married, no longer living with or are financially dependent on their parents, attending school, or are eligible for coverage through their job, according to HealthCare.gov.

Michael Munoz, sales and marketing senior vice president for AmeriHealth answered more specific questions on how it works:

Q: Are adult children entitled to dental and vision services?

A: They are under their parents’ plan if they are under the age of 19. After that time there is a rider available they would be able to purchase to have those services covered. You can buy free-standing dental or vision coverage, or you can go to a carrier that specializes in that. It depends on the coverage, but there are discounted plans starting anywhere from $8 to $12 a month up to $60-$70 a month.

Q: If an adult child leaves her parents’ plan because she gets coverage through her job, then gets laid off, can she go back on her parents’ plan?

A: As long as a child is under the age of 26, they can go back on their parents’ plan. The child can also be eligible for COBRA from her employer, or can go to the federal exchange if they qualify for a subsidized plan, or if not, go directly to the carrier and buy an individual plan.

Q: What happens to the child’s coverage if a parent changes jobs and enrolls in COBRA?

A: The child can qualify for the parent’s COBRA plan.

Q: How quickly does an adult child lose coverage after age 26?

A: At the end of the month. If a child’s birthday is March 15, then coverage ends March 31. If a child’s birthday is March 31, that is the last day.

Q: Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, New Jersey already had a law that allowed parents to place their adult children on their plans. How do the state and federal laws compare?

A: Prior to Obamacare in New Jersey, parents had the ability to cover their adult children up to age 31. Now after age 26, adult children can go on their parents’ plan and get a lower price premium, under the state statute.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Obamacare: Unraveling NJ FamilyCare and Medicaid

• Complete Health and Fitness coverage