Nearly one in five individuals in North Carolina live without health insurance. Many states — from Kentucky to Arkansas to Arizona — have had tremendous success in reducing the number of uninsured in their state by expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, known to many as Obamacare. In Kentucky the percentage of uninsured dropped by 42 percent in just a few months after the ACA and Medicaid expansion took effect, and in Minnesota 40 percent of people lacking health insurance in 2013 now have a health care policy.

With the General Assembly back in session, Gov. Pat McCrory has said the door is open to Medicaid expansion in our state. We’re not likely to see many bipartisan policy efforts this year in Raleigh, yet the broad benefits that would result from this policy could be enough to break the partisan divide we have seen dominate the General Assembly in recent sessions.

If there is a fiscal reason for rejecting Medicaid expansion, then scores of economists, health care policy experts and politicians in conservative states like Kentucky can’t find it. Yes, there are real costs to extending health care, but we’re already paying them. Each day we return $4.9 million dollars to the federal government, money that was to extend health insurance coverage to nearly 500,000 North Carolinians.

Refusing to spend that money to expand Medicaid in our state doesn’t mean we get to invest that money in better schools, or coal ash cleanup — we simply reject those funds while Republicans in states like Arkansas, Arizona and Kentucky look past the political games associated with a policy tied to our president and gladly accept the economic benefits.

But there are conservatives in North Carolina willing to look past the politics of the issue as well. Adam O’Neal, the mayor of Belhaven in far eastern North Carolina, has argued passionately for expansion due to the benefits it would bring to his rural community. His very blunt assessment reveals what many feel is underlying the resistance to this policy: “You can’t close hospitals and let people die to prove a point.” The fact that O’Neal is a Republican shouldn’t matter, but it is proof that crossing the partisan divide is possible when a policy will clearly benefit so many.

A recent study by the Milken Institute School of Public Health at the George Washington University shows North Carolina would add more than 43,000 jobs by 2020 due to Medicaid expansion and the state budget could save more than $300 million after accounting for savings in health care services and higher tax revenue resulting from economic growth. In Buncombe County alone, a projected 12,727 individuals would gain health insurance in the first two years of expansion and more than 1,500 jobs would be created by 2020.

But if the numbers aren’t reason enough, then consider the moral implications of condemning a half million people to unnecessarily live without insurance. According to health policy experts, a minimum of 455 people will die in North Carolina this year due to a lack of insurance. We simply have a moral imperative to expand access to health care.

When a policy that helps so many individuals brings with it clear fiscal benefits, it becomes imperative that we break out of our politics as usual to serve the people of North Carolina. By expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, we can cover about 500,000 individuals and bring jobs to Buncombe County. It’s time to let sanity prevail in Raleigh.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1E7tXRh