A winter storm that dropped about 3 inches of snow on Denver Saturday dumped far more than that on the northern Front Range and in the high country.

A record-setting 10 inches had fallen in Boulder before 5 p.m., according to the National Weather Service. It was more than forecasters expected and far surpassed the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s previous record for the date of 5.1 inches, set in 1996.

By Saturday afternoon, 8 inches had fallen at Copper Mountain, Eldora and Steamboat Springs.

“A lot of the locals are coming back to skiing after the holidays, so we’ll see a busy, busy day today,” Rob Linde, spokesperson for Eldora Mountain Resort, said in the morning. He expected more than 4,000 people to visit Eldora on Saturday.

Colorado Ski Country U.S.A. reported 6 inches fell at Arapahoe Basin and Winter Park, as well as 5 inches at Granby, 4 inches at Loveland and 3 inches at Monarch and Ski Cooper.

Around Denver, the weather service reported snow totaling as much as 8.2 inches in Genesee and 4.1 inches in Northglenn by 3:30 p.m.

Snow at Denver International Airport caused at least 60 flights cancellations. Runways were clear, but flight delays averaged an hour in the afternoon, the airport said in a news release. Unofficially, 2 inches of snow had fallen there by early afternoon.

Especially long lines to check in to Southwest Airlines had been somewhat relieved by the afternoon.

Southeast Denver remained on accident alert at 4:45 p.m. More than 100 accidents were reported to the Denver Police Department on Saturday, spokesman Sonny Jackson said.

Bernie Meier, a meteorologist at the National Weather Service in Boulder, said roads will be slick through the weekend.

“We’re not going to have any natural melting to speak of,” Meier said.

The Colorado Department of Transportation said on its website at 9 a.m. that, because of heavy traffic and road conditions, the travel time between Lookout Mountain and U.S. 40 on westbound Interstate 70 was about one hour. Icy conditions were also reported to the south on I-25 all along the Front Range. I-25 northbound was closed for about an hour in Pueblo because of multiple accidents.

Light snow is expected in the metro area Sunday, with temperatures dropping into the teens. The weather service expected Front Range temperatures to rise to a high of 40 degrees by Tuesday.

Kirk Mitchell: 303-954-1206, denverpost.com/coldcases or twitter.com/kmitchelldp

Alison Noon: 303-954-1223, anoon@denverpost.com or twitter.com/alisonnoon