Topics: 2014 elections, 2016 Elections, Debbie Wasserman Schultz, Democrats, DNC, Editor's Picks, eric schmidt, Hillary Clinton, Teddy Goff, Politics News

We all remember the RNC “autopsy” of the GOP’s devastating electoral losses in 2012. We remember it, mostly, because of how the GOP more or less avoided all of the policy advice (example, paraphrased: “don’t be so nativist… please?”) and still won a hundred billion seats everywhere in 2014. That may come back to haunt the GOP in 2016, when there’s a completely different electorate, but at least it gave the RNC a hollow opportunity to declare its post-2012 revamping “successful” and continue raising funds.

Now it’s time for the DNC to do the same thing. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, who for some mind-blowing reason still chairs the DNC following November’s shit show, has commissioned her own “Democratic Victory Task Force” to produce a report. Its initial findings will be presented in February with final recommendations due mid-year. “This diverse group of Democratic Party officials, strategists and advocates,” Wasserman Schultz announced, “will each bring with them expertise from their fields to collaborate on a holistic review of the Party’s past performance and present actionable areas for improvement moving forward.”

“Officials, strategists, and advocates.” Look at the list and determine which area of expertise the task force tilts toward:

The committee is made up of Democratic fundraiser Naomi Aberly, Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear, DNC Vice-Chair Donna Brazile, political operative Maria Cardona, party lawyer Marc Elias, former Obama digital guru Teddy Goff, marketing and event planning veteran Maneesh Goyal, Colorado Democratic Party Chair Rick Palacio, AFSCME President Lee Saunders and Google Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt.

Don’t know about you, but I see basically two (2) policy-ish people on that list: a labor leader and a governor. Otherwise we have a explicit fundraiser — they’re all fundraisers, in one way or another — a lawyer, an operative, a “digital guru,” an event planner(???), a state party operative, and Donna Brazile, who is cool, but also a campaign operative by training. Also, too: a tech billionaire.