RICHMOND, Va.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--It’s a day of firsts in Virginia, as BeneFinder launches the first online marketplace for individual health insurance in the Commonwealth. Offering industry-leading analytics to help each consumer choose the right plan, BeneFinder.com is a powerful solution for Virginia residents seeking insurance coverage under the Affordable Care Act. A BeneFinder customer recently used this exciting new technology platform to become the first Virginia resident to successfully purchase a broker-supported Coventry Health insurance plan in the Commonwealth.

BeneFinder allows consumers to choose from a wealth of plans offered in Virginia — both those offered within the Federal Exchange marketplace, and those offered privately through the carriers. Further, it helps clients navigate the wide array of options by providing them with proprietary analytical advice, asking only a few simple questions before showing each consumer the best plans for his or her unique needs. BeneFinder’s broker-based model also provides ongoing client support beyond the purchase to help clients navigate the policies when they begin using services. “The Affordable Care Act has extended insurance to a huge new audience, but there’s very little out there to help these potential clients understand what they need,” says David Blanchard, the company’s founder. “BeneFinder shows them all of the available options, not just those on Healthcare.gov, and then helps them understand what’s best for them, based on their expected Out-Of-Pocket cost and usage patterns. It’s a true market experience only if you can see all your options, and BeneFinder is the only platform that does exactly that.”

BeneFinder, in conjunction with Richmond development partner Evenspring, expects to expand its coverage base to the Mid-Atlantic region soon, and is working hard with carriers to list all the plans available through the Federal and State Exchanges as well as those available in the open market. Its simple interface and online enrollment process dramatically simplify the process of obtaining coverage under the ACA.

About BeneFinder

BeneFinder was born out of the desire to help individuals and families find a better match for their health insurance. Tell us as much as you want to about your situation, and we'll use our proprietary, industry-leading technology to find the best plan for you and your family. Better yet, we'll connect you right to the insurance carrier so you can purchase at your convenience, all at absolutely no additional cost to you. The process is simple and free. In fact, by law you’re guaranteed that we’re providing you with the best rate for your recommended plan. Based in Richmond, Virginia, BeneFinder is changing the way people buy health insurance, saving clients money while making the entire process easier.

About Evenspring

Evenspring is a digital strategy concierge company dedicated to rapid implementation of creative solutions, and specializes in distilling complex concepts and technologies into their simplest forms. The Company provides turn-key content creation, application and multimedia design and development, and mobile and strategy consulting services. Headquartered in Richmond, Virginia, Evenspring serves a diverse client base throughout the United States, ranging from small and middle-market firms to Fortune 500 companies. Evenspring is excited and proud to have assisted BeneFinder to launch its successful web-based insurance evaluation and purchasing platform.

For additional information, please visit www.benefinder.com.