BEND, Ore. -

The Oregon Insurance Division approved premium hikes on Wednesday of up to 40 percent for 2016. The increase applies only to the 10 percent of Oregonians who are self-insured.

"This is a pretty good sized increase," said insurance agent Kristine Akenson with High Desert Insurance & Financial Services.

Many Oregonians already struggle with the cost of health care.

"I just hope I don't get hurt," said Ryan Eddy of Bend, who cannot afford health insurance. "Once we pay our bills, we don't have anything left."

Eddy is not alone. KTVZ's Facebook page received many similar stories. Kathi Parshall said: "We are paying over $1,000 per month for a family of four. We can't pay anymore."

The premium increase only applies to those who are self-insured and not to those who are insured through their employers. Currently 10 percent of Oregonians are self-insured. According to the Oregon Insurance Division, 78 percent of those who enrolled through helathcare.gov received an average tax credit of $199 per member per month.

Insurance companies asked for the increase because they lost over $1 million last year. The OID found the cost of providing coverage for individual plans in Oregon was $830 million, while premiums were only $703 million.

"As more people have been able to enroll in insurance, that costs money," said Jake Sunderland with the Oregon Insurance Division. "That's what we've been seeing is that this ultimately reflects the cost of providing health care to Oregonians."



However, the trend of increasing prices for premiums is nothing new.

"The price of insurance seems to always go up," Akenson said.

Sunderland said one of the biggest problems is the rising cost of health care.

"In general, what we see is an increase in medical inflation every year," Sunderland said.

Sunderland also added that since the Affordable Care Act took effect, the inflation has slowed down but overall costs are still increasing.

The United States has the highest per capita spending on health care worldwide.

The average cost of an MRI is around $1,200. Compare that to just $140 in Switzerland.



The average hospital charges around $600 for an IV bag, which is almost 1,000 times the cost of the official solution and materials.

"You would think that if we're paying all that money that we would be able to afford it for us," Eddy said. "I mean, what are we paying it for?"