If we held a forum or a public debate no one would show up. But if we have an event like this it gets people talking about it and if it gets people talking about it then we’ve succeeded ... We’re not afraid to be politically incorrect. We don’t espouse to the belief that politics is immune to offending someone.

Lorenzo V. Garcia, chairman of the UT chapter of the Young Conservatives of Texas in the San Antonio Express-News. November 18, 2013.

I have been shocked at the uproar over the event's premise and at the personal attacks against me. Today, opponents of YCT have claimed that I am being used as a front man. I have been called an "Uncle Tom." I have received emails and comments via social media filled with obscenity. The reactions of some who claim that YCT is creating a demeaning or degrading environment on campus have been truly disgraceful.

Lorenzo V. Garcia, in a statement canceling YCT's "Catch and Illegal Immigrant Game." November 19, 2013.

Good day Austin:

Here, from today's Statesman, is Patrick Beach on Lorenzo V. Garcia's change of heart.

After denunciations from both major political parties and University of Texas President Bill Powers, the UT chapter of Young Conservatives of Texas has called off a “Catch an Illegal Immigrant” event set for Wednesday. In a statement, Lorenzo Garcia, the group’s chairman, said members were concerned “that the university will retaliate against them and that the protest against the event could create a safety issue for our volunteers.” “After the University President and the Vice President for Diversity and Community Engagement released statements denouncing the event we planned as violating the university’s honor code, I spoke with our chapter’s members, and they are both concerned that the university will retaliate against them and that the protest against the event could create a safety issue for our volunteers.”

Here is LVG's full statement.

And here is the top of Ralph K.M. Haurwitz's story from today's paper, before the latest development.

A student group at the University of Texas dubbed its mock sting operation “Catch an Illegal Immigrant,” saying the goal is to provoke discussion about an issue of national importance. But so far, the event planned for Wednesday has provoked little more than a volley of criticism aimed at the UT chapter of the Young Conservatives of Texas, which was repudiated by Democrats, Republicans and university officials alike. Hours after the group announced its plan Monday, UT President Bill Powers declared the event “completely out of line with the values we espouse.” A spokesman for GOP gubernatorial candidate Greg Abbott, for whose campaign the chairman of the Young Conservatives worked until recently, also denounced the plan. The Young Conservatives said several people would be walking around the campus with the label “illegal immigrant” on their clothing. Any UT student who catches someone wearing the label would receive a $25 gift card upon taking that person to the group’s table at the West Mall, a kind of free-speech zone.

I must admit I was feeling a little sorry this morning for Lorenzo V. Garcia, who woke up today to find himself an object of national headlnes and general opprobrium. For the properly provocative campus conservative, that would ordinarily be a badge of honor. But it appears the condemnation was so complete - including denunciation by the gubernatorial campaign of Attorney General Greg Abbott, for whom LVG until recently toiled - that I suspected it might have left LVG feeling a little queasy.

Then again, maybe not.

As David Rauf reported at the San Antonio Express-News:

In 2005, YCT’s chapter at the University of North Texas held an identical affair to protest a renewed call for a guest worker program by then-President George W. Bush. But when students at UT tried to duplicate those efforts, protestors drowned them out and caused the event to be canceled, Garcia said. “Sticks and stones,” Garcia said of potential protestors. “We’re not going to let anything like that stop us this time,” he said.

Here is how LGV explained "Catch an Illegal Immigrant" on the Facebook page he created for the purpose:

YCT will be having a "Catch an Illegal Immigrant" event this upcoming Wednesday. The details of the game goes as follows: There will be several people walking around the UT campus with the label "illegal immigrant" on their clothing. Any UT student who catches one of these "illegal immigrants" and brings them back to our table will receive a $25 gift card. The purpose of this event is to spark a campus-wide discussion about the issue of illegal immigration, and how it affects our everyday lives.

The Facebook page did become a forum for discussion, most of it running against the event. Some samples:

Melissa Lynn Doty Hey Conservative Club! I'm in charge of Thanksgiving activities for the family get-together. Could you help me come up with an offensive game? I'd like to involve genocide, privilege, a splash of colonialism and then sprinkling of hatred. Any ideas? Laila Molina As an undocumented student I find this so disrespectful and offensive. First of all, the foreign policies in place today are not a "game". This is not a laughing matter or something to romanticize with gift cards and money. These people you are targeting are some of the most hard working human beings you will ever encounter. You think we just wake up one morning and say "Hey, you know what? Today seems like a good day to cross the border and risk our lives in the process." No. My parents moved to this country and worked hard to learn a new language and new traditions not because they thought it would be fun... but because they wanted a better future for their daughter. I could not be prouder of all of the hard work my mom and dad put into their lives and into me. The sad part is, there are still so many misconceptions about undocumented people taking from this nation and never giving back when, quite the contrary, we give and give to this country and get no benefits back at all for any of the taxes we pay (surprise surprise...we pay them) or work we do. So, Lorenzo Garcia may stand up for his beliefs as a Latino man and I admire you for that, however.... check your family history before continuing with your methods. And, by the way... it is better to "die on your feet than live on your knees" as revolutionary Emilano Zapata (not a founding father of the U.S.A) stated during the Mexican Revolution in 1910. That is why we fight every day against people like you who have no knowledge of our lifestyle or reasonings or anything remotely close to what we go through. Britt Morrett This is why conservatives can't have nice things - because people would rather pimp outrage than find free market solutions to a broken immigration system. Hey YCT - I'm a Latina conservative and I supported the Affirmative Action Bake Sale, but this is ridiculous. My question to the organizers - how, in any way, does this event expand the conservative movement or display our principles in a positive light? Or is this event just to provoke anger for the sake of being controversial?

Ah yes, the affirmative action bake sale. As Haurwitz reported:

In September, the Young Conservatives held a bake sale, charging different prices based on the buyer’s race, ethnicity and gender to underscore the group’s opposition to affirmative action.

And here, from 10 years ago this fall, is a defense of the affirmative action bake sale on FrontPageMagazine from Brendan Steinhauser, who then, like LGV today, was head of the UT YCT chapter, subsequently went on to help build the tea party movement as the federal and state campaign director for FreedomWorks, and is now managing Sen. John Cornyn's campaign fro a third term.

This past Thursday, September 24th, was a dark day for freedom of speech on college campuses. An Affirmative Action bake sale organized by The Young Conservatives of Texas was shut down by the administration at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. The idea of the bake sale was to show that discrimination is wrong by selling cookies at prices that corresponded to the consumer’s race. While white males were asked to pay one dollar, hispanic and black students paid less. The administration responded to this act of protest by closing the bake sale down because a few students claimed to be offended. At least one black student filed a grievance with the university. Tim Moore, director of the Hughes-Trigg Student Center at SMU remarked, “This was not an issue of free speech. It was really an issue where we had a hostile environment being created that was potentially volatile." According to this Orwellian reasoning, free speech only applies to issues so dull or meaningless as to generate no controversy. By these standards, Martin Luther King Jr. would not have been allowed to give his “I Have a Dream Speech.” Everyone knows how volatile the civil rights movement was in America, but should the concept have been suppressed because narrow-minded redneck hatemongers were offended?



Once again the hypocrisy of the academic establishment has been exposed. To them, free speech only applies to “politically correct” ideas, like support of Affirmative Action. The paradoxical aspect of leftist beliefs is that any speech that does not fit into the paradigm of liberal thought must be prohibited in the name of “tolerance” -- a tolerance that excludes toleration of conflicting views.



As soon as the story broke about the SMU bake sale, news media from all over the country flocked to Dallas. David Rushing, the organizer of the event and state chairman of the Young Conservatives, was flown to New York City to discuss the issue on "ABC World News" and "Good Morning America." This shows the magnitude of the implications for the expression of conservative thought on American universities. If SMU is allowed to shut down such events, what prevents it from stopping similar protests in the future? What precedent does this set for college campuses in the rest of the country?

Well, the precedent it set for conservative activists was more affirmative action bake sales.

This story from Mediaite.com includes video of James O'Keefe - the undercover auteur whose hidden camera videos brought down ACORN and were most recently trained on Obamacare "navigators" in Texas - at an affirmative action bake sale at Rutgers. (That's O'Keefe engaging in debate with a young woman.) Also, in a forerunner of his later work, there is an undercover video here of O'Keefe's mock-earnest meeting with a Rutgers official seeking the removal of Lucky Charms from the dining hall because of its demeaning depiction of an identifiably Irish character.

So is LVG a future Brendan Steinhauser or James O'Keefe? Will he emerge as a Young Conservative hero? Or has he crossed a line into a mean-spiritedness that will cling to him for years to come?

Here is the statement from UT Austin President Bill Powers:

The proposed Young Conservatives of Texas event is completely out of line with the values we espouse at The University of Texas at Austin. Our students, faculty and the entire university work hard both to promote diversity and engage in a respectful exchange of ideas. The Wednesday event does not reflect that approach or commitment.



As Americans, we should always visualize our Statue of Liberty and remember that our country was built on the strength of immigration. Our nation continues to grapple with difficult questions surrounding immigration. I ask YCT to be part of that discussion but to find more productive and respectful ways to do so that do not demean their fellow students.



The university Faculty Council has unanimously endorsed the statement.



And here is the statement from Dr. Gregory J. Vincent, UT’s vice president for diversity and community engagement.

Apparently drawing from a 2005-06 plan of Young Conservative organizations on campuses across the country, the UT Austin chapter of Young Conservatives of Texas (YCT) is hosting a game on campus this Wednesday called “Catch an Illegal Immigrant.”



The game involves students walking around campus with the words “Illegal Immigrant” on their back. Students who capture the marked students and bring them back to the YCT table will be rewarded with a $25 gift card.



As was the case with the YCT bake sale on the west mall last month, such tactics are inflammatory and demeaning. And once again in trying to be provocative, the YCT is contributing to an environment of exclusion and disrespect among our students, faculty and staff by sending the message that certain students do not belong on our campus. Some UT Austin students are undocumented, and under Dream Act legislation signed into law in 2001, these students are entitled to attend state universities. They are part of a growing diverse population on campus and in the state of Texas—a population that plays increasingly larger roles in our intellectual, economic, political and cultural communities.



The university honor code entreats students to abide by the core values of the university, one of which is freedom, but two others of which are individual opportunity and responsibility. The university also values free speech and our campus continues to be an arena that inspires dialogue from diverse viewpoints. However, it is also meant to be a community where students exhibit respect for each other while holding those viewpoints.



If the members of YCT carry out their plan for “Catch an Illegal Immigrant,” they are willfully ignoring the honor code and contributing to the degradation of our campus culture. And once again, they will have resorted to exercising one of the university’s core values to the detriment of others. Such actions are counterproductive to true dialogue on our campus, and it is unrepresentative of the ideals toward which our community strives.

For LVG, though, the criticism that would probably most sting would be that coming from the Abbott campaign.

Here, from Wayne Slater in the Dallas Morning News:

Until this summer, Garcia was a paid field director for the Republican attorney general’s political campaign for governor. “He used to work for us but I think he resigned close to two months ago,” Abbott campaign spokesman Matt Hirsch said Monday. As one of nearly three dozen field directors, Garcia’s job was to recruit volunteers for the Abbott campaign, Hirsch said. Garcia declined to say why he left or how he was being paid. Abbott finance reports do not list Garcia as a recipient of money directly from his campaign.

Here is the statement from Texans for Greg Abbott Press Secretary Avdiel Huerta:



Our campaign has no affiliation with this repugnant effort. Illegal immigration and the failed policies of the Obama Administration are not a joking matter. Conservatives should not stoop to the level of liberals, whose shenanigans at the Texas Capitol this summer, including chants of 'hail Satan' during Senator Davis' filibuster to allow abortions after five months, did nothing but sidetrack the Texas Legislature.

Here is the statement from Hector Nieto of the Democratic Lone Star Project, responding to the Abbott campaign's statement.

Cynical and insincere comments by Greg Abbott won’t hide a campaign dependent upon enabling supporters who denigrate Texas Hispanics. If Greg Abbott truly finds the 'Catch an Illegal Immigrant' game promoted by his supporters to be 'repugnant,' then he should immediately condemn the Young Conservatives of Texas and pledge that he will neither seek nor accept their endorsement or support in any other way.

I do think the statement from the Abbott campaign was wanting and altogether too politically tendentious. If they really find the "Catch an Illegal Immigrant" game repugnant, then why not just say that - and perhaps have Abbott himself actually offer some wise words of direction for a young man who obviously views Abbott as a kind of mentor - rather than throwing in all that extraneous and irrelevant stuff about Satan and late-term abortion.

Here, Abbott would have done well to take a page from the man he hopes to succeed - Gov. Rick Perry.

When Perry was attacked in the Republican presidential debates in 2011 for supporting a bill passed in 2001 that offered in-state tuition rates at public universities for illegal immigrants who have lived in Texas for three years, he replied:

If you say that we should not educate children who have come into our state for no other reason than they’ve been brought there by no fault of their own, I don’t think you have a heart. We need to be educating these children because they will become a drag on our society.”

Of course, I have since learned from Double Down, the new book on the 2012 campaign by Mark Halperin and John Heilemann, that Perry, in painful recovery from back surgery, had not had a wink of sleep the night before that debate. And, Republicans were so furious at being thought heartless, that Perry had to apologize for the characterization. And no Republican running for governor today supports what Perry supported or would say now what Perry said then.

But, as they said of Camelot, for one brief shining moment ...

Catching up with Barack

The other day I got an email from Barack Obama. It began:

Jonathan -- I want to cut through the noise and talk with you directly about where we're headed in the fight for change.

It ended:

Thanks -- I can't wait to catch up.

There was even a P.S.

It's been a while since I've been able to do something like this -- I hope you can join the call.

Wow. The president invited me to get on the phone with him to catch up, to talk things through Monday night. Naturally, I signed up for that, and when I did, I was offered an opportunity to contribute to grassroots organizing on behalf of the president's agenda - $25, $50, $100, $250, $500, $1,000, or whatever amoount suits me; Visa, MasterCard, American Express and Discover accepted. I passed on that but last night clicked onto the designated website for my talk with the president.

I was not alone. According to the woman hosting the call, there were a "ridiclous number" of people on the line - "over 200,000 folks."

I will turn the story over here, for a moment, to Michael D. Shear in the New York Times.

WASHINGTON — Some supporters who tried to log in to hear President Obama defend his embattled health care law on Monday night were unable to hear him because the website of the group behind the call, Organizing for Action, failed to work for them. The website problems were an inconvenient moment for a president who has spent the last six weeks trying to explain the failure of HealthCare.gov, the online marketplace for Mr. Obama’s Affordable Care Act. The event on Monday was intended to offer Mr. Obama’s most ardent supporters a chance to hear directly from him. It was the latest conference call to be hosted by Organizing for Action, the nonprofit group that grew out of the president’s 2012 campaign organization.

Well, I got through to the call and when Obama spoke, there was the warm crackle and pop of a classic vinyl recording. I wondered if that was the manipulation of some sound engineer intended to conjure up the feeling of an FDR fireside chat.

The call amounted to a pep talk for Obama supporters and organizers, focused on working to get as many people as possible enrolled in the Affordable Care Act in the months ahead, and suggesting that Thanksgiving and Christmas holiday dinners were an ideal time to get that odd cousin or uncle interested in signing up.

Mostly, the president offered words of encouragement:

- It's great to talk to you ... you guys are the ones in the trenches. - We knew it was going to be hard. Change is hard. - I’ve run my last political campaign, but I’ve got one last campaign in me and that’s making sure this law works. - I'm proud of you. It's a long race but we're not near the tape, so we've just got to keep running.

The good news for me was that, from what I could tell, the president was no longer dropping his "g's," which had started to get on my nerves of late. And not just my nerves.

For example, there was Samuel L. Jackson's profane denunication of Obama for the dropped "g's" in an interview with Playboy.

As the Daily Mail reported it, 'In an astonishing rant, Jackson, 64, said that the President was trying too hard to 'relate' to normal people instead of being true to who he really is."

And, as Politico reported, back in the thick of the 2012 presidential campaign, James Lipton, host of Bravo's Inside the Actor's Studio, also expressed his displeasure while appearing on Laura Ingrhama's radio show.

After Ingraham played a clip of Obama’s 2011 “shake it off” speech, Lipton said, “I wanted to write a piece some time ago … called ‘The Disappearing G.’ It was inspired more by George W. Bush than by anybody else, where suddenly this man who comes from a [inaudible] upper-class family and comes from an upper-class world, but the G in -ing vanished — I’m goin’, we’re talkin’. And other politicians have taken it on. Obama does it there. I don’t like it anywhere. If a fella is educated and all his life has been saying, ‘We’re going to succeed,’ he doesn’t need to say, ‘We’re gonna succeed.’”

Is Obama's g-dropping any more an "affect" than W's? I don't know, but, as an Austin conservative strategist told me yesterday, "at least Bush had a ranch and cleared brush."