Diego Gonzalez’s high school team won two state championships. That’s not unusual for a college football player, except in his case the state is Nuevo Leon, Mexico.

He also played one year of college football there before transferring to Colorado as the final recruit in coach Mike MacIntyre’s first CU class in 2013. MacIntyre is glad he did.

Gonzalez kicked the game-winning field goal in overtime Saturday night, lifting the Buffs to a 27-24 victory over Colorado State in the Rocky Mountain Showdown.

Gonzalez’s parents drove 18 hours from Mexico to see him play in that game and the next two, but he didn’t have time to look for them in the crowd of 66,253 at Sports Authority Field at Mile High after his 32-yard game- winner. He was mobbed by jubilant teammates.

“It’s really fun kicking the game-winner, especially if your family is here,” said Gonzalez, a senior in school but a junior in eligibility. “All the players were jumping on me.”

But his heroics raised a question: How much American football is there in Mexico?

“There’s a lot of universities in Mexico that play American football,” Gonzalez said. “There’s a lot of high schools too. It’s not the first time I’ve heard that question.”

Gonzalez started out as a soccer player but quit when he was 12. He developed an interest in American football and went out for a club team. “I just didn’t like soccer that much,” Gonzalez said. “I mean, I like it, but I wanted to try something different.”

At first he wanted to be a wide receiver, but then he got a chance to kick.

“A parent of a friend of mine who used to play soccer with me, he told the coach, ‘You should try this guy as a kicker, he has a really good leg,’ ” Gonzalez said. “They tried me and my first kick was a kickoff. It’s pretty different than a soccer ball, so it was a really bad hit, but they taught me how to do it, the different technique. I guess I did pretty good. The coach was like, ‘You’re going to be the kicker-slash-wide receiver.’ “

It didn’t take long before Gonzalez started dreaming about playing Division I football in the United States, so he quit playing receiver to focus on kicking.

“You’ve seen these guys, they’re really fast, really athletic guys,” said Gonzalez, 6-foot and 215 pounds. “I was like, ‘I don’t think I have a good chance being a wide receiver, because I’m not super tall and super fast.’ I was like, ‘I’m going to specialize in kicking,’ and, hey, I’m here.”

Gonzalez played one year of college football at Monterrey Tech in Mexico, but by then he was attending kicking camps in the U.S. Colorado special-teams coordinator Toby Neinas heard about him, liked what he saw on video and flew to Mexico to see him kick in person. That clinched it for Neinas, and CU offered Gonzalez a spot.

As a transfer in 2013, Gonzalez had to sit out a year. Last year he kicked once, a kickoff in the opener against CSU, but because of lingering effects of a sport hernia he shut it down for the season.

This year he was 5-for-5 on field goals — including a 52-yarder in the first quarter Saturday night — before having one blocked just before halftime. He missed a 48-yarder on the final play of regulation, but MacInyre had faith in him in overtime.

“He is a phenomenal young man,” MacIntyre said. “He gets it, he understands life, he’s so thankful to be here. He was, ‘I’ll just kick it again,’ and he did. Of course I was nervous, but I knew I would make that.”

CSU got the ball first in overtime. CU’s Tedric Thompson blocked a 27-yard field goal, setting up Gonzalez for the winner.

“It’s amazing, it’s my first opportunity to kick a game-winner,” Gonzalez said. “It just happened to be I was the last guy to put three points on the scoreboard. I didn’t win the game. The offense, the defense did everything. The offense put me in a great position to make the field goal.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer

Eye on …The Colonels

Nicholls State at Colorado, 11:30 a.m. Saturday, Folsom Field, Pac-12 Network

For the record: The Colonels are 0-2 after losing 20-10 to Incarnate Word of San Antonio.

Who’s hot: Nicholls State’s defense had one of its better games, holding an opponent to fewer than 30 points and 300 total yards.

Who’s not: Nicholls State’s offense. The Colonels have scored only 10 points this season.

Streaking: The Colonels’ losing streak has reached 20 games.

Key stat: Nicholls State is 3-24 against FBS opponents since 2000.

FYI: The Colonels and Buffaloes are meeting for the first time. Nicholls State lost 44-16 at Air Force last year.

Irv Moss, The Denver Post