Okla. Senate Leader Says Medicaid Expansion Not Likely To Advance This Session

Senate President Pro Tem Brian Bingman says expansion advocates don't have the votes in the Republican Senate, which is set to adjourn next week. At the same time, the Oklahoma Medicaid Board is waiting to see what spending level the legislature sets so the board can determine if it needs to go forward with a 25 percent reimbursement cut.

The Associated Press: Medicaid Expansion Plan Likely Dead In Oklahoma

A bill to expand Medicaid eligibility in Oklahoma so that the state could tap into an infusion of federal funding available under the Affordable Care Act appears to be dead, the state's Senate leader said on Monday. With just one week remaining before lawmakers are set to adjourn, Senate President Pro Tem Brian Bingman said there isn't enough support in the Republican-controlled Senate to approve the plan. A proposed $1.50-per-pack tax increase on cigarettes to help pay for the state's share was defeated in the Oklahoma House last week, and Bingman said that proposal is also likely dead for the year. (5/23)

The Oklahoman: Oklahoma Medicaid Board Tables Vote On 25 Percent Provider Rate Cut

The state Medicaid agency board Monday postponed its vote on a 25 percent provider rate cut, planning to vote once the agency knows more about its appropriation from the Legislature. Nico Gomez, Oklahoma Health Care Authority chief executive officer, said he proposed the rate cut in March amid concerns that the agency would see a major cut in state money for the next fiscal year, which starts July 1. However, because the Legislature hadn't proposed a budget as of Monday afternoon, Gomez advised the board to wait to make such a significant decision. (Cosgrove, 5/23)

Also in the news are polls looking at the public's interest in Medicaid expansion —

Twin Falls (Idaho) Times-News: Idahoans Unhappy With Medicaid Inaction But Support New Gun Law, Poll Says

Most Idahoans are unhappy with the Legislature's inaction on Medicaid expansion but supported doing away with the requirement for a pistol permit within city limits, according to the latest polling released by Idaho Politics Weekly. This year's legislative session ended without any action from lawmakers on addressing health coverage for the estimated 78,000 uninsured Idahoans in the "Medicaid gap," and the polling, done by the Salt Lake City firm Dan Jones and Associates, found 64 percent of respondents disagree with this action, while 30 percent agree and 7 percent didn't know. (Brown, 5/23)