The new contracts limit income to about 6 percent and spell out new standards for claims payments and penalties for companies that don’t comply. (Photo: Thinkstock.com)

Kentucky has awarded new contracts to the five private companies that manage its rapidly expanding Medicaid program, its growth fueled by hundreds of thousands of new members under the Affordable Care Act.

The growth has been a windfall for some of the companies over the past year, but the new contracts are designed to limit potential profits and address complaints about slow payments and excessively complicated forms and procedures.

Companies awarded the contracts Wednesday were Passport Health Plan, Anthem, Coventry Cares, Humana and Wellcare.

Last year, four of the companies hired to manage Medicaid — the government health plan for low-income citizens — cleared more than $500 million in income above expenses, according to statements companies must file with the Kentucky Department of Insurance. Only Humana posted a loss.

Some of the profits ranged from 7 percent to nearly 18 percent in 2014. The new contracts limit income to about 6 percent and spell out new standards for claims payments and penalties for companies that don't comply.

Additionally, the state plans to create an "incentive pool" to reward companies that show improved health outcomes for members.

And it sets requirements for standardizing forms and procedures as well as increased oversight of companies from the state.

Audrey Tayse Haynes, secretary of the Cabinet for Health and Family Services, said officials have learned from four years' experience with Medicaid managed care. The goal of the new contracts is to improve efficiency as well as the health and well-being of more than 1.1 million Kentuckians on Medicaid, she said.

The new contracts "will translate into more options and improved services from our managed care companies," Haynes said.

State Sen. Ralph Alvarado, a Winchester Republican and family physician who has criticized the state's Medicaid managed care system, said he hopes the new contracts will clear up the problems, including slow payment and non-payment of claims.

Alvarado, co-chairman of the joint House-Senate Medicaid oversight committee, said he knows from personal experience as well as from numerous complaints by hospitals, doctors and other health care providers.

"That's why I get so hot under the collar," Alvarado said. "While I'm taking care of folks, I'm getting denials like crazy."

He said he also hopes the state succeeds in controlling profits of the managed care companies, calling it an outrage that some companies are reaping millions off the program while denying care or delaying payments.

Mike Rust, president of the Kentucky Hospital Association, said his members are pleased to see more standardization built into the contracts for the five companies that previously used separate systems for claims processing, payment and other services.

"We do like some of the conditions for more standardization," he said.

All of the companies will operate statewide under the one-year contract that began July 1, with the option for four annual renewals.

Louisville-based Passport, the only nonprofit company among the five, said it wants to build on its 20 years of experience providing Medicaid care in Kentucky.

"We look forward to continuing to serve as Kentucky's only nonprofit, provider-sponsored Medicaid health plan for many more years," CEO Mark B. Carter said.

Launched in 2011 primarily as a way to control costs, managed care has saved the state some $1.3 billion in state and federal funds, according to state officials.

The program expanded rapidly last year under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, transforming Medicaid from a program for the disabled and impoverished women and children to one that offers coverage to anyone under 138 percent of the federal poverty level.

That would cover an individual making less than $16,000 a year or $36,000 a year in household income for a family of four.

After Kentucky launched the federal health care expansion through kynect, its health exchange, about 400,000 additional people enrolled in Medicaid and about another 150,000 obtained health plans through the private market.

That has helped Kentucky dramatically cut its number of citizens without health insurance and with lack of access to care.

State officials say they want to use managed care as a way to ensure more Kentuckians get medical care in hopes of improving the state's overall poor health.

State Medicaid Commissioner Lisa Lee, in a recent interview, called the growth in Medicaid and overall health coverage in Kentucky an "exciting time."

"I've been in Medicaid for 16 years," she said. "And I keep seeing it get better and better."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ItYMVg