Topics: chloe hough, Education, Kansas, R-Kan., Sam Brownback, News, Politics News

Located in a towering late Gothic revival building — apocryphally described by locals as the first million-dollar high school west of the Mississippi River — Topeka High School, situated just four blocks from the Statehouse, is the pride of Kansas’ capital city.

The hallowed halls of the 84-year-old building have served as the academic home of Herbert Hoover-era Vice President Charles Curtis, basketball legend Dean Smith, the revered Republican Sen. Nancy Landon Kassebaum, and renowned poet and novelist Ben Lerner. The school’s bevy of Advanced Placement courses and its acclaimed programs in music, theater and debate attract many transfer students who live outside the school district; I was one of them.

Topeka High’s tale, however, is ultimately one of two schools. Its racial and socioeconomic diversity is one of the school’s most trumpeted selling points, but the lived experiences of the school’s poor and minority students are vastly different from those of the predominantly white and affluent students who flock to the school for its robust academics. Nearly 30 percent of Topeka High’s freshmen drop out before graduation, compared with a statewide average of 15 percent. More than two-thirds of students receive free or reduced-price lunches. According to figures provided by the school, about 40 percent of graduates do not go on to any postsecondary education or training.

Those are the students slated to be hit hardest by Republican Gov. Sam Brownback’s public education cuts, which he has imposed to help fill the massive revenue shortfalls created by his income tax cuts for the wealthy. Under a block-grant funding scheme Brownback signed into law this winter, Topeka High’s school district is slated to lose $3.6 million in funding this year and over the next two years after that, jeopardizing a wide array of academic and extracurricular offerings; for Topeka High students, athletics programs, arts education, and foreign language courses could be on the chopping block. Other districts have cut short their school years; others still warn they may not have enough toilet paper to last out the school year.

I graduated from Topeka High in 2009 — one year ahead of my longtime friend Chloe Hough, the waitress who sparked a viral Internet sensation over the weekend after a chance encounter with Brownback. Working her last-ever shift at Boss Hawg’s, a popular Topeka barbecue joint, the 22-year-old posted on Facebook Saturday night: “You guys 911 emergency: It’s my last shift and I am waiting on our governor. What should I say to him. This is not a test. Go.” Her ultimate decision? On the line where customers typically include a tip, Hough marked a big “X,” writing alongside it, “Tip the schools.”

Brownback’s office has yet to comment; the closest we’ve come to an official statement was a petty attack from the director of the Kansas Republican Party, who denounced Hough’s “arrogant stupidity” on Monday. Hough, who said her younger sister with special needs has lost educators because of budget cuts, discussed the brouhaha with me over the phone on Monday. Our conversation, which has been lightly edited for clarity and length, is below.

You’ve received media inquiries from the New York Times, the Daily Mail, and now you’re being pestered by an old friend who works at Salon. Did you expect this kind of reaction?