, CP Op-Ed Contributor By Larry Tomczak CP Op-Ed Contributor

A mother walked into the supermarket with her young son. When he was offered a cookie the mother alleges she alerted the employee of his health problems. After dialogue, the employee gave him the cookie. Tragically, he later died. Now the nationally known supermarket has been sued and the case will revolve around whether or not "due diligence" was done - a reference to people being responsible to do careful investigation beforehand in order to make informed decisions.

Oftentimes, Christians don't give due diligence to political candidates and/or issues affecting their lives. Then at the 11th hour or when it really is too late, prayer and fasting is called for in desperation, hoping God will intervene and do what quite possibly He expectd us to do in the first place to avert disaster. Abortion-on-demand? Same-sex marriage? Change a crafty politician's heart?

Hours after Hillary Clinton declared her candidacy for president, a friend texted me and assured me that this time he was going to evaluate everything more carefully. With Hillary sending a message by selecting young Robby Mook as the first openly gay manager of a major presidential campaign and her YouTube "announcement" video featuring homosexuals celebrating their gay "marriage", many are proceeding with great caution. "Fool me once, shame on you; fool me twice, shame on me!"

In the Bible there is the account of a tragic figure named Saul who is an example of a gifted figure God's people wanted as their leader although it was not the will of God. Since all the other nations had impressive rulers, the people of Israel wanted to make history and have one too. Scripture tells that he was a dark, handsome and charismatic individual who rose to power quickly, but once there three things lead to his downfall:

He was arrogant, deciding his standards were superior to God's; He was a narcissist and crafty leader who lied to accomplish his ambitions; He misused the authority God gave him to advance his agenda rather than God's.

When Barack Obama began his presidency, he promised a "fundamental transformation of America." Six years later, multitudes are profoundly disturbed as they've witnessed the outworking of his vision. Examining the fruit, much of it is rotten to the core.

Former Vice-President Dick Cheney recenlty said he thinks Obama has tried to "take America down." A congressional leader communicated that it is "going to take us years to regain the ground we've lost under this President, if we ever can." Another added, "Our allies no longer trust us and our enemies no longer fear us."

Here's the deal: Do those who didn't give due diligence but voted for Obama blindly share any responsibility for our current state of affairs? As America is experiencing unprecedented moral decline and need for divine intervention, will God revisit us if those who need to repent don't acknowledge their part in our present afflictions? "I will go away and return to My place until they acknowledge their guilt and seek My face; in their affliction they will earnestly seek me" (Hos.5:15).

God's Controversy With His People

In the book of Hosea 4:1, God states that He has a controversy with those claiming to be His followers yet compromising, resulting in the nation's moral decline. He goes on to state, "My people are destroyed for a lack of knowledge; because thou hast rejected knowledge, I will also reject thee…" (Hos.4:6).

The overwhelming majority of America's God-conscious people would never want God to reject us and turn His face away from our nation. But what if as a condition for Him not doing so, He requires us to confess where we rejected knowledge of what He expects of us as the people of

God?

Let's get real practical here. In the last presidential elections did you carefully, prayerfully and biblically investigate key candidates asking for your vote or was there laziness and acting out of emotion. Did you do this with candidate Obama?

Reflect back, do you relate to any of the following?

"I really don't have time to study candidates' positions; but I do know that I love the 'Hope and Change' emphasis…So many celebrities back this guy …Hey, this is our shot at making amends for slavery plus make history…The guy's so cool…I see his bumper stickers at church…Abortion? He says it's above his pay grade… Gay marriage? He states he's a Christian and opposed; he upholds marriage between a man and a woman!...My parents raised us Democrat…The other guy's a Mormon! Watch out for a Mormon takeover…Let's give the guy a chance, he's a good speaker…Our pastors don't address politics, they avoid controversy…I'm tired of Bush...Don't believe all that garbage about his Muslim background and socialistic beliefs and associates…Jesus didn't get into politics…I don't vote 'cause God is sovereign …Look, it's all goin' down anyway, why bother?"

Overview of Obama's Presidency

In the Bible there are numerous references to government and leadership. Romans 13:1-6 is a comprehensive explanation of the role of government in promoting good and punishing evil. A leader is described as "God's servant for your good." The emphasis is on government promoting righteousness and administering punishment.

Under President Obama we've experienced predominately the opposite. We've witnessed the trampling of our Judeo-Christian foundational values.

The standards and institutions providing the glue that held together our society have disintegrated drastically under policies spearheaded by this Administration. Marriage and family are under serious attack with gay and lesbian "marriage" celebrated by Mr. Obama alongside of his unwavering advocacy of unfettered abortion on demand.

Despite what is communicated, the economic condition of our nation and Israel's future are in peril; radical Islam is an exploding yet minimized threat; and intentional deception characterizes much of what comes out of the White House. Since Jesus taught us to be "fruit inspectors" (Matt.7:13-21), the time has come to examine the fruit as I continue to pray daily for our President.

Fruit of the Obama Administration

* Aggressively supported the entire LGBT agenda including same-sex marriage. Declined to protect the federal Defense of Marriage Act. Deliberately deceived Americans while campaigning that he stood for marriage between one man and one woman and opposed homosexual marriage - a lie according to his former senior advisor.

* Supported abortion-on-demand and implemented the abortion pill mandate in Obamacare. Overturned numerous Department of Health and Human Services protections for healthcare workers which would have shielded them from being forced to participate in the abortion of unborn babies. Addressed Planned Parenthood, reassuring them of his unflagging support, ending his speech pronouncing "God bless you!" Supported those under 18 obtaining abortions without parental involvement, yet prohibited counseling youth struggling with homosexuality from finding freedom.

* Fabricated Islam's role in America's founding and history, creating the impression that Muslims were instrumental in establishing America by their "many achievements and contributions." Lectured Christians at the National Prayer Breakfast, indicting Christians falsely for their righteous response during the Crusades. Misrepresented events in Benghazi plus released militant terrorists for a known army deserter, presenting him positively in a White House ceremony.

* After promising to heal political divisions and work with the political parties, he has been the most divisive president in generations. Had to be forced by a rare, unanimous 19-0 bipartisan panel to stop him from approving Iran nuclear negotiations without congressional approval!

* Misled us to pass the "Affordable Care Act" by repeatedly promising us we could keep our plans and doctors plus save $2500 a year as a family of four. Vowed he would cut in half the massive federal deficit by the end of his first term. Guaranteed this would be "the most transparent administration ever with no closed door negotiations - they'll be done on C-SPAN so all Americans can see." Is this true?

* Gave his word that illegal immigrants from Central America would not be able to bring their children into the United States.

* Assured us that the IRS was not intimidating Christian ministries and said there was "not even a smidgen of corruption" at the IRS!

* Vowed to heal racial divisions but designated the polarizing Al Sharpton, as the White House "go-to black leader" (60 Minutes).

* Undermined religious freedom repeatedly. Coerced religious groups to provide life-ending abortifacients and contraceptives to those they employ.

* Alienated Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu repeatedly and has jeopardized the future of Israel, one of our strongest allies.

Let's stop here. Certainly Mr. Obama doesn't deserve all the blame for America's state, but record is beyond troublesome.

If we really are serious about wanting God's supernatural intervention to turn things around in the United States of America, we cannot and must not bypass our need to repent if we were careless and lacked "due diligence" regarding then-candidate Obama and others who sought public office. Considering our heritage and the sacrificial example of those who preceded us, it's time to seek God and confess any idolatry or complacency regarding our civic duty to pray, vote and elect competent people of character to public office.

"When the righteous are in authority, the people rejoice, but when the wicked rule, the people groan" (Prv.29:2).

Larry Tomczak is a best-selling author and cultural commentator with over 40 years of trusted ministry experience. His passion is to bring perspective, analysis and insight from a biblical worldview. He loves people and loves awakening them to today's cultural realities and the responses needed for the bride of Christ—His church—to become influential in all spheres of life once again.