Photo

Arthur Brooks: Hi, Gail. Well, Smackdown Tuesday went more or less as expected: a big night for Trump and Clinton, with both of them moving closer to becoming the nominees. It’s not a done deal yet, though, on the Republican side, where some still hope for an open convention. Taking this idea head on, Trump told CNN that in that scenario, if he lost, “I think you’d have riots. I’m representing a tremendous — many, many millions of people.”

Gail Collins: Yeah, talk about good times. When did we last have a political leader who promised his party there would be blood on the streets if he didn’t get his way?

Arthur: Probably about five minutes ago, somewhere in the world. The funniest thing I’ve seen recently is the Saturday Night Live opener from a couple of weeks ago. Hillary was speaking at a victory party, and said, “To all of you voters who always said, ‘I hate Hillary, I could never vote for her,’ I say to you, ‘Welcome!’ ”

Gail: Could that possibly, in any way, reflect your own current mood? So many of the things Bernie Democrats find off-putting in Clinton are qualities the Republican mainstream loves. On foreign affairs, she’s been an interventionist. And then there are her pals on Wall Street.

Arthur: It’s certainly true that Clinton is closer to mainstream Republicans than Sanders is, but let’s not get carried away — many of her views are deeply at odds with core conservative beliefs. (If only she’d hung onto her youth as a self-professed “Goldwater Girl.”)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Thanks to my nonpartisan day job, I won’t bite on your fair question about my own mood. I will say, though, that I’ve found conservative leaders on all sides of that question. What I always try to remind people is that the need for deep thinking and good ideas won’t change, no matter what. Politics is like the weather; ideas are like the climate. Confusing them is a common but bad mistake. The struggle for ideas that bring freedom and opportunity to more people — especially people at the periphery of society — has to go on no matter what’s going on in politics.

Gail: Noble sentiments.

Arthur: Thank you. I come from nobility — the House of Riffraff.

Gail: There’s a difference between the candidate you want and the one you would support if the other side was appalling. Let’s take the all-critical issue of economics. I can imagine voting for someone whose spending priorities were different from mine. But I find it hard to imagine voting for anyone whose tax plan involved less burden for the wealthy. And don’t try to tell me you’re going to make it up by cutting fraud and waste.

Arthur: Correct — simply cutting fraud and waste won’t do it, although God knows there’s a lot of waste. If conservatives want a smaller tax burden and lower deficits, the only answer is less spending. Long-term, reforming entitlements would have to play a central role. Yet the most likely Republican nominee at this point is actually opposed to conservative entitlement reform.

The cognitive dissonance isn’t just on the Republican side, however. Sanders proposes showering cash out of helicopters, and as far as I can tell, he is really only proposing higher taxes on the much-regretted billionaires. The truth is that middle-class taxes would have to rise under his spending scenarios.

Gail: Let’s talk about Hillary Clinton. I presume you’re not thrilled with her sudden opposition to the Pacific trade agreement. Her explanation was pretty well-constructed, but I nevertheless acknowledge this was a political dive.

However, looking at the big picture, her economic program is far, far and away the most responsible of all the remaining presidential candidates.

Arthur: Clinton’s convenient turnabout on trade was a total union cave — but no worse than what so many conservative Republicans did when they turned against trade promotion authority to spite President Obama, who admirably supported it.

Gail: I love it when we come together in bipartisan agreement that everybody is in the tank.

Arthur: Yeah, people sometimes say we have the “stupid party” and the “evil party,” but in times of crisis they can really come together to be both stupid and evil.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As for Clinton’s economic program, there aren’t any shocking surprises: tax cuts for some working families, more spending on infrastructure and research, a higher minimum wage, and so on. Obviously I would do many things differently, like expanding the Earned Income Tax Credit to better assist childless workers instead of hiking the minimum wage. But that’s no surprise.

According to one analysis by the Tax Foundation, a D.C. research outfit, Clinton’s tax plan could raise far less new revenue than projected because parts of it could drag down growth and depress economic output. And some proposals, like hiking capital gains taxes, would more likely bring about a surge in legal tax avoidance than some new, fair utopia. A bunch of these policies sound good to populist left-wing audiences, but would do real damage in practice.

Gail: I don’t want to sound like a total simpleton, but you could just change the rules and block that “legal tax avoidance” you’re worrying over. Give me an example of something about her plan that really bothers you.

Arthur: I wish her healthcare ideas were more centrist, or at least more original. As far as I can tell, her top three priorities are to 1) Keep Obamacare as is, 2) “Crack down on rising prescription drug prices and hold drug companies accountable,” and 3) Protect abortion rights with hardly any restrictions whatsoever. This is all just so — kabuki progressive.

She has to know that runaway costs are the result of a fundamental lack of market forces operating in health care, not just robber barons ripping us off. Scholars and others on both the left and the right have proposed lots of creative solutions that would better serve Clinton’s own liberal goals than the status quo she insists on defending.