Surgical Tool Manufacturer Hurt And Helped By Obamacare

By contrast, Carlos Lara, 57, bought a business with a brother so that so that his wife could have a job and his brother could emigrate from Canada to the United States.

SOUTHINGTON — Many middle-aged executives-turned-entrepreneurs start working for themselves because they were downsized, or thought they might be laid off soon.

Lara grew up in Colombia and moved to Connecticut in 1997 to work for Capewell Horsenails, a company that started in Hartford and is now owned by a Swiss multinational named Mustad. At the time, the company still manufactured nails for horseshoes in Bloomfield.

His children had lived in Colombia; in Turkey, when he ran a horsenail factory there; and by the time he started shopping for a manufacturing company in 2004, he only considered Connecticut. "We liked the area, our kids were going to [high] school here. They were at the age we didn't want to move."

A precision machine shop, SSI Manufacturing in Bristol was spinning off its surgical instruments business to concentrate on aerospace and gun components, and Lara and his brother pooled resources and signed for a five-year loan to buy the business. Lara's brother did the computer programming for the machine tools until he exited Silex. Now they hire consultants if they're developing a design that will require different machining steps.

Silex kept two production workers who worked for the previous owner. Marta Marin, Lara's wife, took over administrative duties, and engineer Claudia Maldonado, also a native of Colombia, was hired within a year. Maldonado and Marin run the business. Lara still works full time for Mustad. He now oversees a factory in Colombia.

Silex makes graspers, dissectors, forceps, scissors and biopsy punches, all reusable tools for minimally invasive surgeries. Many tools sell for about $950 to hospitals or other end-users, though there are small volume discounts.

While disposable instruments have become very common because they are cheaper and there is no chance of transferring infection from one patient to another, each surgeon chooses what he or she prefers and tends to stick with it, according to professionals in the medical tools business. Giant corporations Johnson & Johnson and Covidien dominate the disposable market, while Aesculap and Stryker are dominant in reusables.

Silex sells about 2,000 instruments a year, and does about $650,000 in annual sales. Lara said that sales grew 12 percent in 2010, 8 percent in 2011, and have been flat for the past two years. They are hoping that engaging some outside sales people will increase their penetration in the hospital market. Now, 55 percent of their tools are sold to distributors, which is less profitable.

Alan Winfree, a salesman with SpecialtyCare, said his company has bought tools from Silex since before it changed hands. SpecialtyCare is outsource provider to the operating room for surgical instrumentation and surgical technicians, and serves 850 hospitals.

"A lot of it is driven by surgeon preference, and Silex does offer tools that other manufacturers have, but they have some unique features about their tools that make them desirable," he said.