KOCHVILLE TOWNSHIP, MI — Hobby Lobby officials wish to dispel rumors that have been circulating on the Internet and on Facebook for some time regarding the future of their stores.

An employee at Saginaw County's Hobby Lobby store said rumors that the store and others across the country are closing are not true and referred a reporter from The Saginaw News and The Bay City Times to corporate headquarters.

Hobby Lobby's Saginaw County store is located at 2480 Tittabawassee Road in Kochville Township's Cardinal Square business district, near a variety of other retailers, hotels and restaurants including Chipotle Mexican Grill, Four Points by Sheraton and Panera Bread.



The company does not have plans to close its stores, rather it's expanding, said spokesman Vincent Parker. The 60,000-square-foot Kochville Township Hobby Lobby store, which opened in October 2004, employs 29 people.

In an email, Parker said Hobby Lobby is opening 36 stores this year and as many as 60 stores in 2014.

The root of the rumor centers around the company's governing principles and how they line up with the Affordable Care Act.

Hobby Lobby founder and CEO David Green, a devout Christian, has been a vocal opponent of the Affordable Care Act, commonly referred to as Obamacare, and what he refers to as abortion-causing drugs, such as emergency contraception and the morning-after pill.

According to Hobby Lobby's website, the company, with 561 stores across the nation, is committed to “honoring the Lord in all we do by operating the company in a manner consistent with biblical principles.”





A sign posted at the Kochville Township store states that the store is closed on Sundays “to allow employees time for family and worship.”

Parker said rumors that the company would close its stores because of Obamacare have been circulating for about a year.

“Any help you can give in dispelling this rumor would be greatly appreciated,” Parker wrote in the email.

Parker pointed out a column Green wrote, which was published on USA Today’s website in September 2012.

In the column, Green announced that the company had filed a lawsuit represented by the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, “asking a federal court to stop this mandate before it hurts our business.”



According to a Beckett Fund for Religious Freedom news release dated Sept. 19, the United States government has asked the U.S. Supreme Court to take the Hobby Lobby case.

If the petition is granted, the release states, the case would be argued and decided before the end of the court's term in June.

— Heather Jordan covers business for MLive/The Saginaw News/Bay City Times. She can be reached at 989-450-2652 or hjordan@mlive.com. For more business news, follow her on Twitter and Facebook.