In 1966, a heart attack took my father’s life, and my mother found herself a 42-year-old single parent of nine children ages 3 to 18.

The depth of her parenting effort came home to me one day 20 years ago. Mom came up from the basement of her Congress Park house holding a large shoebox full of tattered papers. We had been talking about utility bills earlier in the day and now here was her 30-year collection of Public Service bills, all neatly bound and organized.

I asked her why she would go to so much trouble. Her answer humbled me, and impressed me in a way I would never forget. “I kept the old bills and made notes in the margin describing how cold the weather was so I could anticipate next month’s bill,” she said. “Then I could move money around to make the payment.”

We never felt poor, and yet our household would have easily qualified for cash assistance under the federal Low-Income Home Energy Assistance Program.

If that program had existed in 1966, I doubt that my mother would have applied for the government “handout.” That’s one of the inherent problems with the program: Less than 25 percent of households that qualify ever apply.

Earlier this year, I was asked to speak to an annual meeting of some 700 low-income energy advocates. The topic was hydraulic fracturing. I accepted, knowing that science and facts were on my side. After all, even Lisa Jackson, former head of the Environmental Protection Agency, said, “I am not aware of any proven case where the fracking process itself has affected water.”

A friend cautioned me not to sound “like an engineer responding to an insurance adjustor’s inquiry.” She suggested I tell the human side of the story. I asked myself if hydraulic fracturing had helped the poor, and how to quantify that in everyday terms. Was it possible that fracking had made a significant difference?

In 2008, only 4 percent 0f U.S. natural gas production came from “fracked” shale wells. That number grew to 40 percent by 2012. If you compared average natural gas prices from 2003 to 2008 against 2012 prices, you would see a staggering 62 percent decline. That meant an energy savings of more than $110 billion to the U.S. economy, all thanks to fracking shale formations full of natural gas.

In 2012, LIHEAP provided $3.5 billion in cash assistance. That same year, the comparative decrease in natural gas costs for low-income households (heating and electricity) was more than $10 billion.

The next time someone asks you to sign a petition to ban fracking, consider the lack of science behind their claims and the costly financial impact on low-income households if a moratorium succeeds.

John Harpole is president of Mercator Energy LLC, a natural gas marketing and research company in Littleton, and a board member with Denver’s Energy Outreach Colorado.