Photo

What’s new this tax season? In a word: Obamacare. That’s the answer given by many tax professionals.

People who overcame the challenges of Healthcare.gov and succeeded in buying health insurance under the Affordable Care Act last year now face a new set of hurdles in the form of daunting tax forms. So do business owners who offer coverage to employees under the law’s Small Business Health Options Program. But the good news for both is that they may receive a tax credit that reduces taxes dollar for dollar.

Barbara Weltman, a lawyer in Vero Beach, Fla., and the author of “J.K. Lasser’s 1001 Deductions & Tax Breaks 2015,” said it could be a big credit if you qualify for it, but warned, “It is not that easy to qualify.”

For qualifying business owners the credit for 2014 is 50 percent, up from 35 percent in 2013. Individuals who bought insurance through an exchange and had household income between $11,490 and $45,960 last year may be able to claim a tax credit on the new Form 8962.

Most people estimated their income when they bought their coverage and received an advance on the credit in the form of payments directly to their insurance company. Now that the income numbers are real, taxpayers may get a refund — or may owe the government more money.

Photo

“It is extremely complicated,” Ms. Weltman said, referring to the form and the instructions for filling it out. She recommended using tax software with interview questions rather than trying to fill out the form by hand based on the official instructions.

People with incomes below $60,000 qualify for the “Free File” program, in which the Internal Revenue Service teams up with various software providers. Information is available at irs.gov/uac/Free-File:-Do-Your-Federal-Taxes-for-Free.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In addition, Intuit, the maker of TurboTax software, offers free assistance at TurboTaxHealth.com to help people determine if they are eligible for low-cost health insurance and what the tax penalty will be if they have not bought it.

Most taxpayers — those with employer-provided health insurance or Medicare or Medicaid — do not have to fill out any complicated forms. All they have to do is check a box on the Form 1040. A third group of people qualify for exemption from coverage, and they need to fill out Form 8965. More information is available at irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p5201.pdf.

Large employers are required to report health insurance coverage on employee W-2 forms for 2014, but that shouldn’t cause any problems. “Don’t worry,” Ms. Weltman said. “It’s not taxable” to employees.

Identity Theft

Identity theft is not limited to stealing credit card data.

Thieves also use stolen Social Security numbers to file returns and claim refunds, generally early in the filing season. And the I.R.S. said last month that trying to stop this kind of theft is a top priority. It opened 1,063 identity theft investigations last year, it said, and that led to 748 sentences imposed in criminal cases.

Photo

Julian Block, a tax lawyer in Larchmont, N.Y., said taxpayers could protect themselves from identity thieves by filing a new Form W-4 with employers and keeping close tabs on quarterly payments of estimated taxes so that they have a balance due, not a refund, when they file their tax returns.

“If you file a return claiming a refund and the I.R.S. says, ‘We’ve already received a return claiming a refund and paid it,’ they will investigate,” Mr. Block said. “Eventually you’ll get your refund, but it could be a considerable time. If you have a balance due and send in a check, if the I.R.S. has already sent a refund, they’ll have to sort that out, but you won’t have a problem.”

Tax professionals have long recommended that taxpayers limit withholding to avoid big refunds simply because too much withholding amounts to giving the Treasury an interest-free loan.

The Job Hunt

Job search expenses may provide a tax deduction for some people. After all, the nation’s unemployment rate fell to 5.6 percent at the end of last year from 9.9 percent five years earlier, and that surely reflects a lot of job searches.

Photo

Even so, many searchers may not qualify for a deduction, said Greg Rosica, a contributing author to the “EY Tax Guide 2015,” published by Wiley, and a tax partner at Ernst & Young. Mr. Rosica, who leads the firm’s southeast area private client services practice in Tampa, Fla., gave three reasons that would bar many job seekers from claiming a deduction:

■ These expenses are classified as “miscellaneous itemized deductions,” which can be taken only if the total exceeds 2 percent of adjusted gross income.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

■ Online job searches these days do not generate all of the travel and printing expenses that seekers used to rack up.

■ The new job must be in the same field as one’s previous employment. Many people change fields to land a new job.