This story was updated at 3:13 p.m. on 3/25/2014

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid has announced that language related to the restructuring of the International Monetary Fund’s accounts will be stripped from a bill providing aid to Ukraine. The move is a concession to House Republicans who requested the language’s removal, and clears the way for Congress to pass a roughly $1 billion aid package for Ukraine.

----------

Countries around the world have pledged billions of dollars in aid packages to support Ukraine as Russian aggression destabilizes the region. However, a world superpower remains stuck on the sidelines, paralyzed by domestic tensions on Capitol HIll.

It’s one thing when Congress squabbles over the U.S. deficit and domestic budget, but congressional partisanship is far less becoming when the eyes of the world are watching so closely, experts say.

“It’s a shameful spectacle of dysfunctionality in what is the world’s greatest democracy,” says Strobe Talbott, president of the Brookings Institution. “It is a paradox, and it makes it harder for our country to advance our interests abroad and around the world.”

As Congress prepares a roughly $1 billion aid package for Ukraine, there is vast disagreement over whether the emergency funding bill also should include a contentious restructuring of the International Monetary Fund’s accounts. In the Senate, where that type of aid package overcame a procedural hurdle Monday, there is acceptance of such a plan.

[READ: Russia Brushes Off G-8 Threats While Troops Move to Ukraine Border]

Yet the language in the proposal that directs the IMF to shift $63 billion around and gives the U.S. more control over the agency remains a point of contention for House Republicans.

“What they are trying to do here is bring unrelated items into this debate. All it is going to do is slow this whole process down,” House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, said Tuesday about Democratic efforts to include the IMF language in the aid package.

“The sooner we act, the better,” he added later.

The House is signaling it will not back down from its request that the IMF language be stripped from the Senate bill. House lawmakers already voted on one aid package and will vote on another one later this week that does not include the structural changes to the IMF.

With the world’s eyes on Capitol Hill, there are even some signals that Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., may cave to the House Republicans’ demands, but the cracks in Congress over how best to help Ukraine already have been revealed.

That schism, experts say, makes U.S. foreign policy appear wobbly at best. At a time when many in Congress have called out President Barack Obama for his approach to the conflict, there is irony in the fact that the aid package remains in limbo over congressional friction.

[ALSO: Obama Gets Tough on Russia, but Is It Enough?]

Instead of presenting a united front to the world on an aid package, Senate leaders devolved into a public spat. On Monday, Reid went as far as suggesting that Republicans aided Russian President Vladimir Putin in his annexation of Crimea.

"Since a few Republicans blocked these important sanctions last work period, Russian lawmakers voted to annex Crimea and Russian forces have taken over Ukrainian military bases," Reid said. "It's impossible to know whether events would have unfolded differently if the United States had responded to Russian aggression with a strong, unified voice."

In a rebuttal, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., hit the chamber floor Tuesday morning and accused Reid of injecting “hyper-partisanship into the process” when the Senate “should all actually be working together."

In the end, experts warn that Congress likely will overcome differences and send its $1 billion -- a fraction of the world’s aid package -- to Ukraine, but by the time it does, it could be too late.

“The U.S. Congress looks weak and impotent if they cannot make a decision,” says Anders Aslund, a senior fellow at the Peterson Institute for International Economics. “It could embolden Putin in his aggression.”

Other countries like Canada and Japan already have pledged support, along with entities like the European Union and the World Bank. If Congress doesn’t act soon, experts say there is a risk that the U.S. will miss an opportunity to lead.

“This tie-up on the Hill calls into question whether we are willing to put our resources behind our rhetoric,” Talbott says.