John Steenrod scored 36 on the individual tests in science, math, and reading, and a 35 on English. (Photo: Provided)

Achievement: John Steenrod scored a composite 36 on the April ACT, the highest score possible on the college entrance exam. He scored 36 on the individual tests in science, math, and reading, and a 35 on English.

The facts: On average, fewer than one-tenth of 1 percent of students score a 36 on a given testing date, according to ACT. In 2014, 38 Kentucky students, including 16 Louisville-area students, made that score. As of the September testing, in 2015, 33 Kentucky students, including 13 Louisville-area students, have scored 36.

On the test: John said he found the questions easy enough, but he found himself trying hard to finish all of them in the time allowed. He said he thought the questions on the SAT varied more in their difficulty. He said he took a preparation class last summer for the SAT, and he thought a lot of what he learned there applied also to the ACT.

Acknowledgements: “My parents have done a good job, not put too much pressure on me, and have supported my education my entire life,” he said. He said his school deserved some credit as well, for helping him “learn relevant stuff and make sure we have the skills” to apply their knowledge.

Besides the 36: John spends a lot of time on athletics. Basketball – both playing and following - is his favorite sport. He says he cares a lot about his health and he learns as much about it as he can. He enjoys working out and trying different kinds of exercise. “I’m learning how to watch my calories. I like food, and I don’t diet too carefully, but I make sure I’m eating enough to maintain my level of exercise, and to get enough protein.”

John’s hobbies: basketball, weight-lifting, reading, hanging out with friends

John’s home life: John lives in Glenview Hills with his parents Sarah and Wright Steenrod. He has two younger sisters, both students at Louisville Collegiate School.

Teacher Quote: “John is just about as fine a young person as one could hope to meet,” said teacher Clay Gahan. “He is, of course, quite bright, ambitious and disciplined but without being selfish or self-centered: a combination of attributes one does not often find. He listens well and, in my experience, is as caring as he is smart. Our school community will miss him next year.”

Future plans: John has narrowed his list of colleges to five, and he is in the process of visiting schools and making his choice. He intends to pursue studies in the social sciences.

Meet the Achiever

Achiever: John Steenrod

Age: 17

Grade: 12

School: Louisville Collegiate School

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1jnD2Ao