Topics: Charter schools, Editor's Picks, Education, Education Reform, From the Wires, News

Imagine sending your child to a school with a leaky roof, busted windows and a rodent infestation.

Or worrying whether the elementary school where you take your daughter every day is really a health hazard.

Or telling your teenager to feel good about attending a school with no sports or athletic programs of any kind in winter or summer and no instrumental music classes.

Imagine a school system where class sizes have gotten beyond ridiculous with one school so overcrowded that first, second and third graders are packed into a single classroom. In another school, classes overstuffed with 50 students or more are herded into the auditorium.

This is not made up, nor is this a third-world country. This is America. This is Philadelphia. And it is rapidly becoming the norm for schools in many more large, urban communities across the nation.

Yet this crime is being completely neglected by people leading education policy – from the Obama administration all the way down.

In fact, government leadership of the education system in Pennsylvania is so bad, parents have filed a lawsuit to direct attention to the plight of their children.

But the proper response would be from everyone, not just from one group of parents.

Yet, most glaringly absent from making an adequate response are the voices of those who claim they are architects of an education “reform movement” and claim to be the ones who care most about the lives of underserved black and brown school children.

Calling themselves servants in the “civil rights cause of our time,” they avert their oh-so-enlightened gaze from the most glaring civil rights crime being perpetrated in America today.

The Philadelphia Story

Just how bad are conditions in Philadelphia schools?

Reporting from PBS, education correspondent John Tulenko recently went to the city to examine “a school budget crisis that’s been called the worst in the country.” He found a high school where “the budget for extracurricular activities has dropped to zero, its budget for books zero, and for supplies to $14,000. That’s roughly $5 per student to last the entire year.”

He found an elementary school of 578 students with no full-time school nurse; so the principal, who has no medical training, has to sub in that role three days a week.

The ninth grade biology class he visited was “packed wall to wall with 62 students.” A student he spoke with said, “It makes me feel annoyed. It slows down the class and what we can learn. And it makes it harder to pay attention when you can’t even get a desk to sit in.”

The teacher said, “I tried to do a lab with them, and it was extremely difficult because so many of them wanted help and they were not sure of what to do. And you can’t give your attention to 30 pairs of students.”

A recent report from the education writer for The New York Times, Motoko Rich, portrayed an identical scene – “a sixth-grade math class of 33 students with only 11 textbooks to go around; the teacher rations paper used to print out homework equations.”

The news from local sources is even grimmer. Last year The Daily News reported the “new normal” for the district’s 137,000 students and their families.

“Class sizes are skyrocketing – even though the upper limit under the teachers union contract is 33 kids in each classroom. Already, teachers and parents have complained over social media about class sizes reaching 44 students, even 48 in one case.”

Nurses … counselors … librarians … by and large are now things of the past in Philadelphia public schools.

Most kids with chronic health conditions may get attention from school staff who have no training whatsoever in delivering medications or handling emergency health care situations. According to a local news outlet, “Twice in the past year, Philadelphia elementary school students died in local hospitals after taking ill at school – one from asthma and one from a heart condition. Both incidents happened on days when the school nurse was not present.”

Students who have been traumatized by a death in the family, homelessness, or bullying have virtually no trained counselors to talk to – neither do high school students needing help with applications for jobs or higher education.

Almost all school libraries have been shuttered – even one that was once hailed as a national model – despite growth in demand.

A Victim of ‘Reform’

In explaining the causes for these declining conditions, reporters have noted the diminishing state funding, the vanishing federal stimulus dollars, and the declining student enrollments.

What they don’t tell you is why the money dried up, where it went instead and why the students have fled.

Writing for The Nation, Philadelphia-based journalist Daniel Denvir fills in the backstory. It’s familiar: white flight to the suburbs in the 1950s, a vanishing urban industrial base made up of minority families, and a city left with a rapidly declining middle class.

“Relatively affluent whites funded separate school districts,” Denvir explains, “while poorer urbanites were left to fund the impoverished schools left behind.” Instead of unifying the segregated schools into a single metropolitan school system, Philadelphia city schools were left to contend with diminishing resources from a state that has chronically been among the least fair in allocating funds to schools that are the most in need.

When local school authorities and the teachers’ union bridled under their yolks, “furious legislators passed a law authorizing a state takeover.”

From that time on, Denvir explains, those who have wanted to wage “education reform” against Philly schools have gotten everything they wanted – branding of public schools as “failing” based on the No Child Left Behind laws followed by mass school closures and lots of new charter schools, many funded by wealthy philanthropists and private foundations and run by private management companies.

“The basic structure of school financing in Philadelphia is rigged to benefit these privately managed companies,” Denvir notes. “Public-school money follows students when they move to charter schools, but the public schools’ costs do not fall by the same amount … It has been estimated that partly because of these costs, each student who enrolls in a charter school costs the district as much as $7,000. There are outright subsidies too.”

Indeed, as Philadelphia public schools are getting lambasted by budget cuts and staffing layoffs, a local news outlet cheerfully reported that a charter school in the district was getting “a fully-staffed health center.” Further, the school was becoming “one of eight charter schools in the city” with such new facilities.

Officials for the charter school called it “the beginning of a holistic strategy to strengthen its neighborhoods.” Good, for sure, but why isn’t this something that public schools in the district have the funds to pay for too?

Charter schools, in fact, are laying claims to new funding for Philadelphia schools coming from a recently state-approved plan to increase local taxes on cigarettes. As independent news outlet The Notebook reported, the new tax bill came with a controversial provision that required the district to start accepting applications for new charter schools.

Where Do Reformers Stand?

Given the situation in Philadelphia, you’d expect folks claiming to represent the interests of schoolchildren to sound the alarm and man the ramparts in defense of these students.

For years, we’ve been hearing that the whole purpose of the so-called education reform movement was to put the interests of students first. So you’d think they’d have something to say when students have their art classes yanked, their school buildings left in horrid states of disrepair, and their classrooms made untenable with overcrowding.

But while Philadelphia schoolchildren get pushed over the brink, prominent voices in the education reform movement have mostly been content to stay on the sidelines, offer ineffective gestures, or take up the cause of the budget cutters.

The Obama administration has been conspicuously ineffective in casting a lifeline. U.S. Secretary of Education Arne Duncan last addressed the situation in Philadelphia over a year ago, when news of Philadelphia’s declining state first seeped into the consciousness of Beltway policy leaders.

As yours truly explained at the time, more than 3,800 district personnel, including hundreds of classroom teachers, had just been fired due to a “Doomsday Budget,” and schoolchildren faced a massive round of cutbacks. The alarming nature of the cuts prompted education historian Diane Ravitch and Randi Weingarten, president of the American Federation of Teachers, to write a letter to Duncan beseeching him to “publicly intervene.”

In his statement to the Pennsylvania officials overseeing the Philadelphia mess, Duncan urged, “We must invest in public education, not abandon it.” But he proceeded to do essentially nothing to help ensure that.

Eventually, the Obama administration came up with a competitive grant contest ostensibly aimed at inequity but offering no direct help to besieged students. An education journalist at The Washington Post, Valerie Strauss, noted incredulously after the grant competition was announced, “They still don’t get it. The Obama administration still apparently thinks – despite evidence to the contrary – that it can achieve ‘educational equity’ by holding a contest with winners and losers.”

Strauss recalled, “No real dent was made in ‘educational equity’ with a series of Race to the Top contests over the past several years. So now we have a new one … a $300 million proposed ‘Race to the Top-Equity and Opportunity.’ After billions of dollars failed to achieve equity, a $300 million contest along the same lines – but with a targeted title – is the administration’s answer to the festering problem.”