Classmates from throughout the United States as well as Canada attended.

Members of the Perth Amboy High School Class of '65 attend their class reunion. (Photo: Courtesy of Linda Mastroeni Cruz) Story Highlights The class celebrated "all things Perth Amboy."

The class will present a scholarship on Senior Awards Night at Perth Amboy High School.

PERTH AMBOY The Perth Amboy High School Class of 1965 held a three-day celebration to commemorate its 50th reunion.

"The event celebrated all things Perth Amboy," said Linda Mastroeni Cruz, a member of the Class of 1965 and the reunion committee and former director of guidance in the city's school district.

About 120 classmates, including from as far away as Canada, New Mexico, California and Seattle, attended the event, Cruz said.

On Oct. 2, the group gathered at Seabra's Armory, where they held a meet and greet. On Oct. 3, a dinner dance was held at the Raritan Yacht Club, and on Oct. 4, the group enjoyed brunch at the Barge Restaurant before bidding farewell.

"We had the opportunity to reminisce, reconnect and renew old friendships and even pay tribute to those who enabled us to achieve, our family, teachers and each other," Cruz said, as she led a toast to the "Fabulous Class of '65."

The class will be presenting a scholarship on Senior Awards Night at Perth Amboy High School in celebration of its 50th reunion, Cruz said.

Clockwise from top left: Linda Mastroeni Cruz, Eleanor Rizzi DePhillips, Beth Nichols Looney and Libby Julian Hurley celebrate at the Perth Amboy Class of 1965 reunion. (Photo: Courtesy of Linda Mastroeni Cruz)

Attendants shared some comments during the event.

"Golden Memories from a Golden Era in Perth Amboy!" Kurt Epps wrote.

"We had a a blast of the past. One brief moment of Camelot," wrote Darlene Puerschner Niemiec.

"It is a special treat to return to a city that gave us our roots, meaningful experiences on which we built our lives. The view of the bay is beautiful!!" wrote Charlene Steuber Stepnowski.

"Best years of my life were spent at PAHS. Great to see everyone even though I had to look at a lot of name tags. Thanks to the reunion committee," wrote Rosemary Kerekes Kosturski.

Staff Writer Susan Loyer: 732-565-7243; sloyer@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1Lm4KIX