ISTOCK

MICAH HAUPTMAN: Many recent graduates with student-loan payments feel forced to choose between paying off their student loans and start saving for retirement. However, there’s a way borrowers may be able to do both: Those who qualify for public-service loan forgiveness may be able to reduce their monthly student-loan payments by increasing the amount they save for retirement. Here’s how:

If a borrower has a high loan balance, he or she may be eligible for an income-driven repayment plan. Income-driven repayment plans are designed to lower a borrower’s monthly repayment amount relative to the standard repayment plan in order to make the monthly payments more manageable. Under income-driven repayment plans, the amount that a borrower pays is based on a percentage of his or her discretionary income. Discretionary income is based on a borrower’s adjusted gross income, which is calculated as an individual’s gross income minus specific deductions. One such deduction is for pretax contributions to retirement accounts.

If a borrower makes income-driven payments while working for a 501(c)(3) nonprofit or the government, he or she might qualify for public-service loan forgiveness after making qualifying payments for 10 years. Also, the amount forgiven would not be taxable. It, therefore, makes sense under this program for a borrower to reduce his or her monthly payments, regardless of whether the amount the borrower pays is less than the amount of interest that accrues.

However, it’s important to note that under current rules, other repayment programs that allow for loans to be forgiven still require the borrower to pay income taxes on the amount forgiven. Because that amount may add considerably to the total amount paid, this strategy would likely not be conducive to those repayment programs.

Let’s consider a borrower who has a $100,000 loan balance and makes $60,000 annually working for the government. Under the standard repayment plan, he or she would pay approximately $1,160 a month for 10 years.

Assuming the borrower’s adjusted gross income is also $60,000, under the income-based repayment program, he or she would pay approximately $530 a month. After making qualifying payments for 10 years, the remaining amount would be forgiven and no taxes would be owed. However, if the borrower makes $10,000 in pretax contributions to a retirement plan such as a 401(k), 403(b) and Thrift Savings Plan (TSP), he or she would lower his or her adjusted gross income to $50,000, reducing income-based repayments by $125 to approximately $405 a month. After making qualifying payments for 10 years, the remaining amount would be forgiven and no taxes would be owed. Thus, by forcing oneself to save for retirement, the borrower would also reduce his or her monthly student-loan payments, magnifying the benefits under the program.

Assuming a borrower saves $10,000 a year and reduces his or her monthly payments by $125 a month for those 10 years, the borrower will have decreased the total amount paid by $15,000 and saved $100,000 for retirement.

Micah Hauptman (@MicahHauptman) is the financial services counsel for the Consumer Federation of America.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.