STATEN ISLAND, N.Y. -- There was a plea once again at Mayor de Blasio's town hall meeting the other night for a public hospital on Staten Island.

The plea was met with loud applause from residents throughout the auditorium.

We understand why. Emergency rooms are more often that not crammed with people on gurneys in hallways.

Would another hospital operated by the city's Health and Hospitals Corp solve that problem? Frankly, we don't know -- but doubt it. A city hospital here is not the panacea for Staten Island's health care issues.

The need for more hospital service on Staten Island is clear. There is no city hospital on Staten Island, while every other borough has two. Staten Island has two main hospital system and three main hospital facilities -- Staten Island University North and South, and Richmond University Medical Center.

Plans are under way for a new emergency room at Richmond University, while a revamped emergency room opened at Staten Island University North in 2009. It was overburdened not long after it opened.

To drive the need home: RUMC's emergency room was built for 22,000 visits a year. It handles more than 70,000.

As the mayor pointed out at the town hall, emergency rooms are used for primary care for many without a primary care physician. And he rightly pointed out that there are fewer primary care physicians. A study published back in 2012 by the Journal of the American Medical Association predicted as much. Researchers found then that of nearly 17,000 third-year residents, only 21.5 percent planned a career as an internal medical physician.

Complicating this is Obamacare, which in theory brings more and more people into the system.

New York City obviously spends more on health care in the other four boroughs. There really wasn't a need on Staten Island for a city hospital back "in the day." Our population was a fraction of what it is now, and there were more private hospitals, as well as a robust U.S. Public Health Service Hospital that served Staten Island veterans. Of course, there was little vision or anticipation of Staten Island's growth.

But grow we did, and it is now up to the city to provide a fairer share of its health care dollars in this community. After all, it is funding major health care in the rest of New York. It operates 11 acute care hospitals, five nursing homes, six diagnostic treatment centers and more than 70 community-based primary care sites.

The mayor announced a new city-funded clinic for Staten Island the other night -- and that was met with groans.

What is needed is an infusion of city money into our two private hospital systems to expand services and capacity. De Blasio's preliminary 2017 budget includes $337 million for pressing needs in the public system. The City Council is asking for $10 million in capital funds for the new RUMC emergency room.

That's a beginning. But a steady stream of Health and Hospitals funds must be allocated for Staten Island's health care systems to make up for what the city is not spending here.

It's the fair thing to do.