Clinic of Pulaski County names new director

“It’s nice to be back in my home town,” said Debbie Suddarth, new executive director of the Free Clinic of Pulaski County.

Suddarth started her new position Oct. 1. Before that, she thought she had actually semi-retired from Free Clinic of the New River Valley on July 30 There, she was director of programs, and then director of Patient and Volunteer Relations for almost five years.

“When this position became available, it was a great match for what I was looking for: It was in town (no more driving), close to my family, especially to my new grandson, and I was able to help my community once again.

Debbie replaces Gary Elander, who recently retired after serving as director for nine years.

Debbie grew up in Pulaski. She attended Pulaski County High School, New River Community College and Virginia Tech. Her first job out of college was teaching reading and English at Pulaski Middle School. She knew she wanted to return home and finish out her professional life in Pulaski.

Before working at the Free Clinic of the New River Valley, she was the physician recruiter and volunteer coordinator at Pulaski Community Hospital. She reflects, “It was a privilege to recruit physicians to our community and showcase the beauty of our area. Bringing qualified physicians to our area was important to our hospital, our patients and to our community.

“Now, I have more direct connection with the patients and actually see the positive outcome of the patient’s medical treatment. It is awesome to see our physicians treat the free clinic patients in their offices and give them the excellent care they deserve. It is great to be back working with some of the physicians I actually recruited and see their desire in helping the clinic patients. I feel I have come full circle!”

The clinic has a staff of six part time employees. “The clinic staff really cares about the patients and wants to see them succeed in overcoming any medical issues they may have,” she said. “Our patients are wonderful people who are hard working, good hearted folks. They just do not have health insurance and that is really scary.”

She added, “I have seen patients who have put off seeing a physician for years. Then when they do finally decide to come in, they have several health concerns, which are compounded by not taking care of themselves earlier.”

When asked what she sees as the future of the clinic in light of the Affordable Care Act she responded, “Well now that just depends on what day it is! Seriously, the free clinics of Virginia will remain if we have people in the community to donate their time, talent and money.

“There will always be a segment of the population that will be uninsured. We are a private nonprofit organization that depends on grants, foundations, civic organizations and local governments to help meet our financial needs. We are determined to be here for our uninsured population”.

Suddarth suggested anyone interested in volunteering, whether it is a lay or professional volunteer, contact her at her office at 980-0922. She would also be happy to provide clinic tours and explain the work of the clinic to any individual or group interested in seeing the clinic.

“People need to take an interest in the clinic, be concerned for their uninsured neighbors, and get involved in this work. It’s rewarding to help, but it’s also satisfying to think you can make a difference in someone’s life.

“There’s the saying, ‘When you have your health, you have everything.’ Just ask our patients,” she said. “I only ask for three hours per week to volunteer or any amount of monetary donation is greatly appreciated.”

She added, “We are so fortunate to have this wonderful large building where we can see and treat patients of Pulaski County. I consider it an honor to work for our patients as hard as I can to make sure this clinic remains open for another 30 years.”

Debbie and her husband Bob, who also works in health care at LewisGale Hospital – Pulaski, reside in the town of Pulaski, where they have lived for the past 10 years.

Written by: Editor on November 26, 2013.

Comments

comments