Eighteen years ago, when Alan Greenspan wanted to send a message that he worried the stock market was getting a little bubbly, he did it with a typically inscrutable phrasing buried in an otherwise unremarkable speech.

“How do we know when irrational exuberance has unduly escalated asset values, which then become subject to unexpected and prolonged contractions,” Mr. Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, mused in 1996, and the next morning the stock market sold off ferociously on the mere hint of his concern.

How things change.

Mr. Greenspan’s comments were vague and subject to varying interpretation, and even then they prompted hand-wringing over whether it made sense for the nation’s top economist to tell the financial markets that prices might have risen too high. Contrast Mr. Greenspan’s comments with those Tuesday and Wednesday from the woman who now holds that same job. Janet Yellen deployed the bully pulpit of the Federal Reserve chairmanship to send a message on market prices.

Ms. Yellen specifically called out the valuations of leveraged loans (which fund corporate buyouts) and high-yield “junk” bonds (which fund companies viewed as having risky finances) as potentially excessive. She acknowledged that prices for a wide range of assets, including stocks, bonds, and real estate, had risen, but argued that they “remain generally in line with historic norms.”

A written report accompanying Ms. Yellen’s testimony went further still, specifically pointing to “substantially stretched” valuations of social media and biotechnology stocks. An index of social media stock prices fell.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

These events raise an interesting set of questions: Should government officials be speaking up when they think markets have gotten prices wrong? At what point does the Fed chair go from being the nation’s economist-in-chief to the market strategist-in-chief? And are Ms. Yellen’s views something that investors should be listening to?

At a conference in New York, the CNBC host Jim Cramer asked the Treasury secretary, Jack Lew, “Is it ever right for a federal official to comment on substantially stretched valuations of stocks?”

Mr. Lew said: “Jim, I think it is appropriate for us to comment on policies and trends. It is not appropriate for us to comment on individual market movements.”

Given the timing, and the way Mr. Cramer framed his question, it’s hard not to read that as a rebuke of the Fed’s approach to making its views on key asset prices known to the public.

Photo

Here’s the predicament that Ms. Yellen and other top policy makers face. The last two U.S. recessions have been caused by the popping of asset bubbles (first the stock market in 2000, then housing in 2007).

Meanwhile, the mission they are assigned by Congress is to look after the real economy — maximum employment and stable prices, to be precise. But all of their policy tools work through the financial system. They are trying to maintain low unemployment and low inflation, but they do that almost exclusively by buying and selling bonds.

That means that their policies often have a more significant impact (and certainly a more immediate and measurable one) on the price of, say, junk bonds than they do on job creation and wages.

That basic issue is always true, but it has never been more true than lately, with the Fed deeply entwined with unconventional steps to try to boost economic growth, leading to nearly $4.5 trillion in assets ending up on the central bank’s balance sheet.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

To some degree, the whole point of that exercise was to drive up the prices of stocks and other assets in order to encourage economic growth. But a key risk all along has been that the efforts would create a rise in asset values to bubble territory without accompanying economic growth.

If you believe that’s happening, there are two options. One, embodied in a speech at the University of Southern California on Wednesday by the president of the Dallas Fed, Richard Fisher, is to pull back on money printing. Referring to an article The Upshot ran about what we called the Everything Boom last week, Mr. Fisher said, “At some point you cross the line from reviving markets to becoming the bellows fanning the flames of the ‘Booming and Bubbling.' ” He added, according to a prepared text: “I believe we have crossed that line. I believe we need an adjustment to the stance of monetary policy.”

But if you believe that the Fed needs to keep doing everything it possibly can to get stronger growth, then you are left with a few other options. One, which Ms. Yellen has repeatedly emphasized, is regulating banks and other financial institutions well to ensure that even if a bubble does emerge, and pop, the rest of the economy doesn’t go down with it. There is no reason that somebody paying too much for junk bonds or social media stocks now needs to cause a recession in 2016, in other words.

And another is to use “open mouth policy” (as opposed to the usual “open market policy”), jawboning markets to try to rein in excesses that might create risks. It’s not an outlandish idea. An economist, Dean Baker, has argued that if Mr. Greenspan had made full-throated, public arguments that there was a housing bubble in 2004 and 2005, it might have led to fewer people stretching to buy a home and less damage when the bubble eventually popped.

But it does amount to a government official substituting her own judgment for that of the marketplace, the prices arrived at by thousands of buyers and sellers for an app-maker or a leveraged loan.

For a sense of the risks there, consider this: Mr. Greenspan’s warning about irrational exuberance in the stock market took place in December 1996. The worst excesses of the dot-com bubble came years later; even in the worst of the post-dot-com stock crash and the financial crisis of 2008, prices never again fell that low. A person who ignored Mr. Greenspan’s advice and bought into the S&P 500 the morning after his speech has earned a 268 percent return since then (including reinvested dividends).

As Ms. Yellen may learn, the challenge of telling people when the prices are right is that you might just be wrong.