Hundreds of thousands gathered in the nation’s capital Wednesday to march down the National Mall to the United States Supreme Court for the 2014 March for Life. But this year differed from those past in the slightest way, as the Republican National Committee and other conservative groups actively participated in the March, reaffirming the GOP’s public embrace of its reputation as the “pro-life party.”

This year’s March for Life marks the first time in recent memory the Republican National Committee has taken an active role in the annual event. Typically, the March conflicts with the RNC’s winter meeting, which is taking place in Washington, D.C., this week. But RNC Chair Reince Priebus delayed the start of the gathering to allow state party chairs and delegates to attend the March. Priebus himself, joined by House Majority Leader Eric Cantor (R-Va.), even appeared onstage.

“We’ll be there to send a message: We are a pro-life party,” Priebus wrote in an op-ed earlier this week. “Life is a gift, and it must be protected. That means advocating for our beliefs, embracing the right to life, and celebrating the blessing of adoption.”

The RNC’s appearance at the March for Life demonstrates the party’s newfound commitment to pro-life policies and legislation. In its 2012 platform, the term “pro-life” doesn’t appear, though the party does focus on its commitment to allowing faith-based institutions the ability to adhere to their beliefs in regards to abortion. The GOP platform also outlines the party’s refusal to allow public revenues to “promote or perform” abortions, including through taxpayer-subsidized health coverage.

While the RNC has shied away from social issues, instead redirecting the focus to the GOP’s sound fiscal policies, Obamacare and the economy, its outspoken support of the March demonstrates its commitment to this specific cause.

“These are people who would be voting for our candidate,” Kristan Hawkins, president of Students for Life, told Red Alert Politics of the RNC’s participation. “It makes total sense for them to be out there taking an active role in the March.”

The Democratic National Committee took aim against the RNC for its participation in Wednesday’s March, slamming its counterpart for rallying “against women’s rights.”

However, the RNC fought back, reaffirming its stance as the pro-life party.

“Sadly, the Democratic National Committee sees this as an opportunity to go on the attack. It’s disheartening that they would try to disparage the marchers and misrepresent their cause,” RNC Deputy Director of Communications Sarah Isgur Flores said in a press release. “There’s a reason Democrats try to distort Republicans’ respect for life. It’s because the majority of Americans agree with Republicans on important life-related issues. For example, a majority support protecting life after 20 weeks of pregnancy.”

But the RNC wasn’t the only organization that went against its norm and took an active role in this year’s March for Life. The Heritage Foundation, a conservative think-tank, also participated, passing out literature and marching. Though the nonprofit typically hosts a reception celebrating the March for Life, Hawkins said, Heritage was out in full force this year.

“As a conservative, this is something that I want to see,” she said. “We want to see the conservative movement and the pro-life movement marching together. At the end of the day, there are two political parties in the country. One is extremist on abortion … and the other believes in human rights.”

The Heritage Foundation did not return Red Alert Politics’ request for comment regarding their participation.

This year’s March, held on the 41st anniversary of Roe v. Wade, saw more than 500,000 participants, a slight drop from 2013’s 650,000 marchers. Participants Wednesday, however, battled below-freezing temperatures, wind and snow. While the crowd of marchers featured an array of genders, races and ages, young people’s participation was overwhelming.

Millennials, those between the ages of 18 and 34, have been become known as the “pro-life generation” for their unwavering support of anti-abortion legislation and the right to life. According to a recent Knights of Columbus/Marist University poll, 62 percent of Americans believe abortions are morally wrong in today’s society. Additionally, more than half argue life begins at conception.

Being pro-life, Hawkins said, is a winning issue for candidates.

“It’s not something they have to run away or shy away from,” she said.

And as demonstrated by the College Republican National Committee’s postmortem outlining how the GOP can reach young voters, concentrating on pro-life issues is not only a winner for candidates, but young people, too.

“It’s a human rights cause, and it’s something young people are always involved in,” Hawkins said. “They’re standing up for the little guy.”

Congress has begun to take action on pro-life legislation making its way through the House. Cantor told marchers yesterday the House plans to vote next week on a bill aimed to prohibit taxpayer-funded abortions. Meanwhile, the Pain Capable Unborn Child Protection Act, which restricts abortions after 20 weeks of pregnancy, already passed the House. It has yet to leave the Senate Judiciary Committee.