MIAMI — Who knew being a father could ignite the mother of all controversies?

This controversy doesn’t even involve a degenerate on Maury Povich’s show or Pedro Martinez wondering if the Yankees are his daddy.

This story was birthed in New York, concerning Daniel Murphy, heretofore known as Papa Murph. He’s not a blue character with a floppy red cap, but the news story he ignited would have made more sense had it been a fictional cartoon.

The Mets second baseman missed two games last week to be with his wife and newborn child. He is permitted three days of paternity leave in the collective bargaining agreement. This type of absence happens frequently in Major League Baseball, which has gradually clomped out of the cave.

Attendance was required only for conception, baseball curmudgeons said with a straight face for the past century. The pendulum has swung. Family comes first in many workplaces. Which is what made the comments of former father of the year Boomer Esiason so appalling. He has raised millions of dollars in the battle against cystic fibrosis, which inflicts his inspiring son, Gunnar. Yet he said Murphy should have instructed his wife to “have a C-section before the season starts. I need to be at opening day, I’m sorry.”

This isn’t just insensitive, it’s selfish and stupid. Esiason implied Murphy’s attendance at the Mets’ Citi Field was necessary because it helps provide a better life for his family. He’s made $10.3 million entering this season. I don’t think his kids are worried about paying for books at the local community college. New York radio- show host Mike Francesca continued the rant, telling fathers: “Your wife doesn’t need your help the first couple of days; you know that you’re not doing much the first couple days with the baby that was just born.”

I think what he meant was that “Your future ex-wife doesn’t need your help.”

There are some moments that can be missed. Holiday dinners, parties, family reunions. The birth of a child when your employer actually encourages the absence in name of your well-being?

Papa Murph made the right decision, correctly eschewing the club-wielding and pelt-wearing for one of the most important days of his family’s life.

Footnotes. It should come as no surprise that Carlos Gonzalez homered Friday. His family is in town. “I always try to put on a show for them,” Gonzalez said. His mom watches every Rockies game on TV in Venezuela and texts CarGo with advice. “She loves baseball,” he said. … The Dodgers’ chemistry bears watching. The Yasiel Puig dynamic can be overstated, but when Nick Punto and Skip Schumaker left Los Angeles as free agents — they are considered premier clubhouse guys — it left a void. … There are wrinkles to iron out with baseball’s replay review. The system is welcomed, but at some point the managers need to be removed and have everything reviewed from an eye in the sky, like in college football.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck