Photo by: The News-Gazette Collector's item - a glass from the Jolly Roger restaurant Image

Image

Got something to ask Tom? Drop your question here.

Another great week for Mailbag questions. This week we tackle the future of the old Jolly Roger property, an earlier land swap involving Dodds Park, the Affordable Care Act and its effect on charity care, coyotes in Illinois, the mysterious green dots on some mailboxes and more. Here we go ...

Plans for the Jolly Roger property

"As a follow-up on your Sunday article about the county's attempt to raze dilapidated buildings, what about the dilapidated and vermin-infested old Jolly Roger Restaurant in downtown Urbana?"

The Jolly Roger, a mainstay in downtown Urbana since 1955, closed in January 2007 and the building has been vacant since.

Urbana is working with the current owner of the property, Bob Venable, "to pursue redevelopment of properties on the north side of Goose Alley between Race and Broadway, which will likely involve demolition of the old Jolly Roger Restaurant," said Urbana's community development director, Libby Tyler.

The city will announce as early as next week, said Urbana economic development manager Brandon Boys, a request for proposals for the redevelopment of the 1.4-acre site which includes the Jolly Roger.

The RFP, according to a presentation made last month at an Urbana Business and Development luncheon, also must include a new or improved Bunny's Tavern — just south of the Jolly Roger site — and enhanced public parking options. A mixed use development proposal is preferred, according to the presentation.

Bunny's, of which Venable is an owner, has been in downtown Urbana even longer than the Jolly Roger. It opened in 1936.

An earlier Dodds Park land swap

"At the park board study session last week, Joe DeLuce mentioned that the park district swapped a portion of Dodds Park years ago with another entity. Did this swap violate the restriction of the federal grant that would need to be waived to make the Unit 4 swap, or how long did it take to get a waiver that time?"

About three years ago, DeLuce said, the park board agreed to gave up 6.4 acres in Dodds Park in exchange for 20 acres adjacent to The Trails at Abbey Fields plus three lots in Abbey Fields, a new subdivision in far west Champaign.

The land in Dodds Park was what DeLuce called a material handling site off of Bradley Avenue, where mulch and brush was piled.

"It really wasn't much used for recreation at all," he said.

It is now the Parkland Point apartment complex at 2002 W. Bradley Ave.

Through a Freedom of Information Act request, DeLuce said, the park district discovered that there is a restriction on Dodds Park due to the development of the Greenbelt Bikeway Trail in 1979.

"At the time that the swap occurred in 2012 and to this day there is no recorded title restriction for the Land Water and Conservation Fund," he said.

The Illinois Department of Natural Resources "does not require it and have been informed that this happens fairly often, in part, because of the lack of a reporting requirement and the change of public personnel. The district felt confident based on its searches and outside title searches that there were no restrictions on Dodds Park. The park district is in discussions with the IDNR as to what measures if any need to be taken at this time to rectify this."

Coyotes in the county

"Is there an official DNR estimate of the coyote population in Champaign County? Does the state list the number of coyotes that are harvested in each county? There have been reports of black coyotes in some parts of Illinois. Have there been reliable reports of black coyotes appearing in the coyote packs in the local counties? Some sources claim that there are now almost 40,000 coyotes in Illinois. Is this an accurate report? Thanks."

IDNR does not estimate coyote numbers statewide or by county, said Illinois Department of Natural Resources spokesman Chris Young.

"However, IDNR biologists track trends by using hunter survey information, trapping harvest information and other indicators," said Young. "For example, archery deer hunters report the number of coyotes they observe and the number of hours they spend afield. IDNR also looks at trapper harvest success and fur sales. There were 16,607 coyote pelts sold in 2013-2014 compared to 10,246 in 2012-2013."

In terms of pelts sold, IDNR says coyotes were third, behind only raccoon (169,543) and muskrat (25,122) in Illinois in 2013-14.

"Today, pelt values are driven mainly by demand from foreign markets such as Russia and China," said an IDNR report. "Economic conditions, monetary exchange rates, political events and severity of winters in overseas countries shape fur markets in North America and contribute to their volatility.

"Favorable global markets lifted pelt prices to levels not seen since the late 1970s and early 1980s. Sales of trapping licenses increased accordingly," from 6,384 in 2012-13 to 7,870 in 2013-14, said IDNR.

As for the black coyotes, Young said, "Our biologists report there is quite a bit of variation in color of coyotes — including near-black or dark ones. However, there have been no specific, recent reports in East Central Illinois."

The IDNR website says that an average of 7,000 coyotes are harvested each year in Illinois, 75 percent by hunters, 25 percent by trappers.

"Coyotes are common throughout Illinois. They're most abundant in the southern, southeastern and west central parts of the state," said IDNR. "Coyotes were in Illinois for a long time after settlement of the state, but their numbers increased dramatically during the 1970s and early 1980s."

The Affordable Care Act's effect on Carle

"Maybe you can help shed some light on something I've been wondering ... if the (Affordable Care Act) mandates that all people get health insurance, then wouldn't the amount of free/charity health care provided by hospitals/clinics (i.e., Carle) fall to near zero? And if that's the case, wouldn't the reason for their property-tax exemption also go away?"

I consulted Claudia Lennhoff, the executive director of the Champaign County Health Care Consumers and she did a spectacular job of explaining why the amount of charity care given by Carle and other providers won't fall to zero or anywhere near that.

"Although the ACA mandates health insurance coverage, there are two reasons that hospitals will still need to provide financial assistance/charity care," she wrote.

"One, the ACA does not mandate or provide coverage for ALL residents of the United States. For example, most immigrants who do not meet citizenship or permanent resident criteria are not covered under the ACA and frequently remain uninsured and therefore vulnerable to medical debt. Also, there may be people who would qualify for coverage but who are not able to get it for one reason or another.

"Two, the biggest reason that hospitals will still need to provide financial assistance/charity care is because health insurance coverage, even under the ACA, frequently leaves insured consumers with large out-of-pocket obligations and therefore vulnerable to medical debt.

"More people having health insurance coverage does not necessarily mean that less financial help is needed. Health insurance coverage does not cover all costs of care, and in fact, we expect that with more coverage, more people will be seeking care, and will still need help with their out-of-pocket obligations."

Lennhoff said that in preparing this answer she also consulted with Mark Rukavina of Community Health Advisors LLC, of Chestnut Hill, Mass., a national expert on medical debt, hospital financial assistance and charity obligations.

"Having health insurance coverage does not necessarily mean that people can afford their health care. Insurance plans can come with deductibles, co-pays, co-insurance, and other forms of out-of-pocket responsibilities for the insured individuals. This has always been the case, even before the ACA. It is the nature of health insurance in the United States," Lennhoff wrote. "Many of the clients that CCHCC works with to help them apply for hospital financial assistance are people who have (or had) health insurance coverage at the time that they incurred medical debt.

"Even people with Medicare (government health insurance for people aged 65 or older or disabled individuals) frequently face large and unaffordable deductibles and out of pocket expenses. Lower income Medicare beneficiaries often cannot afford Medicare supplemental insurance or a Medicare Managed Care plan. For example, the Medicare Part A (hospital) deductible for 2015 for an in-hospital stay is $1,260. Most Medicare beneficiaries are on a fixed income, and lower-income beneficiaries may not be able to afford the cost of this deductible.

"I believe that over time, as the ACA is more fully implemented and more individuals and families are covered, hospitals should see a change in their financial assistance/charity care numbers. There may be a reduction in financial assistance provided over time — though I don't know how great the reduction might be — but I believe that the biggest change will be that a larger proportion of the patients receiving financial assistance will be insured individuals who just need help with the costs of their out of pocket responsibilities.

"Health insurance is very important for helping to make health care affordable, but most of us who have health insurance know that most health insurance plans require us to shoulder some of the costs of our care, whether in the form of deductibles, co-pays or co-insurance.

"Carle has a great financial assistance program that helps both uninsured and insured individuals who meet the financial criteria. Information about the financial assistance program is here (scroll to bottom of page to see income criteria):

http://www.carle.org/billing/Community-Care-Benefit-Program.aspx

"Presence Covenant Medical Center has financial assistance as well, and operates the Medicare 100 Plus Program with CCHCC, which helps reduce the out of pocket costs for low-income Medicare beneficiaries. Information on the Presence Covenant Medical Center Financial Assistance Program can be found here:

http://www.presencehealth.org/patients-visitors/financial-assistance-hospitals

"If anyone in our community has medical debt at Carle or Presence Covenant and they need help applying for financial assistance, they can contact CCHCC at 352-6533, and we would be happy to help them.

"And lastly, hospitals receiving property tax exemptions should have robust and user-friendly financial assistance programs to help as many people as possible.

"There are new and innovative ways of making financial assistance even more accessible to consumers who need it, and Mark Rukavina specializes in these."

Thanks, Claudia and Mark, for your work in helping explain the ACA and how people can make use of it.

Dodds Park petition

"In advance of the park board study session last week on Dodds Park, there was a petition spread on Change.org. When I signed the petition, there were about 200 signatures. Did this petition/the signers' views ever reach the park board commissioners?"

Yes, said DeLuce.

"A lady brought it to the study session and handed it to our attorney so we have it," he said. "She came up and spoke and said she wanted to present the petition. At that time I think were about 240 names on it."

Here's a link to the petition, which asks the park district to "offer 37 acres of Dodds Park to build a high school to replace the aging Central High School. Dodds Park belongs to the taxpayers in Champaign. We are demanding that you take a reasonable offer of Dodds Park to the Champaign Unit 4 Board and Administration before the April 7th election date":

https://www.change.org/p/citizens-for-new-central-hs-at-dodds-new-central-hs-at-dodds-park

Conflicts of interest

"Last week there was discussion about whether (Champaign park board member) Jane Solon should recuse herself from voting on Dodds Park as a (Champaign High School site) because of her affiliation with Atkins. It strikes me that a bigger conflict exists with school board member John Bambenek and his ISIS-like jihad on (mayoral candidate) Joe Petry. Shouldn't he recuse himself from school board votes on the issue?"

Bambenek, who at one time had a political action committee known as "The Committee," whose purpose was to defeat Joe Petry in the mayoral election and which had $27,306 on hand, said he has no conflict "now that the PAC is closed." It was dissolved on Feb. 11.

"Implying that there is a conflict of interest over Dodds Park because I do not support Joe Petry for mayor is to admit that Petry only put Dodds Park on the table because he wanted to use park district resources to buttress his mayoral campaign," Bambenek said. "Perhaps that is the bigger issue here."

Mysterious green dots

"I recently noticed green reflective dots on mailboxes in my Champaign neighborhood. SNOPES says it is definitely not FEMA. One theory I heard is that they are there to mark homes for newspaper delivery. Is that true?"

Your theory is right-on. The green dots — on delivery tubes, mailboxes, even telephone poles — are an indicator for newspaper carriers that the home is an active, seven-days-a-week customer, said The News-Gazette's Bob Cicone Jr.

Missing the mugshots

"Are the mugshots ever going to be back in the paper? Thanks."

I assume you mean will they ever again be online. The answer is maybe.

News-Gazette Publisher and CEO John Reed said they were taken down after the Champaign County sheriff's office changed the way it posted arrest shots. Efforts are being made to reinstate the feature but it's probably going to take a while, he said.

How's the Hyatt doing?

"Mr. K, I'm curious: is the new downtown Hyatt hotel doing any business? I'd love to know what their occupancy rate is as every time I go downtown it is rare that I see more than one or two people in the lobby. Thank you, my friend."

Victor Patterson, the general manager of the Hyatt Place, said the hotel "exceeded our expectations" for its first six months.

"I kinda chuckled when I heard the question that they saw only a few people in the lobby," he said, "because that's our goal. That's the point we're making about being downtown, that we want our guests to be able to go out and enjoy all the downtown businesses. It wasn't to take all the money downtown. It was to promote downtown."

CarShare in Champaign-Urbana?

"Hey Tom, any word if Enterprise will bring their CarShare program to this area in the near future?"

Not now.

After a ridiculous number of inquiries to Enterprise Holdings Inc., over the last two weeks, I finally got the following reply: "While we do not have any immediate plans to launch an Enterprise CarShare program in Champaign-Urbana, we are always looking at opportunities to expand where there is customer interest and demand."

All that work for that miserable response.

More on those annoying geese

My flip comment last week about geese — I called them "flying rats" — prompted this response from Tom Guilfoyle:

"We operate a Canine Goose Control company in the south suburbs of Chicago called Rescue Me Goose Chasing. We use highly trained dogs that use herding techniques to drive geese away. We create a predatory presence on properties.

"Geese feel unsafe, threatened and leave.

"This technique requires persistence on our part but it works because Canada Geese do not want to nest where there is a presumed predator that threatens their young. Essentially we create a bad neighborhood. It is essential to also chase the geese out of the water where they go to for safety. Almost 100 percent of the time that is where they go because they do not see most dogs swim.

"Ours do and when they see our trained dogs swimming after them it is a game changer. Canine Goose Control works if the handlers and company know what they are doing, have properly trained dogs and persistence."

But that just moves the goose problem to someone else's property and allow them to reproduce. I like what the Urbana Park District is doing with the so-called "nest management" program: dunk goose eggs in corn oil to keep the embryos from hatching.

One more note from Gene Keyes ..

The main subject of the Feb. 6 mailbag — antiwar activist Gene Keyes, formerly of Champaign but now living in Nova Scotia — wrote to answer my question about the woman in a Dec. 24, 1963, photo of him burning his draft card.

"The young woman in the photo is Jane Gordon, then my fiancee. [But no longer my wife ;-( ]." he wrote.