Click To View Gallery

The Family Health Center Inc. (FHC) is a non-profit healthcare provider that was established in 1976 with seven locations throughout the Louisville, Ky., metro area. It now serves more than 37,000 patients annually, without regard to the ability to pay.

In 2012, FHC’s East Broadway Center location had outgrown its existing facility, and with the impending patient increase anticipated from Kentucky Gov. Steve Beshear’s decision to expand Medicaid, FHC leadership determined it was time to improve and expand services. Successful in obtaining a $5 million Affordable Care Act grant through the U.S. Health Services and Resource Administration, FHC entered into a long-term agreement to relocate to the nearby Standard Sanitary Building.

Built in 1925, the Standard Sanitary Building is a historic five-story masonry structure that was located just one block west of the existing FHC. The building originally housed the offices and showroom for Standard Sanitary Co., which was founded in Louisville in the late 1890s and became American Standard in 1929. It also had more than four times the square footage of the FHC, allowing for both the proposed expansion and future growth, as well.

Following a design team selection process, FHC chose JRA Architects and CMTA Engineers (both of Louisville) to implement the renovation of the landmark building. Soon after, the design team began programming the functional requirements as well as assessing the infrastructure needs of the old building, with ground breaking in December 2013.

Getting started

One positive aspect of the Standard Sanitary Building’s existing conditions was that the previous tenant had used it as a warehouse: There were few walls and no ceilings to obstruct visual reconnaissance and no occupants to protect during construction. However, there were plenty of challenges to come.

While an iconic structure, the building wasn’t on the National Register of Historic Places or within a historic district, so there were no restrictions as to maintaining the original exterior appearance or other preservation guidelines. The design team was sensitive to the aesthetic nature of the building, though, and sought to retain the character as much as possible.

An initial observation of the building also revealed some initial concerns, including two different levels on the first floor. The front section was about 5 feet lower than the rear section in answer to the threat of flooding during heavy rains due to a nearby creek. Although flooding was a rare occurrence, the risk of potentially several feet of floodwaters had to be addressed properly in order to obtain a building permit.

Following code review with FEMA and the local regulatory agency, it was required that the entire first floor elevation be raised by 12 inches—or 6 feet above the front section. Existing perimeter vestibules therefore needed small interior ramps to negotiate the offset, so they were enlarged to accommodate 12-foot-long ADA ramps. And, instead of 12 inches of solid concrete being poured, polystyrene foam was used and then concrete topping was placed over it. This composition provided for a lightweight surface that wouldn’t add more loads on the existing structural slab below.

Vertical circulation also needed significant improvement. There were two existing elevators: one passenger and one freight. Another passenger elevator was needed, but the location was undecided, influencing the process of determining a main entry to the facility. Initially, the plan was to have the primary access at the rear, where a surface parking lot was located. However, there was a vacant tract of land just to the west that could serve as ADA parking for patients and a drop-off zone.