AUSTIN, Texas--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Today, Tango Health announced the release of powerful enhancements to its flagship ACA Compliance Concierge Suite. The company continues to guide employers toward full compliance with the complex new Affordable Care Act reporting requirements.

"We pride ourselves on having a client-centric culture that welcomes user feedback. In fact, we hold regular meetings where we preview upcoming product features and gain insights into the needs of employers," said Todd Praisner, CEO of Tango Health.

The ACA Compliance Concierge Suite is a combination of powerful technology with first-class service for medium- to large-sized companies. This solution allows compliance teams to monitor monthly tracking for offering or terminating benefits coverage; forecasting for resource trends and needs; and calculated affordability for benefits-eligible employees.

Tango recently incorporated a number of additions based on valued client feedback, including:

A summary view of an employer’s Minimum Essential Coverage (MEC) for the 1094-C form. For 2016 reporting, clients can use this view to verify that at least 95 percent of their employees were offered MEC each month, as required by the ACA.

A detailed module of changes at the employee level to track corrections, pay data and demographic files. Historical data is imperative for maintaining ACA compliance, and this section will provide a key reference in the event of an IRS audit.

A “heat map” viewer for code summaries populated in Lines 14 and 16 of the 1095-C form. This allows clients to extract code combinations and remedy any data discrepancies.

“We are confident that these features will appeal to our current clients, as well as new clients who have chosen to alleviate the burdens placed on HR departments. Tango strives to be a trusted partner with completely outsourced solutions, including comprehensive support and compliance expertise,” Praisner said.

Tango recently helped employers supply 1095-C tax forms covering more than 2.5 million individuals. These employers represented a diverse group of sectors, including state and local government, financial services, higher education, and manufacturing industries. Tango is also assisting clients with the transmission of 1094-C forms to the IRS.

About Tango Health

Tango Health provides software and services to help enterprises achieve, maintain and report on ACA compliance, as well as decision support tools to ensure that employees are choosing the most appropriate health coverage.

Tango delivers significant cost savings to employees and employers by combining a high-touch services approach with adaptable software that can accommodate any data source, and deep knowledge of both healthcare regulations and human behavior.