Mosquito swarms, pollutants, trees toppling over for no apparent reason — the devastating flood last week will leave an environmental mess. The only real question is, how big?

Everything from litter to unseen poisons are out there. As the waters creep back below rivers’ banks, residents and officials are starting to assess the damage and clean up the debris. Here’s at least part of what you could find:

Mosquitoes and snakes

More mosquitoes will hatch this week, and the air hasn’t cooled down nearly enough to daunt them, said Ed Harne, Charleston County mosquito control lab technician. How thick the biting pests get will vary area to area, but in places of long-standing, water it could get bad. County mosquito crews already were noticing activity pick up in the woods last week. Harne asked residents to dump what standing water they can.

Crews will be out in as much force as they can muster, but the soggy grounds they have to cover will be vast. On top of the standing-water problem, the spread of flooding over otherwise dry ground will cause dormant eggs to hatch. As of Thursday, the aerial crew alone already was spraying 58 sites.

Berkeley County crews are stepping up treatment and will step up spraying as the adults hatch, said Jeff Cary, mosquito abatement manager. “With the extensive river basins and natural marshes all underwater, there’s really going to be more water than we can ever hope to treat.” Dorchester County did not return calls asking for comment.

Meanwhile, snakes and other critters that crawled up from flooded ground were starting to move for seasonal cover anyway. They might not be in any hurry to return. Larger animals such as deer and coyotes were displaced too.

“I suspect we will see things concentrated on higher ground and continue to see displaced animals show up in novel areas,” said Will Dillman, S.C. Department of Natural Resources herpetologist. “As the water recedes, reptiles and amphibians will try to find suitable habitat in place or perhaps try to navigate to a familiar area.”

Plants and soil

Your grass could die. Ornamental plants won’t stand up to a prolonged soaking. Trees that are not wetland-tolerant could wilt or die all together.

“Trees not used to extended periods of water, what can happen is the roots actually die. It may even be a year (later), but trees could die and fall over,” said Dara Park, a Clemson University soil scientist.

And it gets worse.

“The fertility of the soil could be lost for a short time,” said Calvin Sawyer, Clemson University soil scientist. The load of washed-away fertilizer, fecal material from pet waste and other sources, as well as other nutrients in the soil will be good in the long run — floods are how soils distribute nutrients naturally — but not so good in the short term, destroying the richness in the soil that grew plants in the first place.

Water

Sewage and other fecal waste already are showing up in Charleston Harbor. All 15 harbor area sites tested Wednesday by Charleston Waterkeeper were considered unsafe for swimming.

Sewage overflows from the flood are still being reported to the S.C. Department of Health and Environmental Control, and staff are aware of a number of them already, said spokeswoman Cassandra Harris. “Flooding and power outages from this unique rainstorm have created issues for wastewater treatment systems across the state.”

Charleston Water Systems’ Plum Island plant didn’t spill over but some of the system’s lines did, said Andy Fairey, chief operating officer. That happened to lines across the state in the overload of rain runoff and subsequent flooding.

With infrastructure collapsing on the Congaree and other rivers upstream, Santee Cooper and Charleston Water Systems are watching for pollutants at their raw water intakes on Lake Moultrie and in Bushy Park, respectively, but haven’t seen any serious spikes so far, spokespeople said. Chemicals are in place to deal with problems that might show up.

The load of nutrients and other pollutants in the water could become an ugly, fish-killing problem. Hans Paerl, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill marine scientist, is part of a team doing an ongoing study of the impacts of a massive load of freshwater discharged into the eastern North Carolina sounds after Hurricane Floyd in 1999.

The most significant findings so far are that:

The discharge lowered salinity to where habitats “completely changed,” Paerl said, in some areas eliminating shrimp, crabs, larvae of finfish and other marine species. The depletion was serious enough that catch restrictions were put in place to correct it.

For a year after the flood, the load of nutrients triggered algal blooms. The nutrients and the layering of fresh and salt water depleted dissolved oxygen, killing marine species.

In the Lowcountry, salinity loss won’t be so big or long an issue, Paerl said, because the seas more easily flush estuaries here. For the same reason, algae blooms are less likely and wouldn’t be so prevalent. Blooms here, though, have a bigger chance of being killing “red tides.” The blooms in North Carolina largely weren’t toxic.

Among other issues, ferries traveling the sounds after the discharge were damaged from hitting large debris in the water, he said.

The unknowns

Nutrients are just one of the pollutants the flood flushed into the rivers and estuaries. Just what others might be out there, and how toxic they will be, can’t really be answered.

“It’s too early to tell what we’re facing in South Carolina,” said John Rodgers, Clemson University ecotoxicologist, who studied the waterborne pollution in the Gulf states after Hurricane Katrina in 2005.

Sewage is the initial concern, along with washed-away industrial waste. But there is a lab shelf full of others, including:

Household soaps, solvents, pesticides.

Organic toxins such as black mold.

Oil leaked from flooded vehicles and other sources.

Metals.

Biotics: microbes, amoeba and other organisms that can cause disease.

On top of all that is the turbidity, or mud washed into the water, as well as erosion and loss of riverbank structure, deposits of mud and silt and the pollution issues surrounding debris disposal. Environmental damage from Katrina is still showing up, Rodgers said.

“It’s not my intent to be part of the ‘fear factor,’ but if you come across something that doesn’t look right, feel right or smell right, call emergency personnel,” he said.

As for the other pollutants, “we really don’t know that much about the contaminant issue,” Paerl said about the Floyd flood. The long-range damage might not be obvious, “but there could be a long-lasting effects.”

Reach Bo Petersen at (843) 937-5744, @bopete on twitter or Bo Petersen Reporting on Facebook.