Activists take part in the Keep the Promise Alive 2012 AIDS march and rally on the streets of Washington on July 22, 2012. Activists are speaking out against the high costs and lack of access to HIV and AIDS medication. MANDEL NGAN/AFP/GettyImages

William Wilson has one word for what health care reform means for him: freedom. Eleven years ago, Wilson was diagnosed with AIDS in Chicago. He had health insurance that he purchased as a self-employed graphic designer before his diagnosis. Wilson continued paying his health care premiums for a year and a half following his diagnosis, but said his health insurance provider denied the vast majority of his claims. Enormous medical expenses soon forced Wilson into bankruptcy. He says he could not obtain health insurance of his own because of his pre-existing condition. The freedom Wilson talks about is the ability to get many more of his health needs met, obtain insurance without discrimination and have less stigma attached to getting his health care. Wilson won't have to work around the income limitations that previously forced him to maintain a low income in order to be eligible for existing federally funded HIV/AIDS programs, or live without insurance. Gina Brown, who lives in Louisiana, isn't so lucky. Lawmakers in Wilson's state of Illinois have thrown their support behind both health care reform and Medicaid expansion. Those in Louisiana have not. When states don't participate, the federal government will help set up exchanges that some fear will be weaker. The health care exchanges are slated to go live Oct. 1 and the coverage will take effect Jan. 1. The health care exchanges under the Affordable Care Act, in the states that participate, could see to it that 20 to 30 percent more HIV-infected people are covered, according to experts. With health care reform, also referred to as Obamacare, Wilson will have access to far more comprehensive medical coverage and subsidies for health insurance. Health reform encompasses a full package of benefits deemed "essential" to his health, preventive services, health screenings, access to mental health care and much more. For the first time since his diagnosis, his HIV status won't be a barrier to getting insured.

Governors' whims

Access to health reform depends on which state you live in, and legislators in some states – particularly in the South and Southeast, and some Republican-controlled states in the West – have balked at health care reform, meaning it may be harder to get it moving ahead. Brown, who lives in New Orleans and was diagnosed with HIV when she was pregnant in 1994, is enthusiastic about health care reform "if it is rolled out correctly." She referenced Massachusetts, when people living with HIV and AIDS became fully insured and infection rates went down under health reform implemented by then-Gov. Mitt Romney, a Republican, as a positive example. Republican Gov. Bobby Jindal, in Brown's home state of Louisiana, rejected both health care reform and the Medicaid expansion. Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder, also a Republican, recently broke ranks with his party to support the Medicaid expansion. Brown worries the federal government's exchanges in states such as Louisiana could be inferior to those set up in fully participating states. "Governors are much better positioned to negotiate rates than the federal government," she said. "Of about 17,000 people living with HIV/AIDS in Louisiana, at least 5,000 would have been eligible for expanded Medicaid." For those left without coverage, the AIDS Drug Assistance Program (ADAP) and The Ryan White Program, two federally funded programs many consider to be lifesavers, will continue to provide services. The relative patchwork system provides HIV and AIDS medication to low-income patients (ADAP) and other HIV-related services not covered by other sources (Ryan White). Brown credits Ryan White and ADAP with keeping her healthy and making sure she did not pass the HIV virus to her baby while she was pregnant. "As long as Ryan White remains available, I think people with HIV or AIDS in Louisiana will do fine," she said. "We really have to make sure that these federal programs continue to be funded."

Patchwork safety net