We must not deforest hills

In the Bay Area, we pride ourselves on being progressive, environmentally conscious, and protective of wildlife, forests and human life.

As an "enlightened" citizenry, we would not vote for the largest deforestation plan in 100 years over the East Bay hills -- that is, if our vote counted. It is time to tune in, turn on, and petition against this plan. According to FEMA, the clear-cutting plan will result in "unavoidable adverse impacts ... to vegetation, wildlife and habitats, protected species ... human health and safety, and noise."

In the Bay Area of old, we would never stand for this invasion. We would not vote to use our precious tax dollars to decimate our natural parks in a reckless manner. If we had a say or vote we would not elect to spread toxic chemicals from Monsanto over 100,000 eucalyptus, Monterey pines, Monterey cypress and/or acacia trees.

Imagine walking your dog through dead stumps, sun-drenched open spaces, with warning signs about chemical dangers ahead.

This is not "The Garden State," the infamous "Love Canal" zone or Texas. It is the Bay Area. We are a blue state or green state. Let's not be a toxic state. Protect our parks.

James H. Bramson

Berkeley

Advertisement

Foolish to move farmers market

The decision to move the Thursday North Berkeley farmers market is sad and foolish.

The Thursday market is a town square, a gathering place. There is plenty of room where we can chat, enjoy music and the children can run around. It's an attraction.

Why turn all this into nothing but a row of stalls?

Judy Nakadegawa

Berkeley

Name-calling is not OK

I don't understand the Times' decision to publish the July 5 guest commentary by Michael Arata, "Roberts improvised fact on ACA ruling," on the Supreme Court's Affordable Care Act decision.

Arata inveighs against President Barack Obama's election and character, excoriates Chief Justice Roberts for the sin of not being conservative enough, derides our public servants as liars and third-rate, and characterizes decisions he doesn't like as perverse, contorted, sophomoric, jury-rigged, etc. This orgy of name-calling does not constitute reasoned discourse or valid dissent -- it's pure vitriol.

Congress does not create perfect statutes. When a law contains self-contradictory parts and Congress doesn't fix it, our courts' job is to provide a reasonable interpretation. That's what the Supreme Court just did, and the decision wasn't even particularly close (6-3). There's nothing more to it than that.

This paper should be applauded for providing newspaper space for opposing views, but it's really OK to set limits. Name-calling polemics are a waste of newsprint.

Randall Matamoros

Berkeley

Code Pink has told of suicides

This is in response to the July 12 Times Author Profile on John Bateson, whose book, "Last and Greatest Battle," brings attention to the soaring rate of suicide in the military. Bateson is a former Contra Costa Crisis Center director.

For about 10 years, Code Pink has told of the suicides among members of our armed services. Maybe now that this book is out, attention will be paid to the mounting problem.

Will the United States now stop seating personnel at consoles where they control unpersoned flying guns to kill people who couldn't begin to cope with the horror of the attack? Will the United States stop sending military men and women to murder land, sea and people?

No! We all know the United States will continue the establishment and maintenance of its embrace of the world -- and perhaps the universe -- for the profit and power of its few owners.

Even if the United States began to care about the crimes it has committed in the last centuries, and on into the future, it would still continue to ignore those concerns.

Norma J.F. Harrison

Berkeley

Sun governs earth's climate

This is in response to Eric Ettlinger's July 17 letter, "Better climate change solution."

Regarding the carbon emissions and their effect on climate, scientists worldwide have reported for years that it's the sun that governs earth's climate.

And the sun has cycles. While a recent warmer cycle ended around 2007, a reduction of the sun's activity, such as sun spots, indicate that earth is entering a cooling period.

Kathy Youngs

Benicia

Environmental devastation

Government entities and the Cal Berkeley administration are planning to inflict environmental devastation to Oakland and Berkeley beginning this August.

Oakland Mayor Libby Schaaf, UC Berkeley Chancellor Nicholas Dirks and East Bay Regional Park District General Manager Robert Doyle have received federal funding for an environmentally catastrophic plan to destroy eucalyptus, Monterey pine, Monterey cypress, and acacia forests on the public lands and parks of the East Bay.

Starting in August, over 100,000 trees -- and as many as 400,000 in the East Bay hills -- will be clear cut and thousands of gallons of toxic chemicals will be dumped on their stumps.

Costing nearly $6 million, this plan will radically transform the character and appearance of the hills while causing great animal suffering, including the decimation of habitat vital to several endangered species.

With their habitat eliminated, these animals and multitudes of others will be displaced or forced to live in toxic waste dumps filled with chemicals that will poison them and their food and water supply.

Removing trees will make these areas subject to severe landslides when flooding rains appear, as the trees are key to holding the hillside soil in place!

Please visit saveeastbayhills.org/take-action.html to find out more about this insane plan and what you can do to oppose it.

Paul Karsh

Martinez