MOUNTAIN VIEW, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--The Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) shocked the healthcare sector by sharing physician-level outcomes data earlier this month. The Physician Compare disclosure includes patient outcome results for 6 of 10 US physicians as well as new data on Accountable Care Organizations (ACOs), group practices and hospitals. It is intended to bring transparency to patients under the Affordable Care Act. HealthLoop, as a national leader in patient experience technology, is being tapped as a key resource for driving satisfaction and better compliance among patients, leading to better scores.

What's happening: 2015 has been a milestone year for healthcare transparency. ProPublica’s SurgeonScorecard reporting this summer sparked a new wave of patient access to outcomes data as well as a surge of controversy in medical circles. That story was quickly followed by announcements from CMS about the first-ever mandatory outcomes-based payment program for joint replacement surgery (the Comprehensive Center for Joint Replacement model, or CJR) and the first national disclosure of their physician outcomes data.

“This has been healthcare’s WikiLeaks year,” said Todd Johnson, CEO of HealthLoop. “We’ve never before seen such a dramatic turn toward data-driven medicine and patient access to information. Patient engagement has gone from buzzword to a real driver for outcomes in lower costs and increased quality.”

What it means for physicians: Performance data on 400,000 physicians is included in the CMS Physician Compare launch, including a starred rating based on adherence to care standards for obesity, tobacco use, high-blood pressure, depression, medications and prevention of heart disease and stroke. It is yet another way that physicians today face new rankings and performance-based measurements.

How HealthLoop can help: The digital health sector is booming in response to 2015’s outcomes-based transformation and new programs launching in 2016. HealthLoop is a national leader in automating care plans and physician touch points throughout a patient’s episode of care. Using helpful reminders before a surgery, daily check-ins on recovery and indicators to the care team about concerning issues during the episode, HealthLoop’s platform enables hospitals and physicians to improve patient satisfaction, reduce unnecessary hospital readmissions and improve outcomes. HealthLoop has helped improve outcomes for over 30,000 patients in the last three years with partners such as Cedars-Sinai Medical Center. Visit www.healthloop.com to learn more.

About HealthLoop

HealthLoop is reimagining the patient experience by guiding care team communications. The company provides peer-reviewed, automated patient support that is insightful and engaging to increase adherence and comprehension. HealthLoop enables value-based care for hospitals to monitor at-risk populations, provide outreach when most needed and track patients through an episode of care. Patients increasingly rate their doctors with a 5-star experience, and providers achieve better efficiencies with an automated patient check-in approach. Located in Mountain View, California, HealthLoop facilitates over 30,000 automated check-ins each month.