WASHINGTON — Kara Kamienski can’t tell you how much money she’s won.

She can’t say how many vowels she’s bought, or how many puzzles she’s solved.

But she can say the chance to appear on one of television’s most iconic game shows was “fantastic,” not to mention Pat Sajak and Vanna White are as nice in real life as they appear on TV screens across America.

Kamienski will appear as a contestant on Friday’s episode of “Wheel of Fortune,” airing at 6:30 p.m. on WMBD-TV.

For Kamienski, the prospect of appearing on the long-running game show originally began as a joke between friends. After hearing the show’s “Wheelmobile” — the show’s traveling audition studio — would make a stop in Decatur, Kamienski and her friends made the drive south to audition.

Once in Decatur, producers had the prospective contestants fill out applications, which were then drawn at random. Those selected would then participate in a mock game.

“Ironically, I never got chosen that day. My name never got drawn from the drum,” Kamienski said, adding producers would review applications for callbacks.

A couple of weeks later, she said, she received a call inviting her to audition once again in Springfield.

After practicing, playing more mock games and a written test, Kamienski and other hopefuls were told they would receive a written letter should they be chosen to appear on the show.

Two weeks to the date, she said, her husband handed her a letter bearing the “Wheel of Fortune” logo, an invite to appear on a taping.

Work nearly got in the way, though. Kamienski, a wedding photographer, had planned to shoot a wedding in Ireland, conflicting with the original taping date.

“I was devastated because I thought, ‘There’s no way they’re going to call me back. I’ve just lost my opportunity,’” Kamienski said.

Luckily, she said, all was not lost, and producers did call back with another date — Sept. 11. Soon enough, Kamienski, her husband, Chris, and her mother, Cathy Stratman, were flown to Culver City, Calif., for taping.

“The minute we walked in the door, they treated us like royalty,” Kamienski said. “They were wonderful.”

While discussing contracts and enjoying complimentary snacks, Kamienski said the contestants were greeted by one of the show’s personalities.

“This lady walked in eating a peanut butter and jelly, and grabbed a Coke out of the refrigerator … and then she turned around and was like, ‘Good morning, guys!’ It was Vanna White,” Kamienski said, describing the show’s longtime hostess as “sweet as could be.”

“She sat down and talked with us and asked about our families,” Kamienski said. “I was shocked how approachable and nice she really was.”

Kamienski said she was in for another shock once the producers moved contestants into the studio to practice.

“I had heard a rumor that the wheel was kind of small and they make it look bigger on TV,” Kamienski said. “That was all a big lie. The wheel is ginormous, and it is so heavy. My arm literally hurt for like two days after the show.”

Gametime didn’t start for Kamienski once the cameras started rolling. The studio filmed five episodes that day, she said. Kamienski’s appearance was No. 5.

“It was really fun when it was finally our turn,” she said. “I was standing right next to Pat, so that was really exciting.”

Kamienski described host Sajak as kind and encouraging.

“He was just wonderful. He was really encouraging and just a great guy,” Kamienski said.

Though she can’t spill many details of the taping, Kamienski said there was an awkward moment that resulted in some laughs afterward. When Sajak asked about her occupation as a wedding photographer, Kamienski told him she dreams of becoming a criminal photographer taking photos of crime scenes.

“He just looked at me and said, ‘You are a sick individual,’ and then he just went on with the show,” Kamienski said with a laugh. “… But he leaned over at commercial and said, ‘I’m really sorry I called you a sick individual.’”

Now, Kamienski said she is eagerly awaiting her night on TV. She and Chris will host a viewing party at the Washington Knights of Columbus Hall for family and friends.

“I love it because as a wedding photographer, I meet a lot of people. It’s a great conversation starter and it’s something a lot of people can identify with,” Kamienski said. “I love that my friends are excited for me because they think it’s fun, but then my friends’ parents are excited because they also watch the show. Even my kids — who are 10 years old and 8 years old — watch the show all the time, so it’s nice because not only has it been a long, withstanding show, but it’s definitely a show that stretches all generations, so everybody can enjoy it together. Just to be able to be a part of that was just so much fun.”