You’re a healthcare project manager responsible for constructing a new building in your system. To date, you’ve followed the strategic plan and the master plan and have developed a conceptual project budget. You’ve secured board approval, too. Now it’s time to review and make recommendations to your leadership on the project delivery approach.

This is the legal/contractual arrangement that will define the relationships that the hospital will have with the project delivery team, including the design team and consultants, and the construction team and its subcontractors.

What are your project delivery options and how do they vary?

Contracting methods are evolving in response to the challenges of delivering a successful, large-scale healthcare project. Meanwhile, as the Affordable Care Act is more clearly understood, most hospitals are learning to work with the regulations and are motivated by new reimbursement models to pursue outpatient or ambulatory care sites. This trend moves patient care away from the inpatient environment and into smaller, less complex facilities.

Depending upon the type, scope, and scale of a project, the delivery method of choice will vary. Further complicating the picture, there are a variety of pros and cons to consider within even the most successful delivery methods.

Design-bid-build

Design-bid-build is the traditional approach: The client hires the architecture firm, which prepares design and construction documents. Once the design and construction documents are complete, the contractors bid on the work based on the documents.

It’s good practice to prequalify the contractors, using a request-for-proposal process similar to that used for architectural selection. Major subcontractors can also be prequalified, which is wise given that MEP systems can cost as much as 40 to 50 percent of the construction budget.

Pros:

It’s the industry’s most familiar delivery method

Roles and responsibilities for the team are well defined

More firms can bid on a project

The owner can benefit from lower market pricing in a competitive environment, and the low bid may be the deciding factor in a selection.

Cons:

The lowest bid leaves little or no room for the changes (and potential conflicts) that can be expected on complex projects of long duration, such as a hospital

The owner is often required to act as an issues resolution agent when architectural documents and construction conflict

Relationships can be adversarial

Owner control over the general contractor team is limited

Bids can be high in a tight construction market.

Construction manager at-risk

In the construction manager at-risk model, the owner hires both the architect and construction manager (CM), which is brought onto the project team during the early design phases to assist with constructability, logistics, and estimating, providing an early opportunity for collaboration. Under this method, the CM will define a scope of work, construction duration, and a guaranteed price and, by doing so, takes on the risk of the project.

With comprehensive and complete estimating, a CM can help the team keep the project within the budget. This requires transparency and effective communication between the design and construction partners to be sure that as the planning and design evolves, the CM is responding with cost information that accurately reflects any changes.

This method is the most common delivery method for large-scale healthcare projects, and is especially helpful in renovations because the CM is part of the team and can better watch the budget and schedule goals as well as allocate resources for unknowns that often arise.



Pros: