We’ve reached a point in civil society when it is not always possible to know when one might be committing a crime. In his book "Three Felonies A Day – How the Feds Target the Innocent," attorney Harvey Silverglate argues the federal government has, by statute and through regulation, made lawbreakers out of us all.

This is even true among the political class – both elected officials and appointees – at the national, state and local levels. Though not exactly popular right now, those in office are forced to walk a tightrope between what is legal and what is not because the law has become so convoluted. We’re not always sympathetic to their plight, though we should be because, as Silverglate writes in the introduction, “While it’s true politicians under indictment aren’t likely to garner much public sympathy, a healthy skepticism is due when federal authority is imposed on matters primarily of state and local concern. Nothing short of the proper functioning of democratic governance is at stake.”

Consider, for example, the case of the late Ted Stevens, once a powerful United States Republican senator from Alaska. He was charged, indicted and convicted based on evidence later found by an independent investigator to be tainted by misconduct on the part of federal prosecutors, as brilliantly recounted by former Assistant U.S. Attorney Sidney Powell in her book "Licensed to Lie.”

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

That his indictment was later dismissed was of little import, as the damage had already been done. The conviction led to his defeat in a close re-election bid, and he was later killed in the crash of small plane in the Alaska wilderness that he might not have been on had he still been a member of the Senate.

Things like this are an important consideration when governors and other elected officials are sent to jail over such trivial matters as vacation home renovations or the acceptance of gifts given legally under state law. At the same time, it should be noted that the Department of Justice itself is engaged in a cover-up of a departmental, gun-running operation gone bad – Operation Fast and Furious – and is hiding behind a dubious claim of executive privilege.

If things are allowed to continue as they have been going, especially where the still-specious charge of “honest services fraud” – the brainchild of our current Vice President Joe Biden – is concerned, then we may reach a point where politicians are actually indictable for violating campaign promises or other public statements.

Let us consider President Barack Obama. As part of his effort to win congressional approval for the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, he repeatedly promised that, under his plan, anyone who liked the health insurance they had could could keep it. "Period.”

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State group]

As millions of Americans now know – and as many suggested at the time – this statement was untrue. The president’s lie, told many times over, caused real economic damage to those in households across the United States who believed him, and it can be clearly established that there are people who are victims of that lie. Given the vague standards now used by federal prosecutors as well as previous indictments they have brought, this might even be an indictable offense – presuming one is willing to leave aside the constitutional complexities involved were agents of the executive branch to bring an indictment against the man who heads it.

Think likewise about the president’s commitment to wage war on the terrorists who comprise the Islamic State group. There has been some debate over his authority to initiate military action against the group as well as the need for congressional authorization to undertake a lengthy military operation that involves “boots on the ground,” the current term for committing U.S. combat troops to the region.

More than one commentator has pointed out the irony of Obama citing Congress' authorization of use of force against Iraq in 2002, which the current occupant of the Oval Office heavily criticized as a senator, as giving him authority to proceed along the path he has chosen.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Furthermore, the president campaigned on a promise of bringing all the U.S. troops home. If he is found to have allowed “boots on the ground” without informing Congress or because he is now taking advantage of authority given his predecessor to do what he feels needs to be done without going back to Congress, can it be argued that he is depriving the American people of his “honest services” within the meaning of the statute? Before you laugh and dismiss such an idea, consider that the governor of Texas, Republican Rick Perry, is currently under indictment, not because he vetoed a specific spending bill but because he threatened to veto the bill and, therefore, engaged in an illegal and coercive act.