More than three dozen companies have signed an open letter calling on Mississippi legislators to repeal the state's Religious Freedom Bill, which was signed into law last Tuesday. Once it takes effect later this year, the law will allow religious groups and some private businesses to cite religious beliefs to deny services to some people. One top state legislator says there's a big misunderstanding about the bill.

"House Bill 1523 doesn't show hate toward anyone," says Mississippi House Speaker Pro Tem Greg Snowden. He says the idea that the bill is about hate is at the core of misunderstandings concerning it.

"It's ridiculous," says Snowden. "People are saying that it's a return to Jim Crow; that the bill would allow people to be turned away from lunch counters, and it specifically doesn't do that."

Here's what the bill does:

It has three religious beliefs that are protected by it. The legislation notes that those must be sincerely held religious beliefs or moral convictions that a person or religious organization has. The three beliefs that are protected in the law are:

1. That marriage is or should be recognized as the union of one man and one woman.

2. That sexual relations are properly reserved to such a marriage.

3. That male or female refers to a person's biological sex that's determined at birth.

Representative Snowden stresses that the bill has nothing to do with public accommodations that are not related to wedding services. However, it does allow things like religious groups, such as churches or religious agencies, not to rent property nor grant adoptions based on religious beliefs.

It also allows a person to deny wedding services, or non-emergency medical services to a person based on the three stipulations, which effect members of the LGBT community. Plus, they could also effect people who are not married, but sexually active.

"Prior to last summer 13 states in this country had legalized gay marriage," says Snowden. "Everyone of those states had provisions protecting people for religious beliefs from being compelled for prohibiting that. The irony of this is that states like New York, who have a provision very similar to Mississippi's, their governor says, 'We're not going to allow travel to Mississippi because they have this discriminatory law,' when New York has on the books, and has had for years, a law that specifically exempts people with religious convictions from having to participate in a gay marriage ceremony."

Despite outside pressure to repeal the law, Representative Snowden says he does not expect that to happen.

"I think we will change this law when we decide that protection of fundamental rights to believe what your religious convictions allow you to believe, is no longer worth protecting," says Snowden, "then we'll change the law, but I don't think that's going to happen anytime soon."

Mississippi House Bill 1523 is set to take effect on July 1st.