Campbell’s focus not serving Bexar

Photo: Tom Reel /Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Sen. Donna Campbell, R-New Braunfels, is focused on extreme and strange issues rather than addressing her district’s needs. Her district includes part of Bexar County. Sen. Donna Campbell, R-New Braunfels, is focused on extreme and strange issues rather than addressing her district’s needs. Her district includes part of Bexar County. Photo: Tom Reel /Associated Press Campbell’s focus not serving Bexar 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

Both times voters elected Donna Campbell to the Texas Senate, it was pretty clear they were getting a conservative more in the Lt. Gov. Dan Patrick school of conservatism than any school in which House Speaker Joe Straus would be principal.

And still, many of her bills — even beyond school vouchers — go beyond the pale.

She is proposing constitutional amendments, including one that allegedly stands for religious freedom but actually stands it — and civil rights — on their heads. Critics say it will allow business owners to refuse to serve gay couples. It is apparently undergoing tweaks after Indiana’s bill generated fierce citizen and business backlash.

The problem: No one is persecuting Christians, the amendment’s actual premise.

There’s a Campbell resolution for a constitutional amendment that would make it clear that Texans can decline to purchase health insurance. This attempts to supersede the mandate in the Affordable Care Act for folks to sign up for health insurance, many of them qualifying for federal subsidies.

This makes no sense in a state that leads the nation in the number of uninsured people and in a state whose Legislature offers no practical solution for that.

Another useless amendment proposed by Campbell would empower the Texas Legislature to nullify federal executive orders and policies that exceed the authority granted by the United States Constitution.

But those conflicts are routinely and properly ironed out in the courts, the best places to determine what passes constitutional muster.

A bill would prohibit abortions in plans bought through an ACA health exchange. Consumers would have to buy separate, supplemental non-exchange coverage.

This measure has some exceptions — death or certain health threats to the mother — but these are not broad enough. What of rape and incest? In any case, these are decisions that should be left to a woman and her doctor and covered by private insurance, even those with subsidized premiums.

There are bills on religious protections for child welfare providers; keeping the United Nations out of the Alamo; on guns in government facilities; and even a bill requiring a semester course on “the founding principles of the United States.”

These are not pressing issues in the Bexar County portion of her district, nor in her entire district. Preoccupation with them is simply a disservice.