After a slow start in Texas, insurance sign-up under the Affordable Care Act seems to be growing this month as an important deadline looms for those needing immediate coverage.

“I sense that our numbers are picking up dramatically,” Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said after a round of meetings with federal officials to review the troubled rollout of the new law.

Any such enrollment rush is likely to be tied to Monday’s deadline for anyone wanting their new health insurance plan to kick in next month.

“Monday is the last day to sign up for coverage that starts on Jan. 1,” said Louis Adams, a spokesman for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas. “But open enrollment continues through March 31.”

A deluge of calls in early December forced the insurance carrier to add 500 customer-assistance representatives to a phone bank covering five states, including Texas, according to its Facebook page.

Still, its customers posted comments complaining of being told to wait a half-hour or longer, causing them to try again later without much success. Company representatives responded by asking for patience.

Adams said some of the calls concerned other types of coverage, outside of the government program. Typically, December is when people renew their health insurance policies, a process that coincided with the Obamacare sign-up, he said.

“The pace of enrollment has continued to improve as the government has addressed technical issues associated with the marketplace,” Adams said. “We have also experienced a steady increase in visits to our website, calls to our customer hotlines and attendance at community events.”

When the new federal law went into effect Oct. 1, millions of applicants overwhelmed the federal website intended to field questions and process applications for all but 17 states. The online site, HealthCare.gov, was revamped as of Dec. 1.

As of Nov. 30, the federal government was reporting that only 14,038 Texans had applied, been approved and picked a plan under Obamacare. A much larger group, 244,695 Texans, completed their applications but did not choose a specific plan by the end of last month.

Considering Texas has 4.8 million uninsured residents, even the higher number of completed applications would represent just 5.1 percent of those who could apply for coverage in the state.

The federal government, which is overseeing Texas’ sign-up, will not provide December’s enrollment numbers until early January.

The last report by the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services tallied 364,682 individuals who had completed the application process and picked a plan nationwide. An additional 583,473 applications were pending completion.

Such a slow rollout does not surprise the people who have watched the launch of other national insurance programs over the years.

Medicare Part D, offering drug coverage to senior citizens, frustrated pharmacists and patients alike when it kicked off in 2006. Private health insurance companies implemented the new benefit, but prescriptions weren’t necessarily filled. Some pharmacists called it a fiasco.

Hector De La Torre, executive director of the Transamerica Center for Health Studies, said the Affordable Care Act is requiring a much more complicated process.

Online enrollment requires consumers to provide information about income and family members. Then the government decides who qualifies for a tax subsidy. Finally, an approved applicant must peruse a menu of insurance plans, pick one and pay for it.

“And when you think about the people who are trying to sign up for the first time, it’s even more complicated,” he said.

“Many are in lower-paid jobs that don’t have insurance, which means they may have lower education levels, too. This was never going to be easy.”

Diane McCollum: It’s not a ‘free ride,’ but counselor is pleased

Although she is just two years short of Medicare coverage, Diane McCollum has been eagerly awaiting the arrival of the Affordable Care Act.

McCollum, a 63-year-old mental-health counselor, lost her health care coverage when her job was reduced to part time five years ago. Ironically, her full-time job was cut back after the state trimmed Medicaid for mental-health services.

“Indigent children with mental-health needs got 1 hour and 15 minutes of therapy each month instead of an hour every week,” McCollum said. “We’re allowed to give more time than that, but it’s without pay. It’s a tragedy for them.”

McCollum, who lives in Lake Highlands, used COBRA to extend her insurance and then found an individual plan that cost nearly $360 a month, a good chunk of her reduced paycheck. And it would have increased to almost $600 next year.

Under the new law, she found a more comprehensive policy, and she qualified for a $200 tax credit that lowers it to $250 monthly, McCollum said.

“I’m not getting a free ride,” she said. “But I’ll have good coverage if I need it.”

Diane McCollum

• Age: 63

• Coverage: Individual

• Tax subsidy: $200 monthly

• Premium: $250 monthly

• Deductible: $7,000

Brenda Copple: Costs go down without subsidy

Retiring early as a corporate marketing executive sounded like a good idea a decade ago, said 56-year-old Brenda Copple.

“I was ready to go back to school and reinvent myself,” said Copple, who lives in Uptown.

She also took advantage of COBRA and then looked for a private health plan that would give her the coverage she’d always had. She believed her hours on the treadmill and good health made her an attractive candidate.

But Copple forgot about a test result on her first colonoscopy, offered as part of a comprehensive physical awarded to top executives. It picked up a slight abnormality that turned out to be nothing.

“I was rejected for individual coverage because of that test result,” she said. “They called it a pre-existing condition, and I couldn’t buy insurance anywhere.”

So Copple ended up in the Texas high-risk pool, paying $758 in monthly premiums with a $5,000 annual deductible. Never once did she spend enough per year to put in an insurance claim, she said.

Even though Copple doesn’t qualify for a tax subsidy, her new plan is $20 cheaper a month, and she cut her deductible and out-of-pocket costs to $3,250 a year.

“And I got $40-a-month dental coverage after 10 years without anything,” she said. “I am thrilled.”

Brenda Copple

• Age: 56

• Coverage: Individual

• Tax subsidy: None

• Premium: $738 monthly

• Deductible: $3,250

Harry O. Davis: Keeping his specialists, reducing costs

When you have a chronic condition that could be fatal, you need to pay attention to the details in your insurance plan, Harry O. Davis said.

The 57-year-old North Dallas consultant lost his group coverage when he sold his small business five years ago. While he doesn’t like to talk specifics about his health, he concedes that someday he might need an organ transplant.

Being relegated to the state’s high-risk pool meant Davis paid the full $5,000 deductible each year, plus $9,000 in total premium costs.

“I feel great now, but I follow every order my doctors give me,” Davis said. “They are kind of amazed at how well I’m doing.”

As Davis shopped this fall for a new plan under Obamacare, his biggest concern was hanging on to those specialists.

He found half a dozen plans that allowed him that access. He chose a gold plan that will reduce his future out-of-pocket costs by about $1,800 a year.

“I had no problem with the health exchanges,” he said. “I couldn’t be happier.”

Harry O. Davis

• Age: 57

• Coverage: Individual

• Tax subsidy: None

• Premium: $662 monthly

• Deductible: $3,250

Daryn DeZengotita: Partners find way to cover the family

Daryn DeZengotita was uninsured until she met her partner, Celia Barshop, who worked for a company that offered the couple a family health plan. They have two sons.

The coverage lasted until Barshop took a different job that made the family policy too expensive.

Being a self-employed small-business owner, DeZengotita shopped for her own coverage. She found a $656-a-month policy that covered her and the two boys.

But it didn’t provide her much beyond an annual checkup and mammogram, the 48-year-old Rowlett resident said.

Working downtown in a lofty incubator office, DeZengotita said she pored over her insurance options when the federal government began accepting applications in October. She waited patiently to get through when the federal website collapsed.

She found a plan for $414 a month, qualifying for a $63 subsidy. The boys will stay on her plan.

“I love the fact I can keep my doctor,” said DeZengotita, who works 30 hours a week. “I spent so much of my life getting health care at Planned Parenthood that it’s a luxury to have a doctor at all.”

Daryn DeZengotita

• Age: 48

• Coverage: Family

• Tax subsidy: $63 monthly

• Premium: $414 monthly

• Deductible: $6,000

Luis Veloz: ‘I can tell people for the first time I’m going to the doctor’

When he was in second grade, Luis Veloz fell and broke his arm. But he didn’t tell his family about the pain because he was worried it would cost too much to get it fixed.

He knew about medical bills because his uninsured father suffered his first heart attack earlier that year. Veloz remembered the stunned look on his parents’ faces every time they opened a hospital bill.

“People think the kids don’t notice things. But kids know,” said the 20-year-old Veloz, who lives in East Dallas.

He made the best of his pain by writing with the other hand, until his teacher noticed something was wrong. The school nurse diagnosed the broken bone and his mother took him to the doctor for a cast.

His arm would heal, but not his anxiety about medical bills.

When he was a student at Southern Methodist University, studying for his first-semester finals, his father suffered another heart attack. This time, it required open-heart surgery, and the family’s medical bills would top $250,000.

“I was living the American dream,” Veloz said. “But my family needed my help. I realized I could go to school later.”

He worked as a waiter for almost a year without health insurance. But his family’s experience of being uninsured inspired him to join the Texas Organizing Project in 2011. He went door to door last summer explaining how the Affordable Care Act would work.

Last week, he sat down at a computer and picked out an individual health insurance plan that will cost him $114 a month. After he pays the first premium, he plans to schedule his first physical exam. His family will pick a plan early next year.

“I can tell people for the first time I’m going to the doctor,” Veloz said. “Isn’t that awesome?”

Luis Veloz

• Age: 20

• Coverage: Individual

• Tax subsidy: None

• Premium: $114 monthly

• Deductible: $6,000