PHOENIX - January 20 is the first day to file your 2014 tax return



But the Internal Revenue Service has already warned this tax season could be one of the most confusing.



And if you're one of the nearly 8 million Americans who signed up for the Affordable Healthcare Act, you'll be one of the first to notice.



Many who got policies through the healthcare exchange are eligible for a tax credit on this year's return .



"There is a tax credit available to help people who may genuinely not be able to afford the coverage," said attorney Stephanie Fierro.



According to Fierro, some decided to wait to use the credit when filing taxes, others opted to be paid the credit in advance when they originally signed up.



The government then made an estimate of how much each person would be eligible for and paid the insurance company directly.



But Fierro says if that estimate was too high you could owe the IRS and if it was too low, they could owe you.



Also if you've had life changes like children or divorce that could change the amount you are eligible for.



And if you weren't insured at all in 2014, that could cost you too.



"If you haven't gotten coverage, this is the year that you're actually going to potentially pay a penalty," said Fierro.



That penalty equals up to 1 percent of your income or $95 per adult. The cost is half for each child who was not covered.



Aside from health insurance, there are other potential pitfalls: virtual money, like Bitcoin.



"It would be much more like a house than wages," said Fierro.



So if you received it in 2014--you'll likely be hit with a tax.



And something to beware of throughout 2015: withdrawing from your IRA isn't as simple as it once was .



You used to be able to withdraw money for 60 days without penalty.



But in 2015 you can only do that once a year before being penalized and hit with a 10 percent early withdrawal tax.

Need my help? Call the Assistance League of Phoenix volunteers at 1-855-323-1515. You can also send me an e-mail , a tweet , or like the Let Joe Know Facebook page and tell me about it there.



AND WE NEED YOUR HELP! If you want to be a volunteer and help consumers who call the Let Joe Know helpline, let us know. Just call the 855 number above. Leave your name, phone number, tell us that you want to volunteer, and we will get back to you. It's a great way to help others AND learn the latest scams and how to protect yourself.