DENVER, Oct. 23, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- With open enrollment for 2015 Affordable Care Act policies just weeks away, Evolution Communications Agency in Littleton is proud to be recognized for its work helping to increase health insurance enrollment within the Latino community. Evolution won three Bronze Leaf Awards at the Colorado Healthcare Communicators 2014 Gold Leaf Awards. The annual awards program recognizes excellence in public relations, marketing and communications of local healthcare organizations and professionals.

Evolution won two awards for "Crossroads/Encrucijada," a one-hour drama in English and Spanish funded by the Colorado Health Foundation, and one award for the Montez Family testimonial commercials produced for the state-based health insurance marketplace, Connect for Health Colorado.

Nationally, and in Colorado, Latinos continue to have a higher rate of uninsurance than the general population and are more likely to face barriers to getting enrolled, such as language and a lack of workplace-based coverage.

"The evidence shows that this population is very interested in getting health insurance," says Anne Smith, Evolution principal. Smith cites a study released in September commissioned by the Colorado Health Foundation, "Two-thirds of uninsured Latinos in Colorado are concerned that they don't have coverage, but we need to make them aware that insurance has become more affordable." The study shows that most Latinos in Colorado don't realize they may be eligible for financial assistance to help them pay for their health insurance premiums.

Evolution was also recognized for its work on the "I Am A Smoke-Free Zone" mass media and outreach campaign, which won Gold Leaf Awards for multimedia campaign of the year and the Judge's Choice Grand Gold, the evening's top honor. This three million dollar project was funded with taxes generated by Amendment 35 to educate Coloradans about the dangers of tobacco use. Evolution managed the creative design of the campaign, as well as the dual language media buy across 18 counties in metro Denver and Northeastern Colorado, and incorporated extensive non-traditional outreach elements.

About Evolution Communications Agency

Evolution is a full-service marketing and communications agency with expertise in public health messaging in English and Spanish. The firm provides media buying, public relations, digital marketing and general communications support to numerous state-based and local public health agencies. Please visit becausemessagematters.com and follow us on Facebook and Twitter.

Media Contact:

Jordan Peel

Jordan@becausemessagematters.com

303-881-7958

SOURCE Evolution Communications Agency