Gov. Andrew Cuomo signed last weekend legislation aimed at easing the process for municipalities to buy their own streetlights.

Yes, what we’re saying is there are a number of municipalities in New York that don’t actually own the streetlights within their borders. Rather, the utility companies that provide electricity own them.

The result is difficulty for some with saving energy when utility companies aren’t ready to switch over to more energy efficient lighting sources, such as LEDs. In cash-strapped Albany’s case, finding streetlight cost savings was one of the recommendations made by the state’s Financial Restructuring Board.

The legislation largely eases the process by which a municipality can attempt to purchase streetlights from a utility company, though it does not appear to make things considerably less costly. Essentially the legislation provides a clear set of guidelines for municipalities to begin the process of buying their streetlights. As state Senate sponsor Joe Griffo’s office explains it, the new law:

would facilitate discussions between the parties involved by requiring that all investor-owned utilities have the appropriate tariff in place that allows municipalities to purchase streetlights. This legislation, while not forcing utilities to sell their property, would also establish specific steps to make it easier for a municipality to initiate a proceeding for the Public Service Commission (PSC) to review and approve the sale of these streetlights.

“As municipalities struggle to find ways to save money while retaining adequate services for taxpayers, this legislation will make a significant difference in reducing the utility bill of localities, in which the cost savings can be truly substantial,” Assembly sponsor Patricia Fahy of Albany said in a statement. “Through owning their own streetlights, villages, towns, and cities can now pave their way to an energy-efficient and taxpayer-friendly future.”

In its comprehensive review report released in February, the Financial Restructuring Board suggested that changing over to LEDs in the City of Albany’s streetlights would undoubtedly save money. According to the report, the annual cost is about $4.2 million with things the way they are.

But there have been issues with purchasing the lights from National Grid.

“(Albany) could approach National Grid in an attempt to buy the infrastructure,” the report states. “Based on early indications, this option could be cost-prohibitive as the City would have to pay National Grid for the present amortized value of each applicable light/pole, and potentially associated wiring, as well as the cost of the “business model” – the future value of operations to National Grid. On top of this, the City would then have to purchase the necessary materials to upgrade and/or replace the light fixtures, and staff the necessary personnel to maintain the new infrastructure the City would then own. The costs to address over 10,000 units could be quite significant.”

The report also stated that Albany could encourage National Grid to upgrade, though any work would be entirely at the company’s discretion.