When a person is down, one tends to do stupid things. Recently, the Republicans in the California Assembly seemed to have fallen into that trap by creating a new website called:

Covering Health Care CA

The site downplays the Covered California’s Medicare expansion while also spreading lies about how the Affordable Care Act AKA Obamacare is a flop.

I worked IT as well as being a reporter. The greatest thing about the Internet is the treasure trove of information that can be found with a few keystrokes. So what did I find? I found out that the website is hosted at GoDaddy.com, the website host that promotes sex-crazed women during Superbowl commercials. This is the host for the Republicans in the California Assembly. Gee, Republicans sexist?

The Registrant Name: Sabrina Lockhart

Registrant Organization:

Registrant Street: State Capitol

Registrant Street: P.O. Box 942849

Registrant City: Sacramento

Registrant State/Province: California

Registrant Postal Code: 94249

Registrant Country: United States

Registrant Phone: 9163192034

Registrant Phone Ext:

Registrant Fax:

Registrant Fax Ext:

Registrant Email: sabrina.lockhart@asm.ca.gov

So who is Sabrina Lockhart? According to her Twitter account she is the Communications Director for Assembly GOP Leader Connie Conway.

The information about Lockhart was provided by GoDaddy and also posted on Twitlonger.com http://tl.gd/n_1rso90i. According to Crooks and Liars,

“California Republicans are desperate and shameless. In the past two weeks, GOP Assembly members have sent mailings out on what appears to be the state’s dime to their constituents about health insurance. Only, they don’t direct those people to CoveredCA.com to sign up. Instead, they send them to their own astroturf version at the URL CoveringHealthCareCA.com.”

Are the Republicans using California tax money to send out the anti-ACA propaganda to their constituents? That would be nice to know. Interestingly, on their website, there is a disclaimer.

Disclaimer The California State Assembly does not warrant or make any representations as to the quality, content, accuracy, or completeness of the information, text, graphics, links and other items contained on this server or any other server. Such materials have been compiled from a variety of sources, and are subject to change without notice from the California State Assembly. Communications made through this site’s e-mail and messaging system shall in no way be deemed to constitute legal notice to the California State Assembly or any of its agencies, officer, employees, agents or representatives. The presence of a link does not constitute or imply any endorsement, sponsorship, or recommendation of the content of any linked site. The Assembly does not monitor, control, or fund any linked site and is not responsible for its content. If the linked site solicits funds, this should not be construed to mean that the Member is soliciting funds for that site.

Why is there a disclaimer? From the looks of things, it appears that this site is not endorsed by the Republicans, so why did Sabina Lockhart use her “official” government email address: sabrina.lockhart@asm.ca.gov on a known sexist hosting site? Why, because it’s cheaper or like any Republican, they couldn’t care less about the rights of women so long as their message gets across?

I wonder if Lockhart would explain to the people of California why this site was created, why is there a disclaimer and why did she use her official taxpayer-paid email address? I hope she and the rest of the Assembly could answer these relatively simple questions, or maybe the Democratic party will always have a super-majority in both the Senate and Assembly?