Bishop Joseph Walker (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights We have to adjust to new technology, but we must be aware of the potential negative side effects.

Social media should not be used as a substitute for human interaction and authentic relationships.

I have to admit that I am a social media junkie. Innovation is a part of my ministry and my personal life.

These tools are useful in galvanizing people around issues as well as giving many an opportunity to share their opinions in open space. Social media and technology have become multigenerational. My 71-year-old mother knows everything happening in my life through Facebook.

Admittedly, times are changing and we have to adjust to the cadence of technology; however, we must be aware of the potential negative side effects this could bring.

It concerns me that some people spend more time looking down at their cellphones than interacting with people sitting next to them.

There was a time everyone knew each other and shared tight-knit communities. Now it could be months, even years before there is a single interaction with the person living across the street.

I’ve noticed in office spaces that employees would rather send a text or email to the person across the hall rather than pick up the phone or walk over and have a face to face. People can befriend someone with the click of a button. This trend is especially troubling because as many of you know those whom you befriend on social media are not always your real friends.

Friendship requires time, interaction, intentionality and investment. The Bible says in Proverbs 17:17 “a friend loves at all times and a brother is born for adversity.” Though social media is an effective tool to gather and disseminate information, it should not be used as a substitute for human interaction and authentic relationships.



If we don’t pay attention to this trend, there will be an even greater divide and disconnect among us.

I believe we were created relational beings. We do better when we interact with others through human contact.

There is something to be said about looking into a person’s eyes, shaking their hand, patting them on the back or giving a hug of encouragement. A virtual thumbs-up cannot replicate the emotion and sincerity in that.

Self-esteem appears to be tied to social media for some. Studies have even shown that teens' self-esteem wavers depending on the responses that they receive once they post something online. If they received frequent positive feedback, then they had an increase in self-esteem. Contrarily, if they received a small amount of feedback with a negative tone, then their self-esteem decreased.

One of the things I’ve struggled with in the integration of technology and social media are people who are more comfortable watching our ministry locally via Internet than actually getting up and coming to the physical building where there is genuine fellowship.

I originally began our virtual ministry as an opportunity of worship for those who could not physically attend due to geographical and vocational constraints and not those who would not attend because of convenience.

I grew up learning the books of the Bible and how to find them. Today with the click of a button these books can immediately appear on your phone.

I personally don’t think more access to the Bible is a bad thing. The critical question for me is: Is it OK to never know how to locate the books for yourself?

John 5:39 admonishes us to “search the Scriptures,” but is it OK to search the newest Bible app?

Let’s be clear: Technology and social media allow us to expand human interaction. I joined a new app called Periscope and I’m averaging 1,000 new followers every 72 hours.

Clearly it works and is allowing me to connect with more people.

Although I use this means of communication, I still shake hands after every Sunday service, visit the sick and pray for people in person.

The real challenge for us is balancing the two.

Can you be social media and technologically savvy and maintain a high level of meaningful and personal interaction at the same time?



Bishop Joseph W. Walker III is pastor of Mt. Zion Baptist Church in Nashville and international presiding bishop in the Full Gospel Baptist Church Fellowship International.

Social media is a wonderful marketing tool when used properly. (Photo: Getty Images / iStockphoto)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1FouzYh