Topics: economy, g20, GlobalPost, Obama, Putin, Russia, Syria, News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

BUZZARDS BAY, Mass. — The smiles were in place, the handshakes firm, as Russian President Vladimir Putin greeted his American counterpart in St. Petersburg, site of this week’s G20 summit of the world’s leading economies.

But it was not hard to see the gritted teeth beneath the genial exterior.

This summit, designed to showcase Russia’s status as a world power, is, instead, being overshadowed by the crisis in Syria.

President Barack Obama and Putin stand at opposite ends of the issue.

Obama is the main advocate for military strikes to punish the regime of Syrian President Bashar al-Assad for alleged chemical weapons attacks near Damascus on Aug. 21.

So far the US president has only France unequivocally on his side, although he does have the backing of Saudi Arabia and Turkey. The UK’s Prime Minister David Cameron is personally supportive, but lost a crucial vote on the issue last week in parliament.

Putin and China are united in their opposition to the use of force.

The rest, which include Canada, Italy, South Africa and Argentina, are at various points on a spectrum of dismay, even disgust at the gruesome deaths in Syria, but where a reluctance to commit to military action predominates.

Over the past few days, Italy has sent warships to Lebanon, where it has United Nations peacekeeping soldiers stationed, but it’s cagey on the subject of direct military action in Syria.

The UN has appealed for patience and restraint. Secretary General Ban Ki-moon will also attend the summit and, along with UN-Arab League envoy Lakhdar Brahimi, will press for a diplomatic solution to the Syrian crisis.

Even the Vatican weighed in. Pope Francis sent a letter to Putin urging the world leaders to abandon “the futile pursuit of a military solution.”

Obama is expected to spend a significant portion of his time at the G20 lobbying reluctant allies to get behind his plans for Syria.

This was not how it was supposed to be.

The G20 represents two-thirds of the world’s population, nearly 90 percent of global gross domestic product and 80 percent of international global trade.

It was created in 1999 to restore the world’s economic growth, strengthen its financial system and reform its financial institutions.

It was never designed to be a proxy UN. But with politics taking precedence over economics, it’s starting to look that way, says Risto E.J. Penttila, president of the Finland Chamber of Commerce, writing in The New York Times.

“The G-20 [has] become the forum where questions of war and peace will be debated and decided,” he said.

With the deep divisions among the major players, it’s very unlikely that any real progress can be made during the scant two days of the G20.

Putin did say during an interview with Russian television that he did not rule out strikes on Syria if sufficient evidence could be presented that the Assad regime was behind the chemical attacks.

This, says Steven Pifer, senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, a Washington, DC think tank, is disingenuous in the extreme.

“Obama could present a smoking gun with Assad’s prints on it and Putin would not accept it,” he said. “This is not about evidence, it’s about politics.”

And the politics are complicated.

According to Pifer, Putin has four major reasons for supporting Assad. First, Russia has very few close allies, and Putin may be reluctant to ditch one. Second, Putin stands squarely behind the principle of non-interference in other countries’ internal affairs, no matter how ugly and abhorrent.

Third is payback for Libya. Putin is still smarting from having voted for a 2011 UN resolution to establish a no-fly zone. The resulting regime change was not something he had envisioned.