One of the first things passed last week was the “Health Care Empowerment Act.”

This legislation authorizes direct primary care membership agreements. It defines “direct primary care membership agreement” as a written contractual agreement between a primary care provider and an individual patient, or the patient’s legal representative, in which:

— the provider agrees to provide primary care services to the individual patient for an agreed fee over an agreed period of time;

— the direct primary care provider will not bill third parties on a fee-for-service basis;

— any per-visit charges under the agreement will be less than the monthly equivalent of the periodic fee;

— the agreement described the scope of primary service that is covered by a periodic fee

— the agreement contains a statement that the agreement does not constitute health insurance;

— the agreement specifies the duration of the agreement, including automatic renewal periods; and

— the patient is not required to pay more than twelve months of the fee in advance.

The legislation specifies that a patient or legal representative will not forfeit insurance benefits, TennCare benefits or Medicare benefits by purchasing medical services or medical products outside the system. It also authorizes either party to terminate the agreement upon written notice to the other party.

The Direct Primary Care Coalition estimates that 40 percent of primary care revenues are spent on personnel submitting claims to insurance companies. Therefore, direct care doctors can care for patients without charging a higher rate for those services to be included.

Direct Primary Care is financed by direct payment, outside of insurance, primarily with monthly fees. The providers are able to see fewer patients and recapture costs sooner because of the reduced personnel required to process claims. I believe that this is one of the steps to affordable health care for everyone. I have learned that many of the direct care primary doctors also are able to provide more care to indigent patients because of the lower costs and reduced man hours in submitting paperwork.

If you would like to read the legislation, please go to: http://www.capitol.tn.gov/Bills/109/Bill/HB2323.pdf

Allergy emergency

prevention bill passes

HB 2054 will allow epinephrine auto-injectors to be available in public places that attract groups of people and where exposure to allergens could pose a risk to those who know they have allergies and those who are unaware that they may be at risk for anaphylaxis — a severe, sometimes life-threatening, allergic reaction.

The legislation authorizes trained individuals as well as others acting under the supervision of a physician to provide or administer an epinephrine auto-injector under certain circumstances, which would allow organizations such as scout troops, daycares, colleges and universities, restaurants, sports arenas and other business entities to obtain a prescription and have the life-saving medication on hand for use in an emergency.

The bill also protects those who prescribe, dispense and administer epinephrine auto-injectors under the provisions of the bill from civil liability. It does not, however, protect against gross negligence, and entities that choose not to have auto-injectors available are protected from civil liability as part of the legislation.

It is estimated that at least one in 13 children in the U.S. is living with a food allergy, and according to federal guidelines, epinephrine is the treatment that should be given first when a person is experiencing a life-threatening allergic reaction.

Nineteen states have passed similar legislation — 16 of those laws were passed in 2015, including in Michigan, New Jersey, Kentucky and West Virginia. Legislation is also pending in additional states including: Ohio, Massachusetts and Pennsylvania.

Educating the children of fallen Tennessee soldiers

As passed, House Bill 1407 provides in-state tuition to any college in the University of Tennessee and the Tennessee Board of Regents systems for children of military parents who die as a result of a targeted attack on Tennessee soil. The in-state tuition would be available to these children regardless of their domicile or place of residence during the child’s enrollment in the institution.

This legislation is in direct response to last summer’s tragic attacks in Chattanooga, and helps to ensure Tennessee serves any future victims and their families. As supporters note, it is the duty of the legislature to do everything in its power to care for these families who have given so much to their state and country.

Awareness, prevention of sexual assault on

college campuses

The bill passed the House with overwhelming support. With recent reports in the news media concerning alarming stories about sexual assault and harassment on college campuses, we passed this legislation as a step forward in reminding students about the importance of doing all they can to keep campuses safe. Through efforts to collaborate and work with state colleges — with students, parents, faculty and staff — there is an urgent need to cultivate and sustain a campus culture that is free of sexual violence and characterized by caring and respect for one another.

As passed, House Bill 2409 requires each public college in the state to require all incoming freshmen during orientation or introductory studies to receive instruction aimed at increasing the awareness and prevention of sexual assault, sexual battery, sexual harassment and date rape. The bill also strongly encourages institutes of higher education to offer instruction of these same topics to all grades at some point during the school year.

I, personally, believe that parents and teachers should begin at a very early age teaching our young people to honor and respect each other. I also believe that there are things we can teach young people to do (and not to do) that will command the respect of others. It is a shame that we have to be reminded of the need to teach these things by what is happening on our college and university campuses. However, with that being said, I am all for teaching these important lessons at every age!

◆◆◆

Sheila Butt, R-Columbia, is state representative for District 64.

Cutting fraud and abuse

in Tennessee’s

welfare system

Legislation aimed at cutting fraud and abuse in Tennessee’s welfare system was approved last week.

The legislation makes critical changes to the way the Tennessee Department of Human Services (DHS) contracts with and monitors organizations that receive taxpayer money to feed children and adults who need temporary help from the government. Recognizing the need for more oversight, this bill passed the House unanimously.

The legislation comes after investigations and audits from the Comptroller of the Treasury that identified financial mismanagement and fraud within some of the federal food programs administered by DHS. Approximately $80 million flows through DHS for program services each year.

As passed, House Bill 1940 directs the Department of Human Services to conduct background checks on each applicant of the sub-recipient or sponsoring organization. It also requires sponsoring organizations applying to participate in any food program administered through the Department to obtain and maintain a performance bond. If a contract is awarded, the Department must perform both unannounced and announced physical site visits during the sub-recipient monitoring process and report their findings.

Similarly under the bill, DHS must develop sub-recipient monitoring plans that must be submitted to legislative leaders and the State Comptroller on an annual basis. In addition, the bill requires the inspector general of DHS to submit a report summarizing the results of any substantiated investigations concerning fraud, waste, and abuse regarding the child and adult care food program and summer food service program every three months.

The legislation brings more transparency and accountability to programs overseen by the Department of Human Services and will help further protect taxpayer dollars by catching bad actors attempting to abuse state food and welfare programs. I am also continually committed to working to make our welfare programs more cost efficient and more effective by actually requiring able-bodied people to work.

Just a couple more weeks of the 109th Session of the Tennessee General Assembly. Much more to come …