Whimsical creations spread the spirit of joy

Kathy Burdick works on a wreath made with used and surplus wine corks last week in her Erie home. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

A holiday wreath made from wine corks by Kathy Burdick. Greg and Kathy Burdick of Erie make arts and crafts decorations out of used and surplus wine corks. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

ERIE - Greg Burdick figures he celebrated his birthday 75 times before age 21 for all the corks he pulled from wine and champagne bottles during his two-year Army stint in Vietnam in the late 1960s.

"If your toes still pointed in the right direction coming off the field, we celebrated," the Erie resident said.

But four years ago, his wife sized up the cork collection he started in combat and gave him an ultimatum.

It never came to "or else."

Burdick, 67, began repurposing his cork supply by building birdhouses for his mother and mother-in-law for Mother's Day in 2009.

"Pardon the term, but those first ones for our mothers were butt ugly," he said, laughing. "When my wife came out to the garage where I was working, she told me to close the door. 'No one wants to see those,' Kathy said. 'Start over.'"

Kathy Burdick glues eyes and a nose to a reindeer made of wine corks. Kathy and her husband Greg, of Erie, make arts and crafts decorations from surplus and used wine corks. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

To Greg Burdick's surprise, the design he refined in time for Mother's Day that year tempted friends, family and others with a wandering eye for birdhouse beauty.

Many soon called about getting a cork-decorated birdhouse for the tree branch outside their window or the coffee table in their livingroom.

The next year, Burdicks invested their income tax return money and used her nickname for him — "Bear" — to launch their limited liability corporation: Bear's Birdhouses.

Greg Burdick tinkered with all sort of cork appliques to glue on purchased, pre-fabricated birdhouses. He shaved champagne corks into rounded roof shaker shingles and cut wine corks with purple stains into pillars, chimneys and sidings for bird abodes themed as beach houses, duck blinds, love shacks and more.

About two years into these custom creations in cork, the couple abandoned their basement and three-car garage shop at home in Erie for a 750-square foot commercial space in Longmont and later a 2,000-square foot space in Lafayette that included a white room for packaging shipments with minimal cork dust.

Bear's Birdhouses For more information, email bears.birdhouses@yahoo.com

They opened "thank you" notes from Erie neighbors as well as celebrities such as Peggy Fleming, the 1968 Olympic gold medalist in ladies' figure skating.

They even got an international order for 20,000 birdhouses, but they never filled it.

"Some guy came up to me and told me that he could make us millionaires. I said, 'Pray, tell,'" Greg Burdick said. "... He wanted us to pay a person in China 75 cents or a dollar a day to make our birdhouses. I told him 'That's not going to happen on my watch.'"

Artists to philanthropists

Despite landing a coveted spot in the 2012 holiday issue of Wine Enthusiast magazine, taking online orders at their now defunct creationsincork.com website, and stocking shelves at boutique customers in Colorado and two other states, the Burdicks began closing out their cork birdhouse business last fall.

Decorating any one of their 18 birdhouse styles with corks took eight to ten hours. The post-recession market could only bear $39.95 to $79.95 per birdhouse. So, they barely broke even.

But it was last summer's news — her mother's bladder cancer diagnosis and their landlord's need to rent their space for a bigger tenant's expansion — that stopped them short.

An assortment of bears made by Greg and Kathy Burdick of Erie, who make arts and crafts decorations out of used and surplus wine decorations. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

Kathy Burdick, 60, left a long career in marketing and advertising. Greg Burdick worked in sales before becoming disabled after a bout with cancer and ongoing kidney disease.

The hobby started feeling like a time-consuming job, they said.

"And in the end, the most important part of this business was our ability to give back," Kathy Burdick said.

Besides faithfully donating finished cork birdhouses all along to auctions for nonprofit organization fundraisers, the couple in October delivered 350 undecorated birdhouses to Erie Elementary School along with bags of corks.

St. Vrain Valley School District records list the donation at $2,100.

Greg Burdick demonstrates how he works in his garage to make the arts and crafts decorations which he and his wife Kathy create out of used and surplus wine corks. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The students before winter break used them as hands-on learning projects in art and science classes, the school's science lab instructor and STEM (Science, Technology, Engineering and Math) coordinator Kristina Stem said.

"What the kids needed to do was build a better bird house, and that began by defining the user," she said.

Some students cut larger door holes or flipped the roof to re-fit it for a turtle or for dolls. Then, they decorated it with corks, carpet, paint and other bling.

Green gifts

The Burdicks hope their donation helped some students catch the spirit in time for the holidays of giving green gifts — something they continue to do on a smaller scale with their "cork critters."

These hand-crafted cork figurines and ornaments stand 6 inches to 7 inches tall and often come with another repurposed material such as pine cones and tree branches.

They sell for as much as $21 at winery gift shops in California's Napa Valley, Kathy Burdick said.

Critters in the works include bride and groom cake toppers; Democrat donkeys and Republican elephants; and the University of Colorado's buffalo mascot along with Colorado State University's ram mascot.

But top sellers so far include Santa's reindeer team, Greg Burdick said.

"All of our reindeer have an attitude because you never see them all looking the same direction," he noted.

Their attitude about creatively repurposing a material most often reused in floors, soil conditioner and insulation remains fixed on reducing the estimated 13 billion corks worldwide that go out with the garbage every year, they said.

To this end, the couple solicits wineries to donate outdated corks — corks too dry to stop bottles — and friends to donate corks from their tables. Some in the latter group even collect corks from environmentally conscious wait staff at Boulder County restaurants who gladly gather them in baggies from the tables of departing diners, Kathy Burdick said.

The repurposing effort reminds Greg Burdick of lessons he learned in Vietnam.

"Those people didn't waste a thing. So, when I came back home, I started recycling long before it was the thing to do here," he said. "We're people who want to recycle, repurpose and keep corks out of the landfill."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at Mellskog@msn.com or 303-746-0942.