Editorial: Too many kids are uninsured. But lawmakers can fix that -- and save taxpayers money -- in one simple act.

Arizona froze enrollment in the KidsCare health-insurance program for low-income families in 2010. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights State lawmakers should restore KidsCare

This health insurance program serves children of the working poor

Uncle Sam will pay 100 percent of the cost

Back when the Great Recession was pulling Arizona into a sinkhole of red ink, the state froze a program that provides health care to children in low-income families.

Now the state has a chance to reopen the program at no cost.

Arizona should do so without delay.

The federal Children’s Health Insurance Program, called KidsCare in Arizona, once enrolled nearly 50,000 children in our state. It was financed by a three-to-one federal match of state dollars.

Today, KidsCare serves about 775 children. Attrition will bring that number to zero unless the Legislature acts.

There’s no reason not to act.

The recession-era freeze cost the state more than it saved. According to the Kaiser Commission on Medicaid and the Uninsured, the freeze saved the state $12.9 million in fiscal 2011, but it cost the state $41 million in federal matching funds that year.

The freeze also resulted in more than 100,000 children being put on a waiting list at a time when families across the state were suffering from job losses and home foreclosures.

Times are better now. The state is looking at a surplus.

Some children may have gotten coverage when their parents found better jobs. Others were helped by the expansion of Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act.

But the need remains.

It’s anticipated that 30,000 to 40,000 children would benefit from reopening KidsCare.

The federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost of restoring the program for at least two years.

Fiscally conservative lawmakers should not leave that money on the table when so many children lack medical care.

Republican Rep. Regina Cobb, who will introduce a bill to restore the program, says the federal government “probably will extend” the full funding beyond two years. She’s aware of concerns about Arizona being on the hook for coverage if Uncle Sam doesn’t continue paying, and she’s open to adding triggers to her bill to make sure that doesn’t happen.

For now, the federal dollars are there to help low-income working families “get their feet under them,” Cobb says.

It makes sense to use that money in Arizona.

KidsCare helps children whose parents earn too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to buy health insurance. The program serves children whose parents have incomes between 138 percent and 200 percent of the federal poverty level. That’s about $27,000 to $40,000 for a family of three.

These are people with fragile finances who often cannot afford to buy into a marketplace plan.

“Even with financial help, research shows that Arizona marketplace plans cost much more for families than KidsCare in most cases and may not offer benefits that are as comprehensive or child focused,” according to a new report from Georgetown University’s Center for Children and Families.

KidsCare is not a free ride. Families pay a share of the cost with monthly premiums based on income.

Arizona, which is the only state that does not have an active federal Children’s Health Insurance Program, has the third-highest rate of uninsured children in the country. Our state has a 10 percent rate of uninsured kids, compared to a national rate of 6 percent.

Children who don’t get preventative care get sick. Children who don’t get ongoing care for chronic conditions get sicker.

The impact on a working family can be profound. A sick child cannot focus at school. A parent often can’t work if the child stays home from school or child care.

KidsCare can help children so parents can continue to work and pursue employment opportunities that will lift their income beyond the eligibility limit.

That’s good for kids, families and the state.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1UPWpz7