HRC Fitness donated dozens of pieces of gym equipment to the Hillsborough Rotary Club

Gregg Wilke (left), general manager, HRC Fitness of Hillsborough, and Abed Medawar (right), Hillsborough Rotary Club Board member and president of Somerset Marine, an international shipping company, discuss HRC’s donation of dozens of exercise machines that the Rotary then sold to a Jordanian businessman to help raise funds for the Hillsborough service organization. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF HRC FITNESS) Story Highlights HRC Fitness organized a community 5K Run to raise funds for Hillsborough Chapter of Gigi's Playhouse.

Older gym equipment was donated to the Rotary, so they could in turn sell it to raise funds.

Hillsborough Rotary Club raises funds for a wide variety of community needs.

HRC Fitness on Brower Lane, recently demonstrated that serving the Hillsborough community means much more than offering a premier exercise facility. It also means supporting those who provide community service to those in need. For the second time this year, HRC Fitness donated dozens of pieces of gym equipment to the Hillsborough Rotary Club, a service organization that raises funds for a wide variety of community needs from college scholarships to Autism research.

"We like to keep our gym equipment state-of-the art, which means we need to replace it every few years," explained General Manager Gregg Wilke, "This offered us the opportunity to donate the older equipment to the Rotary, so they could in turn sell it to raise funds. It was a win-win situation."

HRC Fitness also recently organized a community 5K Run, which raised funds for the Hillsborough Chapter of Gigi's Playhouse, a Down syndrome achievement center.

HRC Fitness' equipment donation included a variety of approximately 70 exercise machines from one of its former facilities in Somerset. The equipment was disassembled by volunteers arranged by Rotary member John Shockley, transported by trucks donated by Rotary member Joe Horner, and ultimately loaded into two shipping containers, which are now on their way to their new owner in Jordan.

The concept of selling the used gym equipment was conceived and brokered by Rotary Club member Abed Medawar, president of Somerset Marine, an international shipping company headquartered in Hillsborough. Earlier this year, HRC Fitness donated a similar variety of equipment to the Rotary, which was then sold locally, along with other community-donated equipment, to raise funds for a wheelchair accessible van, which was donated to the township by the Rotary Club.

"Partnering with HRC Fitness to raise funds for the Rotary is especially satisfying for our membership, many of whom are local business owners themselves, and who understand how important it is to give back to the community" commented Anthony Franchini, president of the Hillsborough Rotary Club.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1rEjM5k