'Our Caucus' participant Madeline Meyer says no candidate has struck her as 'The One.'

Buy Photo Our Caucus offers unique viewpoints. (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

Is this bad? I’ve been following the election and even blogging about my experiences. I’ve met nearly every single candidate and no one has struck me as “The One.” At this moment in time, I don’t even know if I’m caucusing Democrat or Republican. Hardcore politicos can criticize me for not choosing a side, but my core values do not align with any of the candidates that I have met.

I care about education. I don’t think Bernie Sanders’ support for free college education for all is plausible. I wish it was. I heard Marco Rubio speak about vocational training, which I think is a better way to go, empowering students who would prefer being trained with technical skills rather than pursuing a four year degree. School choice in Florida has received backlash from many critics, but has also seen reading and math scores increase, something Jeb Bush touts proudly.

I care about healthcare. I don’t think that the Affordable Care Act should be repealed. That, to me, is a complete destruction of forward progress. I agree with Hillary Clinton that the ACA needs to be reformed and updated.

I care about foreign policy, but I am not educated enough to decide whether or not the U.S. should get more involved in the civil war in Syria. Prior to this past week, I would have argued that the Iran nuclear agreement was a bad deal, but after seeing the Iran and US exchange prisoners and the deal come to fruition, I think I was wrong. Foreign policy is tricky, but I do support a more hardline stance in the Middle East. Something both Hillary Clinton and Marco Rubio agree on.

I care about the economy. Bernie Sanders wants to attack the big banks of Wall Street, I would rather see a relationship with Wall Street than a war. I do support closing tax loopholes and trying to limit tax inversions. Republicans would argue that lowering taxes within the U.S. would bring American companies back to their home country. I would agree, but that also means closing tax loopholes and heavier regulations on corporations.

None of the potential presidential candidates completely align with my values. I know that other Iowans might be feeling alienated from the process as well, and I just want them to know that they are not alone.

Madeline Meyer is a senior politics major with a concentration in broadcast news at Drake University. She has interned for Sen. Chuck Grassley in Washington, D.C., at the White House in the Office of The First Lady and for CBS during the Democratic national debate at Drake. Her main interests are education, the economy, social liberties and foreign policy.

To read more from the 12 Iowans who are writing about their experiences for Our Caucus, visit https://medium.com/our-caucus.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1ViuI2a