Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. (left) and Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett. Credit: Journal Sentinel file photos

All Politics Blog From Milwaukee, Madison and beyond, a daily dose of political news and glimpses behind the scenes SHARE

By of the

In recent days, Mayor Tom Barrett, who has indicated he plans to run again for mayor in 2016, has been more outspoken about comments made by Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr.

On Thursday, Clarke said Milwaukee was in serious, but not critical condition. And he said Milwaukee lacked a vision.

Clarke plans to formally announce his bid for a fourth, four-year term as Milwaukee County sheriff in May. And he has said he will make a decision after that election whether he wants to challenge Barrett in 2016.

Barrett apparently assumes Clarke will challenge him. On Saturday, Friends of Tom Barrett, his fundraising organization, sent out a letter to supporters in which the mayor called Clarke "one of Milwaukee's most controversial politicians and darling of the far right."

Wrote Barrett: "Sheriff Clarke has some interesting ideas when it comes to how he does his job and how he would address Milwaukee’s challenges.

"For example, he once advocated that Milwaukee County citizens arm rather than rely on law enforcement - and he's the County Sheriff. And then went a step further and touted this dangerous message nationally."

Barrett wrote that Clarke claims he has "balanced every budget put in front of him. But his office is projected to run a $4.6 million deficit this year, and his solution - threaten to sue the county so he can spend more."

Barrett also said Clarke said he is prepared to spend more than $350,000 to challenge the mayor.

"When he comes after me, I’ll be ready," Barrett wrote in asking supporters to donate to his Rapid Response Fund.

Barrett closed 2013 with nearly $350,000 in his campaign fund. He raised about $206,000 last year, including $64,000 in the second half of 2013.

I've reached out to the sheriff for a response.