Other Related Content March 21 front pages

Yes, there are slow news days.

But March 21 has rarely been one of those in recent years.

I looked through our archives at what made the front page on this date in the last few years. Maybe not every one of these will wind your clock, but there have been some big stories on this date.

— In 2002: University of Illinois Provost Richard Herman was a finalist for president of Texas A&M.

— In 2003: 'Shock and Awe' became the catchphrase for a massive bombing of Baghdad.

— In 2004: Herman was chosen by UI President James Stukel to be interim chancellor after the departure of Nancy Cantor.

— In 2005: Danville native and legendary cabaret singer Bobby Short died.

— In 2006: Blowing snow kept primary voters away early from polling places, where a proposed $66 million bond issue that would have, among other things, covered a renovation of Dr. Howard Elementary School was on the ballot in the Champaign school district. (Voters would reject that measure, 64 percent to 36 percent.)

— In 2007: The neighborhood around the McKinley YMCA was worried about plans to close the building and leave for a new location.

— In 2008: Urbana had a plan to spend $2.8 million over 10 years on extensive bike paths throughout the city.

— In 2009: Controversy erupted after Champaign police shot and wounded a man who had a BB gun on his porch and was preparing to use it to ward off vandals who'd egged his home the night before.

— In 2010: The U.S. House was preparing to vote on the Affordable Care Act.

— In 2011: Illinois lost in the second round of the NCAA basketball tournament — to Kansas, coached by Bill Self.

— In 2012: Mitt Romney won the Illinois Republican presidential primary over Rick Santorum, Ron Paul and Newt Gingrich.

— In 2013: Republican challenger Rex Bradfield and incumbent Laurel Prussing debated in the campaign for mayor of Urbana. Also, Stephen Alltop took the reins of the Champaign-Urbana Symphony Orchestra.

— In 2014: UI graduate and astronaut Mike Hopkins took part in interviews after his return from al- most six months aboard the International Space Station. His photo from the space station has not yet been surpassed as the best selfie of Champaign-Urbana.

— In 2015: The Preservation and Conservation Association of Champaign County opposed the $144 million referendum proposal for Champaign schools, over concerns about the proposed demolition of Dr. Howard and the proposed location of a new Central High School.