Topics: From the Wires, News

POIPET, Cambodia (AP) — As the number of Cambodian workers returning home under pressure from Thailand approached 200,000 on Tuesday, the returnees made troubling allegations about their treatment by Thai authorities.

While rumors of beatings and even killings by the Thai military have not been confirmed, several returnees have told of being extorted by soldiers or having relatives taken away, with their whereabouts still unknown.

Thailand’s military has been running the country since staging a coup on May 22. Martial law remains in force nationwide. It announced soon after the takeover it would crack down on the illegal employment of undocumented foreign workers, who number in the hundreds of thousands. They come mainly from the poorer neighboring countries of Cambodia and Myanmar and fill low-paying jobs in industry and services shunned by Thais.

Banteay Meanchey province governor Kor Samsarouet said Tuesday some 190,000 Cambodians workers had returned home this month, most through the checkpoint at Poipet.

Thai authorities have asserted that there has been no abuse involved in the repatriation of Cambodians, and that they left voluntarily, panicked by stories that some of their compatriots had been shot, or that they may be arrested. Some left after dismissal by their Thai employers, themselves liable to legal penalties for hiring them.

Underlying workers’ suspicions is bad blood between the two nations. Cambodians resent their bigger, richer neighbor, whose people they consider arrogant. The two nations have had several armed skirmishes in the past decade over disputed border territory, and Thai army and paramilitary rangers have been accused of shooting dead Cambodians who were allegedly logging illegally on the frontier.

Thailand’s foreign ministry has said there have been no deportations or forced repatriations of foreign workers. But comments by other officials are more nuanced, distinguishing between those who are working legally and those who are not among the Cambodian worker population, which may number as many as 400,000.

“There is no policy to round up migrant workers but if the authorities find illegal workers, then they must repatriate them,” Thai Labor Ministry Deputy Permanent Puntrik Smiti said Monday.

Several returned workers interviewed in Poipet confirmed fear had been their motivation to leave. But others spoke of problems with Thai authorities.

Sary Muy Huy, 43, said she had been waiting at the border checkpoint for three days, scanning the Thai trucks that arrive and discharge groups of returnees. She said her 25-year-old son went to work a month ago at a construction site in Sa Kaeo province in eastern Thailand.

She said that on the afternoon of June 9, he called to tell her, “Mom, I have been arrested by Thai soldiers.”

“Since then I have not heard any news from him,” she said.