An elementary school teacher has been diagnosed with viral meningitis, according to a letter posted on the school district's website.

A lab technician packages cerebrospinal fluid of meningitis cases to send to the CDC for testing. The South Amboy school community and the Middlesex County health department have been put on alert after the school district was notified that a teacher was diagnosed with viral meningitis, according to a statement posted on the district’s website. (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights The teacher's elementary school classroom and other common areas were sanitized.

The superintendent said that "the chance of your child or you also becoming ill with this disease is very small."

Hand washing can reduce the chances of catching viral meningitis, the superintendent said.

The school community and the county health department have been put on alert after the school district was notified that an elementary school teacher was diagnosed with viral meningitis, according to a statement posted on the district's website.

"I have informed the Middlesex County Health Department and sanitized the teacher's classroom and common area prior to the arrival of staff and students today," Superintendent of Schools Robert N. Sheedy said in the statement posted on the school district's website Tuesday. "She will be absent this week and will see her doctor before her return."

In a letter to staff, parents and guardians, Sheedy said that "while this can be upsetting, the chance of your child or you also becoming ill with this disease is very small."

"Viral meningitis is not the same as bacterial meningitis," Sheedy wrote. "People who get viral meningitis usually recover completely with rest and fever-reducing medicine."

Sheedy said "the district will work closely with public health officials to monitor the situation."

The letter further said that meningitis can occur throughout the year, but is most common in the summer and fall. People of any age can get viral meningitis, but it is more frequent in children.

About 90 percent of viral meningitis cases are due to common stomach viruses called enteroviruses, which are passed from person to person through stool or saliva, the statement said. Most people who come in contact with enteroviruses do not develop an infection.

While there is no specific prevention for viral meningitis, Sheedy said "good personal hygiene, such as frequent hand washing, can reduce the chances of catching viral meningitis and other illnesses."

Additional information may be obtained by contacting your family doctor or the Middlesex Department of Health at 732-745-3100. Information also is available on the district's website at sapublicschools.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1ySZg4C