Rows of police officers stood with their right hands raised Saturday morning and, through tears, gave an oath on behalf of Veronica Moser-Sullivan to make the youngest Aurora theater shooting victim an honorary member of the force.

“We wanted to give this little angel her own badge in hopes that her spirit will watch over the Aurora Police Department,” said Police Chief Nick Metz.

The ceremony took place outside Nick’s Garden Center in Aurora, where the community gathered to support two little girls: 6-year-old Veronica, who lost her life in the 2012 shooting, and her 7-year-old second-cousin Aubrey Dearman, who wanted to keep her cousin’s memory alive.

Dearman overheard her mother, Heather Dearman, talking about raising money for the Aurora Municipal Center memorial garden for the victims, families and community affected by the theater shooting.

“She looked up at me and said she wanted to have a lemonade stand to raise money for the garden, and I thought, ‘Oh, that’s cute. We could do that,’ ” Heather said, glancing around at the crowd of people in line for lemonade and iced tea on Saturday morning.

“We had no idea it would get this big,” she said.

When Veronica’s family invited the Aurora police to the lemonade stand, Metz said he found out that Veronica wanted to be a police officer when she grew up.

The department talked it over and decided they wanted to make her wish come true. Officers took an oath on Veronica’s behalf, inducting her posthumously as an honorary police officer.

A crowd filled with Veronica’s relatives, law enforcement and community members cheered as a plaque was presented to her parents, Ashley Moser and Ian Sullivan.

George Brauchler, prosecuting attorney for the trial in the shooting that left 12 dead, said that hope influenced him to bring his family to Saturday’s event.

“We resolved the formal business of that night of horror and heroes,” he said, adding that he was glad to be able to come to a positive event with the community.

“Aubrey, you should be very proud,” he said. “You done good.”

After Veronica was sworn in, the lines began forming for lemonade sales in which all proceeds would be donated to the fund for the memorial garden.

Aubrey, who teared up alongside her mother as Veronica was sworn in, switched between serving lemonade and playing with other children at the event.

“I feel like I’m doing something special,” she said. “Because of my lemonade stand, Veronica gets to be a police officer.”

Elizabeth Hernandez: 303-954-1223, ehernandez@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ehernandez