It has been nearly seven weeks since the Nuggets won a home game.

But no matter how bad things have gotten this season, they’d always been able to beat the New Orleans Pelicans. Two games, two W’s going into Sunday night’s contest at the Pepsi Center.

Not this time.

The Nuggets put forth their best full 48-minute effort in some time, and that took the game into the fourth quarter with the outcome still to be decided. But when it was, it was the Pelicans who had just enough answers to pull out a 99-92 victory.

“I must say that we had better effort tonight, definitely,” Nuggets coach Brian Shaw said.

Still, the Nuggets’ home losing streak was stretched to 10 games.

The Pelicans — minus their star, Anthony Davis — carved out a small lead in the fourth quarter and then just kept it. There were not huge deficits in the game, just a lot of back and forth throughout. But the Pelicans were quicker to the loose balls and were able to avoid a scoring drought because they got to the rim many times.

The Nuggets simply could not overcome that. A game after they allowed 50 points in the paint, the Pelicans got 42 points themselves, including all of their first 16 points of the game. Whether it was a post-up or a drive into the lane, the result was almost always a made bucket. And that helped the Pelicans overcome a shot-attempt deficit of 18. They made the most of the ones they got.

Nuggets Mailbag: Pose a question for Christopher Dempsey

The Nuggets used volume to combat another frigid night from the field. They shot 40 percent, and did hit nine 3-pointers, but consistent shot making still eluded them.

The Pelicans’ backcourt gave the Nuggets the most fits. The duo of Eric Gordon and Tyreke Evans combined to score 40 points. Center Omer Asik grabbed 16 of the Pelicans’ 44 rebounds in the game.

The Nuggets, meanwhile, got another good performance from newcomer Will Barton (16 points, 10 rebounds) and mainstay Danilo Gallinari (21 points). Randy Foye started the game and had his best performance in a long while, hitting five 3-pointers on his way to 19 points.

But none of it was enough.

PHOTOS: Denver Nuggets vs. New Orleans Pelicans, March 1, 2015

“New Orleans won four in a row before they came in here, so I think they just know how to get the job done,” forward Kenneth Faried said. “We’ve been in this rut and trying to get this monkey off our back, so I guess when you’re winning four in a row you know how to win games and when you’re them — we have to find a way to win them.”

So the Nuggets go into Tuesday’s game, the finale of this five-game homestand, still searching for that home victory.

“Everyone is sick of losing. We are all trying to get a win,” Barton said. “We are on a losing streak right now, but we are trying to find our way out of this funk. We will do it with the type of effort tonight and build off it.”

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost