Years ago, when W.A.C. Bennett became premier, there were two private ferry systems operating just two profitable routes. The Black Ball Ferry and the CPR Ferry. They refused to operate ferries to the Gulf Islands and so Bennett started the B.C. Ferry system, providing service to most of the Gulf Islands.

His motto was to unite all B.C. residents through an affordable and reliable transportation system. They called it Bennett’s Navy. It led to the settlement of many of the Gulf Islands. The service was expanded to previously un-serviced islands. They were water roads and vital to communities.

Successive governments failed to recognize this as a service to the people. They played with the concept and failed to honour the intent to be of service to residents. They started building larger and more luxurious ships. Then they started outsourcing the construction. They saddled B.C. Ferries with billions of dollars of unnecessary debt, forcing it to raise prices to cover the losses of their stupidity. When they did that, they priced the cost of travel outside the reach of the non-government employee and ridership fell!

They knew it would because it reached critical economic value. The reduced ridership made the vessels too large for the service and too costly to maintain. To remedy the loss, B.C. Ferries decided to — wait for it — raise rates again. Simultaneously it also decided to cut service to “unprofitable” routes.

The current government intends to undo the system so that it goes back to the two or three routes that were profitable before W.A.C. Bennett launched the system.

In the Washington State, a 200-foot ferry requires 17 crew. In B.C., thanks to Transport Canada, that figure is 48. Logic dictates that if a 17-person crew can successfully run a ferry for 70 years without incident that it should be emulated. Remember, B.C. Ferries and Transport Canada are the partners who have a ship on the bottom of the sea. Washington State Ferries does not.

We need a new W.A.C. Bennett now!

Leo Vanderbyl, North Vancouver

The editorial pages editor is Gordon Clark, who can be reached at gclark@theprovince.com. Letters to the editor can be sent to provletters@theprovince.com.