Advertisement - story continues below

Americans wanted ‘Hope’ and ‘Change’ during the 2008 election cycle, but never expected that the ‘change’ would involve having Marxist-socialists occupying America at every level from the top down, who are hard at work dismantling the ‘America’ that we all know and love. Led by the most corrupt and least transparent president in American history, according to dozens of media stories, Obama–who is a proven Marxist and social-activist himself–seems intent on transforming America from a Constitutional Republic and the greatest beacon of light and freedom on earth to a miserable third-world socialist state, or worse. A very revealing way to judge Obama’s actions as president is made under the lens of his mentor’s handbook for social activism and ‘change’ titled ‘Rules For Radicals’.

Part of the Obama agenda that is being levied against Americans by these now-embedded Marxist-socialists involves demonizing America and its heritage, traditions, and culture, while offering ‘diversity’ in its place: the Utopian Dream. A quick review of what’s happening around America at this very moment clearly shows that this Marxist agenda is actually unfolding before our eyes and demonstrates this is no conspiracy theory.

Well-intentioned Americans were bamboozled into electing a Marxist with an Islamic background as its president.

Advertisement – story continues below

First: Right out of the gate after taking office, Obama tours the world and publicly downgrades and demeans America, while offering apologies for America’s history.

Second: Obama promises to be ‘the most transparent administration in history’ and, even as he pledges this, is busily engaged in doing the exact opposite.

Third: In order to run a shadow government beyond the constitutional purview of the People’s elected representatives in Congress, Obama creates numerous new departments in the government and appoints ‘Czars’ to head those many departments. Most of these new departments and the Czars who run them are outside the scrutiny of Congress, even though they are spending millions of taxpayer dollars in achieving socialist goals that are in many cases set unilaterally by Obama and his administration.

Advertisement – story continues below

Fourth: Obama has already begun purging the U.S. military of its leading commanding officers, many of whom are well-proven patriot-heroes and protectors of our Constitution and nation! And as he does, he replaces those commanders with others who are arguably loyal to him and his political agenda, as opposed to the U.S. Constitution and the American People.

Fifth: Even though America was founded under Judeo-Christian beliefs, Obama and his administration are taking many steps to expunge the Christian faith from America and seems to support supplanting Christianity throughout America with other non-traditional beliefs.

Sixth: Obama and his administration have engaged and inserted themselves into matters and issues that have historically and legally been the jurisdictional responsibility of local state and city governments. And these actions are supplanting and undermining the authority of the duly elected representatives of the People at the local levels of government through their proxies inciting and instigating riots and racial tensions, which Obama and his proxies subsequently deem require Federal attention.

Seventh: Obama seems intent on creating and maintaining a national police force frighteningly reminiscent of Adolf Hitler’s ‘brown shirts’ in every city of America, which would arguably be under his control. And as that is happening, the DHS seems to be arming itself for WW3 inside America with its recent paramilitary acquisitions. Obama also makes frequent use of the office of the U.S. Attorney General to intervene into local police matters. Seemingly in line with these goals (to literally control the population), Obama also used what has been called his ‘royal decree’ to ban .223 caliber rifle rounds as a first step in disarming U.S. Citizens and effectively separating them from their 2nd Amendment Constitutional rights to keep and bear arms by eliminating ammunition for those privately-owned guns. This sneaky and underhanded move by Obama is further evidence of his maligned agenda for America and its People.

Advertisement – story continues below

Eighth: Obama is arguably regularly operating beyond the authority granted to him under the U.S. Constitution and in a manner that on several occasions has effectively suspended Constitutional Law and the powers of Congress. Obama has already acted unilaterally anytime he disagrees with Congress, and seems inclined to continue doing so going forward as his actions fly in the face of the U.S. Constitution.

Ninth: As with any systemic disease that is deeply rooted, the Obama administration’s socialist tentacles also reach into schools and universities, where the pace at which ‘change’ is occurring is alarming. In primary public schools and on university campuses around America, the socialist Common Core programs, which include revisionist history on America and other subversive and immoral teachings, are now propagandizing the children and young adults in America. Obama supporters are now mobilizing efforts to empower political action groups across America in what seems to be a designed effort to undermine the core traditions and culture of America. Even America’s veterans are falling victim to this subversive undercurrent.

Tenth: Disenfranchising Americans from their heritage, religious beliefs, heroes, and symbols like the American flag is a battle that fits hand-in-glove with the Marxist-socialist plan for America. Historically, American students would say the ‘pledge of allegiance’ to the flag of the United States of America at the beginning of the school day; but no more. Through Marxist intervention into our schools, American patriotism is snuffed out at the earliest possible age. This and other literal brainwashing methods are levied on young minds outside the purview of parents, while children are under the control of teachers.

Eleventh: Obama has already begun the nationalization of many key sectors of the U.S. Economy. The most recent instance of this was the FCC obtaining control of the Internet. It may just be a matter of time until the government decides which articles you are allowed to see on the Internet; and sites such as Western Journalism may be censored or removed from the Internet, together with all referenced materials.

The Stock Market also appears to be ‘rigged’ and kept artificially buoyed by the Federal Treasury. Of course, the nationalization of much of America’s auto industry, as bad as that is, also resulted in huge financial losses to American taxpayers.

Obama’s nationalization of health care is Machiavellian throughout, starting with lying to Americans to even get some initial buy-in, even though elected legislators never approved this catastrophic plan. And placing the nationalized health plan under the auspices of the IRS, and allowing them to handle Americans’ confidential health records, is obscene. The entire Obamacare plan is an insult to the integrity and the rights of Americans.

And possibly the final nail in the coffin of American freedom may very well be ‘ObamaLaw’ if it is allowed to proceed as a planned, nationalized police force, replacing locally managed police departments.

I am shocked by the apathy of some Americans, especially the decent-minded Democrats and Independents out there who somehow don’t see the earmarks of a so-called ‘leader’ who is nothing more than a pathological narcissist with many similarities to Adolf Hitler. What U.S. President names everything after himself (‘ObamaLaw’, ‘Obama-Care’, ‘Obama-phone’, etc.)?

American patriots are all asking the same question: what can we do about Obama’s disregard for the U.S. Constitution and the rights of Americans thereunder? Do Americans have to ‘Hope’ we can stop the ‘Change’ in the next election cycle?

God help us!

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.