GENEVA — For more than 50 years, the Alabama National Guard Armory has been a staple of this small Wiregrass city.

From fundraisers to sporting events to major disaster relief, armories like this one have buoyed numerous rural communities throughout the state.

But in the next two years, the Geneva National Guard Armory — and 18 others, including Hartford and Eufaula — will be closed as part of a statewide consolidation the Guard attributes to continued funding shortfalls.

According to the Guard, the closures are part of a 25-year consolidation plan, but they’ve been accelerated due largely to dwindling state funding.

The armories are funded by both the state and federal governments.

“In the past six years, the Alabama Army National Guard has received over $126 million … for the (federal) share while receiving only $16 million in (state) share,” Guard Public Affairs Officer Lt. Col. Shannon M. Hancock said in an email. “This chronic funding shortfall accelerated the near-term phase of the plan that resulted in closure and consolidation of 15 armories. A $200,000 reduction to the (fiscal year) 16 (state) budget also forced a corresponding near-term closure of six additional armories.”

She said the Guard also had to pay an additional unbudgeted $192,000 in the 2015 fiscal year and $264,000 in 2016 as a result of the Affordable Care Act, resulting in the 2016 budget being $464,000 short of the “absolute minimum amount just to operate our armories.”

The Guard announced the planned closures a few weeks ago, catching at least one Wiregrass legislator off guard.

Coupled with the announced closure of a satellite driver’s license office in Geneva , it wasn’t a pleasant surprise.

“You expect to be called by the governor’s office or his staff and made aware of the closings that are going to be announced in your district,” said State Rep. Donnie Chesteen , R-Geneva. “That’s usually protocol for announcements that are going to have the impact that these guard closings and the driver’s license office closings had statewide.”

But what really bugs Chesteen is the lack of action following a constitutional amendment approved by voters last November.

The amendment allowed the state to borrow up to an additional $50 million for capital improvement to National Guard armories.

Though it was approved last year, no movement has taken place thus far.

Seeking answers, Chesteen called for recent meetings with Guard leadership and members of Gov. Robert Bentley’s staff.

“In speaking with National Guard leadership, two things were talked about. Number one, had the bond been issued, there was a one-to-one dollar match from the federal government,” Chesteen said. “The $50 million from the state turns into another $50 million, so we’re looking at $100 million in funding had the bonds been issued all at once. The Guard leadership said, had that money been available, there were some units that possibly could’ve been saved.”

Hancock said the units picked for closure were chosen based on the costs of operations and maintenance, condition of the armory, and the ability to meet mission support.

Chesteen said the governor makes the ultimate decision on when to enact the bond issue and has yet to give a sufficient answer on why a bond was never issued.

“No decisions have been made regarding this bond issue,” said Bentley spokesperson Jennifer Ardis . “We are reviewing.”

Hancock said only that the National Guard has a plan to use bond money if it becomes available.

Since 1988, Alabama National Guard soldiers and armories have decreased from 21,000 and 157, respectively, to 10,500 and 83.

The Guard’s master plan “strategically places armories and units in areas where we can provide rapid response services to all communities across the (state), is based upon a business model that provides the best value to our citizens, benefits from recruiting populations, and ensures the highest levels of unit readiness,” according to Hancock.

Chesteen said he understands the functional reasons for the closures.

“With what we’re asking our National Guard men and women to do nowadays and with the number of deployments, if this will provide better training and provide them with a modernization of military training that they need, I guess that’s the direction we need to be moving,” he said.

However, the closures represent more than just a loss of military presence in their towns.

The economic impact, Chesteen said, is undeniable.

About 110 soldiers stay at the armory in a given month, the legislator said.

“The local hotel here is booked full for two nights a month, and they count on that every month,” Chesteen said. “Think about the meals the soldiers buy at local restaurants or, in some cases, they are even catered from local restaurants. They might buy a tank of gas on their way out of town or whatever else they want to purchase. That’s a loss of revenue right there that’s hard to recover.”

He said it’s indicative of a larger trend in Alabama – small towns getting the short end of the stick.

“It just seems as though small towns in rural Alabama continue to take a hit on closures,” Chesteen said. “Whether it’s jobs, armories or driver’s license divisions, it continues to be bad news for small towns. Small towns continue to get hit with closures, and it’s really discouraging for the people living here.”

He’s not yet ready to throw in the towel on Geneva ’s armory.

If both the Hartford and Geneva armories close, it would leave Geneva County without a National Guard presence.

In his meeting with Guard leadership, he came away with the impression that a chance remains to save some of the armories with the $50 million bonds, if they are indeed executed.

“One factor that could change some of these closings would be if the bonds were issued, some of the armories that are scheduled for closing possibly could be renovated and remain open,” Chesteen said. “There are no guarantees, but National Guard leadership did say that could possibly happen. I was told the Hartford unit was definitely on the list, but there was a possibility, if the funds were available, that Geneva could have remained open.”

Hancock said she couldn’t comment on hypothetical situations, but the Guard would reassess the conditions if they change.

As for the next step, Chesteen said he and other Wiregrass legislators must focus on assuring that one of the planned multi-unit consolidated Guard facilities being planned is located in the Wiregrass.

“We have to fight as a Wiregrass delegation to make sure the Wiregrass is represented in these multi-unit readiness centers,” Chesteen said. “The two key components the Guard is looking for are population and infrastructure. If that’s the case, Dothan being the hub of the Wiregrass, we need to make sure we are at the table and we are in line for one of these facilities in the Wiregrass.”