Happy fourth anniversary to the Affordable Care Act! Did we miss the anniversary party? The implementation of Obamacare has made it seem more like the American people have been forced into an arranged marriage. So far, the marriage has been tumultuous, and the majority of Americans are left feeling very unsatisfied and stuck with their unpredictable and burdensome spouse. Unfortunately, there is no way out, at least in the foreseeable future.

The only one who seems to be celebrating these days is former U.S. House Speaker Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., who stated that Obamacare is a “winner” for the 2014 elections. She must not be following the polls or the sentiment of the majority of the American people. Democrats in swing states are running away from defending the unpopular law. Even President Obama mentioned to donors at a private reception yesterday that the Democrats will “get clobbered” this election cycle. He forgot to mention that his inability to lead and the disruptions caused by Obamacare are the main reasons why the Democrats running for re-election are in such jeopardy.

The Democrats in swing states are staying far away from President Obama and refusing to campaign with him. The president and his troubled polices are creating a toxic environment for these candidates who are left having to defend their votes.

[See a collection of political cartoons on Obamacare.]

Let’s take Sen. Jeanne Shaheen, D-N.H., who has voted 99 percent of the time with the president. She is facing a constituency where thousands of New Hampshire residents have received cancellation notices from the health care insurance companies. One insurance company greatly reduced the number of hospitals in its network, excluding 10 of New Hampshire’s 26 hospitals. Individuals are also losing access to their own doctors and health care specialists, including oncologists and cardiologists, because they are excluded from their coverage in the plans offered on the state’s exchange. It was also reported that, in some cases, individuals including seniors and women are being forced to find a new in-network doctor who are located far away from their homes.

Shaheen is in trouble and refusing to answer questions about campaigning with President Obama. Similarly, Democratic senators in swing states such as Louisiana, North Carolina, Alaska and Arkansas are in the same boat, as they struggle to keep their seats. A new poll released yesterday showed that Sen. Kay Hagan, D-N.C., is the least popular elected official in North Carolina.

More and more complaints about Obamacare are filling the airwaves. Individuals are learning that they are losing access to their health care specialists and doctors. Americans are also shocked by the sticker price of paying for high deductibles or a higher premium in the plans offered by the health exchanges. We have also learned that cancer patients are unable to be treated at top hospitals because of the changes in their new healthcare plans. According to an Associated Press survey, only four of 19 comprehensive cancer treatment centers accept all the insurance policies offered in their states. Because of Obamacare, our health care choices are greatly limited.

[See a collection of political cartoons on the Democratic Party.]

The arranged marriage has been filled with broken promises and disappointments. President Obama’s vision of insuring the uninsured and a government in charge of one’s health care has turned into a nightmare for millions of working Americans who have had their policies cancelled or their doctors removed from their plans.