U.S. Rep. Bradley Byrne has been "running around acting like he's stopping the Syrian refugee resettlement program" after voting to fund it last year, GOP congressional candidate Dean Young said Thursday.

"We have this false narrative going out, but he's literally funded this program," Young said. "Bradley is talking out both sides of his mouth."

But Byrne's spokesman shot back, saying that the congressman has been leading the charge for two months in helping draw attention that refugees could be placed in Mobile. Byrne introduced a bill Wednesday to defund President Barack Obama's plan to admit at least 10,000 refugees into the country.

"Like everything else Mr. Young says, these statements are blatantly untrue," said Byrne spokesman Seth Morrow. "Congressman Byrne has a very serious job to do on behalf of people in Southwest Alabama, and he won't be distracted by Mr. Young's antics."

Young's comments focus on a vote Byrne made on the 2014 federal spending plan and he's highlighted that vote online as a key campaign issue ahead of the March 1, 2016, primary election.

Young, a real estate developer and tea party darling from Orange Beach, lost a relatively close election to Byrne in 2013. The two are set to battle in a rematch during the March 1, 2016, primary.

The 2014 spending bill, at the time, represented "good news" for southwest Alabama, Byrne said, because it provided funding for military ships at Mobile's Austal USA shipyard and included measures to restrain domestic spending.

Other Republicans, at the time, voted against the proposal complaining that the $1.1 trillion in spending failed to take on the president's executive action on immigration nor made any attempts to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

The overall spending plan also added approximately $3 billion to assist refugees, with reference to the crises in Syria, Iraq, Sudan, and the Central African Republic.

"He's acting like he's so innocent when he's the one fighting for all of this," Young said. "He was on national TV (Wednesday) talking about the Syrian refugees when he's funding the whole program. It's amazing to me that this man will do this stuff."

Byrnes' staff has said that the congressman is helping lead efforts in Washington, D.C., to block Syrian refugees from entering the U.S., a popular stance among conservatives in the wake of Friday's terrorist attack in France.

In October, Byrne joined other congressional Republicans to voice concerns over refugee resettlements amid reports that it was "inevitable" that some of the refugees accepted in the U.S. would be sent to Mobile. Catholic Social Services in Mobile is one of only 190 authorized refugee organizations in the U.S.

A civil war in Syria has displaced millions from their cities, leaving citizens in search of refuge in other nations.

But the massacre France has left governors and other leaders in the U.S. concerned that terrorists might intermix themselves with other refugees and enter into the country.

CNN reported that one of the suicide bombers entered Europe among Syrian refugees last month.

Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley was among the first governors in the U.S. to publicly announce that the state would not accept refugees.