PHOENIX, Feb. 20, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Grand Canyon University has added to its doctoral degree program the Doctor of Nursing Practice (DNP), seeking to anticipate organizational changes and better meet patient needs in an emerging national health care system. The 36-credit program will prepare advance-practice nurses and nurse managers to translate research into innovative health-care solutions, while integrating Christian perspectives.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20121127/AQ19393LOGO)

"We want to be responsive to the health-care needs of patients, families and communities," said Dr. Anne McNamara, Dean of the College of Nursing and Health Care Professions, "but we also want to create a program that truly advances the profession."

The new DNP program, which was requested by nurses in the field, incorporates the teaching of a Christian worldview -- beliefs, values and guiding principles – and encourages students to think about how those worldviews impact their decisions in their practices. It will enable them to become transformational leaders in health care, and to navigate the Affordable Care Act as its practicalities unfold, McNamara said.

The program is fully online, making it ideal for working nurses. Dr. Melanie Logue, program chair for the DNP, said students will be able to connect with mentors and other students based on their geographic locations and interests through a "practice immersion workspace," in collaboration with GCU's College of Doctoral Studies.

"This provides online students with the opportunity to feel truly connected to the university and each other, while learning in a strategically designed online environment," Logue said.

The DNP will begin with 120 students, expanding in 2015 with 300 more new students. For details on the program, visit gcu.edu/dnp.

Grand Canyon University was founded in 1949 and is Arizona's premier private Christian university. GCU is regionally accredited and emphasizes individual attention for both traditional undergraduate students and the working professional. GCU offers traditional programs on its growing campus, as well as online bachelor's, master's and doctoral degree programs. The University's curriculum fuses academic and clinical rigor with Christian values to prepare its students to be skilled, caring professionals. For more information about GCU, visit gcu.edu.

SOURCE Grand Canyon University