A measure calling for additional aerial support to fight calamitous wildfires that have become commonplace in Colorado arrived before lawmakers on a Senate committee Thursday, though a final vote on the measure will not come until next week.

Sponsored by Senate President Morgan Carroll, D-Aurora, and Sen. Steve King, R-Grand Junction, the measure was amended in the Senate Agriculture committee to allow the Colorado Division of Fire Prevention and Control to spend an estimated $19 million this year to purchase and contract for use various aircraft outlined in a recent report released by the division.

The money for the proposal was set aside in the state budget earlier this week.

Before casting votes on the measure, which has gained the support of many lawmakers as well as Gov. John Hickenlooper, some on the committee wanted to look at an updated fiscal note on the measure.

Others wanted to read the division’s full fire report.

Lawmakers and fire officials on Thursday said the goal of fighting wildfires in the state is to spot the location of every fire within an hour of the first smoke reports.

“It’s a heavy lift. The needs of this state for the big picture, for forest health, for watershed management, for prevention of catastrophic wildfires, is frankly a bigger need than even what we’re taking on here,” said Carroll in a briefing with reporters prior to the committee hearing. “This is an investment for early detection, so we can get in and respond early before losses are catastrophic.”

The report from Paul L. Cooke, director of the Division of Fire, was made public late last month. It calls for the state to contract for firefighting use up to four helicopters, four single-engine air tankers (SEATs), two large air tankers and the purchase of two multi-mission aircraft, among other suggestions. All of this, according to the report, would cost the state about $33 million this year.

However, fire officials, lawmakers and Hickenlooper’s staffers came to the consensus that the pair of large tankers — estimated to cost the state about $12 million this year — are not what’s most needed as high winds often ground the planes. That brings the cost closer to the $19 million now outlined in the state budget for 2014.

A measure passed by King in 2012 allowed the division of fire prevention to create a state air corps. Some staff from Hickenlooper’s office said a bill this session is really not needed and that an appropriation can be attached to the measure from last session, though Carroll believes the current bill is needed.

Last year, the state contracted for only two single-engine aircraft to fight wildfires during what became the most destructive wildfire season in Colorado history.

Cooke stressed that “aviation is not a fix-all” to the state’s wildfire epidemic.

“But it is a tool in the toolbox,” Cooke said Thursday. “We still need firefighters on the ground. People who live in high fire areas have a role to play in mitigation and making sure their land is in proper shape.”

A separate measure making its way through the legislature allows a landowner to receive a tax credit of half the costs incurred in performing wildfire mitigation, which cannot exceed $2,500.

The reason Colorado is moving on the air fleet legislation is because the federal government lacks aerial resources to help.

A depleted fleet of firefighting aircraft are often in use in other states as wildfires rage throughout the West in the summer months.

In Washington on Thursday, U.S. Sen. Mark Udall penned a letter to the U.S. Department of Defense urging it to elevate the readiness status of its aerial firefighting assets, specifically C-130s ready to be equipped with Modular Airborne Fire Fighting Systems. The U.S. Forest Service and three private contractors have yet to deliver five next-generation air tankers in accordance with contracts outlined last year, Udall said.

“These tankers promised to be a game changer for western communities grappling with the perennial threat of modern mega-fires,” Udall wrote in the letter.

Kurtis Lee: 303-954-1655or klee@denverpost.com