RUSKIN — They could have built a new house on their five oak-covered acres skirting the edge of the Little Manatee River. But that would have been too easy and not nearly as much fun as finding an historic home ready for the wrecking ball.

So, George Corbett went in search of an old house he and his wife, Nancy, could restore. And in 2006, he found it — a three-story 1910 Victorian house in Palmetto, sitting on the banks of the Manatee River. It was slated for demolition to make way for condominiums.

After much ado and great fanfare, the 220-ton house, featuring a portico, turret and a wraparound porch, along with its cottage, were floated 25 miles north on barges up Tampa Bay, under the Sunshine Skyway Bridge and around a bend to the property in Ruskin.

Seven years later, Lamb Manor — named for Asa Lamb, the son of Palmetto founder Samuel Lamb — is fully restored and up for sale. The buyer can move in to this elegantly furnished, custom home for $4.9 million.

It is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.

“You just can’t build a place like this,” George Corbett said. “You can collect parts from all over the country and in this case, the world, but you can’t do that with a new house.”

The couple added a bottom floor with a theater room, an elevator from the old Woolworth mansion on Palm Beach, bronze door handles and sconces from around the country and adorned it with custom drapery, antique cabinets from Savannah, chandeliers they purchased in Massachusetts and stained glass windows they found scattered throughout the Northeast.

They added antique crown molding and tin ceiling tiles, had custom woodwork made for the walls and dressed it in fine French furnishings.

And all the while, they had a ball doing it, Nancy Corbett said.

“You can spend $10 million on a house in Tampa and you’re looking across the canal at other $10 million houses with TV antennas and satellite dishes,” George Corbett said. On their Ruskin property, the couple kept the scrub oak forest filled with ferns and added some tropical plants, like palm trees and birds of paradise. Their efforts are visible from the wrap-around veranda that overlooks the river, where manatees and bottlenose dolphins swim past roseate spoonbills and the occasional fisherman.

“It’s like old Florida,” the Miami native said.

Still, he said, he and Nancy don’t get too attached to things like houses. “We’re attached to each other.” They plan to move to Plant City to be closer to their grandchildren and are open to the possibility of finding and restoring yet another historic home.

This is the eighth house they have refurbished and some of the others have been historic, too.

The couple still owns a Christian camp in North Carolina, the former hunting lodge of Thomas Edison, Henry Ford and Harvey Firestone. They restored the 1903 lodge and its 20 nearby cabins on 100 acres to use as a retreat for ministers. They also purchased and restored the former Winter Haven home of 1960s and ‘70s country stars Bobbie Gentry, “Ode to Billie Jo” from 1967, and Jim Stafford, “Spiders and Snakes” and “Wildwood Weed” from the 1970s.

“We’ve restored houses all our married lives. This one was not in terrible shape,” but it had its challenges, Nancy Corbett said. Just finding all that bronze was one of them. “We bought three times more than we actually used, because you didn’t know which pieces would work where” George Corbett said.

Loving to antique together, the couple scoured salvage yards, hit antique shops, and supply houses, worked with online dealers and even got a few things, like the wooden front door, on eBay. More than once, Nancy Corbett said, their motor home was filled to the ceiling as they trooped up north and back again.

“We had some amazing craftsmen work for us, too,” Nancy Corbett said. “I can’t say enough about their talent.” They installed the mantels, the crown molding, the brick in the kitchen and all those windows collected from a half-dozen states.

Admittedly, she says, the couple took a plain house and made it fancy. But they also made room for family fun. The fourth floor is their jungle room, decorated to look like a thatched-roof African hut, with sprawling couches and tucked-away tables for game nights with the grandchildren.

The addition of more windows throughout the house gives it a lighter look than it previously had, especially near the several dining areas scattered throughout the 25 rooms.

“That’s the beauty of a Victorian,” Nancy Corbett said. “You can put in it what you like. We like French, so we put in a lot of French furnishings. Still, it’s not a hodgepodge. It works.”

It was a lot of work to find old pieces that matched pieces they planned to save in the house, George Corbett said. In the sitting area of the master suite, for example, they needed to find stained glass to match a window with green and yellow glass.

“That stained glass, one piece was from Pittsburgh and one from an antique dealer and the other from another part of the country. That’s how good Nancy is at this. It was really interesting. It really was fun. We really enjoy being together and we enjoy the beauty of the old world things.”

yhammett@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7127