By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

A proposal to increase Ohio’s minimum wage to $10.10 would cost 21,886 low-skill workers their jobs, according to a study from two economists.

Replicating a national analysis from the Congressional Budget Office, Miami University economics professor William Even and Trinity University economics professor David Macpherson estimated 12,782 women and 9,104 men would lose their jobs if Ohio hiked its minimum wage to $10.10.

As a result of an amendment to the Ohio Constitution approved by voters in 2006, the state minimum wage is $8.10 and increases annually based on the Consumer Price Index.

Senate Bill 25, 128 pages of proposed changes to Ohio employment law introduced in February by state Sen. Kenny Yuko, would increase the state minimum wage to $10.10.

“The bill is modeled on the Ohio Constitution which already provides a minimum wage of $8.10 tied to inflation,” Yuko, a Democrat, said in an email to Ohio Watchdog. “The state minimum wage applies to businesses with gross annual receipts of greater than $297,000 — a threshold that is also adjusted for inflation annually.”

“We would be open to an increase for all employees, but the bill follows the model of the Ohio Constitution to improve conditions for workers without unduly burdening smaller businesses,” he said.

Yuko’s proposal is cosponsored by all nine of his Democrat peers in the 33-member Ohio Senate.

Minimum-wage hikes are strongly supported by union-funded groups including think tank Policy Matters Ohio.

“Increasing the federal minimum wage would reduce inequality, keep workers out of poverty, reward work, create jobs and help our economy,” Policy Matters asserted in 2013 after President Obama began pushing for a $10.10 federal minimum wage.

In a phone interview, Macpherson told Ohio Watchdog labor unions and their allies have two reasons for supporting increases to the state minimum wage.

“They might feel that they’re helping low-wage workers, but another reason they might do that is because it raises the cost of nonunion labor,” Macpherson said. “It lowers the cost differential and makes the union premium smaller, which makes this advantageous for union firms.”

There are several flaws in the widespread assumption minimum-wage mandates help the poor and boost the economy by giving low-income workers more money to spend on goods and services, Macpherson said.

“One of two things has to happen: profits have to go down, and if profits go down then employers have less money to spend,” he said. “Secondly, to the extent that employers pass it on through higher prices, that affects consumers and they have less money to spend on goods and services that way.

“To the extent that workers are laid off, that would reduce their consumption, as well,” Macpherson said.

What, then, should Ohio’s minimum wage be if not $10.10 or the even higher $15 minimum called for by Service Employees International Union?

“Zero, because it costs jobs,” Macpherson said. “Because it’ll lower employment, and it hurts the people with the least skills the most. I don’t think it’s a good idea”

“There are competing schools of thought regarding the minimum wage,” Yuko said in response to Ohio Watchdog questions about Even and Macpherson’s research. “According to data released by the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics in 2014, the 13 states that increased their minimum had higher job growth than states that did not.

“The number of jobs grew an average of 0.85 percent from January through June 2014 for the 13 states that boosted their minimum wage, while the average for the other 37 states was 0.61 percent,” Yuko said.

“The same CBO study used as a basis for Professor Even’s research found that a $10.10 minimum wage would lift 900,000 people out of poverty and (result in) a $2 billion rise in real income overall. Raising the minimum wage will result in significant savings for businesses through reduced employee turnover and increased productivity. By increasing the pay of low-wage jobs, which more families are relying on than ever, a stronger minimum wage will allow individuals to spend more in our local businesses and help stimulate the economy.”

Senate Bill 25 awaits consideration in the Senate Transportation, Commerce and Labor Committee.