By Darlena Cunha

When my 7-year-old twins started with stuffed noses and sore throats, we did what parents typically do: We broke out the throat spray, the cough syrup, the decongestant.

Instead of going away, the problem got worse. The pediatrician did a test for strep, which came back negative. After that, he just shrugged and told us it was a viral infection, probably stemming from an allergy.

It’s very difficult to test for a virus, he told us. Pinning down an exact diagnosis would require blood work, and for many children the trauma of having blood drawn to diagnose a condition for which nothing can be done outweighs knowing the actual condition.

There is nothing more frustrating for a parent than to hear the words “just wait it out,” but according to Michael Brady, a spokesman for the American Academy of Pediatrics, waiting it out is basically all anyone can do when dealing with a virus.

“Parents want to be part of trying to help their child get better,” he said, “but sometimes doing nothing is better than doing something, particularly when the treatment could be worse than the virus itself.”

Brady, an Ohio pediatrician specializing in infectious diseases in children, emphasized that cold medicines do nothing to cure a virus.

“Just say no to cold medicines,” he said. “They do not work, and they have some medications in them that make kids irritable and upset. They are more dangerous than helpful. All the over-the-counter meds are discouraged for children of any age.”

Brady said that most such medications fall into two camps: antihistamines and decongestants.

“Antihistamines do nothing for colds, because there has been no increase in histamines to begin with,” he said. “And decongestant syrup is meant to clear the nose and sinuses, but it must go through the patient’s bloodstream first, meaning in order to get enough to be effective, you’d have to ingest way too much of it.”

Even worse, he said, are cold medicines that include fever reducers, because the mixture makes it difficult for parents to know exactly how much fever reducer their child has taken.

“If you need to give Motrin or Tylenol, give it by itself,” he said. “Don’t waste time or money on combination cold medicines.”

Brady said honey works best for coughs and that Vicks VapoRub is better for decongesting than any syrup. And while sprays work better than meds, parents should use them for only a few days. Otherwise, they risk damaging the nasal passages.

The time to really start taking note of symptoms is when a child stops eating regularly, has a fever of higher than 101 or is no longer alert while awake. Even then, he said, call the pediatrician before going to an urgent care or emergency room.

“Many pediatricians are happy to talk to parents over the phone during off hours,” Brady said. “Remember, the pediatrician knows their patient better than an emergency room ever could.”