Contrary to popular belief, I don’t like writing negative article about Republicans. I especially don’t like criticizing Republican candidates running for office in the final month of the campaign. As I sat down to write this article at 9:15 p.m. last night, I had no clue what I was going to be writing about. I thought perhaps I’d write about the Des Moines Register’s latest Iowa Poll that shows Governor Terry Branstad leading his Democrat opponent by 15 points.

Examining another poll showing Branstad with yet another significant lead isn’t all that exciting, but we are at the point where we can begin to talk about what it means to the other candidates on ballot with him. But how can I write about Branstad’s strong poll numbers when I’m greeted with David Young’s comments about Obamacare being “here to stay,” when I powered up my laptop?

Here to stay?

What the hell, David?

Young made the comment at a healthcare forum at Des Moines University on Monday. The Des Moines Register noted that Young “agrees with the sentiment” of those who want to repeal the law, but went out to say it would be more productive to fix the law than repeal it.

Look, I understand that Young was attempting to communicate that the repeal of the Affordable Care Act is unlikely, but waving the white flag of surrender on Obamacare in the final days of a congressional campaign is ridiculously stupid. I guess Young was lying when he said that President Obama had “ripped apart our healthcare system” in a primary TV ad. I mean, if you think that Obamacare ripped apart our healthcare system, how on earth can you say, “Well it’s here to stay, so maybe we can tweak it to be a little better”?

Ironically, despite Young’s “just deal-with-it” view on Obamacare, his campaign is currently running an ad beating up his Democrat opponent, Staci Appel, for voting against a bill that would have protected Iowans’ right to chose their healthcare. The ad then says, “Appel stands side by side with President Obama supporting Obamacare, legislation that cuts $700 billion from Medicare.” The ad then shows Appel saying in a recent debate, “What we shouldn’t be doing is repealing it.”

Needless to say, Young is about as far off message as a candidate can ever get. Heck, writing this article confuses me; I can’t imagine what a typical voters thinks of Young’s schizophrenic campaign. Besides admitting that Obamacare is here to stay, Young has also expressed positions on issues in recent debates that were already giving Republicans heartburn.

Young supports increasing the gas tax. Furthermore, he advocated adding a new tax on vehicles powered by natural gas. Young also supports a pathway to citizenship for the eleven million or so illegal immigrants who are currently in America. Young also supports means testing for Social Security, and raising the minimum wage to $10.10.

Here is what I find the most frustrating about David Young.

Had Young taken the stage at the District nominating convention back in June and said, “Hi, I’m David Young, and I support raising the minimum wage, means testing social security, a pathway to citizenship, new gas taxes, and oh yeah, we all just need to deal with Obamacare,” he would have been booed off the stage. Seriously, it would have been a nasty sight.

Yet, the David Young who asked for the Republican nomination never said those things until he secured the Third District Congressional nomination. To say that voters, and especially convention delegates, feel a little misled is an understatement.

Election Day is three weeks away, and lets be honest. David Young is running a campaign like you would expect from a candidate who came in last place in the primary. After watching Young in the debate and seeing his recent comments, I must admit that there is little that he says that I can agree with. Worse yet, as the election draws nears, I’m more confused about David Young’s positions on the critical issues facing this county than I was back in June.

How disappointing.