FOXBOROUGH, Mass. — It was the longest road trip in Colorado Buffaloes history in the continental United States, 1,770 miles to be exact. Imagine how long the flight back would have seemed for the Buffs had they lost to the lowly University of Massachusetts Minutemen, a former Division I-AA team that entered Saturday’s contest 2-23 in its previous 25 games.

For much of the afternoon, it was just the sort of gloomy scenario that stared the Buffs in the face, especially when they fell behind by 11 points in the third quarter. Even the smattering of UMass fans that dotted the otherwise vast swaths of empty blue-and-red seats inside Gillette Stadium were starting to make some noise.

A Buffs program that has seen its share of misery over the past decade was heading into perhaps its worst indignity of them all.

And then everything turned. UMass became UMass again, the Buffs’ beleaguered defense finally woke up and CU escaped this empty cavern with a 41-38 nonconference victory.

Down 31-20 after Jamal Wilson’s scoring run for UMass 2:36 into the third quarter, the Buffs pieced together three touchdown drives, and their defense began harassing 6-foot-6 UMass quarterback Blake Frohnapfel.

“It’s definitely easy to panic and to just give up. I’m really proud of the team for showing some heart,” said CU quarterback Sefo Liufau, who threw for 318 yards and three touchdowns. “I think we did a good job of just staying positive. It was a lot different than last week, I feel, where we were kind of separated — offense, defense and everyone kind of by themselves. But this week, we were a full team.”

CU was pummeled 31-17 by Colorado State in its opener.

Wide receiver Nelson Spruce had a huge second half, catching two touchdown passes, including a 70-yarder from Liufau with 4:24 left in the third quarter that put CU up for good, 34-31. The Buffs (1-1) gave up a late score, but the game was essentially wrapped up when Liufau hit Spruce with a short completion for a first down with just less than three minutes left.

CU coach Mike MacIntyre seemed most pleased with the resilience of his team, maybe even more than with the win itself.

PHOTOS: Colorado Buffaloes top Massachusetts Minutemen 41-38, Sept. 6, 2014

“It’s about their heart and their fight and their attitude,” MacIntyre said. “When you’re a head coach, you only care if you got one more point than they did. You don’t care about stats. You don’t care about anything. You just want to find a way to win. When things started to unravel, we just couldn’t click back last week.

“So all we preached (this week) was ‘Do your job.’ So when it comes that time and everything starts going hectic, just do your job.”

The Buffs had a 20-14 lead and the football with 1:11 left in the first half, but instead of playing it safe deep in their own end and running out the clock, they attempted three consecutive passes, all incomplete. So, UMass got the ball back with 48 seconds left at its own 30. Five plays later, the Minutemen had the lead after tight end Jean Sifrin leaped in heavy traffic in the end zone and snared the ball with his right hand. A junior college transfer, Sifrin became eligible to play last week, and MacIntyre admitted his staff hadn’t scouted him. It proved costly, because the 6-6 Sifrin was a handful.

“After about the third time, though, we started to notice that every time he came into the game, they threw the ball to him,” Mac-Intyre said. “We were able to make some adjustments.”

In the first 2:26 of the third quarter, the Minutemen added 10 points onto their one-point halftime lead. Liufau threw his first interception of the season, and one play later Wilson easily ran into the end zone. Suddenly, it was 31-20 Minutemen.

But the Buffs regrouped.

Junior fullback Christian Powell capped off a 77-yard TD drive with a 14-yard scoring run up the middle to cut the Minutemen’s lead to 31-27. UMass drove down the field, but instead of electing for a field-goal attempt, the Minutemen went for it on fourth-and-2 and came up a yard short. On the ensuing drive, Liufau scrambled right on a third-and-long play and made a great, off-balance throw down the sideline to Spruce, who ran it in for a 70-yard scoring play. The Buffs had the lead back for good at 34-31.

“It’s something I’ve been working on, my downfield play,” said Spruce, who had 10 catches for 145 yards. “It felt good to execute what we’ve been trying.”

The Minutemen damaged their comeback chances with silly penalties.

The crowd, announced at 10,227 at a stadium that seats close to 77,000, was probably generous by a few thousand. CU had nearly as many fans at UMass.

“(Our) fans were amazing today,” Liufau said. “You could hear them. It really helped.”

Adrian Dater: adater@denverpost.com or twitter.com/adater

Game balls

Nelson Spruce — The Buffs’ junior wide receiver finished with 10 catches for 145 yards and two touchdowns, including a 70-yarder in the third quarter that gave CU the lead for good at 34-31.

Jean Sifrin — Where did this guy come from? The UMass tight end, who wasn’t listed on the roster until last week, caught two TD passes, including a spectacular one-handed grab late in the first half.

Sefo Liufau — The Buffs’ quarterback made clutch throws when his team needed him most. He finished with 318 yards passing and three touchdowns.

Adrian Dater, The Denver Post