CSU researchers find the practice helps with balance, muscle control and strength

Colorado State University health and exercise science student Dawn Christensen participates in Brian Tracy's latest study on Bikram yoga. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

When Suzette Mallette, 55, was in her early 20s, she had problems with her lower back. "I had three low-back surgeries," she said.

Her pain and discomfort continued off and on through the years. Recently she had several people recommend trying Bikram yoga to see if she could get her back feeling better. "I've been doing it for three months now, and I am seeing results. They're not miracles. There are days when I backslide, but other days when I feel better, when the pain is reduced significantly."

While many of us are trying to escape the summer heat, Bikram yoga participants do yoga in a room that is heated to 105 degrees Fahrenheit, with humidity kept at 40 percent. It uses a very standardized 90-minute session, with 26 postures and two breathing exercises.

"It is always performed the same way in each individual class. You can go to Fort Collins or Phuket, Thailand, and you could get the same exact yoga class," said Brian Tracy, an associate professor in CSU's Department of Health and Exercise Science.

But what about that heat? "I was really concerned about the heat," said Mallette, "but you have to listen to yourself. If you feel like you're lightheaded or your heart's pumping, you can just stop, lay down and relax. The first time I did it, I'd stop. Over time it doesn't bother me as much."

Tracy agrees. "The normal healthy person does take some time to acclimate to the heat. But the point is that the body does acclimate. If you start hot yoga, you might feel a little woozy in the beginning. Pay attention to your body, most people can acclimate to the heat."

Advertisement

If individuals have a serious medical condition or concerns, they should consult with their medical professional before beginning Bikram yoga.

Bikram yoga is not new. It was introduced in the United States in the 1970s by its creator Bikram Choudhury. He developed a series of postures that accomplished what he thought ought to be accomplished. Today, there are hundreds of licensed studios throughout the world. Instructors must undergo specific training at the Bikram Yoga College of India, which is based in Los Angeles.

In spite of the number of individuals who participate in Bikram yoga, very few studies had been conducted that looked at Bikram and how it affected the body. In 2008, Tracy led the first scientific study to look at the physiological responses that occur in the body during Bikram yoga. Using a group of test subjects who had never used Bikram yoga before, the study found that balance, muscle control and strength were improved.

In 2013, further research measured the effects of Bikram yoga on fitness, measuring metabolic rate, heart rate and core temperature. For this study, Tracy chose to use 19 seasoned Bikram practitioners (those who had practiced Bikram yoga for at least a year). "This was designed to be a purely descriptive study. We wanted those who could do them [the postures] right and hold them," he said.

The research showed significant gains in flexibility, specifically in the spine, hamstring and shoulders. Participants also noted improved whole body strength.

Participants had average core temperatures of 100.3 degrees Fahrenheit and elevated heart rates averaging 160 beats per minute.

Although some reports have stated that participants can burn as much as 1,000 calories in one session, Tracy's findings showed averages of 460 calories for men and 330 calories for women. The calorie use is closely equivalent to taking a brisk (3.5 miles per hour) walk for 90 minutes.

Bridget Baxter owns Bikram Yoga Fort Collins and Bikram Yoga Greeley, along with her husband Kyle. "In 1999, I had some severe injuries from running in college and really bad back pain."

She decided to try Bikram yoga. "It absolutely helped within a couple of months. It was such a big impact on my life that I decided to make it a career." She bought the studio in Fort Collins in September 2006.

What does Baxter see as the most powerful benefits? "Circulation, circulation, circulation," she shared. "Chronic pain comes from chronic lack of circulation.

"The one thing that we always hear is how much better people are feeling," she said. "When we live with pain for so long, we begin to believe that we deserve it — maybe I'm supposed to be in pain, to live with my pain. It takes a little discomfort to move out of pain, but when we see someone moving away from pain, it's pretty magical."