Oct. 10, 2014 -- Lindsay Kolowich wanted to see her doctor for unrelenting pain after her foot surgery. But the operation had already forced her to miss work at a new job, and she didn’t want to ask for more time off.

Instead, she went home at the end of the day, logged onto the Internet, and paid a doctor a virtual visit. Such visits -- via smartphone, tablet, or computer -- are gaining in popularity, and an increasing number of insurance companies and health care providers tout telehealth’s potential to deliver cost savings, efficiency, and convenience without compromising quality.

“The convenience factor was really important to me,” says Kolowich, 23, who lives in Cambridge, MA.

Companies like Teladoc, MDLive, and Boston-based American Well, which Kolowich used, offer 24/7 access to doctors, who see patients via webcam for common, acute problems that don’t require emergency or ongoing care. That includes colds, coughs, rashes, diarrhea, allergies, and other problems.

Though the number of companies offering such services is not clear, the American Telemedicine Association estimates that as many as 500,000 patients will see a doctor via webcam this year, and that number is rising. An August HIMSS Analytics report found that 46% of more than 400 hospitals and doctor practices surveyed reported already using some form of telemedicine, most commonly videoconferencing. Dozens of hospitals and insurers are embracing it, with the number growing rapidly.

The consulting firm Deloitte predicted in August that out of an average 600 million general practitioner appointments in the U.S. and Canada this year, up to 75 million could be e-visits. Even if only 30% to 40% of office visits are replaced by e-visits, that could make up a $50 to $60 billion market, Deloitte found.

A few moments after Kolowich signed up for American Well’s online service, she was filling out a medical history form and selecting a doctor. She chose one at nearby Massachusetts General Hospital because of the positive reviews he had received from other American Well users.

“He walked me through a self-exam,” she says, describing how she flexed her toes as the doctor watched remotely. He then assured her that the pain was normal and made several recommendations, including: avoid excessive walking, take ibuprofen, and watch for any signs of infection. “It was great, and easier than I thought it would be.”

She maintained regular appointments with her surgeon, but the ability to see a doctor when it was most convenient to her helped ease her concerns over her pain.