RALEIGH, N.C.--The second day of the NCGOP state convention featured a speech from 2016 Republican presidential candidate, Sen. Ted Cruz.

During the Texas senator's speech, he discussed wanting to reignite America's promise and he says that can be done by abolishing the IRS, Common Core and the Affordable Care Act.

Sen. Cruz also compared his campaign to President Ronald Reagan's in 1980 and said it will take a grassroots campaign to win.

“If you think we just need to fiddle around the edges and not make fundamental change, then I ain't your guy, but if you think it is profoundly broken that there is bipartisan corruption, where the rich and powerful in Washington get stronger and stronger and working men and women get left in the cold, if you want to get the power out of Washington and back to we the people, that's what this campaign is all about,” he said.

In addition to his stance on creating a stronger and safer America, the Texas senator discussed keys to economic growth. He touted regulatory and tax reforms and mentioned abolishing the IRS.

“There are about 90,000 employees at the IRS. We need to padlock that building and take everyone of them and put them on our Southern border,” he said.

While some of Sen. Cruz's speech could be considered tongue in cheek, some delegates say they appreciated the honesty.

“There wasn't any question about where he stood on the issue. He wasn't kind of wishy-washy, he was direct and clear,” said delegate Virginia Crocker.

Delegate Watson Lawrence said support from delegates is important for presidential hopefuls' campaigns.

“We have a lot of delegates to the National Convention, so this is a very important state for all presidential candidates to come and garnish folks,” he said.

Sen. Cruz said grassroots support will help him win.

“Just like it happened in 1980, I think 2016 is going to be an election like 1980. I think Ronald Reagan is right, we win when we paint in bold colors, and not pale pastels,” he said.

Donald Trump will headline Saturday night's events. Dr. Ben Carson will also have a speaking slot Sunday. Stay with Time Warner Cable News for continued coverage from the NCGOP state convention.