Former Wisconsin U.S. Sen. Russ Feingold introduces Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barret at a rally in Kenosha during the 2012 gubernatorial recall race. Credit: Angela Peterson

On Oct. 22, 2010, Democratic Sen. Russ Feingold was onstage, sitting at a table next to his Republican challenger, businessman Ron Johnson. It was the night of the final debate between Feingold and Johnson, barely more than a week before an election night that appeared to be heavily favoring Republicans.

It was the end of a long, bitter campaign that had seen new charges and countercharges levied at each candidate on an almost daily basis. Indeed, outside Marquette's Eckstein Hall, two men wearing Chairman Mao masks waved large Chinese flags, holding signs that said "Ron Johnson will send my job to China." (Earlier in the campaign, Feingold had needled Johnson for "praising the communist Chinese system over our system.")

But as the debate began, one thing became perfectly clear: Feingold knew he was going to lose. After lobbing bombs at Johnson throughout the campaign, the senator took a knee during the debate. In the previous months, Feingold's campaign attacked Johnson for everything from supporting pedophile priests to hiring sex offenders in his Oshkosh business.

Yet none of this surfaced in the debate. Rather than set the stage for a nuclear final week of campaigning, Feingold opted for restraint. If he was going to lose, he was going to lose with his good name intact.

And now we know why.

While F. Scott Fitzgerald famously counseled that there are no second acts in American lives, Feingold appears to be trying to prove the author wrong. It is evident that the former senator is gearing up to run against Johnson in 2016, setting the stage for a rematch of the race that swept Johnson into office in 2010.

Certainly, the political landscape seems more fertile for Feingold in 2016 than it was in 2010; next year is a presidential year, and Wisconsin hasn't voted for a Republican presidential candidate since Ronald Reagan in 1984. Also, five years ago, Feingold had to weather the summer of Obamacare discontent, when senior citizens were regularly disrupting town hall meetings to condemn his vote for government-run health care.

But a successful second act in Wisconsin political life is rare. Just ask Tommy Thompson, who was beaten soundly in 2012 despite his status as one of the most popular politicians in the state's history. Former state senators such as Gary Drzewiecki and Alice Clausing attempted comebacks after losing their seats in the Legislature, only to see their candidacies quickly fizzle out.

Of course, a political comeback isn't impossible; current Assembly Minority Leader Peter Barca of Kenosha served in the body from 1985 to 1993 before being elected to one term in Congress. But Barca's Assembly stints came 16 years apart; many voters probably didn't even remember his previous Assembly career. For the most part, it appears that once voters are done with you, they're pretty much done with you.

Thus, if he were to run, Feingold's challenge would be to get voters to forget why they booted him out of office a mere six years before. But this will be an extraordinarily difficult task, as Republicans are more than happy to remind Wisconsinites that Feingold was a staunch defender of a government program that ignited large GOP victories in 2010 and 2014.

That program, of course, is Obamacare. Back in 2010, Democrats ran from Obamacare like it was a pair of thrift store underwear. But Feingold doubled down on his support, saying the program didn't go far enough.

Last week, the state Republican Party issued a video showing that many of Feingold's statements on Obamacare have aged about as well as a Yi Jianlian Milwaukee Bucks jersey. The video revives clips of Feingold saying things such as, "We have to work in the future to add the public option to the bill," indicating he supports morphing Obamacare into a single-payer plan.

In one interview, Feingold says, "There's very little in (the bill) that I can see that would force someone to give up their health insurance." Of course, Politifact deemed President Barack Obama's statement that "if you like your health care plan, you can keep it" to be the 2013 Lie of the Year.

After Feingold conceded to Johnson on election night, he finished by thundering, "it's on to the next battle, it's on to 2012!" This led many to believe he would challenge for the retiring Sen. Herb Kohl's seat two years later.

It is now becoming evident that he may have just been off by a few years. Maybe he thought he needed to give the voters a little time. But as hard as Feingold tries to run away from 2010, it will always find him.

Christian Schneider is a Journal Sentinel columnist and blogger. Email cschneider@jrn.com. Twitter: @Schneider_CM