No time to read the today's 21-page opinion from the U.S. Supreme Court on the Affordable Care Act?

We've got you covered. One of the joys of getting a decision handed down from the high court is reading the language they use to explain it.

In this case, Chief Justice John Roberts' majority opinion was a fine read, giving a good description of what made six out of the nine judges determine that when Congress decided federal tax credits should be available to those buying insurance on "an Exchange established by the State," they didn't mean to exclude those, like the 138,000 people in Louisiana, who purchased health care coverage through the federal exchange.

Here's a round up of the 11 notable outtakes from Roberts' majority opinion.

(And when you're finished here, hop over to read our "11 best" from Scalia's dissent.)





Chief Justice John Roberts, in his majority opinion:

1) "Tax credits are among the Act's key reforms, involving billions of dollars in spending each year and affecting the price of health insurance for millions of people. Whether those credits are available on Federal Exchanges is thus a question of deep 'economic and political significance' that is central to this statutory scheme; had Congress wished to assign that question to an agency, it surely would have done so expressly." (Page 8)

2) "Our duty, after all, is to 'construe statutes, not isolated provisions.'" (Page 9)

3) "After telling each State to establish an Exchange, Section 18031 provides that all Exchanges 'shall make available qualified health plans to qualified individuals.'... Section 18032 then defines the term 'qualified individual' in part as an individual who 'resides in the State that established the Exchange.' And that's a problem. If we give the phrase 'the State that established the Exchange' its most natural meaning, there would be no 'qualified individuals on the Federal Exchanges. But the Act clearly contemplates that there will be qualified individuals on every Exchange." (Page 10)

4) "The upshot of all this is that the phrase 'an Exchange established by the State under [42 U.S.C. §18301]' is properly viewed as ambiguous. The phrase may be limited in its reach to State Exchanges. But it is also possible that the phrase refers to all Exchanges – both State and Federal – at least for the purposes of tax credits." (Page 13)

5) "The Affordable Care Act contains more than a few examples of inartful drafting." (Page 14)

6) "Congress passed much of the Act using a complicated budgetary procedure known as 'reconciliation' which limited opportunities for debate and amendment, and bypassed the Senate's normal 60-vote filibuster requirement ... As a result, the Act does not reflect the type of care and deliberation that one might expect of such significant legislation." (Page 14)

7) "After reading Section 36B along with other related provisions in the Act, we cannot conclude that the phrase 'an Exchange established by the State under [Section 18301] is unambiguous." (Page 15)

8) "The combination of no tax credits and an ineffective coverage requirement could well push a State's individual insurance market into a death spiral. One study predicts that premiums would increase by 47 percent and enrollment would decrease by 70 percent." (Page 17)

9) "It is implausible that Congress meant the Act to operate in this manner." (Page 17)

10) "In a democracy, the power to make the law rests with those chosen by the people. Our role is more confined – 'to say what the law is.'... That is easier in some cases than others. But in every case we must respect the role of the Legislature, and take care not to undo what it has done. A fair reading of legislation demands a fair understanding of the legislative plan." (Page 21)

11) "Congress passed the Affordable Care Act to improve health insurance markets, not to destroy them. If at all possible, we must interpret the Act in a way that is consistent with the former, avoids the latter." (Page 21)

<a href="http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2110920/obamacare-supreme-court-ruling.pdf">Obamacare Supreme Court Ruling (PDF)</a> <br /> <a href="http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/2110920/obamacare-supreme-court-ruling.txt">Obamacare Supreme Court Ruling (Text)</a>