Topics: From the Wires, News

Coverage of the BP oil spill back in 2010 began as a sprint, trying to find out who had been killed and wounded in the explosion aboard the Deepwater Horizon drilling rig, and how bad the leak might get.

It turned into a marathon as at least 134 million gallons of crude spewed from the well over 87 days.

It required journalists to be on planes and helicopters, on boats big and small, everywhere that disaster workers were, and some places they weren’t: One Associated Press journalist even donned scuba gear to dive into the muck.

Below, AP photographers Gerald Herbert, Charlie Riedel and Eric Gay look back on five of the most enduring images from the spill:

___

A TOWER OF SMOKE

Rig fires happen with some regularity, but when word came that the Deepwater Horizon was listing badly after an explosion the night before, the New Orleans-based Herbert raced to a small airport and grabbed the first helicopter pilot he could find. Together with a photographer from the Times-Picayune newspaper, they headed out in a four-seat helicopter with only enough fuel to get to the site and shoot for a few minutes.

“You could see it for miles,” Herbert recalled. The smoke “started appearing through the haze as a thick blob,” he said.

“As we got closer, we realized how immense it was. The smoke was actually higher than us, and we were circling around it trying to avoid it.”

Hovering at 4,000 feet — the lowest authorities would allow them to fly — the three were struck by the scale of the unfolding disaster.

“The enormity of it did not escape us, because you could see that what looked like a tiny little burning ember was a massive oil platform. You could see oil in the water,” Herbert said.

The images were the first from what would become the nation’s worst offshore spill. The rig would sink within three days of exploding, and oil would flow from the well for nearly three months.

___

A SURREAL SEASCAPE

More than two weeks later, oil had yet to wash ashore, and images of huge ships floating amid a slick above the broken well had grown commonplace. San Antonio-based shooter Gay was sent on a mission to capture the scale of the slow-motion catastrophe.

“I had been on helicopter several times trying to show the oil coming to the coast, because we knew it was going to hit at some time,” he said.

One day, he found it: a massive area of orange swirls against a floating field of black.

“I expected to see a big black blob floating out there,” he said, “but then it was this orange, swirling thing that looked like something from another planet.”

Several miles out from land, and with no ships nearby, the image was abstract. Gay flew back out the following day to put the pollution into context.

“We noticed this armada of shrimp boats that had been converted” to oil skimmers deploying floating boom, something many shrimpers did to make money while the area was closed to fishing. After shooting them from a few hundred feet above, Gay asked the pilot to move a little higher.

“You could see the boats and the orange swirls, and it gave it this strange perspective.”

The result was a set of surreal, artistic shots.

“It’s kind of sad that something so tragic looks so beautiful,” Gay recalled, “… but it was pretty, from a distance.”

___

A DRAGONFLY TRAPPED

A month after he’d first gone up in the helicopter, Herbert was on a boat tour with local officials and had stepped onto a small marsh island awash in syrupy crude.

Someone pointed out a blue dragonfly perched on a reed, and Herbert stooped to capture the insect, the tips of its translucent wings tinged brown.