Apple may unveil a smart watch next Tuesday – but competing smart watch makers Intel and Motorola are taking a head start by launching devices crafted by fashion companies that could make consumers begin to see wearables as a must-buy accessory.

The Motorola 360 watch goes on sale Friday for $249, using Google’s new Android Wear platform for wearable devices that allows consumers to operating system to help record jogs, keep track of sports on the Internet with voice search, and receive reminders about their schedules. Companies are trying to make smart watches more fashionable like traditional high-end watches, so Motorola aimed for a classy design and partnered with Chicago tannery Horween Leather Company to design the leather wristband.

Intel, meanwhile, is going all out by debuting its new MICA smart bracelet during a fashion show on Sunday organized by Opening Ceremony – which partnered with the tech giant to create the device. The MICA bracelet – short for “My Intelligent Communication Accessory” – keeps users connected to SMS messages, personal alerts for meetings and other notifications.

“It’s a statement piece; it’s not so much a piece of technology as it is a beautiful accessory with the added benefit of technology,” says Intel spokeswoman Ellen Healy. “Some of the apps available are still being determined with third parties, so we will announce those before early November.”

Intel debuted its MICA smartwatch at a fashion show on Aug. 31. Courtesy of Collier Schoor

Intel arrived late to the tablet and mobile revolutions that made fortunes for younger rivals Google and Apple, but Intel‘s CEO Brian Krzanich has been determined to seize the opportunity of the wearables market. Intel founded its New Devices Group last September, and announced the MICA bracelet at the Consumer Electronics Show in January, where it showcased some of its other prototypes like smart earbuds that track a user’s heart rate.

"We are entering a new era of computing," Krzanich said during the show in January. "Wearables need to solve problems.”

But consumers mostly don’t see wearables solving problems that a smartphone doesn't already, says Carolina Milanesi, chief of research at Kantar Worldpanel ComTech, a market analysis group.

“I still think we are very early in the market and wearables will remain niche for the next 12 months at least,” Milanesi says.

The Intel MICA may change people’s minds about the way wearables could become a part of everyday life the way cell phones have, says Brian Blau, research director at Gartner, a market analysis group.

“It will help open consumers’ eyes that having a digital capability in items such as jewelry or clothing isn’t so far-fetched or exotic, and one day these types of devices will be commonplace,” Blau says. “One of the biggest questions today is what will we do with these devices, will they focus on communication, shopping, family or even entertainment, and how will users value them.”

Apple’s expected smart watch – dubbed the “iTime” according to a patent granted to the tech giant – will likely make use of the new HealthKit mobile health and HomeKit smart home platforms debuted in June.

Patent drawings filed to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office of a potential Apple smartwatch.

Courtesy of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office

Apple is also trying to make its technology more fashionable following its recent hiring of Angela Ahrendts – the former chief executive officer of Burberry – as senior vice president in charge of strategy for retail and online stores. The Intel watch design is targeted more toward women than the Apple watch is like to be, Milanesi says.

“Although we have no details on the Apple device I would expect a classy design that appeals both to men and women with a good deal of focus on user experience,” Milanesi says. “It makes sense to diversify diversify? YES​ but price will remain crucial.”

Price is among the biggest factors for customers when buying a new device, so the cost of Apple’s watch may determine the sales appeal. Samsung sells the Galaxy Gear watch for prices starting at $299, which include a camera on the watch. The Motorola 360 price of $249 may have better luck because it has a more fashion-conscious design and the backing of the Android Wear operating system.

Apple may be a late comer to the wearable market, but that may be due to its culture of design perfection that add new kinds of features beyond the status quo, Jonathan Gaw, a research manager at market analysis firm International Data Corporation told U.S. News in a previous interview.