Inside the small town of Stonewall, with a little over 1200 residents, a big movement is in the works to remember one of their own. 39-year old Jonathan Sanders died Wednesday night, following an interaction with a local police officer. It's a case that is being thouroughly investigated, as to what happened and why. Amidst the investigation, friends, family, and supporters of Sanders are gathering this weekend for a memorial of his life.

"I don't know what the reason was or why, but he was doing what he loved and we are going to keep doing it," Event Organizer Lon McCoy said. We always rode horses. We'd go from here, to Texas, Louisiana, or wherever. This was always something that we did and we are going to keep it up for him and make sure he's smiling over us."

McCoy is planning a horse and buggy ride through Stonewall Sunday evening, for Sanders. According to The Clarion Ledger, Sanders has crossed paths with authorities before. He was arrested for possession of cocaine and has been convicted on other charges. He spent five years in prison with five years probation, but that's not stopping law enforcement or family members form working together to ensure that the weekend events stay safe and peaceful.

"We're going to try and assist the sheriff's department as well as the city of Stonewall as much as we can," Capt. Malachi Sanders of the Mississippi Highway Patrol stated. I called a few unites down from Jackson to assist. We want to help the family, we want to help the law enforcement community, we want to do as much as we can to assist them."

"Our community has done an outstanding job," Chief Michael Street of The Stonewall Police Department said. "We've not had one incidence of any looting or rioting."

And that's how law enforcement, along with friends and family want to keep any gatherings that will be held. In the meantime, the community will work to keep Sander's memory alive.

"We are going to do what he loved, riding horses," McCoy said. "We did it everyday, rode horses as a normal routine every night. So we are going to keep it up and keep the dream alive and do what we have to do."

A candlelight vigil will be held in Stonewall for Sanders Saturday evening at 7 o'clock. Sunday evening at 5 o'clock the ride through town will be held. The ride will consist of horses, buggies, four-wheelers, and personal vehicles.