SAN FRANCISCO, Jan. 6, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Keas, the market leader in population health management, today announced the close of a record year of growth fueled by rapidly-increasing F500 demand for enterprise-class health management solutions. In 2014, the company tripled the total active users and new clients of its patented, award-winning health engagement platform.

America's largest employers rely on Keas to unify fragmented health benefits, health data, incentives, and employee communications into a single, easy-to-use platform application that employees love to use to improve their health.

Keas welcomes Land O'Lakes, JB Hunt and Lincoln Financial to a roster of clients that includes more Fortune 500s than any other health management company. Previously announced industry-leading clients include Safeway, Target, Salesforce.com, Reed Elsevier, Pfizer, among others.

As Affordable Care Act (ACA) regulations impacting employers go into effect in 2015, large employers have turned to Keas to manage health benefits and wellness programs, promote behavior change, lower incentive costs, and achieve health outcomes for their employees.

Keas helps employers lower their cost of healthcare through guaranteed, sustained, employee engagement of the Keas platform, designed and built around state-of-the-art behavioral economics, gamification, and evidence-based health management.

"Keas remains the only health management company that guarantees sustained employee engagement and lower incentive cost. We do this by making the health management experience personalized, relevant, fun and social for employees and their families," said Josh Stevens, CEO, Keas. "We are dedicated to making the health management experience easy, engaging and effective for both the employer and employee."

2014 Keas Growth Highlights:

300% growth in members

14x frequency of use per member per month

5 million health goals completed

1 million health risks lowered

$30 million of incentive costs saved

Keas recently hired Brian Golden, formerly of Towers Watson, with over 20 years of health management experience, to lead the Keas Customer Success Team. Colleen Yoo, Keas' former VP of Customer Success and founding VP of Product, was promoted to Chief Operating Officer. Both Golden and Yoo report to Josh Stevens, Keas CEO.

About Keas

Keas is the market leader in population health management. Leveraging evidence-based science in behavioral-economics, gamification, and health management, Keas maximizes engagement of health benefits, delivering an integrated and streamlined health benefits experience, while lowering risks and costs of claims, incentives, and administration. Keas guarantees employee engagement in health improvement. Fortune 500 employers including Pfizer, Safeway, Target, Land O'Lakes, JB Hunt, Salesforce.com, and Lincoln Financial rely on Keas to power their population health management programs. Founded in 2008 by Adam Bosworth, Keas is headquartered in San Francisco, California. For more information, visit http://www.keas.com

SOURCE Keas