Obamacare enrollees on average have one-third fewer choices when it comes to picking doctors and hospitals than those on regular commercial plans, a new study says.

But its authors claim that’s not necessarily a bad thing. And others in the health-care arena believe the findings are misleading and don’t tell the whole story.

The study from Washington, D.C.-based Avalere Health finds that those under Affordable Care Act plans have roughly 66% of the choices compared with those in commercial plans, and the number of options may vary depending on the type of physician needed.

Under Obamacare, enrollees have access to roughly 58% of the oncologists and cardiologists that commercial plan members have. The average goes up when it comes to hospitals, as those using the public exchanges have access to 76% of those care facilities.

But Avalere Vice President Elizabeth Carpenter says while there generally are fewer providers in an Obamacare network, public exchanges offer a wide range of health plans. If a consumer wants the same variety of doctors and hospitals as a commercial plan, those options are available under Obamacare.

Going with a network that narrows the choices often means savings for the consumer in lower premiums, Carpenter points out.

“The important thing to keep in mind is putting the consumer with a plan that meets their needs,” she said.

However, Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, the Obamacare exchange in California, says Avalere’s findings can be easily misconstrued. While the average exchange may have fewer doctors than a commercial plan does, consumers in either program are getting equal access to health care.

“The headlines scare consumers,” Lee said. “I don’t think it adds to a better understanding. It puts smoke, rather than light, on the topic.”

Lee points to a May study in Health Affairs magazine that says there is “no substantive” difference in geographic access to hospitals for those in public exchanges or commercial networks. At the same time, the Commonwealth Fund said that 77% of Obamacare exchange enrollees found it “very easy” or “somewhat easy” to find a doctor.

Finally, a recent survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 91% of Covered California participants were able to find a doctor geographically close to them, identical to the proportion of those in employer-sponsored commercial plans, Lee said.

“We are no longer talking about Obamacare or the Affordable Care Act,” Lee said. “We’re talking about health care in America.”

The Avalere study notes that Obamacare enrollees who go outside their network for care will find the money they paid for that won't count toward out-of-pocket maximums on their plans.

Avalere sampled exchange programs from large metro areas in five states — Florida, California, Texas, Georgia and North Carolina — to come up with its findings. It compared exchange networks in those regions to commercial networks available in the same areas. Group and individual plans were among the commercial networks sampled.

More from MarketWatch