With bowl hopes slipping away, CU now in must-win mode

Colorado's Bryce Bobo (4) goes up to make a catch over UCLA's Jaleel Wadood during Saturday's game at Folsom Field. The Buffs once again mounted a strong rally only to come up short, 40-37 in double overtime. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

The Colorado football team is officially in must-win mode for the rest of the 2014 regular season.

The Buffs set a team goal of playing in a bowl game back in the summer and at 2-6 overall, they will have to win their final four games to reach the requisite number of wins to qualify.

The notion of the Buffs reaching the postseason seems ridiculous at this point to anyone outside the program, because CU has lost four straight games and hasn't proven it can put together a complete outing even once this season. It will have to do that four straight times and then some to make its dream come true, with games against a tough Washington team this week, No. 14 Arizona, No. 5 Oregon and No. 18 Utah remaining.

"I do believe that football teaches character and reveals character," MacIntyre said. "I believe our team has great character. They'll keep battling and we'll bounce back and start getting these."

MacIntyre and his players are the first to say it's getting old talking about small notes of progress week after week without ever celebrating big moves forward in the form of wins.

But there they were late Saturday afternoon, enduring another postgame of pats on the back and 'you'll get 'em next time' encouragement from friends and family after coming agonizingly close to earning their first Pac-12 win of the season and the first win over a ranked opponent in MacIntyre's short tenure in Boulder.

Advertisement

The script is becoming familiar and tired. CU rallies late, generally with the defense leading the charge, only to have the offense fall short at the end. It happened at Cal in double overtime last month. It happened at home against Oregon State three weeks ago, and it happened against UCLA, which came to town ranked No. 25 in The Associated Press poll and remained in that spot when the new poll came out Sunday morning.

"It seems like very week we're saying we're that close to finishing and that close to winning games out here," linebacker Brady Daigh said. "Minus last week (against USC), it seems like it's happening every week. As a team, we have to learn how to finish and really come together at the end of games."

Colorado plays host to the Huskies this week in another early game at Folsom Field (11 a.m., Pac-12 Networks). The Huskies are loaded with talent, including at least three players who are considered potential first-round draft choices in the 2015 NFL draft. The Huskies have had issues adjusting under first-year coach Chris Petersen, who was hired away from Boise State last winter.

The Huskies come to Boulder on a two-game losing streak hoping to earn their sixth win and become bowl eligible. Petersen has lost two consecutive games for the first time since 2007. He has never lost three straight as a head coach.

It will be another tough test for MacIntyre and his Buffs. By now, they're used to them.

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, twitter.com/kyleringo