Photo

The former governor who made Kentucky a national leader in health care expansion under the Affordable Care Act is moving to protect that legacy from his successor, who has set out to dismantle parts of it.

Steven L. Beshear, the former Democratic governor, announced on Thursday the creation of a nonprofit group, Save Kentucky Healthcare, to marshal opposition to changes being made by Gov. Matt Bevin, a Republican who took office in December.

The effort will begin with online advertising and organizing, Mr. Beshear said, but where it goes from there remains unclear. He declined to say how much money would be behind the campaign, or from what sources.

Kentucky, already a test case for the enthusiastic embrace of the Affordable Care Act, now stands to become a test case for attempts to undo it.

A central part of the federal law mandates an online marketplace in each state where people can shop for insurance. If a state refused to build an exchange, as most did, then the federal government created one.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Another major part of the law allowed states to make Medicaid, the government program for those with a low income, available to far more people, with the federal government paying most of the bill. But the law left it up to each state whether to participate, and 20 have declined.

Under Mr. Beshear, Kentucky expanded Medicaid and created an online exchange, Kynect, which experts called one of the best in the country. The state also tied the parts together: When people visit Kynect, if they are eligible for Medicaid, the system enrolls them in that program.

Since the exchanges opened, Kentucky has had the steepest decline of any state in the number of uninsured people, and Medicaid enrollment nearly doubled. About 7 percent of Kentuckians younger than 65 were uninsured last year, well below the national average, about 11 percent.

While surveys show that Kentuckians view the state’s programs favorably, they elected Mr. Bevin, an ardent opponent of the Affordable Care Act, in November. He has backed away from an earlier vow to undo the Medicaid expansion. Instead, he says, he will try to negotiate changes with federal officials, to pare costs and the number of people eligible.

“We cannot afford to have 25 to 30 percent of us on Medicaid,” Mr. Bevin said in an address to the Legislature in late January.

He has taken steps to dismantle Kynect, saying it will be cheaper to let the federal government run the state’s exchange. “It will not affect the health insurance of a single individual,” he told the Legislature.

But Mr. Beshear and others argue that eliminating Kynect will result in more uninsured people, primarily by making it harder to enroll in Medicaid. And they point to studies concluding that expanded coverage is a boon to the state, not a drain.

“Governor Bevin simply says, ‘I don’t believe any of this evidence,’ ” Mr. Beshear said. “He says it’s unsustainable based upon some right-wing political ideology.”