Licensing rules put suppliers in bind

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Pennsylvanians who use prosthetic devices or corrective footwear could find a shortage of specialists and suppliers if state lawmakers don't amend pending licensure rules, industry groups warn.

Lawmakers in 2012 passed Act 90, which imposes state licensing requirements on prosthetists, pedorthists, orthotists and orthotic fitters in Pennsylvania for the first time. The Bethlehem-based Pennsylvania Orthotic and Prosthetic Society sought the move, to ensure accountability and high-level care among specialists who provide medically necessary shoes, artificial body parts and some braces, said POPS President Eileen Levis.

At least a dozen states have similar rules.

But Levis said Pennsylvania lawmakers went too far when they wrote Act 90, failing to let established specialists who have recognized certification keep practicing while they await licenses from the state. Their deadline for licensure is July 6.

The state Board of Medicine issued about 150 licenses to specialists as of mid-June, though about 500 applied, Levis said.

The board's staff was not available to discuss the matter, a spokesman said.

“The ramifications are disastrous,” Levis said, warning that hundreds of specialists might have to stop working in the short term.

Her group joined 10 others to lobby for House Bill 2242, which would amend Act 90 to allow certified specialists to continue working while the licensing requirement takes effect. The House passed the bill last week in a unanimous vote, sending it to the Senate for consideration.

It would relax some planned work-experience requirements and let pharmacies and other suppliers sell specialized shoes for diabetic patients, much as they do now.

Some suppliers would have to spend as much as $2,000 per worker to comply with licensing standards planned under the unamended Act 90, said Tom Fedlak, executive director of the Harrisburg-based Pennsylvania Association of Medical Suppliers.

“What we're looking at really would be an access problem for patients who need these shoes, probably in the rural areas where there aren't a lot of providers,” Fedlak said.

The Alexandria, Va.-based American Board for Certification in Orthotics, Prosthetics and Pedorthics takes a mixed view. It supports allowing established, certified specialists to keep practicing while they pursue state licenses, but it questions a provision in the House bill that would grant a pedorthic or similar license when a worker dispenses over-the-counter devices for two years.

“The intent of licensure, in our opinion, is to protect the public and to provide a means to assure that someone who's providing health care has the proper qualifications,” said Stephen Fletcher, the clinical resources director at the board.

Others urge the Senate Consumer Protection and Professional Licensure Committee to act swiftly on the House bill and move it to a Senate vote before the licensure deadline.

“Deadlines in the state come and go,” said Sen. Jim Ferlo, D-Highland Park, a committee member. He said he would raise the issue with committee leaders, promising that lawmakers “can multi-task.”

“We should figure this out quickly, which we can do,” Ferlo said.

Adam Smeltz is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach him at 412-380-5676 or asmeltz@tribweb.com.