Guest speaker: Be proud to be a nurse

The class of 2015 is presented to the audience at the end of NJC's Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony Thursday. There were nine graduates this year. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

Class president Emily Anderson reflects on all that the graduates did to get to this point during NJC's Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

After many hours spent completing class work, exams and clinicals, they're now ready to enter the medical field as registered nurses. Northeastern Junior College recognized nine graduates at its Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony on Thursday.

The ceremony started with an invocation by Jim Bob Baintin, followed by a welcome by Julie Brower, director of NJC's nursing program.

"I would really like to end my congratulations to the graduates on a job well done. I'm very proud of each one of you and look forward to watching you succeed in your nursing careers," she told the graduates.

This year's guest speaker was Sara Grauberger, RN, MSN, who is a nurse a Banner Health. She recalled her first shift as labor and delivery a nurse, she had the flu and ended up passing out.

Guest speaker Sara Grauberger, a nurse with Banner Health, gives some advice to graduates at NJC's Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"But I found my passion and I kept moving forward," Grauberger said, encouraging the graduates to find their own passion, "figure out what you want to be, what you want to do and what inspires you. Once you figure that out you figure out how you can get there."

She also asked them to think about what being a nurse means to them. For her it's a way to make a living and an "incredible opportunity to work with, serve and care for people."

"Being a nurse allows us to make a difference in people's lives by the care we provide. We see people at their best and quite possibly at their worst moments. Patients are going to remember the nurse who stuck by their side, just like us as nurses remember those patients who have impacted our lives and our careers," Grauberger said.

Advertisement

She pointed out that nursing is a tough job and there are frustrating moments, but she told the graduates when they get frustrated and start to question if they're doing the right thing to think about the reasons why they became a nurse.

Grauberger also noted that being a nurse is "an awesome opportunity." It's one of the fastest growing occupations in the United States today and the opportunities in nursing are endless.

Sarah Stieb receives the Highest Academic Average Award from David McClain, president of the Sterling Rotary Club, during NJC's Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. Behind them, Associate Professor Valerie Edinger talks about Stiebs accomplishments. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"Be proud of the career you chose, be proud of the opportunity you have to help and serve others and always be proud to call yourself a nurse," she told the graduates.

The class president, Emily Anderson, then said a few words. She recalled the obstacles the graduates overcame to get here and the classes, tests, labs, clinicals and finals they had to complete. Anderson also thanked the graduates' family and friends for all their support, their instructors for helping them get here, the hospitals where students completed their clinicals and the nurses that shared their knowledge with the graduates.

Sarah Jenkins receives the Best Bedside Nurse Award from Kurt Vogel, president of the Sterling Lions Club, at NJC's Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. Behind them, Associate Professor Valerie Edinger says some words about Jenkins. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"Nursing is not an easy profession. Some days will be the best days ever and there will be those days you go home and cry, want to give up and swear you're going to quit. We won't though. We will go back day after day, because someone out there needs our help and we truly love what we do," she said.

Following her remarks, Associate Professor Jan Brandenburg recognized graduates who received the Frank and Gloria Walsh Scholarship. They include Jonetta Anderson, Sarah Jenkins, Nichole Merrigan and Sarah Stieb.

Two awards were also handed out. The Highest Academic Average Award, presented by Sterling Rotary Club president David McClain, went to Sarah Stieb.

Tiffany Storch, of Sterling, receives her pin from Julie Brower, director of nursing at NJC, during the Associate Degree Nursing Pinning Ceremony. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

Associate Professor and Clinical Coordinator Valerie Edinger called Stieb a "dedicated student, who takes her learning seriously and has very high expectations of herself." Stieb achieved a 4.0 grade point average during the nursing program and her prerequisite courses.

"Besides her academic success, she also provides excellent bedside care. Her professionalism, caring personality and knowledge will be a wonderful added asset to the nursing profession," Edinger said.

The Best Bedside Nurse Award, presented by Sterling Lions Club president Kurt Vogel, was given to Sarah Jenkins.

"Sarah is a very passionate nurse, who has been practicing in the field for a few years. She has demonstrated passionate hard work, improvement and dedication from day one of her ADN program," Edinger said. "She offers the most sincere care to each individual patient and takes care of them to the best of her abilities."

After the awards were handed out, it was time for the graduates to walk across the stage and receive their nursing pins. The class of 2015 was then presented and the graduates headed out to begin their nursing careers.

The 2015 graduates are: Ariana Yvette Abarca, of Sterling; Emily Marie Anderson, of Centennial; Jonetta Lynn Anderson, of Haxtun; Tanya Kay Jagers, of Sidney, Neb.; Sarah Jenkins, of Sidney, Neb.; Nichole Marie Merrigan, of Colorado Springs; Arinda Shaw, of Woodrow; Sarah E. Stieb, of Sterling; and Tiffany A. Storch, of Sterling.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com