50 years ago, on May 22, 1964, LBJ unleashed his call to make America a 'Great Society.' A lot has changed ... but are we closer to being a great society?

President Lyndon B. Johnson signs a bill creating the Medicare and Medicaid health care programs, one his “Great Society” initiatives, on July 30, 1965. (Photo: AP Photo )

1964 began with the promise of a new era.

President Lyndon Baines Johnson delivered his first State of Union address, calling for a "War on Poverty." The U.S. Surgeon General declared, for the first time, that smoking was hazardous to your health. Developers unveiled the design of their visionary office complex on the south end of Manhattan Island, which they named the World Trade Center. The 24th Amendment to our constitution was ratified, eliminating poll taxes and other conditions on the right to vote in elections.

The Beatles arrived. The Supreme Court ruled on New York Times v. Sullivan upholding the right to criticize public officials. George Lucas, having given up on a racing career, transferred to the University of Southern California School of Cinematic Arts.

The first Ford Mustang rolled off the assembly line in Dearborn, Mich.

And that was all before the cherry trees bloomed.

LBJ delivers a visionary commencement

On May 22, President Johnson, in a graduation address at the University of Michigan, unveiled his vision for the American future:

"… For a century we labored to settle and to subdue a continent. For half a century we called upon unbounded invention and untiring industry to create an order of plenty for all of our people.

"The challenge of the next half-century is whether we have the wisdom to use that wealth to enrich and elevate our national life, and to advance the quality of our American civilization.

"Your imagination, your initiative, and your indignation will determine whether we build a society where progress is the servant of our needs, or a society where old values and new visions are buried under unbridled growth. For in your time we have the opportunity to move not only toward the rich society and the powerful society, but upward to the Great Society.

"The Great Society rests on abundance and liberty for all. It demands an end to poverty and racial injustice, to which we are totally committed in our time. But that is just the beginning. …"

It was a political speech, he would be facing GOP nominee Sen. Barry Goldwater of Arizona, in a contest of stark contrast, and he predicted massive challenges on the horizon for the United States: where 80 percent of Americans would choose to live in cities – at a time when those cities seemed to be crumbling, and would require enormous investment; where America the Beautiful may succumb to pollution, overcrowding and over-development; and where the country's commitment to education was failing.

A stirring call to graduates

The president quoted Woodrow Wilson, "Every man sent out from his university should be a man of his Nation as well as a man of his time," and said:

"For better or for worse, your generation has been appointed by history to deal with those problems and to lead America toward a new age. You have the chance never before afforded to any people in any age. You can help build a society where the demands of morality, and the needs of the spirit, can be realized in the life of the Nation."

It was a stirring speech, and the graduates responded to his call, though perhaps not in the manner Johnson envisioned.

Political leaders got the message, and passed landmark civil rights legislation two months later. The Supreme Court, using that legislation, ruled that public accommodations could not discriminate on race. Martin Luther King was awarded the Nobel Peace Prize in December. Johnson won the election in a landslide.

But Johnson's message also stirred up passions for change that would not be contained within the structures he grew up in, and his vision of a "Great Society" was changed by an ever-widening caste of participants.

What was the impact?

Johnson's predictions were very accurate: We do mostly live in cities, and there has been tremendous investment in developing them as better places to live; America the Beautiful is still challenged by pollution and development, yet progress has been made; and then there is education, more children attend school and go on to college than ever before, yet challenges remain.

For all the changes that have occurred during the last 50 years, do we have a "Great Society?"

Reach Frank Daniels III: fdanielsiii@tennessean.com, 615-881-7039, and on Twitter: @fdanielsiii.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1nuHo5h