IntelliTouch 50 Employees have open access to their time and attendance information freeing up payroll and HR resources for other important activities

Attendance on Demand, Inc. announced today the release of the IntelliTouch 50 time clock. The high definition touch screen technology takes employee accountability for their time and activity to a new level. Employees can attest to the accuracy of their time cards and acknowledge their break time on a daily basis or pay period.

One touch confirms compliance. Hours, meals, breaks and even workplace incidents can all be reported at the end of a shift right at the clock. Companies benefit from easy employee adoption because of the intuitive icons and friendly touch screen. Minimal training is necessary as the time clock instructs employees and supervisors on the action required next. The IntelliTouch 50 also sends alerts to the supervisor’s through mobile app or email, letting the supervisor respond wherever and whenever needed.

“Employees are more aware and engage in managing their time when using a time clock like the IntelliTouch 50,” said Beth Baerman, Director of Communication at Attendance on Demand, Inc. “Employees have open access to their time and attendance information freeing up payroll and HR resources for other important activities.”

The IntelliTouch 50 has a capacity of approximately 1,000 employees. Multiple language support let you communicate with your diverse workforce. Real time communication means information is up to date and ensures compliance with meal and break rules.

About Attendance on Demand, Inc.

Attendance on Demand supports the labor management needs of thousands of companies and more than three-quarters of a million employees across North America. Launched in 2006, Attendance on Demand is a rapidly deployed, cloud-based solution that minimizes a company's risk and technology investment while providing advanced features for securely managing labor data—calculating pay rules, scheduling employees, budgeting labor, automating recordkeeping for labor law compliance and managing employee status and reporting for the Affordable Care Act. With standard uptime over the industry average of 99.995% and above average customer retention rates, Attendance on Demand removes the worry of maintaining expensive infrastructure. An extensive North American distribution network helps organizations use Attendance on Demand to reduce labor expenses and improve decision making.

http://www.attendanceondemand.com

800-465-9980