More Video...

Miami is the first team to punch its ticket to the Sweet 16 after holding off a 2nd half rally from Wichita State in the round of 32 on Saturday.

The Hurricanes led big early, before holding on to defeat the Shockers 65-57 to earn their first Sweet 16 berth since 2013.

Miami fans chanted "Sweet 16! Sweet 16!" in the closing seconds.

Angel Rodriguez led Miami with 28 points and five assists. Sheldon McClellan added 18 points.

There is some symmetry in the victory for Miami coach Jim Larranaga, who led George Mason to the Final Four a decade ago when he was the Patriots coach. He had to go through Wichita State in the Sweet 16 in Washington, D.C., to do it.

In just a few dizzying minutes, Wichita State has made it a ballgame.

After trailing by as many 21 in the first half and 13 at halftime, Wichita State has fought back and trimmed Miami's lead to 48-45 with 7:43 to play in the game.

The Shockers came out of the half with a lot of pep and briefly took a 43-42 lead on a 3-pointer by Ron Baker at the 10:24 mark.

Wichita State has found its touch after shooting just 24 percent in the first half, The Shockers are 9 for 16 so far in the second.

Miami had nine turnovers in the opening 20 minutes, but has already committed six in this half.

Miami came out fast, then weathered a late surge by Wichita State to take a 32-19 lead into the half in the second round of South Region matchup.

The third-seeded Hurricanes led 27-6 early after connecting on 8 of its first 9 field goal attempts, before an 11-0 run by the No. 11 seed Shockers made things a little more interesting.

The Hurricanes got their footing and the momentum back, though, thanks to 16 first-half points for point guard Angel Rodriguez. He has been unflappable throughout and has connected on all seven of his field goal attempts.

The Shockers were a blur offensively in their first-round win over Arizona, but aside from their one spurt haven't been able to match Miami's quickness at the guard spot.

Wichita State had 10 turnovers and is shooting a paltry 24 percent (7 for 29).

Coach Gregg Marshall is known for his halftime speeches. He will need a good one to help get his team back into the game.

The Miami Hurricanes have almost completely silenced the electricity that the Wichita State brought to the Dunkin Donuts' Center this week.

The third-seeded Hurricanes lead the 11th seed Shockers 27-6 with 8:26 to go in the first half of their South Region second round matchup.

Miami is shooting a blustery 80 percent from the field (12 of 15) and are much quicker to the attack so far against a Wichita State team that won a First Four game against Vanderbilt before upsetting sixth seed Arizona 65-55. The Shockers are just 1 for 14 from the field with nine turnovers.

Miami was a slight underdog against the Shockers entering Saturday's matchup for a berth in the Sweet 16.

Miami was a slight underdog against Wichita State entering the matchup for a berth in the Sweet 16.

In a game featuring two stellar backcourts, Miami's Angel Rodriguez has the edge. He scored the first seven points for Miami. Fred VanVleet has two as the Hurricanes lead 9-4 early.