× Oberweis looks to win U.S. Senate seat

68-year-old Jim Oberweis is a state senator, a millionaire businessman and grandfather to 19.

He’d like his next title to be U.S. Senator.

He’s well aware it`s a tough battle against his opponent, Democratic incumbent Dick Durbin.

His fastidious nature is one trait that drives him to become a highly successful businessman in the dairy industry and the financial trade. That business acuity, says Oberweis, is his strongest asset.

“What this campaign is about is how to get the economy moving and growing faster,” he says.

At their first debate and throughout the campaign Oberweis has called his opponent Dick Durbin a 32 year veteran who is out of touch with everyday people and in touch with Washington.

But Oberweis is no stranger to politics.

Two years ago he won the Illinois Senate seat for the 25th District. It was his 6th attempt to win office. Since 2002, Oberweis has tried but lost races for U.S. Senator, Congressman and Governor.

He has learned to tap into support beyond his traditional republican roots and into the African American community. It’s raised a lot of eyebrows but Oberweis says he’s gotten the endorsements of a dozen African American pastors on the South Side because, he says, he shares their priority: Getting jobs.

Here is where he stands on some key issues. With ISIS, the U.S. should not rule out ground troops. On minimum wage, Oberweis supports a hike only for adults 26 years or older. those no longer covered by parents under ObamaCare. Oberweis is against same sex marriage but won`t fight laws which support it. On immigration, he supports the Dream Act but is against amnesty for all undocumented people.

At the debate, Durbin accused Oberweis of being the Tea Party candidate, something Oberweis vehemently denies. He’s confident about support downstate, but the battle elsewhere, is the key.

“I don`t think we have to win in Chicago. I think if we get 25 percent in Chicago, if we do that, I’ll be your next U.S. Senator.”

Oberweis is a multi-millionaire who has contributed close to $2 million dollars of his own money in the U.S. Senate race.

The election is Nov 4.