Federal officials established a special enrollment period for health insurance plans under the Affordable Care Act through Feb. 22 for people who were unable to complete applications by the Feb. 15 deadline. (Photo: iStock) Story Highlights Some encountered trouble selecting a health insurance plan over the weekend

People with active accounts at healthcare.gov will be able to complete it during an extended period

BlueCross BlueShield, Get Covered America to be available during the special enrollment period

The White House estimates 11.4 million people signed up for ObamaCare by the deadline

The federal government is giving people who encountered trouble selecting a health insurance plan over the weekend until Sunday to finish the enrollment process.

Some people found federal websites unable to verify enrollees' incomes for part of Saturday, leaving many people unable to finalize the selection process. Others, however, were roadblocked by long wait times at the call center.

Sandy Dimick of Family and Children's Service said people who attended Affordable Care Act enrollment clinics in the Nashville area on Saturday were among those impacted. In some cases, volunteers were able to help people finalize applications on Sunday. Others are still outstanding.

"We will provide them with a time-limited special enrollment period for March 1 coverage," said Benjamin Wakana, press secretary at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services in Washington, D.C.

Plan selections completed during the special enrollment period will have an effective date of March 1, according the HHS. To participate in the special enrollment period, people must have created an account with healthcare.gov before the Feb. 15 deadline.

Federal officials implemented a special enrollment period in 2014 as well to accommodate people who were "in line" to complete an application and select a plan but were unable to complete the process before the deadline.

Inclement weather around Middle Tennessee is not expected to stymie plans by BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, Get Covered America and others to help people with the selection process.

Get Covered America will have volunteers, or navigators, at the main library in Nashville on Wednesday to help consumers. Employees of BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee will be available to help at its retail outlet at 100 Oaks beginning Wednesday and running through Sunday. The Nashville Blue of Tennessee Center was not open Tuesday because of travel conditions in the region.

Most of the volunteers who will be at the library in Nashville live in Davidson County and plan to be there as scheduled, Dimick said.

The White House said Tuesday that an estimated 11.4 million people had selected a plan on an exchange as of the deadline. The early estimate exceeded the administration's goal of 9 million enrollees. More than 200,000 Tennesseans had signed up as of early February.

Contact Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Resources for completing an application during the special enrollment period

•The Nashville Blue of Tennessee Center will be open from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Wednesday. Staffers available through Sunday,100 Oaks (near the theater), 719 Thompson Lane, Nashville.

•Get Covered America

The Main Library: 615 Church St., Nashville: 9:30 a.m.-4:30 p.m. Wednesday, third-floor computer lab.

•Get Covered TN

Volunteers give one-on-one assistance at free appointments.

Call 844-644-5443 or visit getcoveredtenn.org to make an appointment.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1A3Vfs7