WASHINGTON -- The House and Senate passed dueling bills aimed at containing the Zika outbreak and preventing its spread.

House, Senate Split on Zika Funding

The House passed a $622.1-million bill targeting the Zika virus on Wednesday, but where it goes from there is uncertain. The White House has already threatened to veto the House bill, calling it "woefully inadequate."

On Thursday, the Senate passed its own $1.1 billion Zika funding bill, according to Reuters.

Besides the difference in funding level, the two bills differ in other important respects. The House version includes offsets making it budget-neutral, whereas the Senate would appropriate money as new, emergency funding.

Adding another wrinkle, the appropriations in the House bill would extend only until Sept. 30, 2016, while the Senate's funding would continue into the next fiscal year. This makes dollar-for-dollar comparisons more challenging.

SCOTUS Punts on Birth Control Coverage Issue

"Work things out among yourselves." That's what the Supreme Court essentially said Monday to the two sides battling over whether religious organizations should be required to certify their refusal to provide their employees with insurance coverage for contraceptives.

"The parties ... should be afforded an opportunity to arrive at an approach going forward that accommodates petitioners' religious exercise while at the same time ensuring that women covered by petitioners' health plans 'receive full and equal health coverage, including contraceptive coverage,'" the court wrote as it remanded the case -- which is a combination of several lower-court cases -- back to the lower courts. "We anticipate that the Courts of Appeals will allow the parties sufficient time to resolve any outstanding issues between them."

The case, known as Zubik v. Burwell, revolves around a mandate included in the Affordable Care Act requiring that insurers offer contraception coverage.

FDA: Canagliflozin Linked to Amputations in Post-Marketing Trial

The diabetes drug canagliflozin (Invokana) was linked to an increase in leg and foot amputations in an ongoing post-marketing study, the FDA said Wednesday.

Canafliflozin, a sodium-glucose transport (SGLT-2) inhibitor, was being tested in a post-marketing cardiovascular study known as CANVAS to determine safety when an independent data monitoring committee noticed the increased risk.

Amputations occurred about twice as often on canagliflozin-treated patients compared with the control group, according to data from the agency.

House Hearing Shows Divisions on Part B Proposal

Lawmakers' opinions about the proposal to revamp the way Medicare pays for drugs under its Part B program are similar to their feelings about the Affordable Care Act -- they are divided on whether to scrap it altogether or just make fixes to it.

That division was in evidence Tuesday at a House Energy & Commerce Health Subcommittee hearing on the Part B proposal, announced in March by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS).

"I urge CMS to scrap this proposal, and come to the table with stakeholders, and look for other ways we can address medication costs," said Rep. Larry Bucshon, MD (R-Ind.) a cardiac surgeon. "Cutting provider reimbursement is not the solution to a very, very complicated problem I think we all recognize needs to be addressed."

Rep. Jan Schakowsky (D-Ill.) disagreed. "I support CMS's proposal to do a demonstration project," she said. "Drug manufacturers are the only entity that can charge Medicare anything they want for their products; we would never accept that from any other entity in our healthcare system, and we should no longer accept it from pharma."

FDA Approves First PD-L1 Inhibitor

The FDA granted accelerated approval to PD-L1 inhibitor atezolizumab (Tecentriq) for the most common form of bladder cancer on Wednesday.

The approval pertains to patients who have locally advanced or metastatic urothelial carcinoma that progressed during or after platinum-based chemotherapy, or within 12 months of receiving either neoadjuvant or adjuvant platinum-based chemotherapy. Urothelial carcinoma accounts for about 90% of all bladder cancer in the U.S.

Atezolizumab becomes the first PD-L1 inhibitor to receive FDA approval for any indication. The existing immune checkpoint inhibitors -- nivolumab (Opdivo) and pembrolizumab (Keytruda) -- target the PD-1 receptor, as opposed to the ligand (PD-L1).

Next Week

On Monday, the Bipartisan Policy Center's Senior Health and Housing Task Force will explore recommendations for healthy aging.

On Tuesday, the FDA's Circulatory System Devices Panel of the Medical Devices Advisory Committee will meet to discuss Amplatzer's Patent Foramen Ovale (PFO) Occluder, a permanent cardiac implant.

And the FDA's Endocrinologic and Metabolic Drugs Advisory Committee will discuss insulin degludec and liraglutide injection for treatment of adults with type 2 diabetes, in addition to diet and exercise.

On Wednesday, the House Committee on Science, Space and Technology will meet to discuss the "science of Zika".