Melbourne star Billy Slater from under the radar to on top of the rugby league world

Video

Image The Grill Team's Friday wrap 3:53 Play video Triple M Sydney's The Grill Team wrap up all the major talking points in sport as Australia desperately seek a Test cricket series win in South Africa and the NRL and AFL seasons draw closer.

BILLY Slater is one of rugby league’s most potent weapons and greatest crowd drawcards.

This year is the 10th anniversary of his State of Origin debut and he has been an integral part of Queensland’s eight series winning streak.

Innisfail raised Slater today talks about his colourful rise from a youngster so small he slipped under the radar of most talent scouts into one of the game’s finest players.

How famous are you in AFL-mad Melbourne?

I think you might have to do a survey to find out the real answer to that. What I can say is that the recognition of the Storm right throughout Victoria has certainly improved since I have been there.

The early players did a great job and were very successful but even in 2003 some people still thought we were a basketball team. The success and publicity, both good and bad, has put us on the map and we are held in high regard.

Did people really mistake you for a basketball team?

Yes. I actually had someone say that to me. He must have thought we were a pretty short basketball team.

I saw once you said you used to start work as a trackwork rider and stablehand for Gai Waterhouse at 2.30am. That sounds obscenely early!

We started at 3am but I took a little bit longer to do my stalls than everyone else so I would start at 2.30am and we would normally be finished by 8.30-9.

Then we would start again at midday and go to 2.30pm. They were not great hours but horses don’t know when the weekends are. We were working pretty much seven days a week. It taught me a lot about work ethic. You had to work pretty hard.

TAKE PART IN OUR SUPERCOACH CHALLENGE!

Did you have a racing moment that really moved you?

I never saw Kingston Town run but I get goosebumps when I watch the replay when he won the Cox Plate and the racecaller said he could not win and he did. It just sends shivers down my spine.

What did you learn from Gai Waterhouse?

The biggest thing was how diligent she was. She was always excited and enthusiastic when she came to work in the mornings. From the time she got there to the time she left she was always doing something and making sure everything was in tip top condition. It stretched all the way down to the stables being swept properly and the brass knobs on the stable doors being properly polished. It typified the lady that she was and the trainer that she is that she left no stone unturned and made sure everything was done properly.

So that stood you in good stead for you football?

Yes because when I came down and played with Melbourne, Craig Bellamy was just starting out and he had a very similar mindset to Gai in terms of work ethic.

Did you have many blow-ups with Craig because he is so structured and you are more of a free spirit?

If I had had any blow-ups with Craig in my early years there he would have probably hailed the next cab and sent me to the airport. You didn’t really have much choice when I was young but I was a young guy who wanted to work hard and Craig appreciated that sort of stuff.

Your whole body shape must have expanded since you were a trackwork rider. How much did you weigh then?

I have put on about 20kgm. I was about 68kg then and about 88kg now.

I’ve heard you still live with the dream of maybe training a few nags when you retire and maybe even racing them at the picnic races. True?

It certainly appeals to me. It’s not just the racing but the breeding. I like horses in general, whether they are racehorses or leisure.

I will always have that passion. One day maybe I will settle down, put the feet up and train a few.

Some of the best fun I have ever had was spending Easter at a races rodeo weekend when I was a kid. To be able to do that with your family is something that definitely appeals to me.

As a boy you used to play in puddles with a Cowboys jersey on. Do you ever ponder what might have happened if you had stayed in the far north?

They are all hypotheticals. I am very happy and feel very fortunate to be associated with the Melbourne Storm. I have no regrets. If I had my time over I would be doing exactly the same thing. I feel fortunate to land on my feet in Melbourne.

Who was your first football hero?

Allan Langer for sure. He was a small guy and very courageous and I was quite a small kid growing up and had that in common with him.

It was interesting how you slipped through North Queensland’s net because you did play rep footy in the far north didn’t you?

No, I didn’t play much rep footy. I made the Innisfail side but I didn’t make the North Queensland sides or even the Peninsula sides in school.

I didn’t play in any of the carnivals so I dare say the scouts would not have been watching the Innisfail junior rugby league teams go around. That is the way it goes.

I hold no grudges. You get what you are given and you get what you deserve sometimes too.

Will the knee injury you are fighting at the moment threaten your longevity?

I am just working pretty hard at it at the moment. It is improving at the time. Hopefully it won’t jeopardise how long I play football. It is going along really nicely at the moment.’

Melbourne have done brilliantly to defy gravity over the past few years but there seems to be a feeling this could be the year you come back to earth. Your thoughts?

They are all tough years. The NRL is a tough competition. We would like to think we are a consistent side and we don’t really look at outside perceptions and where we are going to finish.

You and Cam Smith were born on the same day. Do you give each other presents or share celebrations?

We don’t give each other presents. We don’t do too much because we are normally playing that weekend and it is normally around the second Origin game. Last year our 30th birthday was the day we went into Origin camp and our families surprised us by coming into camp and we had a cake. It was a very special birthday.

'Simply Obsessed' with the NRL 1:01 Play video The new FOXTEL promo for the NRL 2014 season is a funny take on Tina Turner's 'Simply the Best' with must-watch cameos from Matty Johns and Nathan Hindmarsh.

Who do you think will play longer?

If you went by how we were looking I might play a bit longer but he is pretty durable, old Smithy. Nothing seems to faze him. He can make 50 tackles a game do a lot of work in the middle but it does not look as if he will be bowing out any time soon.

Your wife Nicole has her own career as an artist. Do you feel when you retire she will take over as the breadwinner?

Yes, I might have to take care of the kids and let Nicole take the reins for a while. I am very proud of what she has achieved and her ability. She is dabbling in her photography at the moment and is a very driven person. She strives for goals and works very hard to get them. She always has something on the go and is doing very nicely in her own right.

NRL season officially launched 1:11 Play video 'The most exciting competition in the world' has officially launched, according to the face of the NRL, Anthony Minichiello.

Are your attacking skills just a natural gift or manufactured?

To some sort of degree you have to have talent to play our game but there has to be a lot of dedication and willingness to work hard. It is a mixture.

You twice won Australia’s Greatest Athlete competition. What was the main skill that got you there?

Probably my competitiveness. Any successful sportsperson has to be competitive whether it be a ping pong game at training or playing rugby league. I am there to win and I will think about tactics and I did that in Australia’s Greatest Athlete. In every competition I thought through what would be the best way to attack it. I am a thinker and I make sure I am on the right track.’’

Any areas in which you really surprised yourself?

Probably rock climbing. It was just helter-skelter up the wall. I surprised myself in that one a bit.