Topics: From the Wires, News, Politics News

WASHINGTON (AP) — Seventy years after the end of World War II, Japan wants to look to the future but can’t shake off its past. When Prime Minister Shinzo Abe visits the U.S. next week, he will be promoting a regional free trade pact and stronger defense ties with America as his government loosens the shackles of Japan’s pacifist constitution.

But history will be following him.

And it’s not just Japan’s arch critics on the issue, South Korean and China, that will be watching what he says. So will Korean-Americans who have championed the cause of former sex slaves of the imperial Japanese military, and the dwindling ranks of elderly U.S. veterans who suffered as prisoners of war.

In an unusual step, 25 House members have sent a letter to Japan’s ambassador to the U.S., urging Abe to address sensitive issues of history when he becomes the first Japanese leader to address a joint meeting of Congress next Wednesday, a day after meeting President Barack Obama.

“To ignore past atrocities, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure a very troubling future,” Democratic Rep. Steve Israel said in the House this week.

Under Abe, Japan’s government has given an impression of apology fatigue.

Since the 1990s, Japanese governments have apologized directly for wartime aggression and treatment of so-called comfort women — tens of thousands of women across Asia, many of them Koreans, who were forced to provide sex to Japan’s front-line soldiers.

Abe says his government upholds those apologies, and he has spoken of his “heartfelt sympathy” for the comfort women. But he appears reluctant to repeat another apology himself, despite the complications that has caused in Tokyo’s attempts to improve relations with Beijing and Seoul.

Abe’s hawkish reputation has made him a target of sometimes shrill criticism in neighboring countries, but he did little to help matters when he visited a controversial Tokyo shrine in December 2013 where war criminals, including wartime prime minister Hideki Tojo, are among those memorialized.

His speech to Congress will be watched for signs of how he might phrase a formal statement in August marking the war anniversary.

Japanese Ambassador Kenichiro Sasae said Abe’s focus will be on the current and future challenges in the U.S.-Japan relationship, including the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal, and mutual defense guidelines. Abe’s Cabinet has re-interpreted an article of its pacifist constitution and is pushing security legislation that, if approved by Japan’s parliament, would allow Japan in some circumstances to defend U.S. forces if they come under attack.

Sasae said he expects Abe will speak about World War II, but added that Congress is not the right place to talk about other countries’ concerns over history. “This is not something we need to focus on as a major agenda between Washington and Tokyo,” he said.