The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

Since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, many small businesses have been intrigued by the possibility that they might be able to stop dealing with health insurance entirely and instead offer their employees a stipend to go buy insurance on the individual exchanges. But in a clarification issued in early November, the federal government appears to have taken a stand against that strategy.

There had been little doubt among most lawyers who follow the tax implications of the Affordable Care Act that a company would not be able to subsidize its employees’ individual health insurance with pretax dollars (the way that premiums for group health insurance are excluded from an employee’s income). But as we reported a few weeks ago, the government’s guidance on using post-tax compensation was murkier. With its recent statement, the government removed some — though not all — of that ambiguity.

The additional clarity came in the form of a “frequently asked questions” document issued by the Department of Labor. Even now, however, the issues remain complex and open to interpretation, and the tax and benefits lawyers contacted by You’re the Boss offered differing perspectives on the Labor Department’s answers. What better way to try to make sense of these issues than to borrow a trope from the government and present them in the form of an FAQ.

Q.

So, can a company reimburse workers for their insurance premiums with after-tax money?

A.

No. Any reimbursement scheme constitutes a group health plan, according to the Labor Department. This designation is important, because the government had already decided that a group health plan must comply with certain market reforms in the Affordable Care Act, including one that bans dollar limits for certain benefits. And a plan that reimburses members for individual policies simply cannot comply with those requirements, according to the agencies.

Businesses with plans that violate the health law’s market rules can face penalties of up to $36,500 a year for each affected employee.

Up until now, there had been a debate among lawyers about whether a company could expressly reimburse individual insurance premiums with taxable income, or, if not, condition the additional compensation on buying insurance — even if the money is not tied directly to the cost of premiums. But the latest advice from the Labor Department should end those arguments, according to four of five lawyers contacted by You’re the Boss.

“What we know now is that you can’t condition the receipt of after-tax money only on the purchase of insurance,” said Christopher E. Condeluci, a Washington-based lawyer. “Instead, you have to give the employee the choice between taking the money as cash wages or allocating that money toward the purchase of insurance.”

The one lawyer we talked to who disagreed is Seth Perretta, who represents a number of large business organizations with a stake in the various rule-makings of the Affordable Care Act. “I can condition employment on all sorts of things,” Mr. Perretta said. “I can condition a subset of compensation on all sorts of things, on the employee doing lawful acts. I think it really turns on whether the regulators would agree that so long as the amount I’m paying to you is not directly related to the amount you pay for insurance, whether or not disconnecting the two would allow me to treat that as a taxable wage.” Even Mr. Perretta said the answer was still not clear.

Q.

Suppose an owner just gives raises and doesn’t specifically reimburse premiums? Can the owner tailor the amount of additional compensation for each person to the cost of health insurance without crossing the line into reimbursement?

A.

Yes, at least if the owner gives the raise unconditionally. (Mr. Perretta said it was unclear whether correlating a conditional raise would be permissible because “we are in uncharted territory.”) For example, the raises could follow the government’s age curve that sets the relative cost for premiums in the individual market. “Employee pay rates and raises are subject to various employment non-discrimination rules but, other than that, employers have wide discretion in setting pay,” said Linda Mendel, a lawyer in Columbus, Ohio. It is not illegal, by the way, to discriminate in favor of older workers.

Q.

What about Zane Benefits, which is promoting a plan it says allows companies to reimburse employees who buy individual insurance with pre-tax dollars — and even lets lower paid employees who qualify claim federal subsidies when they buy their insurance on the exchanges. How is this possible?

A.

It is not, at least according to federal regulators. The recent guidance did not mention Zane by name, but it referred to the type of plan it uses (a Section 105 plan, after that section of the tax code) and said that it, like other reimbursement plans, was subject to the Affordable Care Act’s insurance market reforms but cannot comply with them because of the reimbursement mechanism. Moreover, the Labor Department declared, “employees participating in such arrangements are ineligible for premium tax credits (or cost-sharing reductions) for Marketplace coverage.”

Zane, for its part, published its own FAQ in response to the Department of Labor FAQ. In it, Zane insisted that its plan complies with the health law and that businesses that use it can rest assured that their employees can qualify for exchange subsidies. “This is nothing new,” Rick Lindquist, Zane’s president, wrote in an email about the Labor Department’s guidance.

All of the lawyers we’ve talked to disagree with Zane’s legal reasoning, but until one side or the other forces a resolution of the issue, it will be Zane’s word against the government’s.