This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... welcome to Opinion Journal why Mary Kissel ... present Obama is Guinea get his stated the Union address tonight not that many people are going to watch it ... but we are because it's going to say a lot about the president ... and his economic beliefs Buckle diary editor and Fox News contributor Jason Riley joins me Jason ... the center piece seems to be tax hikes ... yes exactly what one of the economy you were on job creation has been a struggle what's increased taxes on doors risk takers business owners and so ... it so why would the president to this is why I think he wants to put Republicans in the position of defending the wealthy I think it's about ... class warfare an accident because of the tax ... he wants to raise the ... tax increase ... on on given investment capital gains taxes on dividends ... and aam you know he says he needs to do this in order to raise revenue to pay for other nations child tax credits the student loan forgiveness and so forth ... but the track record Mary is that when we have caught ... the capital gains tax when is brought in ... more revenue that's what happened when Clinton did in nineteen ninety seven it's what happened when George W Bush did it ... in two thousand the race so if you if your goal is to raise more revenue ... it would seem it would make better sense to store likely to cut capital gains tax rate increase ... it seems to be explaining this place is personally economy is strong but secondly ... I'd you know that this is this is fair ... to take from the rich to give to the middle class ... by Jason the it he's trying to sell for the last six ... the problem of his own making ... he is going to talk about a whole point of economic policies ... that are produced the current situation ... and how we need to double down ... that's about tax cuts ... and talk about spending increases you know presence usually use the stated the Union of brag about their accomplishments but the president ... doesn't have a lot to brag about totally ... economically this recovery is nowhere ... near where it should be in terms of job creation ... yes the unemployment rate is down that's due mostly to people not looking for work anymore manner ... and so he does have a lot to brag about ... the energy revolution he always brings a company's others the well that die low gas prices and presidents do muesli take credit for that I expect him ... to do the same it has to be out there bragging about things like ... Obamacare are talking about his executive action on immigration he sees these ... as accomplishments and that ... those impulses the public costs is party the Senate in November GC it doesn't sound like there's any ... reaching out to the other side in here it's like no Palm Island clients from what we seen from the talking points that the White House has released ... aam and all that doesn't look like he has any plans at all to be working with this Congress there's no way you're going to get a tax hike to a Republican Congress he knows that this is about posturing but I think it bodes well for what we can see in the next two years of this presidency which is constant conflict with the legislative branch and also can using executive actions to do more and runs around Congress I think he's really setting up as an attrition go that route final thirty seconds left this is good for the Democratic Party ... no I don't think it does the party any any good for Obama to leave office when up ... not a lot of accomplishments before up a possible Democratic successor Deron and I think ... they should want and they will be pressuring the president to get things done to work with Congress ... because they know what those are the parting of that to happen we bought this with with ... his approval rating in the tank top and a political diary editor ... and Fox News contributor Jason Riley thanks very much ...