Topics: Anorexia, Bulimia, Eating Disorders, Feminism, gender pay gap, gender wage gap, Pay gap, Sexism, study, Social News, Life News, News

We know the gender pay gap doesn’t affect all women equally. Women of color and LGBTQ women, for example, fare much worse in terms of pay equality than, say, straight, white, cisgender women. We also know that approximately 20 million American women struggle with eating disorders at some point in their lives.

Those two things might seem oddly paired in the same paragraph. But a new study finds that disordered eating might actually contribute to the disparity within the disparity between men’s and women’s earnings, in ways that can affect the women who have eating disorders for much of their professional lives. According to research published in the International Journal of Eating Disorders, women with illnesses such as anorexia and bulimia are not only at risk of long-term health problems, but also “were at a distinct disadvantage when trying to achieve socioeconomic independence in early adulthood.”

So, on top of earning less than men on average, women with eating disorders also earn less than women without. For men who experience disordered eating, however, the economic burdens don’t appear to be the same. Of course, negative effects on earnings are also only one of the detriments the study uncovered for women, the Washington Post reports:

[Women] with such problems “had lower levels of educational attainment, personal income, and lower odds of owning a home in early adulthood compared to females who did not report” the illnesses — but “these detrimental associations were not present among males,” the study said. “My suspicion is that girls who are preoccupied with weight and appearance and insecure at very young age — that follows you,” said Jennifer Tabler, a PhD candidate in the University of Utah’s Sociology department and the study’s lead author, in a telephone interview with The Washington Post. “Your decision-making process about your life choices are going to be affected by it.”