Buy Photo Gethan Ward, Nate Rau, Lizzy Alfs, Jamie McGee and Holly Fletcher of THE TENNESSEAN Business team Wednesday April 1, 2015, in Nashville, Tenn. (Photo: / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

When I was applying for my first job in journalism after graduate school, an editor asked me if I’d rather be a news reporter or a business reporter.

I chose business and loved it. Fellow business reporters or biz new junkies know it takes a special kind of person to get excited to read an earnings report or see a new SEC filing pop up. I spent several years covering the auto industry, retail, real estate and development in Michigan before moving to editing and news leadership roles.

I see the same passion I had for covering business in the team that covers Nashville-area business at The Tennessean. And I know you will, too, after you come meet them on April 14.

We’re hosting a “Meet The Tennessean’s Business Team” event at Emma, 9 Lea Ave. near the Nashville Entrepreneur Center, from 7:30-10:30 a.m. that day. We want you to join us for coffee, meet the team and share your story ideas.

Who will be there? Business reporters Holly Fletcher, Getahn Ward, Jamie McGee, Lizzy Alfs and Nate Rau, as well as other Tennessean staffers. Here’s a look at the team:

Holly Fletcher covers health care — how the changing health care landscape will impact both the people who need health care and the businesses that provide care. She’s a Middle Tennessee native who joined us last year after reporting on the power and utility sector in New York for five years.

Getahn Ward is our prolific growth and development reporter. He began his Nashville journalism career at the Nashville Banner and now writes about the area’s commercial real estate industry and the impact of the city’s changing landscape. There are few business executives in Nashville who don’t know Getahn. In fact, I haven’t met one who doesn’t know Getahn.

Jamie McGee is a business columnist for The Tennessean. Since 2012, she’s covered the city’s growing start-up community and technology companies.

Retail reporter Lizzy Alfs covers the openings, closings and expansions of area retail businesses, public companies and trends. She had previously been a real estate and development reporter for The Ann Arbor News and had been an intern for me at AnnArbor.com.

Music business reporter Nate Rau has been a Nashville journalist since 2002. He previously reported on sports and politics and in 2013 began covering our city’s $9.8 billion music industry. You might remember his recent month-long series on music’s “working class” in December, which culminated in a documentary premiere, performance by The New Dylans and panel discussion in January at the Belcourt Theatre.

You can RSVP and get a ticket at tennesseanbusinesscoffee.eventbrite.com or call 615-259-8071. And if you bring a copy of the printed newspaper or show us your Tennessean smartphone app, your coffee will be free.

Hope to see you there!

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1C3wp8t