Video

Barack Obama’s eulogy for the Rev. Clementa C. Pinckney of the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church in Charleston, S.C., was remarkable not only because the president sang the opening refrain of “Amazing Grace” on live television, and not only because of his eloquence in memorializing the pastor and eight other parishioners killed by a white gunman. It was also remarkable because the eulogy drew on all of Mr. Obama’s gifts of language and empathy and searching intellect — first glimpsed in “Dreams From My Father,” his deeply felt 1995 memoir about identity and family. And because it used those gifts to talk about the complexities of race and justice, situating them within an echoing continuum in time that reflected both Mr. Obama’s own long view of history, and the panoramic vision of America, shared by Abraham Lincoln and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., as a country in the process of perfecting itself.

Mr. Obama’s view of the nation’s history as a more than two-century journey to make the promises of the Declaration of Independence (“that all men are created equal”) real for everyone, his former chief speechwriter, Jon Favreau, suggested in an email, is “both an American and a religious sentiment” — predicated upon the belief that individual sinners and a country scarred by the original sin of slavery can overcome the past through “persistent, courageous, sometimes frustrating efforts.”

Photo

For Mr. Obama, America is “a constant work in progress,” a nation founded upon the idea of new beginnings, and the enduring belief, as he once wrote in an essay about Lincoln, that “we can constantly remake ourselves to fit our larger dreams.” Like his two moving speeches in Selma, Ala., in 2007 and this year, Mr. Obama’s eulogy used the prism of history to amplify and crystallize the meaning of the occasion — a wide-angle lens that reminds us of the distance we’ve come from the days of slavery, segregation and Jim Crow, and the distance we have yet to travel in addressing enduring prejudice and inequities.

These are themes that have animated Mr. Obama’s writings and oratory for years, going back to his 2004 Democratic National Convention keynote address and 2008 “A More Perfect Union” speech, to his 2013 speech commemorating the 1963 March on Washington. History, he believes, is an odyssey, a crossing, a relay in which one generation’s achievements serve as the paving stones for the next generation’s journey.

In his eulogy on June 26, Mr. Obama recounted the history of Charleston’s “Mother Emanuel” — how “a church built by blacks seeking liberty” was “burned to the ground because its founders sought to end slavery” and how it rose again, “a phoenix from these ashes,” to become a sacred place where Dr. King would preach from its pulpit. He spoke of how history “must be a manual” to avoid “repeating the mistakes of the past” while building “a roadway toward a better world.”

Video

This looking back at what has been overcome and looking forward toward a better tomorrow is a bedrock tradition in the black church — which, having borne witness to so much suffering, looks to the promised land ahead. And it is a fundamental theme in the sermons of Dr. King, who talked in his great “Dream” speech of hewing “out of the mountain of despair a stone of hope,” of transforming “the jangling discords of our nation into a beautiful symphony of brotherhood.” Mr. Obama, like Dr. King, is fond of quoting the words of the 19th-century minister and abolitionist Theodore Parker: “The arc of the moral universe is long, but it bends toward justice.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In grappling with the wounds of the Civil War, Lincoln similarly looked to the broad vistas of history and the lessons of Scripture — both for solace and as a way of framing and universalizing his own arguments. In the Gettysburg Address, he effectively redefined the founders’ vision of America and how we read the Constitution and Declaration of Independence, and in his Second Inaugural Address, he recognized the sin of slavery and the terrible scourge of war that was part of its price, and at the same time, sought to “bind up the nation’s wounds,” to find a way forward “with malice toward none, with charity for all.”