COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo. — The race for the White House came to southern Colorado Thursday night, as Republican Dr. Ben Carson made his first campaign stop in our area.

Hundreds of people showed up to see him at America the Beautiful Park, even after a storm rolled through, delaying the rally.

Even though Carson had to speak to the crowd through a megaphone for awhile, he was able to share a clear message.

“I’m not a politician, so I don’t do what politicians do. I come and I talk to people all over,” Carson said.

That’s exactly why hundreds of supporters came out Thursday. Many of them have been following Carson for over a decade and said the fact that he has no political background is what makes him a great candidate.

“That’s the beauty of what he has. He has a way to bring America back and be strong and exciting and wonderful again instead of worrying about taking money from people,” Barbara Rickett said.

“He believes in the Constitution and I believe he is going to make sure that we follow the Constitution, that we take care of our veterans, and that we do what’s right for this country,” Jini Clare said.

Carson is a strong opponent of Obamacare and spoke to his followers about the issue, but another one of his main concerns is veterans affairs.

“The problem is a lot of veterans, when they go from the Department of Defense to the Department of Veterans Affairs, a lot of them fall through the cracks…We need a system that is smooth that allows them to move from one phase to the other without getting lost,” Carson said.

He said people are realizing that our country is of, for and by the people, and that it’s important we start making changes.

“The issues that face us as a nation right now are not regional issues. They are national issues and they have a profound effect on the next generations,” Carson said.

Carson is one of 17 candidates currently running for the Republican nomination. In a recent Quinnipiac University poll, 12 percent of registered Republican voters said they’d vote for him. That puts Carson just behind frontrunner Donald Trump, who has 28 percent of voters’ support.