Fort Smith’s long-standing federal mandate to comply with the Clean Water Act will likely lead to firm sewer-system regulations this fall and possibly higher sewer rates as early as next year.

For years the city has been under a mandate handed down by the Environmental Protection Agency and U.S. Department of Justice to eliminate sewer overflows and discharges into the Arkansas River during heavy rains.

Since 2006, the agencies have been working toward an official consent decree that would set a schedule for construction projects and require a program for ongoing care of the aging sewer system at the city’s cost. Failure to comply could result in fines.

“They want to have the consent decree filed in federal court by the end of September,” Fort Smith City Administrator Ray Gosack said. “Then we’ll be mandated to do certain things like constructions projects, maintenance for the sewer system, record-keeping and reporting.”

Gosack and other city officials met in Dallas with representatives of the EPA and Department of Justice last week.

“It went well,” he said. “We have another round of discussions set with them in August here in Fort Smith. That will probably be the final round of discussions. So we’re getting close.”

During budget talks in November, Utilities Director Steve Parke was asked by city directors if sewer rates will eventually rise.

“It’s not if, but when,” he said.

Gosack said the rates could rise next year if the consent decree is filed this fall.

“They take the average income in the city and say that number times 2 percent is what a sewer bill should be,” he said. “We’re quite a bit below that number. What we’ve been doing is trying to structure this so we can phase in the sewer rates.”

Additional funds would help pay for maintenance and rehabilitation of the sewer system. The city has been using voter-approved sales tax bonds for sewer construction work.

“We’re doing a lot of construction work, but we’re not doing nearly as much on the maintenance, record-keeping and reporting side as we’ll have to do under the consent decree,” Gosack said. “We’re costing all that out now.”

He added that over the past eight years, Fort Smith has eliminated more than 70 percent of the recurring sanitary sewer overflows.

“They recognize we’ve made significant progress,” he said. “They also point out that no other city in the U.S. has been under an enforcement action longer than Fort Smith. That’s not something to be proud of.”

The consent decree’s length is still in debate.

“We’re asking for a 15-year period,” he said. “They’re trying to keep it down closer to 10. We’re telling them if we have to do it all in 10, it’s not going to be affordable for the community. We will exceed the EPA’s own affordability guidelines.”

Fort Smith has been plagued with sanitary sewer overflows for decades, Gosack said.

“Those are violations of the Clean Water Act,” he said. “We had 21 locations in this city where back in the late 1970s the city intentionally put in overflow points in the sewer system to let the sewage escape into the creek — a blatant violation of the Clean Water Act. I think it was about a year-and-a-half ago we removed the last of those.”