WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama downplayed the benefits of the Keystone XL Pipeline during an appearance Monday night on the Colbert Report in which he traded places with his host to read a monologue poking fun at his presidency.

In one of the few serious moments, host Stephen Colbert asked Obama if he'll sign a bill approving the controversial pipeline that Republicans say they'll pass in the new Congress.

"We've got to make sure that it's not adding to the problem of carbon and climate change," Obama said. "We have to examine that, and we have to weigh that against the amount of jobs that it's actually going to create, which aren't a lot," he said. "Essentially, this is Canadian oil passing through the United States to be sold on the world market. It's not going to push down gas prices here in the United States. It's good for Canada."

He made a direct reference to the many young people both in the live audience and watching on Colbert's Comedy Central show.

"These young people are going to have to live in a world where we already know temperatures are going up," he said. "We've got to measure its benefit against whether or not it's going to contribute to an overall warming of the planet -- which could be disastrous.

The keystone legislation, which would approve the project and bypass the now required administration approval, was brought up for a vote last month by Keystone supporter, Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La. But it fell one vote short of the 60 needed to pass.

With nine fewer Democrats in the new Senate that convenes in January, including the replacement of Landrieu with Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, the Keystone bill is expected to pass both houses easily, but probably not by a margin that could override a presidential veto.

Obama took over the reading of Colbert's regular "The Word," monologue, giving him a chance to poke fun at himself.

"Nation," Obama said, channeling Colbert. "As you know, I, Stephen Colbert, have never cared for our president. The guy is so arrogant. I bet he talks about himself in the third person."

He then continued to, again playing Colbert, talk about how Republicans could kill his Affordable Care Act.

"They could pass a bill repealing Obamacare," the president said, via Colbert's monologue. "But the president still has the veto, and if, I know that guy, he is willing to use it. "And let's face it, even if Republicans somehow did repeal it, they would have to replace with their own health care plan. Once they touch it, they own it, and then if anything goes wrong, suddenly everybody will be complaining about Mitch McConnell-care."

When Obama read that there are parts of Obamacare that people from both parties actually like -- such as allowing children up to age 26 to remain on their parents health insurance coverage -- the text shown to the audience and viewers read, "Everything but Obama."

You can watch the segment here.