Create presentations to give to businesses

From left: Tre Lewis, Sertio Munoz and Nicole Hrbek, Merino High School students in the High School of Business marketing class, discuss the average retail sales, median household income and average wage for Sterling, during a presentation at the Logan County Chamber of Commerce Thursday. The students were asked to put together a presentation with information businesses would need to know if they are looking to come to Sterling. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

STERLING — When a business looks at moving into a new city, like Sterling, there are a variety of factors they look at. Students participating in the Northeast Colorado BOCES High School of Business ™ program have been examining those factors recently.

On Thursday, three groups of students from Merino, Julesburg and Revere marketing classes shared what they learned with members of the Logan County Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors and Marketing Committee.

Before the students presented, Merino business teacher Penny Thomson spoke about the program and what students were asked to do for this assignment.

High School of Business participants Lauren Thompson (left), of Revere Jr./Sr. High School and Tiffany Collins, of Julesburg Jr./Sr. High School, talk about the educational levels of residents in Logan County during a presentation for Logan County Chamber of Commerce board members and Marketing Committee members Thursday. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

High School of Business ™ is a national program that Merino, Peetz, Lonestar, Holyoke and Haxtun High Schools began participating in last year. The program is a four-year program, with a total of eight semester-long classes. Once students complete all the courses they will get 12 credits at Northeastern Junior College if they choose to attend NJC after high school and get a business degree.

"Some of them really capture this and are engaged and love this program and I've got two of them that are actually in three different classes right now, because they are driven and motivated to get those 12 credits. It's exciting to see them just really desire to do something and strive to achieve at a higher level," Thomson said.

Advertisement

The program is going well so far, but she did point out there have been a few "glitches." This year they added online courses to the program and while they expected technology problems, they didn't expect to lose educators who were trained for the program. They went from five teachers to two actually in the school and another, Tammy Fehringer, who no longer teaches in a classroom anymore, but agreed to teach the online classes.

From left: High School of Business program participants Teryl Fenn, Anna Werner and Ashtyn Egan, from Merino High School, discuss the Vine videos they created for their marketing class project, during their presentation at the Logan County Chamber of Commerce. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

This is the second year students have done this particular project. To kick it off, Kim Sellers, executive director of the Chamber, visited the classrooms and introduced the students to what the Chamber does. She talked about demographics, what it takes to have a business in the area and what they look for when they bring businesses in.

"So, this particular project is to help your organization bring new businesses into the community," Thomson told the Chamber representatives. "(The students) were acting on behalf of the Chamber of Commerce basically and they are trying to put things out there, wherever there is, for a business to see what Sterling is like, the demographics, income levels, there's just a whole list."

For their presentations, students used a brochure that Sellers gave them, as well as online resources. It was up to them to decide what kind of media they wanted to use, a Power Point, a brochure or a video.

"I stressed creativity," Thomson said, noting they were "trying to reach different markets with what we're doing."

The first group to give their presentation was Nicole Hrbek, Sertio Munoz and Tre Lewis, from Merino. Hrbek and Munoz are juniors and this is their first year in the program; Lewis is a sophomore and in his second year of the program.

For their project they used Piktochart, similar to Power Point; it can be printed out or put online. They also included a QR code, a kind of barcode that can be scanned with a cell phone, with a link to the Chamber's website.

Their presentation included information about Sterling's population, average retail sails, median household income, average wage, outdoor activities, schools and daycare facilities, housing, major employers, transportation, financial institutions and community resources.

Some of the things the students were most surprised to learn about in their research was the number of healthcare centers Sterling has that are considered separate and the number of courses NJC offers.

They said their presentation could be shared with businesses by putting it in a brochure or posting on a webpage.

The second presentation was by Tiffany Collins, a junior at Julesburg Jr. /Sr. High School, in her second year of the program, and Lauren Thompson, a sophomore at Revere Jr. /Sr. High School, in her first year of the program. Both are taking the class online.

For their presentation, they created a Power Point showing the community demographics, including Logan County residents' educational levels, age groups and ethnicity. They also looked at the different types of households in Logan County, average income, the surrounding communities that do business in Sterling, for profit and non-profit businesses, the top employers and local activities.

They said their presentation could be shared with businesses through a website.

The final group included Anna Werner, Ashtyn Egan and Teryl Fenn, all sophomores from Merino in their first year of the program.

For their presentation they used Vine, a social networking tool that allows users to post six second videos. They created videos on NJC, historic Sterling and the artwork that can be found in Sterling. To go along with the videos, they also handed out a written snapshot of the community.

The group said their presentation was geared more toward teenagers and 20somethings, because that's who uses Vine, and while it could be used for both economic development and tourism, they said it's probably more applicable to tourism.

As for how they would get their videos to businesses looking to come to Sterling, they said the Vines could be shared using a QR code or on a website.

Sellers thanked them trying something different with the Vine videos. She pointed out that she asked all of the students to "look at things outside of the box that I don't know how to do."

"I think that's the new marketing charge, whether we're marketing products or businesses or whatever; they're always looking for the newest thing," she said.

At the end of the presentations, students were evaluated on organization, communication and teamwork.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com