BOSTON, July 7, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Steven Pollock, Chief Operating Officer of Boston-based Delta Dental of Massachusetts and its affiliated companies, has been named Chief Executive Officer. Pollock replaces Fay Donohue who retired after twenty years with the company, leading it through a period of tremendous success. Pollock and current Delta Dental of Massachusetts president, Dennis Leonard, will work to continue the enterprise's legacy of excellent service and foster new company growth.

"Steve embodies the principles that drive our company – hard work, dedication, innovation and commitment to the customer," said Dennis Leonard, president of Delta Dental of Massachusetts. "His leadership of operations and efficient processes have enabled us to now help more than two million people across Massachusetts. He has contributed greatly to our mission of improving the oral health of all."

Pollock is a 16-year veteran of the company and held multiple senior positions before being appointed COO in 2011. As COO, he was responsible for all business segments, as well as leading the company's growth in an evolving and complex health care market, particularly during the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

"I'm proud of the work we do, the people we serve and the employees who make Delta Dental of Massachusetts a leader in the industry," said Steven Pollock, incoming CEO of Delta Dental of Massachusetts. "We have a bright future and I look forward to serving the people of our state in my new role as CEO."

Pollock earned a B.B.A. from the University of Wisconsin-Whitewater and a J.D. from the University of Wisconsin Law School. He is a member of the State Bar of Wisconsin and a certified public accountant in Ohio. He also serves on the board of directors for the Massachusetts Association of Health Plans, the DentaQuest Foundation and the DentaQuest Institute. He resides in Concord, Mass. with his wife and two children.

Based in Boston, Delta Dental of Massachusetts (www.deltadentalma.com) is a member of the Oak Brook, Ill.-based not-for-profit Delta Dental Plans Association, the leading national network of independent dental service corporations. Delta Dental provides dental benefits programs to more than 62 million members enrolled in more than 111,000 groups across the nation.

For more oral health news, follow us on Twitter @deltadentalma and on Facebook at https://www.facebook.com/DeltaDentalMA, and check out the monthly oral health calendar at: http://www.keepahealthysmile.com/.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150707/232281LOGO

SOURCE Delta Dental of Massachusetts