For Syrian families who are new to the U.S., a picnic on the Palisades in Fort Lee on Sunday offered a chance to set aside worry about their families back home and their struggles to settle in a new country.

amy newman/staff photographer Hamid Imam of Paterson, far left, led some of the men in a dabke dance at Ross Dock Picnic area in Fort Lee.

They grilled, played volleyball and enjoyed Hudson River views at Ross Dock Park. But more importantly, they met Syrians who have lived for decades in North Jersey and who could offer help and understanding.

amy newman / staff photographer Newly arrived Syrian families gathered for a picnic at the park Sunday so they can meet, socialize and network within the Syrian community

“If you don’t have papers here, you can’t work and you can’t do anything. It’s not easy,” said Nidal Almeslamani, 24, of Paterson, who came here two years ago and has a green card. He pointed to a friend, Mohamad Jalo, also 24, of Wayne, whom he met at a protest. “This guy here, he helped me find a job,” he said.

Almeslamani is among hundreds of Syrians who have settled in North Jersey since fighting began in their country more than three years ago. The conflict started in March 2011 with anti-government protests and turned into a full-scale civil war following a brutal government crackdown. More than 191,000 people have been killed, according to a United Nations report last month, and 3 million people have fled the country.

For those who made it to the U.S., North Jersey is a destination because of the large Syrian-American community that has century-old roots here and because many have relatives here. But Syrian immigrants continue to struggle as they try to find jobs or, in some cases, get permanent resident status.

An informal network exists through word of mouth and through mosques and churches. The Wafa House charitable non-profit in Clifton has also offered help with legal services, therapy and food vouchers.

”We want to bring those families together to meet each other, to expand their network and share experiences,” said Hamid Imam, a Syrian-American activist from Paterson who organized the picnic. “Maybe people will have jobs for them, or housing or simply friendship.”

For sisters Mariam Alzouabi, 12, and Hoda Alzouabi, 15, the event was a chance to meet up with friends who also are from Syria.

“I’m happy because they are here,” said Mariam, who is learning English at her school in Paterson. “It’s hard leaving your family and country.”

She and her family escaped bombings, gunfire and hunger in Syria and made it to Jordan, where they got visas to travel to the U.S. The girls’ father, Mahmoud Alzouabi, works as a janitor at the Islamic Center of Passaic County.

Almeslamani, 24, got out of Syria with the help of a sympathetic man who worked for the Assad regime. He also used a fake I.D., he said, because the regime targeted health-care workers like him if they were suspected of aiding the wounded from the opposition.

“I had applied for a visa [to the U.S.] before the fighting. I’m lucky I got it in time,” he said.

His friend, Jalo, said Syrian-Americans should reach out to newcomers because they need help and because any one of them could have been in their situation. The goal, he said, was to be unified like “eid wahada” — or “one hand.”

“We have this event so he knows that we are Syrian. If he needs help, he comes to us.”

Some activists also said they hoped the United States would do more to help Syrians settle here.

So far, 164 Syrians have been officially accepted as refugees since the war began. That’s expected to increase, according to the State Department, because the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees has determined that many are unlikely to be able to return home. The agency said it will make 130,000 referrals for refugee placement around the globe between 2014 and 2016. The United States is taking thousands of referrals and the screening process for applicants takes 18 to 24 months.

Other Syrians have come to the U.S. as visitors and stayed. Between March 2012 CQ and January of this year, the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services has accepted 5,261 applications for temporary protected status from Syrians already in the U.S., approving 2,038 of those and denying 59 so far.

Of those, 335 applications came from Syrians in New Jersey; 150 were approved, three were denied and the rest are pending. Immigration Services has granted asylum in about 1,200 other cases, sometimes involving whole families. Immigration courts approved an additional 83 applications for asylum out of 518 that were received in the past three years, according to the U.S. Justice Department.

Email: adely@northjersey.com