On June 17, 2014, CDC’s monthly Public Health Grand Rounds will spotlight hepatitis C. The one-hour program, “The 25th Anniversary of the Discovery of the Hepatitis C Virus: Looking Back to Look Forward,” will be webcast, beginning at 1:00PM (EDT) and will feature presentations by nationally recognized experts. Recent therapeutic advances can halt the progression of HCV infection and disease. While HCV-infected persons can be effectively cured, more effort is needed to screen, diagnose, provide continuity of care, and treat. CDC’s Public Health Grand Rounds will discuss how new screening guidelines, testing recommendations and methods, and therapeutic advances will provide us with an opportunity to improve individual outcomes and move us closer toward the eventual elimination of HCV infection.

On June 17-18, 2014 the CDC Foundation’s Viral Hepatitis Action Coalition will webcast “A National Summit to Improve Access to HCV Testing, Treatment and Cure” featuring a cross-section of subject matter experts from public health, academia, health care, health care systems, and industry. Beginning at 2:30 PM (EDT) on June 17 and from 8:30 AM–4:30 PM (EDT) on June 18, Summit topics will include implementing policies for HCV testing, improving the continuum of HCV care and treatment, reducing HCV incidence, and implementing surveillance and evaluation.

Twenty-five years ago CDC played a pivotal role in the discovery of the virus that causes hepatitis C. After its discovery, the implementation of programs to screen blood products and donor organs led to major reductions in new HCV infections between 1990 and 2009. In spite of these successes, HCV is still a serious threat, both domestically and abroad. HCV remains the most common chronic blood borne infection in the United States, affecting as many as 3.9 million individuals. However, up to 50% of HCV-infected persons are unaware of their infection. Globally, there are some 180 million people who are chronically infected with the virus, and 3-4 million new HCV infections occur every year.

Viral Hepatitis Action Plan Encourages Healthcare Provider Training

Improving the prevention, diagnosis, care, and treatment of viral hepatitis is a key aim of the updated Action Plan for the Prevention, Care, and Treatment of Viral Hepatitis (2014-2016). Federal and non-federal partners who are engaged in implementing the Action Plan are providing professional education opportunities, like this session of CDC’s Public Health Grand Rounds, to build a U.S. health care workforce prepared to prevent and diagnose viral hepatitis and provide care and treatment to infected persons.

Public Health Grand Rounds

The Public Health Grand Rounds is a monthly webcast created to foster discussion on major public health issues. Each session focuses on key challenges related to a specific health topic, and explores cutting-edge scientific evidence and potential impact of different interventions. The Grand Rounds sessions also highlight how CDC and its partners are already addressing these challenges and discuss the recommendations for future research and practice. You can receive free training and continuing education opportunities/contact hours for watching Grand Rounds.

Visit this page for links to view the Public Health Grand Rounds session for those with a broadband connection, slower connection, and an option for Apple users.