Welcome to the Daily Buzz, a quick and pithy rundown of the stories people are talking about:

Couples craving a sign marry on 11/12/13 as the latest date craze strikes today: Are you doing anything special?

When is a Tuesday not just a plain, old Tuesday? Today of all days.

Don’t know what I’m talking about, check your cellphone calendar again. Got it? It’s not just a Tuesday. It’s 11/12/13. And this sequential date is causing couples to take the plunge on what otherwise would be a slow wedding Tuesday.

Check out other 11/12/13 happenings here.

Atheists do church, too, in a big way: Rise of the non-believer mega-churches

Not believing in God isn’t stopping more and more atheists from going to church. In fact, atheist mega-churches are on the rise in U.S. and Australia, after finding a warm reception in England. And what do they do, all these non-believers gathered under one roof on a Sunday?

Well, they don’t bash their believing brethren. But they do flock together, along with their non-worshiping children, to share ungodly ideas with other like-minded atheists. Slogans like ‘God-less is more’ and ‘born-again humanist’ proliferate.

Go inside one non-believing congregation here and view a video of members discussing why they go to a church where god is not be found. It’s all here.

Grumpy Cat tours Disneyland with Grumpy the Dwarf in theme park's bid for social media cred (with video)

This is how big social media has become. Viral video all-star Grumpy Cat has been called upon to lend star power and social media buzz to Disneyland. And there is no doubt that Grumpy Cat stole the show, dwarfing the star power of Grumpy the Dwarf as Disneyland made its desperate bid for social media attention.

Check out this video to see Grumpy Cat dominate Disney characters. The contest of who is the coolest wasn’t even close.

Rush Limbaugh says President believes 'Obamacare is working perfectly'; website bugs a ruse to hide higher policy prices

Rush Limbaugh is always one to blowviate. But Obamacare has the conservative broadcaster worked up in a lather like perhaps nothing before. And yesterday, Limbaugh came up with his most outlandish Obamacare blast yet.

In his regular radio broadcast Monday, Limbaugh asserted that all the embarrassing website glitches that prompted a presidential apology were on purpose. And the reason for the disaster: To hide the higher prices, including rising deductibles and increasing premiums under Obamacare.

Listen to the extended clip from his radio show and find out how PennLive readers are reacting. It’s all here.

Other buzz-worthy stories:



Incredible Hulk wannabe does something incredibly stupid: He colors himself green with nuclear submarine paint

What was he thinking? Man flicks cigarette lighter at gas pump, sets wife ablaze: Shocking video

'JFK' director Oliver Stone stokes Kennedy assassination conspiracy theories ahead of 50th anniversary: Where do you stand? (with video)

Amazon's Sunday delivery, more stores opening on Thanksgiving: Is nothing sacred in our over-commercialized culture?

Look for more buzz-worthy stories every weekday mornings beginning at 7 a.m. on PennLive, along with our Daily Buzz round-up at noon.