Donald Trump, who loves superlatives more than anyone ever, released a letter from his physician indicating that the candidate's most recent medical exam yielded "only positive results" that were also "astonishingly excellent." (Reuters)

Remember Grand Junction, Colo.? That's where President Obama went to tout the virtues of cost-effective care. Obama, seeking support for Obamacare, said that in Grand Junction Medicare was spending less on care but getting the same results as pricier areas. Well, it turns out that Medicare's costs are less, but guess what? Private insurers are paying more. That's the Upshot in The New York Times.

Here's an occupational risk you may not have considered: people who treat victims of trauma may develop PTSD themselves. (The Atlantic)

Electronic medical records? "We succeed with the simple expedient of paper," says Abigail Zuger, MD.

Presidential candidate and senator Ted Cruz (R-Texas) has a plan to overhaul the FDA. Vox's Julia Belluz reviews it.

Emergency physician Chris Tedeschi warns that, with the coming of winter, Europe's refugee crisis is about to get a lot worse. (PLOS Blogs)

"In basic biology, doctors are taught that good parasites don't kill their hosts." In The New Yorker, Perri Klass, MD, reviews the war on worms.

Richard Lehman at the BMJ blogs highlights the scabies treatment study in Fiji, "the ultimate cluster randomized trial." (And see our coverage here.)

For your spare time: BMJ publishes a special "10,000 cases special edition."

"I tell authors they can say .07 is 'approaching significance' if they say .03 is 'approaching non-significance'," writes statistician Richard Morey.

This is what happens when a dialysis catheter malfunctions -- and this is what other doctors have to say about it. (Reddit)

Calling a response to sugar pills the "placebo effect" belies what perhaps more often accounts for a patient getting better: regression to the mean. (DC Improbable Science)

The scientific revolution that eventually led to modern medicine is usually understood as the triumph of experimental reason over superstition. But it's really about the triumph of mathematicians over philosophers, writes the New Statesman.

There's plenty of technology to track your exercise habits. But not until today was it possible to purchase a "penis pedometer." (It even has Wi-Fi.)

After hearing about all the studies showing that marriage and cohabitation are better for your health, people living alone can point to their very own study showing that people flying solo do pretty well, according to CNN.

Morning Break is a daily guide to what's new and interesting on the Web for healthcare professionals, powered by the MedPage Today community. Got a tip? Send it to us: MPT_editorial@everydayhealthinc.com.