Controversy over proposed medical residency cap, as a group that accredits medical residency programs is considering lifting five-year-old caps on doctors-in-training work hours.

The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), which reviews the residency programs at teaching hospitals and universities, will review this week input scores of healthcare groups to determine whether the five-year-old cap on work hours will be removed.

In 2011 ACGME changed limits for first-year residents’ work hours, which included a 16-consecutive-hour cap on shifts as well caps on all other residents to 28-consecutive-hour shifts. An additional limit requires an eight hour minimum of time off between work shifts.

“Any effort to increase the number of consecutive hours resident physicians can work without sleep threatens the health of both residents and their patients, and should be rejected,” said Dr. Michael Carome, director of Public Citizen’s health research group.

Reports at the time said long hours contributed to more medical errors, which in turn caused immense pressure to be directed at graduate medical education programs by Congress to curtail the prevalence of errors.

Some groups questioned whether the caps were improving patient safety, saying they may actually be contributing to potential medical errors due to the fact that increased cap limits causes patient care to be more frequently switched between health professionals.

“Restricting resident duty hours has had the unintended consequence of substantially increasing the number of hand-offs or transitions of care for patients,” said Dr. Ana Pujols McKee, chief medical officer of The Joint Commission, in a letter to the graduate medical education council.

The urgency to optimize caps on work hours follows the pressure that hospitals and health systems are under to reduce medical errors, especially given the Affordable Care Act penalizes hospitals for errors and poor care that leads the re-admission of patients.

The Joint Commission, which accredits and certifies over 20,000 U.S. health facilities, said “communication failure remains on of the leading” causes of sentinel events in its database “and hand-offs are a major contributor to this category.”

Other health groups cite lacking evidence, saying the caps should be left as they are.

“The most rigorous trial to date of the effects of different work shift lengths found that reducing first-year residents’ shifts to 16 hours or less reduced the frequency of serious medical errors,” Carome of Public Citizen’s said, referencing a New England Journal of Medicine study that shows increased medical errors among residents working 24-hour shifts in intensive care units.

The Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education said it will post the recommendations for resident hours for public comment in April, and any changes would enter the accreditation process the following year.

Source: Patient Safety Worries Emerge Over Relaxed Limits On Medical Resident Work Hours

Photo credit: www.kevinmd.com

Join the Discussion