Schalmont girls' soccer looks to make up for last season's upset In dominating season, Sabres stay motivated, gear up for sectional run

Schenectady

Bananas and yellow card-style cautions have become focal points of Schalmont's season of girls' soccer blowouts.

A team that has won all 17 games and scored about 14 times as many goals as it has allowed has to find ways to stay motivated. It usually leads to practices, where the Sabres beat up on each other (in a fairly kind way, of course) and coach Alaina Resue harps about the necessity of potassium and good diets as well as playing together without getting too physical in practice.

Resue had a little trouble garnering attention after an 8-0 blowout of Ichabod Crane this past Friday. It advanced her team in sectionals, and players were ready to get out of there. Granted, attention spans were drifting in part because it was freezing, and players wanted to get cleaned up so they could attend the playoff football game that night, too.

But watching Schalmont play, the challenge is obvious: How do the Sabres get where they expect to be (sectional champions, after a stunning upset last year) when they've got a variety of weapons and not a ton of opposition on the schedule? It would be easy to drift.

"We literally push each other," said Davia Rossi, an eighth-grader whose sister, Julia is a senior. "That's not a rumor."

Schalmont figures its advantage comes in two distinct forms. It's a group that appears to enjoying watching each other play. Resue was pleased to substitute a lot in the second half against Ichabod Crane after securing a 6-0 lead. The Sabres had six scorers. Older players relished watching lesser experienced ones get their shot.

Balance and support have been statistical keys. Sydnee Metzold and Molly Older each have a team-leading 33 points, combining for 41 goals and 25 assists. Julia Rossi and Vanessa Wainright each have 13 assists. The younger Rossi is one who seniors joke that, yes, they pick on. But she takes any resentment (it all seems to be pretty tongue-in-cheek) out on opponents, producing 15 goals and four assists.

"They're good to me," Rossi said with a smile. "They're not awful."

Resue points out there are a couple sets of sisters (the Rossis along with Kaylie and Molly Older), and sisterhood runs in the program. That, and many of these nine seniors have known each other since elementary school.

"It's puts the idea of family to real life, because we are," Resue said.

Schalmont will play Cohoes on Monday. It represents true go-time on avenging last year's stunning upset, by Voorheesville, in the Class B sectional semis (1-0). There are stretches when Schalmont looks slow to get going, the coach noted, and those are things she's trying regularly to make sure don't exist in practice.

But there aren't many problems for a team that's scored 132 goals, allowed nine.

"We always harp on the fact that no game is going to be easy in sectionals. No team is just going to give us a win," Resue said.

The goal is to make it to the sectional final to get a chance to substitute joy for the coach's discomfort.

She recently dislocated a thumb playing flag football and sports a black cast.

If the team keeps winning, players will get to sign it at the end of the week. Right now, the cast sits blank.

"They've been begging me to sign it," Resue said, laughing. "They want to be the only ones. But they know we need to play well."

Whatever works for motivation, in a season that has come pretty easy so far.

Jason Franchuk is a freelance writer.