GRANDVILLE, MI -- A team of Michigan radiologists is trying to improve women's access to mammograms by opening what they call a "first-of-its-kind breast cancer screening center" at RiverTown Crossings mall in Grandville.

Clarity Screening Mammography, part of Allegan-based Southwest Michigan Radiology PLLC, is owned and operated by Dr. Dennis Bruce and two other board certified radiologists with 55 years of combined mammography experience.

Those who come to the RiverTown office will receive a mammogram on state-of-the-art digital equipment with timely reporting and follow up with their primary care provider in a setting that feels more like a spa than a doctor's office.

"We found that women were not getting screening mammograms as recommended by multiple medical societies, the American Cancer Society and the National Comprehensive Cancer Network," Bruce said.

He added some studies suggest only 40 percent of women older than 40 get their annual mammogram. Bruce and his partners concluded one reason for the low mammography rate is due to the inconvenience of the process, which is why they liked the idea of opening a clinic in a high-traffic mall.

"RiverTown Crossings Mall became the obvious choice in our area to grab the attention of a large number of women who are outside of work, home and their car," Bruce said.

Women can step into the Clarity center with or without an appointment for the screening, which takes about 15 minutes.

The exam costs $225, and most insurance coverage is accepted.

The Affordable Care Act, with few exceptions, requires insurance carriers to fully cover screening mammograms without copay or deductible. Still, Bruce expects Clarity to see a relatively higher proportion of women who do not to have insurance, compared to traditional clinics.

The 832-square-foot office is on the mall's lower level next to anchor department store Macy's.

The location is getting praise from Tanya Horan, development director for the West Michigan chapter of Susan G. Komen foundation, an organization that raises money for breast cancer research and prevention.

"I can go to Macy's and then get a mammogram," said Horan, who has taken a tour of the facility that opened in June. "I thought it was a brilliant concept."

She added that the fee seemed on the low side, noting the test usually runs $300 to $500, although the foundation negotiates a rate of $150 for those who qualify for its program.

Despite the mall setting, the office doesn't resemble a storefront. The opaque windows keep a passerby from glimpsing into the waiting room.

"What I like is that it is very private," said Horan. "They did a really beautiful job of making it very spa like."

Clarity Screening Mammography is among only a handful of breast cancer screening centers located in shopping centers worldwide.

The mall's parent company, General Growth Properties, has leased space to medical offices in some of its more than 100 properties, said Amanda Gielczyk, marketing manager for RiverTown.

She added that RiverTown is open to having non-traditional tenants if they meet the "needs of our shoppers and local community."

RiverTown Crossings is located on RiverTown Parkway, in Grandville, just east of I-196.

Shandra Martinez covers business for MLive/The Grand Rapids Press. Email her or follow her on Twitter @shandramartinez.