Fifty-two Columbia State Community College nursing graduates were honored Dec. 13 in a pinning ceremony held in the W.J. “Billy” Webster Athletic Center at the Columbia campus.

“The December 2013 nursing graduates are a group of talented, creative individuals who will bring much to the profession of nursing,” said Barbara Blum, Columbia State nursing program director. “They have demonstrated the ‘art and science’ of nursing that blends compassion with the knowledge necessary to be effective health care providers.”

Nursing graduates must complete four semesters at Columbia State, as well as 10 credit hours of clinical instruction to earn an associate of applied science degree in nursing. Graduates must next pass the National Council Licensure Examination to earn licensure to practice as a registered nurse.

Columbia State’s nursing program has a competitive admission process with applicants admitted twice per year.

Nursing students are trained to provide direct patient care in various areas including medical, surgical, pediatrics and more.

Graduates will work in hospitals, long-term care facilities, clinics, schools and home health care settings.

Registered nurse graduates at Columbia State also have numerous options for affordable and convenient pursuit of the bachelor of science in nursing.

Columbia State has a “3+1” partnership with Middle Tennessee State University which offers registered nurses the opportunity to complete extra general education course work at Columbia State and a year of advanced nursing through MTSU and earn the bachelor of science degree in nursing.

The Columbia State nursing program is committed to excellence in nursing education. The program has full approval from the Tennessee Board of Nursing and is accredited by the Accreditation Commission for Education in Nursing.

Students admitted to the nursing program at Columbia State demonstrate excellent completion rates, first-attempt board exam success, and in-field employment rates.

For more information about applying to the program, contact Blum at (931) 540-2609 or bblum@ColumbiaState.edu, or visit www.ColumbiaState.edu/Nursing.