Aetna Inc. (NYSE:AET), the third-largest health insurer in the US, announced Friday it has agreed to acquire its smaller rival Humana Inc. (NYSE:HUM) for $34.1 billion, following weeks of merger-related speculation concerning the health insurance giants.

The said deal is expected to boost Aetna’s ranking in the health insurance industry to number 2, bringing the company on par with Anthem Inc. (NYSE:ANTM) as measured by memberships.

As per the deal, Aetna would pay $230 for each share of Humana, in return for the ownership of Humana’s assets. The cash-and-stock offer carries a premium of 22.6% compared to the closing price of $187.57 of Humana stock on Thursday. The per-share payment by Aetna would involve $125 in cash, while the rest would be paid through 0.8375 of Aetna shares. Aetnaplans to finance the cash part of the payment via a new debt issue worth $16 billion. After the completion of the deal, Humana’s shareholders will have ownership of 26% of the merged firm, while Aetna will own the remaining 74% of the combined company. The deal is valued at $37 billion, including debt, according to the companies.

Aetna’s decision to acquire Humana, the fourth-biggest US health insurance company by revenue, looks promising. Humana’s extensive reach into various parts of the nation would offer a large revenue generating opportunity to Aetna. Humana’s Medicare enrollment has been experiencing remarkable growth in the recent past; with Humana’s current enrollment at 3.2 million, along with Aetna’s current Medicare membership of 1.26 million, the combined firm will own the largest share of the Medicare program, beating the current leader, Universal Health Services, Inc. (NYSE:UHS). The merger would also increase by about 180 the number of US counties where a single insurer caters to at least 75% of customers of Medicare Advantage plans, as per a recent analysis carried out by the Wall Street Journal.

Furthermore, the acquisition deal is also expected to be significantly accretive to Aetna’s operating earnings in 2017, according to the company. The merged company is predicted to have 2015 operating revenue of $115 billion, with around 56% resulting from government-sponsored programs such as Medicare and Medicaid. Total medical members of the combined firm are expected to be at 33 million by the end of March 2016. The acquisition deal is expected to close by the second half of next year, contingent on antitrust regulatory approvals.

The Aetna-Humana tie-up, if completed as expected, would represent a major consolidation success for the two health insurers giants, as they seek to expand their size in order to better cope with the volatile health insurance environment, marked by rapid changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act. The deal comes about in the midst of a merger frenzy, as insurance companies grapple to strengthen their negotiating power against pharmaceutical companies.

Aetna stock closed down 2.65% at $125.49 in Thursday’s trading. The company’s stock is expected to soar when trading resumes on Monday, on the back of the acquisition news.