Buy Photo After spending the night — clinging to a buoy in the ocean — for over eight hours, 19-year-old Dylan Gowan of Highlands was rescued Wednesday morning off Sandy Hook (Photo: ANDREW FORD/STAFF PHOTO)Buy Photo

Dylan Gowan refused to die.

Perched on a channel marker tower Tuesday night, stranded alone in the ocean, he saw shooting stars. He wished on each one and prayed to God. He could see rescuers searching, but they didn’t see him.

In the morning, he made his move.

Gowan, 19, explained how he survived Wednesday afternoon at Riverview Medical Center. He was in a wheelchair, hooked to an IV and a heart monitor, flanked by doctors who treated him for scratches and cuts on his arms, dehydration and a condition in which muscles break down.

He spent Tuesday afternoon riding a friend’s WaveRunner near Highlands. His friend drove the water craft to Brooklyn and ran out of gas. Gowan took his friend’s car to Brooklyn, gave him fuel, took over the WaveRunner and aimed homebound at 6:30 p.m.

It was the first time he had tried this water route. Google Maps shows it’s about 11 miles between Highlands and Brooklyn at the closest points. Gowan estimated closer to 20.

He didn’t take his cellphone because the waterproof compartment on the WaveRunner was broken, and he didn’t expect the worst to happen.

Leaving Brooklyn, he hit a wave, crashed down hard and fell off. But he didn’t think he hit anything.

He got back on and kept going.

About four miles off the shore of Sandy Hook, the WaveRunner started to bog down.

It sounded like it was going to shut off.

He kept running it until the engine quit, and he started sinking. He thinks there was damage to the hull.

He opened the back seat to see water pouring in. It became unstable, and Gowan jumped in the water.

He took off his sweat pants, took off his life jacket and tried to swim to shore.

But the current was heading out. He was getting exhausted.

The ocean claimed two lives in the past week, not far from where Gowan was stranded.

A missing swimmer’s body washed up on Sandy Hook Friday.

A swimmer caught in a rip current at Sea Bright died the day after he was pulled from the surf.

Gowan is an emergency medical responder for Highlands and Sea Bright, and a junior Sea Bright firefighter. He’s been taught water rescue and swimming techniques.

He paused to rest, clinging to a crab pot buoy, then paddled to a channel marker tower and climbed up.

He doesn’t know how much time passed, but he saw U.S. Coast Guard boats and helicopters.

He could see rescuers from the New York Police Department.

He climbed to the top of the light and waved and yelled, but couldn’t get their attention. He was in the one place no one looked.

“I could see everyone looking for me, but I couldn’t reach out to them,” he said.

He climbed back down and tried to light a fire using batteries on the tower. But it was too windy.

He dismantled two boxes to shield himself from the wind. He couldn’t sleep, but he laid down.

At dawn, he went to the bottom of the channel marker to check the tide. Four or five sailboats and a clamming boat passed by him.

He yelled and screamed and waved, but they couldn’t see him.

He thought if he were back in the water he’d be easier to spot.

“It’s either: do I want to sit here and die? Or do I want to make the effort?”

He jumped into the water and swam toward shore.

He didn’t think he’d make it, but he saw boats and thought he might get someone’s attention.

His arms and legs burned as he swam.

In about 20 to 30 minutes, he saw a Coast Guard boat, but they didn’t see him.

He yelled, screamed at the top of his lungs, waved his arms, splashed as much as possible.

They spotted him.

Three officers helped him aboard, and Gowan broke down in tears. He hugged an officer.

Gowan was taken back to Coast Guard’s Sandy Hook station. The National Park Service and his first aid squad checked him out. He was a relieved to see people he knew.

He was taken to Riverview Medical Center in Red Bank, where he was aggressively treated for rhabdomyolysis. Stephanie Reynolds, director of the hospital’s emergency room, explained that’s a condition in which muscles break down, releasing proteins that could damage the kidneys and throw off potassium levels, which impacts heart rhythm.

He said when he leaves the hospital, he’ll take some of his friends from the first aid squad out to Sandy Hook to see the tower where he spent a night.

“I was praying to God that I’d just be able to give my mom a hug again,” he said. “That’s all I really wanted.”

Andrew Ford: 732-643-4281; aford3@gannettnj.com

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1NssOs9