Photo

In December 2012, 56 percent of Americans approved of President Obama’s leadership. About 40 percent disapproved.

Today, those numbers are almost precisely reversed, a fact that Democrats were made keenly aware of in the fall campaign and in the midterm elections.

“The public’s confidence is gone, and it doesn’t seem to be coming back,” says Ross Douthat at The New York Times.

So what happened?

Mr. Douthat offers not a unified theory but four “partial” ones: Republican intransigence, an incomplete economic recovery from the Great Recession, Obamacare and foreign policy crises.

Indeed, partial theories are popular among observers, and many land on similar issues. In an account of Obama’s second term, Juliet Eilperin and David Nakamura, writing at The Washington Post, detail what amounts to a war of attrition between the White House and Congress, with each side blaming the other for a lack of progress on legislation of any kind.

What all the parties had to show for it, after multiple failures on policy and a government shutdown, was nothing but disapproval, The Post reporters write: “The president’s approval ratings took a nose dive, and Congress’s were even worse.”

For Andrew Sullivan at The Dish, “a fanatically obstructionist and increasingly extreme GOP” wanted to undermine the president with a strategy “hatched privately before Obama even took office.”

“They judged early on that the real promise of Obama — his ambition to transcend the old politics in favor of pragmatic reform — could be killed if they simply refused to play along,” Mr. Sullivan writes.

On the economy, Peter Foster at The Telegraph says: “Since Mr. Obama took office facing the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, unemployment has fallen from 10 percent to 6 percent and American businesses have created 10 million new jobs — that’s more than Japan, Europe and every other advanced economy combined.”

Problem is, he adds, many of those “jobs are ‘McJobs’ — that is, low-paid and part-time work that don’t leave people feeling better off.” On top of that, “in numerical terms, G.D.P. has risen by 8 percent since Mr. Obama took office, but median household incomes are down.”

Mr. Douthat agrees: “Even with the improving employment picture this recovery is still basically a disappointment, especially for the middle class,” and adds that it “isn’t necessarily a case study in the economy not mattering. It’s an example of voter patience persisting for a while, and finally running out.”

“The most persuasive answer to the question” — where did Obama go wrong? — “was the botched roll-out of healthcare.gov,” Mr. Sullivan says. “No one else can be blamed for this, and it hit the president’s ratings like a ten-ton truck.”

Mr. Douthat points to competence as a general concern for the public with this administration and identifies the roll-out as a key moment: “The health care law is Obama’s signature issue, it remains largely unpopular (even if support for full repeal is weak), and its initial stumbling coincided with the sharpest second-term drop in the president’s approval.”

Yet for Mr. Sullivan, this is only the start of the narrative: “What this superficial version of events misses is what happened next. The truth is: the Obama team subsequently achieved a near-miraculous rescue of Obamacare, achieved real success in enrollment, and have seen core healthcare costs slow down in such a way that could yet shift our long-term fiscal liabilities for the better.”

Still, as Mr. Foster points out, “Like George W. Bush after Hurricane Katrina, Mr. Obama’s approval numbers never recovered from the sight of his flagship piece of legislation capsizing so ignominiously before it had even left the harbour.”

Mr. Douthat suggests that the president “had an edge that Democratic politicians often lack: The public trusted him on foreign policy.”

But, he writes, one crisis after another — Syria, Ukraine, ISIS, Ebola — eroded that trust and “made Obama’s position irrecoverable.”

While acknowledging that Mr. Obama’s refusal “to engage in the theatrical parts of the presidency looks terrible during crises,” Danny Vinik at The New Republic, like Mr. Sullivan, defends the president on issues like ISIS, at least on substantive grounds: “It’s more important that the president craft effective policy responses to crises. Obama has done that — and the media coverage has missed it completely, focusing instead on Obama’s rhetorical shortcomings and downplaying his policy successes.”

Conor Friedersdorf at The Atlantic has an entirely different log of reasons to disapprove of Mr. Obama’s performance. His list includes warrantless wiretapping, a failure to punish illegal torture, a costly and ruinous war on drugs, the unacknowledged moral costs of drone strikes, the president’s “secret kill list,” an out-of-control national-security state and the president’s persecution of whistle-blowers and journalists who’ve worked with them.

“Confronted with all of those transgressions, more than four in 10 Americans still approve of the job Obama is doing,” Mr. Friedersdorf writes. “And most of them are loyal Democrats. Partisanship and tribalism are overriding the moral compass of too many liberals.”

For Elias Isquith at Salon, the root of the president’s problems is not to be found in specific events or issues but in his temperament. Many moderates see “Obama’s penchant for working from within the system rather than trying to disrupt it” as a real plus.

But, he asks, was this temperamental conservatism “the wrong fit for the current era, when major reforms are so desperately needed”?

Mr. Isquith turns back to a 2009 Harper’s article by Kevin Baker, predicting that Mr. Obama would fail, because he would be unable “to seize the radical moment at hand.”

For Mr. Isquith, “Rather than recognize how ideological and partisan realignment and polarization had effectively changed the rules of the Senate,” the president went looking for consensus where none existed.

“At this point, there is no question that President Obama will fall short of initial expectations,” Mr. Isquith says. “But more than the failure to pass any one particular bill, the disappointment stems from the president’s dogged insistence on being a reformer during a radical era.”

But perhaps our focus on the presidency is itself skewed. The presidency is the central element in our political system, but as Aaron David Miller writes, maybe the problem is our expectation of the presidency itself.

He argues at Foreign Policy (and in his book “The End of Greatness: Why America Can’t Have (and Doesn’t Want) Another Great President”): “The centrality of the presidency must be reconciled with the limitations of the office and the constraints that bind it. The presidency has always been an implausible, some might even say an impossible, job. But the following mix of challenges and constraints — some old, some new — has made the post-World War II presidency harder still: constitutional and practical constraints on the office itself; the president’s expanding reach and responsibilities; the expanding role of a government we trust less, even when we demand more from it; America’s global role; and an intrusive, omnipresent, and nonstop media.”

“Greatness in the presidency is too rare to be relevant in our modern times and — driven as it is in our political system by big crisis — too risky and dangerous to be desirable. Our continued search for idealized presidents raises our expectations and theirs, skews presidential performance, and leads to an impossible standard that can only frustrate and disappoint. To sum up: We can no longer have a truly great president, we seldom need one, and, as irrational as it sounds, we may not want one, either.”

He concludes: “Historic greatness in the presidency has gone the way of the dodo. And it is unlikely to return any time soon.”