TORONTO -

Jamie unlaces his skates and prepares to decompress after a gruelling hockey practice.

The 16-year-old North York student cools down as a shiny, colourful tin is passed around the changeroom.

They call it “dip” – another name for smokeless tobacco.

Sometimes the chewing tobacco alternates between regular, mint or wintergreen-flavoured.

More than half of Jamie’s friends – many of whom play hockey – often grab a chunk of the blackened, crushed leaves.

He says it’s a social thing.

“When we’re showering or on a road trip or hanging out, they’ll toss one in,” he said. “It’s got little (glass-like particles) in it that open tiny microscopic pores in your gum line, so the nicotine can diffuse into it. And it’s got lead – so obviously it’s super-bad, but addictive. It’s not so much the taste, it’s more that they like the head rush and stuff.”

While chewing tobacco is hardly new, a recently released study found students in Grades 6 to 12 are getting hooked by flavouring in tobacco.

According to a study released by the University of Waterloo, 46% of 117,000 students surveyed in 2010-2011 used a form of flavoured tobacco within 30 days of the poll.

Of 54,200 youths using flavoured tobacco, the study found cigarillos were the top choice, followed by menthol cigarettes, flavoured cigars, chewing tobacco and shisha (molasses-based tobacco).

The study’s author Steve Manske, a senior scientist at and research associate professor in Applied Health Sciences at the University of Waterloo, said the provincial and federal governments have left too many loopholes open to the tobacco industry.

The federal Tobacco Act was amended in 2010 to prohibit flavours in cigarettes, cigarillos and blunt wraps, with an exception for menthol. Cigarillos are defined as cigars weighing 1.4 grams or less or having a cigarette filter.

However, many tobacco companies have avoided this definition by increasing the weight to more than 1.4 grams, which allows them to continue to add flavours to the product, Manske said.

“We really need legislation that closes those loopholes,” Manske said. “The other concern is tobacco companies were able to get menthol exempted. The argument was, “It’s not going to make a difference and kids don’t really use it anyway.’

“This data shows that 32% of kids that smoke cigarettes actually use menthol cigarettes, which is so dramatically different than the adults,” he added.

Anti-smoking organizations have jumped on the bandwagon, calling for an outright ban on flavoured tobacco.

Michael Perley, of the Ontario Campaign for Action on Tobacco, said: “If you look at the products and saw them in a retail store – the flavours of cherry, vanilla, strawberry fields – they not only have names that remind people of Fruit Roll-Ups or other candy products, they look like them.

“If my kid comes home with one of these, I’m not necessarily going to know it has anything to do with tobacco. They’re cheaper than buying a premium brand of cigarettes.”

Ontario Health Minister Deb Matthews said the province has a plan to set “an aggressive target” to have the lowest smoking rates in the country.

“We know that a lot of kids start smoking by using flavoured tobacco products. This is something we’re very concerned about,” Matthews said. “I continue to support the need for a federal response to this issue, but in the absence of federal action, the Ontario government is considering how best to address youth use of flavoured tobacco products.”

“About one of two people using tobacco on an ongoing basis is going to die,” Manske said. “That means 27,000 kids are going to have an early death. To me, that’s a whole lot of people that is easily prevented.”

Health Canada spokesman Sean Upton said the department is aware of the issue and continues to evaluate the impact of recent tobacco marketing trends, especially on youth.

“If Health Canada determines that the tobacco industry continues to market tobacco products, including these modified cigarillos (and) little cigars, to Canadian youth, the government will take appropriate action,” said Upton in an e-mail statement.

Part of the government’s restrictions also require little cigars and blunt wraps be packaged in minimum quantities of at least 20 units – a measure that ended an industry practice of selling these products in single units and “kiddy-packs” that are affordable to youth.

Health Canada’s tobacco inspectors seized 28 million units of flavoured little cigars that were not compliant with the Act in Jan. 2012, Upton said.

An official with Montreal-based Casa Cubana – which imports and distributes flavoured tobacco products – said tobacco companies aren’t targeting kids and blamed anti-smoking interest groups for trying to quash the tobacco industry.

“(The Waterloo study) is tantamount to an outright lie,” argued Luc Martial, vice-president of government affairs for Casa Cubana. “It’s really misinforming the public and government, and then government feel they have to do something to protect children, and who doesn’t want to protect children?”

Martial said the complaints surrounding flavoured tobacco products aren’t because of product design, but rather access.

“They’re getting access six times more to non-flavoured tobacco products,” he said. “The market for flavoured tobacco products is less than 1% in the market in all of Canada. Our market is legal age consumers. That’s why I’m always saying (lobby groups are) sounding the alarm.”

Michael Hegyi, owner of Thomas Hinds Tobacconist on Cumberland St., a Yorkville landmark for 21 years, said a ban on flavoured tobacco could affect his business.

“A ban would affect the whole industry,” said Hegyi, adding he doesn’t sell to anyone under 19. “There’s a good chunk of sales going towards those products.”

Back at the arena, Jamie said an older friend has developed lesions in his mouth from chewing tobacco for so long.

“I know a lot of guys whose gum lines have started to retract and started to rot away,” he said. “His gums are trashed. He hasn’t gone to a dentist. It’s a really dirty habit.”

Dr. Jonathan Irish, chief of surgical oncology at Princess Margaret Hospital, said flavoured tobacco can contribute to throat and oral cancer, which can develop over the course of 20 to 30 years, depending on how much tobacco was consumed.

The first signs of oral cancer include a non-healing sore on the tongue for three weeks that won’t go away. Treatment involves surgery and possibly removing the tongue.

“The concept that (flavoured tobacco) might be safer is an illusion,” said Irish. “You’re just wrapping it up with a different wrap, but the end result is going to be the same – tobacco – and the end result is cancer.”

In his Yorkville office, Perley examines the colourful packages of cigarillos, Arabic shisha and miniature cigars. Some have small labels similar to the warning pictures you can find on regular cigarettes.

However, the ingredients are rarely listed on many of these products. One tin of chewing tobacco was show to contain 0.012 mg. of Nitrosamines, .0004 mg. of lead and 27.5 mg. of nicotine.

“The bottom line is, if we have nearly 60,000 Ontario kids using these products, it’s something we want to get rid of,” said Perley.