Cheryl Fernandez-Versini is poised to return to The X Factor on Saturday evening after a throat infection left her appearance hanging in the balance.

The 31-year-old singer was thought to be suffering from the highly contagious strep throat – a bacterial infection that attacks the tonsils and larynx.

But contrary to reports she will be back on the judging panel after making a speedy recovery.

Speaking on Saturday morning, her spokesperson told MailOnline: 'Cheryl is feeling better and will make the live show tonight.'

Scroll down for video

In the balance: Cheryl Fernandez-Versini with her last remaining act, 17-year-old Lauren Platt. The singer was reportedly poised to miss this weekend's show, during which two acts will be eliminated, after being struck down with a highly contagious throat infection

The illness has already kept Cheryl away from rehearsals at Fountain Studios in Wembley, where 17-year-old Lauren Platt – her last remaining act – has been preparing for the forthcoming live show.

The potential absence would see her miss out on a dramatic weekend, with two acts leaving the show – one on Saturday, followed by a second on Sunday.

The former Girls Aloud star is already thought to have faced the wrath of Simon Cowell, who is reportedly less than impressed with her revelation that she would quit the show if she and husband Jean-Bernard become parents.

Back in the fold: Cheryl returned to The X Factor judges panel this year with show debutante Mel B

Reacting to her plans, the 55-year-old music mogul - who has admitted to never changing his baby son Eric's nappies - told The Sun: 'Well, I had one.'

As for whether he'll offer Cheryl a spot on the TV talent contest next year, he said: 'It's too early to say.... I like to let people finish the show, relax over the New Year then see how they feel. So I wouldn't ask Cheryl the question this year.

'But one thing I say to all these judges now is that it's only important to come back if you want to come back for the right reasons, which is you want to find stars, you want to mentor people.

'Yes, the money is always a factor. But Cheryl's got a lot of money. So has Mel, and she has been after this job for five years.'