Prince Havely thought he knew Ben Carson: how he stands, how he talks, how he holds his hands and how those hands hold a scalpel.

For 21 years, Havely has played Carson in “Ben Carson, M.D.,” a children’s theater production seen by a generation of Baltimore area school kids who read Carson’s memoir Gifted Hands as part of their curriculum. Long before Cuba Gooding Jr. played the neurosurgeon on film, before the “political outsider” wave swept the soft-spoken doctor from the far wing of the GOP debates to a center podium, it was Havely’s characterization that indoctrinated thousands of students in the tale of Carson’s rise from poverty to international medical celebrity.

Story Continued Below

But this year, Havely, 56, is seeing a new side of the man he helped turn into a local folk hero.

He has watched Carson, the presidential candidate, seize the attention of the electorate on the strength of his controversial statements—equating Obamacare with slavery, asserting that Jews in World War II could have avoided death camps if more of them had been armed, suggesting that gay marriage leads to bestiality. Havely, a registered Republican, now finds himself trying to reconcile the motivational message of the script with the candidate’s more politically charged discourse.

“All of a sudden you find out all this stuff you don’t know,” he says with a bemused look. “I didn’t expect it. I think he’s growing and evolving like everybody. I don’t think he would even have thought about getting into politics back when I was doing him in the 90s.

“He’s pretty … whew,” he says, trailing off.

But allegations that Carson fabricated significant features of his autobiography—the stabbing of a childhood friend in a “pathological” rage and the candidate's claim that he was admitted to West Point on a full scholarship—have not swayed Havely’s faith in Carson. “I don’t doubt anything he says,” he says.

What is shocking to Havely is that the play is not being staged this year—the first time, he says, since its debut in 1994.

Havely suspects that the directors and crew at Toby’s Youth Theatre in Columbia, Maryland, where the play was born, wanted to avoid any association with Carson’s politics. The theater’s spokesperson rejects that notion, saying that the book on which the play is based is falling out of favor with teachers. “No political agenda on our part,” Janine Sunday of Toby's told Politico in an email. “Just trying to make connections between theatre and the core lessons the students are learning.”

“It’s the perfect time to do the show,” Havely says. “My jaw is on the ground.”

***

Havely had never heard of Carson before he won the role.

In 1993, Havely, a tenor for the National Opera, was performing in a play at Toby’s about Jackie Robinson, but the show closed after local school officials complained there was too much racially insensitive language. The theater went looking for substitute play that would meet the Howard County school system’s list of characteristics it wanted to nurture in its students. The group initially thought of Ben Franklin before discovering another Ben’s story.

For Carole Graham Lehan, the playwright who's now an arts instructor at Glenelg Country School in Ellicott City, Maryland, Carson was the ideal subject for children’s theater, a vessel for kids to “imagine the inner life” at an early age.

In a February 2008 performance of "Ben Carson, M.D." at Doris M. Johnson High School in Baltimore, Prince Havely portrays local icon Ben Carson. | Baltimore Examiner and Washington Examiner | Barbara Haddock Taylor

And Havely, she thought, fresh from his aborted performance as the color barrier-defying baseball player, was the perfect actor to take on the role.

Havely went to school on Carson: He softened his imposing 6-foot-2 framed and toned down his muscular voice to match the slighter Carson’s gentle movements and whispery voice. “I went and interviewed him, I followed him, I watched his patterns. I watched him do lectures in Baltimore. I’ve got all these videos of him. I studied him,” Havely says.

The play’s plot hewed closely to the 1990 memoir Gifted Hands—Carson’s poor childhood in Detroit, his bigamist father, his mother's insistence that he and his brother write book reports even though her third-grade education prevented her from being able to read them. And it made dramatic use of the moment Carson says defined his life—when he claims he stabbed a friend and then prayed in a bathroom for three hours for God to take away his “pathological” anger.

“This young boy with the knife would have ended up in jail or reform school!” the narrator says as Havely, in a surgeon’s smock, turns around to face the audience. “That man with the knife led a team of 70 on a groundbreaking operation!”

That story gained new scrutiny Thursday when CNN interviewed childhood friends of Carson’s from Detroit who said they didn’t remember ever hearing of such an attack. Carson later admitted that he made up the name of the boy he says he stabbed, but Havely stands by the overall veracity of Carson's account.

I’m super nervous,” he recalls. “Ben comes up and he just starts crying. He said that it was so accurate, it was like he was reliving it.”

“That’s what the whole show is about! He never hid any of that,” Havely said Friday. “The whole point of us doing the show was us showing this.”

Carson and his family did more than simply green-light the production. Carson donated family photographs for a video that was projected behind the stage. “Anything we needed, he would give us,” Havely says. Sometimes that included gentle directions on how to play certain scenes.

Havely remembers the first time he played Ben Carson in front of Ben Carson, a kind of thrill he had never approached.

“I’m super nervous,” he recalls. “Ben comes up and he just starts crying. He said that it was so accurate, it was like he was reliving it.”

Havely’s performance schedule was tireless. During the school year it was common for him to perform the show for several thousand students from 50 or more schools in a matter of a few days. Often the schools would make a trip to Toby’s Theatre in Columbia, but Havely and the cast would also take the minimalist production on the road. The show went from a local novelty to a sprawling exposition of Ben Carson literature, including his self-help book Think Big.

As Carson told Politico in an email, “The play was supposed to go for one season and went on for more than 20.”

Havely (second from right) poses with Candy Carson (Ben Carson's wife), Toby Orenstein of Toby's Dinner Theatre, and Ben Carson, Jr. | Courtesy of Prince Havely

Over the years, the Carson family remained devoted to the production. Sonya Carson, Ben’s mother, came to a performance of the play every other week, according to Havely. She was a constant critic of her son’s character and her own, letting Havely and the play’s directors know when the fictional "Mama" got a little too sharp-tongued. In a 1997 feature about Sonya Carson in Parade Magazine, she asked the author to accompany her to the play, where she basked in the “moist eyes” of the students around her.

Havely says that area teachers would arrange for children who had been operated on by Carson to attend the play. Havely would feature them in the post-show Q&A session. He believes the idea of kids seeing Carson’s patients in their classrooms and social circles served to accentuate the force of the Ben Carson lore.

The real Carson saw the play at least once every year starting in 1994. The surgeon, Havely says, didn’t just come to watch. Once, while bringing a group from the Carson Scholars Fund to a performance, Carson stood up in the front row to play himself in the play about himself. “It was cute, because I got ready to end the play, and I go, ‘I have an answer for that: it’s think big!’ He’s in the front row and he goes, ‘Let me take that from here.’ And he comes up, and everybody applauded. It was the coolest thing,” Havely says. On several occasions, Carson brought Havely to dinners and Scholars Fund events to appear in character for a selection of the most memorable scenes.

Although he was invited several times to the Carson home, Havely declined: Two Ben Carsons at one dinner table would be complicated.

“I was just in awe of him. I didn’t go because I felt like I would have overstepped my bounds. He has an aura. You meet him, and it’s different than what you think.” Havely grabs my hand to imitate Carson’s handshake—so light it’s almost impossible to feel.

***

One of the early audience members was David Fraser, now in law school at the University of Baltimore. Fraser grew up in predominantly African-American Randallstown, went to Baltimore County public schools and studied political science at Johns Hopkins. He was in third grade at Hebbville Elementary in 1995 when he first read Gifted Hands and went to the play. He then went to see it again in 1997 after reading Think Big for the first time.