Twenty-five business groups, including several in Western Massachusetts, have asked the state’s congressional delegation for a waiver from a provision of the Affordable Care Act that affects how health insurers calculate premiums.

“Without this waiver, many small employers in this state will see their health insurance premiums increase by as much as 57 percent,” the groups wrote in a letter released by the Associated Industries of Massachusetts. “These steep increases are simply unaffordable for small employers and risk our impressive 97 percent coverage rate in the event that employers discontinue providing health insurance to their employees.”

The issue centers on the number of “ratings factors” a health insurance company can use in calculating insurance premiums. Under Massachusetts’ 2007 health care reform law, the state allows insurance companies to use 11 considerations, or “rating factors,” when determining the cost of a health plan for an individual or small group. These include things like age, industry, participation in a wellness plan, the size of the group insured by the plan and the use of a group purchasing cooperative to buy insurance. The national health care reform law requires insurers to use just four factors when determining the cost of a plan: age, geography, tobacco use and family composition.

Business groups have been warning for months that this could lead insurance rates to spike for some small businesses – even though some businesses and individuals could also see their premiums decrease. Gov. Deval Patrick asked the Obama administration for a waiver from the provision, and was granted a three-year transition period. The Massachusetts Legislature then passed a bill requiring Patrick to return to the federal government and ask for a full waiver. U.S. Secretary of Health and Human Services Kathleen Sebelius denied the request.

The business groups are now turning to the Massachusetts congressional delegation for relief. Signatories to the letter include the Affiliated Chambers of Commerce of Greater Springfield, Berkshire Chamber of Commerce, Greater Chicopee Chamber of Commerce and several other local chambers of commerce and statewide business organizations.

The groups are asking the administration to grant Massachusetts a waiver from the ratings factor change. They also want to waive a requirement that insurers set their rates annually. Currently, Massachusetts insurers set rates every quarter.

The groups argue that the Obama administration has already granted 1,200 waivers of provisions of the Affordable Care Act. Most recently, Obama said insurers will be able to offer existing customers insurance plans for one more year that do not meet the minimum coverage standards required by the law. Obama also delayed by a year the requirement that employers provide health insurance for their employees.

“Given the number of administrative actions and waivers granted, we are left to wonder why our reasonable request for a limited waiver from two small provisions of federal reform has been denied for the one state in the nation that has already accomplished what the federal law is setting out to do,” the business groups wrote.