Photo

HOLETOWN, Barbados — Outside the Barbados airport stands a Rolls-Royce, no doubt waiting to pick up one of the West Indian island’s celebrity residents. Simon Cowell, perhaps, or the singer Rihanna? Any one of the superrich who lend this island a gloss of wealth and well-being.

The Rolls might be taking its famous passenger to one of the west coast resorts of Sandy Lane, the Royal Westmoreland or Sugar Hill. They are all glamorous, all trim and tidy, but, like so many places in the sun, without any great sense of place or time. They could just as easily be in an expensive part of the Algarve in Portugal or Palm Springs, Calif.

But Barbados has a fascinating history, and it has houses to buy that reflect a turbulent and colorful culture.

Drive inland from the crowded west coast, skirt the manicured golf course of Apes Hill resort and the polo field of Lion Castle, past scrappy fields where sugar cane once flourished and through deep bamboo-fringed gullies and huddles of houses of wood and tin roofs, and there, on a sugarloaf hill, is Chimborazo Great House.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It is a solid affair, clad in the gray coral that is the bedrock of the island and surrounded by cherry trees, oranges, mangos, banana and guavas, while green monkeys climb around a bearded fig tree. Through the trees, it is possible to glimpse the east coast, with its unspoiled beaches and rolling waves.

“The house is the highest plantation house on the island at 1,171 feet and is named after Mount Chimborazo in Ecuador,” said Richard Eames, who is not only the owner of the house, which is valued at $2.2 million, but of the company handling the sale, Island Villas. “It was first built in the 1700s when it was an 800-acre estate with slaves picking cotton and cane. Now the estate has shrunk to 3.5 acres and the remaining tenants pay $1 a year in rent.”

Photo

The property is protected by the Barbados National Trust, which preserves the island’s historic buildings, and shares many of the characteristics of traditional plantation homes. It seems likely that the house was rebuilt in the late 18th century or early 19th century, perhaps after a hurricane that tore through the island in 1831. And it was built to last; a wooden frame was filled with stone from below the house and lined with coral “bricks” rather than plaster.

It is possible that Chimborazo once had a third story which was damaged in the storm. When a house is barricaded against a hurricane with its shutters tightly shut, the pressure difference between inside and outside can cause the roof to lift off and walls to collapse. The settlers had a solution: They fitted air vents, six inches in diameter, into the sides of the window frames, which allowed the air in, bypassing the closed shutters and allowing the pressure to equalize.

The vents are still in place, as is the 48-foot gallery/hallway that runs the width of the building and leads to a living area with high ceilings and Canada pine flooring. There are three bedrooms, two of which are en suite, a small pool by a terrace that overlooks the jungle of vegetation, and a large cellar with laundry and staff facilities. Included in the price is a two-bedroom, two-bathroom cottage.

Chimborazo has withstood the tests of hurricanes and time. Other fine old plantation properties on the island have not been so lucky. A protracted and complex scandal involving the collapse of a West Indian insurance company has left many individuals in financial difficulties and several homes in a state of neglect and disrepair.

Todds Plantation, in the middle of the island with its great house and dilapidated outbuildings, has been reduced to $2.47 million from $4.45 million (it is listed with the agency Terra Caribbean). And Villa Nova, built in 1834 and in its heyday owned by Prime Minister Anthony Eden of Britain, was converted into a 28-bedroom hotel in 2001. It has been empty for several years and has been reduced to between $9.5 million and $10 million from $14 million, depending on the agency involved.

But few old properties are more interesting — and challenging — from the developer’s or homeowner’s point of view than the 18th-century Old Pharmacy in the seaside town of Speightstown, one of the few relatively uncommercialized places on the west coast. Admittedly ramshackle, this long, narrow building is painted a bright blue, with tall windows, a balcony that runs the length of the building under a pitched gabled roof and dormer windows. Inside, traces of the old store linger: the shelves for the shoe shop and the pharmacy and, a late addition, a juice bar.

The building is in a Special Development Area, which allows several exemptions from taxes including import duties, consumption tax and stamp duty. A value-added tax on construction and renovation, as well as charges on reparation of interest and capital, are also waived for 10 years.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The Old Pharmacy, priced at $2.75 million by the international real estate agents Knight Frank, totals 18,000 square feet, which includes scruffy land and outbuildings at the back and more than 3,000 square feet of beach to the front. Permission has been granted for a 19-room inn.