Traci Cunningham, a 28-year-old Aurora woman, was charged with the murder of her mother, Eagle County authorities said Sunday.

The body of Penelope Sue Cunningham, 60, was found beside a rural road in the county Friday.

Sheriff’s deputies took Traci Cunningham into custody Saturday, calling her a “person of interest.”

Investigators interviewed her and charged her later in the day with first-degree murder, according to a statement by the Sheriff’s Office.

She is being held without bail at the Eagle County Detention Facility.

A passer-by found Cunningham’s body by the side of Gypsum Creek Road in Gypsum. The body had multiple gunshot wounds.

The county district attorney will file formal charges, according to the Sheriff’s Office.

The mother and daughter lived together in the 12000 block of East Pacific Circle in Aurora.

Traci Cunningham badly injured one of her legs while she was in boot camp and received a medical discharge from the Army, said Gary Lesmann, 53, a neighbor.

The leg was painful, and she took medication for the pain, Lesmann said.

“She would always joke that she would rather have the leg cut off, it was so painful,” Lesmann said.

Traci Cunningham was a free spirit, a hippie who festooned the rear of her silver Hyundai with bumper stickers that included anti-government slogans and references to witchcraft and the Wicca religion, Lesmann said.

She had recently increased the number of tattoos and piercings. “I think she did it more for attention,” Lesmann said. “She is almost like a teenager in a 28-year-old body.”

Traci Cunningham and her mother seemed to get along well, said Carol Lesmann, 54.

“Traci was a little rough around the edges, but she would never fight with her mom,” Carol Lesmann said.

The two were animal lovers who rescued unwanted and abused pets.

At one time, Lesmann said, they had five guinea pigs, some of which had injuries requiring they be nursed back to health.

“I was fortunate to get to know her, and I really hope it wasn’t her,” Carol Lesmann said.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee