Lights, camera, business losses

Brooklyn: We are very happy to know that the film industry is having a positive macro-effect on the city’s economy. But city film commissioner Cynthia Lopez must also recognize the negative impact that film shoots have on retail areas of the city that often end up with blocked storefronts and lost parking for 24 hours or more.

In our area of Brooklyn, we have many destination businesses that draw driving customers from afar who depend on parking. We conservatively estimate each impacted business loses at least $1,000 per day of shooting.

During the holiday season, retail businesses are trying to provide the goods that families need and are making money that sustains them through many slow months of the year. We have asked the mayor to give us a break during the holidays and to shift production permits to after the new year.

We are thrilled that this industry has chosen New York, but accommodating film shoots cannot come at the expense of the small businesses who have been here providing jobs for New Yorkers through thick and thin for decades. Josef Szende, executive director, Atlantic Avenue Business Improvement District

Tragedy plus time

Huntington Beach, Calif.: Life has finally caught up with Bill Cosby. Better late than never. His sinful ways of allegedly sexually abusing women are finally being shouted out loud and clear. Kenneth L. Zimmerman

Accountability now

Astoria: Mr. Mayor, your wife was not elected. If you are going to make her part of your administration, then the public has a right and you have an obligation to answer some questions. What exactly does your wife do? Why does she need a $170,000-a-year chief of staff? A few weeks ago, comments were attributed to your wife about the police commissioner; shouldn’t she have been the one directly answering questions from reporters? I guess transparency is for the other guy. Tim Austin

What’s good for the gander

Staten Island: Rachel Noerdlinger received dispensation from Mayor de Blasio to reside in New Jersey because her son was in two serious automobile accidents. Apparently the son is better now; he plays football for his high school and can travel to New York. Rents and the cost of purchasing a home in the five boroughs, Nassau and Suffolk counties are astronomically high. Since Noerdlinger got dispensation for such a lame excuse, de Blasio should excuse all police, fire and city workers from the law requiring them to live in New York. Why shouldn’t civil servants be allowed to worry less about finances? Susan Esposito

Smart take

Brooklyn: Obamacare expert Jonathan Gruber was right. The voters are stupid. They gave us Bill de Blasio. Edward Brown

Hold the line

Flushing: Can we at least wait to ruin the city until after the royals visit, after the fragile Pope Francis visits and after the Democratic National Convention may be held here? Now you can possess 25 grams of marijuana, and proposals are being made to limit searches without warrants. Why not carry kilos of cocaine in your morning briefcase? In an age of extreme terrorism, including domestic terrorism, this is going too far. This city needs to be safe. I’ve been searched once and I am happy about it. I got a free ride onto the subway afterwards — and I felt like the system was working. Tiffany Olgun

Nothing to see here

Malverne, L.I.: After reading various Voicers’ opinions on this supposedly new policy by the NYPD to only issue summonses for people possessing 25 grams or less of marijuana, I felt it necessary to set the record straight. There is nothing new here! When legislation was passed years ago, marijuana became a violation under the state penal law. As a violation, a subject can receive a summons in lieu of arrest, provided he or she is properly identified and has no warrants issued against him or her. David Kalin

Sky: still there

Manhattan: According to the Daily News, “The city experienced the lowest crime rate in August, September and October since at least 1994, new statistics show” (“A prime time for low crime,” Nov. 17). How is this possible? The all-knowing editors of the Daily News, champions of the police state, and all the right-wing bloviators were certain we would return to the bad old days if we abandoned the Gestapo practice of stop-and-frisk. How could the editors of The News ever be wrong? David Fantaci

Laff riot

Bellerose: Arthur Laffer (“N.Y.’s suffocating tax burden,” op-ed, Nov. 17) claims that state and city taxes are killing business. Sorry, I’m not buying it. A quick Internet search reveals that Laffer’s business is located in Nashville, and prior to that in San Diego. If so many are migrating out of this city, good riddance; many more are banging down the door. He thinks our public services stink? I would put them up against those of any other American city any day. There is a reason some of the wealthiest citizens of our nation are here. They seem to be doing all right despite his alarm. Michelle Cronin

Small pest, big problem

Syosset, L.I.: My elderly parents — father 90, mother 87 — are faced with bedbugs for the second time. They reside in a Mitchell-Lama co-op, Big Six Towers in Woodside, Queens. And yes, we have contacted management, who told us it was “our problem.” The first time, we did a very expensive prep of the apartment, sent items to bedbug laundry and followed all the protocol. Not even two months have passed and the bedbugs are back. If bedbugs are in one apartment, they are in others. The building needs to be prepped and fumigated at the co-op’s expense. Randi Portnoy

Everyone’s a fashion critic

Brooklyn: What an unglamorous, horribly clad bunch of ladies at the Hollywood Film Awards. The host, Queen Latifah, wore a gown that made her already ample body look ampler. A bespectacled, tall, wide-shouldered Laura Dern wore an-off-the-wide shoulder, little black flirty dress that was so not her! Keira Knightley wore what looked like a take on Scarlett O’Hara’s “drapery” gown, but was like a bedspread. And Angelina Jolie looked like death warmed over, a veritable skeleton. Where are you, Edith Head? Ruth Biller

The system works

Oceanside, L.I.: To Voicer Marilyn Miller: Your opinion on the Electoral College is a left-leaning view. If you look at the population of the U.S., you will see that New York City alone has over 8 million people living there. That population, plus the left side of this country, namely California, would be electing every President. You want to talk about disenfranchisement of voters? We had three choices when this country was forming: Have Congress pick a President, use the popular vote, or go the only fair way — the Electoral College. Leave the Electoral College alone. Al Fabiano

To ARIS is human

Mineola, L.I.: While it’s nice to hear that the Education Department will no longer be shelling out millions of dollars to Joel Klein and his company for “maintaining” the nine-figure disaster known as ARIS, the tragic part is how many schools were left without some of the bare necessities while this whole mess was allowed to go on. Who will be held accountable for this? Gary Malone

Tribal concerns

Bellerose, L.I.: You must be kidding! The Sioux tribe is declaring an “act of war” if the Keystone pipeline goes through? The entire country is to be held at bay because Native Americans want to shake down the government? Paul Dellacona

Aksed, answered

Melville, L.I.: To Voicer James F. Tobin: I’ve always wondered the same thing, although all this time to me it sounded like a lot of people were “axing” or getting “axed.” I feel better now that I know that actual people haven’t been hacked up, just our English language. Dorothy Boyle

Enough already

South Nyack, N.Y.: Would you please stop printing any more news on Kaci Hickox? Her latest whining complaint about bearing the “Ebola nurse” label is just attracting more attention to her, something she professes not to want. Let’s put attention on the many health care workers and doctors who risk their lives every day without drawing notice to themselves, not to mention the ones who gave their lives. Grace Araujo