PRINCETON — When Elena Kagan was studying history as a student at Princeton University, a career in law as a Supreme Court Justice never crossed her mind, she said.

“Life is long and it takes lots of twists and turns, and you can’t ever know where you’re going to end up,” said Kagan, sitting with university President Christopher Eisgruber Thursday night in the school’s Richardson Auditorium as they spoke of the Constitution and American justice system.

Kagan, 54, graduated from Princeton in 1981 and earned a master’s in philosophy from The University of Oxford in 1983. She graduated from Harvard Law School in 1986 and served as the school’s dean from 2003 to 2009.

President Barack Obama nominated her in 2009 as the solicitor general of the United States and as an associate justice of the Supreme Court on May 10, 2010. She took her seat on Aug. 7, 2010.

The last time Kagan visited the Princeton campus, she said, was for her 25th reunion eight years ago. Everything she learned about writing was through her Princeton education, she said.



“I love Princeton. I think all of you folks that go to Princeton are incredibly lucky, at least if it’s anything like what it was then, and I suspect it’s better,” Kagan said.

Once an opinion has come out, Kagan said, much of the communication within the court is in writing, rather than verbal exchanges. Email hasn’t quite hit; a chamber’s aide walks written memos around the building, Kagan said.

“Maybe part of it is an attachment to tradition,” she said. “But there have been a lot of emails that I’ve sent — I don’t know about you — where I click the send button and then think, ‘Eh, what did I just do?’”

On the Constitution’s “due process” clause and issues of equality, Kagan said some part’s of the document are written in such abstract and vague terms that they’re difficult to interpret.



“When the Constitution says you’re entitled to due process of law and you’re entitled to the equal protection of law, trying to give that content meaning — it can’t be done by just staring at the words,” she said.

One option is to decide what the drafters’ intended when they put the Constitution together and come up with a list of practices they thought were prohibited or not, Kagan said. But that’s not the best way to go about it, she said.

“One way you know that is that it leads to results that are simply untenable,” she said, citing segregation in schools and misogyny issues.

Instead, it’s important for judges to start with the original meaning of the Constitution and observe how it’s developed and applied in different ways over time, she said.

“For me, I think it’s really important what the history over time has been, so it’s not just the history at the particular moment but it really is the history of our republic, in a sense,” she said. “I myself am a big precedent person. Some people call it a common law constitutionalist.”

Eisgruber asked Kagan if judges think about how particular decisions they make might result in political backlash.



“It’s super rare that justices do or that they should. For the most part, you have a job to do, and your job is to apply the law as best you can,” Kagan said. But to some degree, justices must think about the consequences of their actions and avoid making hasty decisions, she said.

To those that say justices typically rule along political party lines, Kagan said the court doesn’t experience such divisions as in politics. Last year, 60 percent of the opinions the nine justices issued were unanimous, she said.

Eisgruber called attention to an op-ed piece printed in The New York Times this month written by Paul Krugman, a Princeton faculty member, that he said accuses the conservative wing of the court of being corrupt because of its willingness to attack the Affordable Care Act.



Is there any reason to worry about corruption in the Supreme Court, Eisgruber asked.

“There is not a day in my job that I have ever thought that anybody was not doing everything that they do in utter, complete good faith,” Kagan said. “You can disagree with people, and you will disagree with people, but everybody is trying to get it right.”

Nicole Mulvaney may be reached at nmulvaney@njtimes.com. Follow her on Twitter @NicoleMulvaney. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.