Republican voters will see two candidates on their primary election ballot June 24 for an office that hasn't been contested in 36 years — Larimer County coroner.

The county coroner is responsible for determining the cause and manner of death, informing the appropriate officials and family members.

Dr. James Wilkerson and Carolyn Speshock are in the running. Wilkerson is a colleague of current County Coroner Dr. Patrick Allen and is a regional medical examiner and a Triple Board Certified pathologist. Speshock is a former crime scene investigator and former field deputy medical examiner, certified in crime scene investigation and DNA analysis and in death investigation.

Wilkerson is running on a campaign of continuing the work of Allen and the county office, while Speshock is running on a campaign of change.

According to Wilkerson, the county coroner's office is a professional one with good people and a good system.

"Dr. Allen has developed a medical examiner system. The National Association of Medical Examiners accredited the office, which is unusual for a small place," Wilkerson said.

Both Wilkerson and Speshock agree that instituting a full medical examiner system for Larimer County would be preferable; the difference is Speshock would like to push for an assessment of a centralized and statewide medical examiner system while Wilkerson thinks it would be too costly for the county, in addition to recognizing the county's reluctance to give that authority to the state.

Advertisement

There are a few differences between a statewide medical examiner system and a coroner system. In the centralized system Speshock is referring to, she said costs would be shared across the state and a medical examiner would be appointed, rather than elected. A central office would send investigators to the field and the medical examiner would conduct the autopsies.

While the county has studied this issue in 2011, a task force decided against the medical examiner system, but Speshock wants to bring the issue back to the table.

"It seems to be preferential with other states; it seems to bring more continuity to other states," she said.

Wilkerson, however, says building a toxicology lab and finding the resources would be too expensive, so the way the office is run now is similar to a medical examiner system using local resources and a coroner.

But that's not the only change Speshock is planning to make if elected.

The county contracts pathology services with Allen and Wilkerson through their private practices. They also provide private services to other Colorado counties and southern Wyoming.

While the state sets the coroner's salary at $87,300, Allen and Wilkerson, if elected, chose to not accept the salary but instead receive payment by the autopsy. The autopsy average charge is about $856 to the county. In 2012, the office conducted 209 complete forensic autopsies.

Speshock said this is unethical and costing the county too much money, creating a "potential for corruption."

"I will be a full-time coroner for Larimer County," she said. "I will represent ... Larimer County and Larimer County alone."

Because Speshock is not a pathologist, someone else will need to be hired and paid to do autopsies, but she said that will remove any conflict of interest.

Wilkerson insists that the current arrangement poses no issues.

"The county hired an attorney and they have a legal opinion," Wilkerson said.

And that opinion, according to Wilkerson, is he could take the salary and benefits as coroner and charge for autopsies as a private pathologist. But he said he has chosen to save the county money but not taking the salary.

Another change Speshock is planning to make if elected is in management. The office has 5.5 full-time employees who are paid $537,000 in staff salaries and benefits of its $968,000 budget, so she said she plans to "reduce inflated salaries" and "put an end to questionable hiring practices."

Wilkerson, on the other hand said he wants to continue the work of Allen.

"The office is very good, and I look forward to being its leader," he said.

Wilkerson said he not only has the medical background and experience for the job but he also has the legal experience because he testifies a couple of times a month for a disposition.

"I know what's important in a case, how to collect it and how to perserve it," he said.

One change Wilkerson said he would make is to use more "scientific" identification in cases, something he admits many coroner's offices do not use. But Wilkerson served for 11 years active duty in the Army as a pathologist.

"We were more rigorous while we were in the military," he said.

Both Speshock and Wilkerson agreed about the importance of the race, despite that many don't notice it.

"It's important to have a coroner mostly because of the interaction with the legal system ... It's important to take care of the deceased and their families," Wilkerson said.

And that's why Speshock wants to make the office more visible by working with victim advocate groups and"managing the ethical responsibilities of the office in regards to personnel, speaking with families and obtaining records."

Wilkerson said he wants to maintain the environment of the office.

"People who have to interact with the coroner will respect a proessional and compassionate office," he said.

Regardless of the outcome of the race, Speshock said she's happy to be in it.

"It's been a life-changing event ... it's really helped me realize how one person can make a difference through our caucus system here in Colorado, that it can be a grassroots effort," she said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Saja Hindi at 970-669-5050 ext. 521 or hindis@reporter-herald.com.