Dr. Nandi's empathy is apparent in his one on one interviews Ask Dr. Nandi, an informational, heart-felt and often humorous medical talk show, capsulized for easy digestion. Past News Releases RSS

The critically acclaimed Ask Dr. Nandi show airs to over 55 million viewers every weekday on the Impact Network on Comcast and Dish, as well as DIYA TV in San Francisco, Chicago, Atlanta, Dallas, and San Jose.

Partha and Kali Nandi, the shows creators and executive producers, aim to build a studio in Detroit that features a free clinic where experts appearing on the show can care for patients in need.

Upcoming shows will cover exciting and relevant topics such as infertility with celebrated infertility specialist Jill Blakeway (yinovacenter.com), founder and Clinic Director of the YinOva Center, one of the largest acupuncture clinics in the United States.

Energy medicine will be discussed with renowned healer Adam McLeod (dreamhealer.com), who was able to heal his mother from her debilitating multiple sclerosis pain when he was just 13. He says we all have this gift, and he will teach the audience how to unleash their own healing power.

Explore mindfulness with our experts. The Buddha advocated that everyone should establish mindfulness in their day-to-day life, maintaining a calm awareness of their body, feelings, and mind. Mindfulness meditation teacher to the stars Dr. Donna Rockwell (donnarockwell.com), and stressed television producer turned mindfulness meditation enthusiast Mark Koberg http://www.markkoberg.com, will demonstrate how simple mindfulness practices can change your life.

Mike Gibson, Vice President for Grants at The Thiel Foundation (thielfoundation.org), will talk about success and the Thiel Fellows, a group of students under 20 who are given $100,000 to drop out of college to pursue other work such as scientific research or creating a start-up. Are some people just born to be successful? Is college necessary? What can you do to increase your success? Those questions and more will be answered during this enlightening episode.

Join us to learn about the poverty trap with representatives from Matrix Human Services (matrixhumanservices.org), an organization that is fighting poverty in Detroit with programs designed to support, educate, and empower families, children, men, and women. The generational cycle of poverty can be broken, and you can help.

Richard H. Bernstein, who has been blind since birth, will be a featured guest on our blindness episode. Bernstein is an attorney at The Law Offices of Sam Bernstein, an adjunct professor at the University of Michigan, and a passionate advocate for disabled rights. He is also an avid runner, having completed 17 marathons and an Ironman Triathlon. Come hear him tell his inspirational story.

Can’t get enough of Dr. Nandi? Join him at these exciting events in Detroit! Dr. Nandi will speak about colon cancer at the Men’s Health Event at Ford Field on September 21st, and on October 2nd he will discuss healthcare at the TedX Detroit event at Cobo Center.

Be a part of the LIVE STUDIO AUDIENCE- Visit askdrnandi.com for free tickets.

For media inquiries, please email Kristen Wolosonowich at kristen(at)askdrnandi(dot)com.