Lung cancer patient Carla Willson and daughters cope with treatment regimen through Operation Choose Joy

Carla Willson sits with her daughters Robyn Willson, left, and Jessica Wicker. The trio have created Operation Choose Joy to bring some humor to Carla's cancer treatments. ( Jeannie Lancaster / For the Reporter-Herald )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

»

When Carla Willson's lung cancer returned after six years of remission, her family was devastated.

"In January, we went to see the oncologist," said Willson, 66. "He basically said, 'If you do nothing, you have a month, if you do something, you have a year.'"

But what would that year look like? Willson chose to undergo chemotherapy. It was a hard journey, but then something changed.

In March, Willson had pain and went to the hospital. X-rays showed that she had pneumonia. "I was not in very good shape," she said. "They really didn't want me to go home."

The X-ray department wheeled her over to McKee's Cancer Center. Through the process, she grew tired of being repeatedly asked to state her name and her birth date, something hospitals are required to diligently double check.

She grabbed one of the stickers from her patient file and put it on her forehead.

"It was a moment of defiance," said her daughter Robyn Willson, who lives with her mother. Robyn decided to stick one on her forehead as well.

"Everybody laughed, the doctors and nurses," said Carla. "It was joyful to them, to see what we had done.

"It just changed everyone's demeanor and her attitude," said Robyn. "It made it not about us and not about that [cancer] thing. It was about being silly."

Shortly after that, Robyn came up with an idea. "I think we should do something to make other people laugh every time that we go to the hospital."

Advertisement

Carla was not sure, but eventually came on board. Doing something every time she went to the hospital felt a little overwhelming, so they settled on doing it when she went for chemotherapy.

Together with one of Carla's other daughters, Jessica Wicker, they decided to call their efforts Operation Choose Joy. Every two weeks, when Carla undergoes chemotherapy, she and Robyn dress up in crazy costumes and carry treats for the nurses working that day.

"The themes started with things that were going on in life," said Wicker. "When they did Superman, my son and I had just been to Comic Con. We got inspiration from that."

Since April, they have appeared at chemo wearing a wide array of costumes, from ballerinas to Broncos, Hawaiian dancers to silly hats. When they showed up wearing large, red clown noses, Carla's oncologist Dr. Samuel Shelanski said, "That's not from the chemo you know."

"One of the things that has happened is that before, when I knew that I had to go in for chemo, I was depressed," said Carla. "I'd say, no, I don't want to do this anymore. It was pretty awful.

"Now, it's changed. I called Robyn yesterday and told her I was going into Goodwill, what did she think I should look for? That's what's on my mind — the costumes and how can we get a cookie or cupcake or something to go along with our theme."

Carla is grateful for her family. They have freed her to focus on her journey with cancer. "Robyn would say, 'Mom, you're fighting cancer, that's all I want you to do. Those words allowed me to not worry about it.

"Now the times that I'm able to do something are such a blessing, but those times that I can't, I'm free. The most important thing is to just fight the cancer."

Visits from her grandchildren have helped too. "On days that I've been down, Jessica bringing them over has pulled me out of the pit," she shared.

Jessica, who takes her mother to her labs and shopping, is working to get the word out about Operation Choose Joy. "I want people to feel the way that I do," she said. "Because I was so scared [when mom's cancer came out of remission], and now I'm not."

"I post the pictures on Instagram," said Robyn. The family also has three Operation Choose Joy videos on YouTube with Carla and Robyn singing in the car on their way to chemo.

"If my silly little story can inspire somebody, let's go for it," said Carla. Her wish is that others could have a "Joy Team" too.

What is joy to Carla Willson? "It's like a bubbling from inside," she shared. "I believe it comes from God, and it's not just a bubbling, it's strength."

That strength to look adversity in the eye and still find moments of joy is what keeps Carla and her family going. "The doctor says she has this amount of time," said Robyn, "But right now we still can choose to do something awesome."