I spent a good 30 minutes on the phone yesterday, trying to sort out a $30 charge from my mammogram provider that I felt sure I didn't owe.

I've written exhaustively about Obamacare, including the "free" annual preventive health screening and immunization services to which insured consumers are now entitled without paying a co-pay or deductible. So, I knew that annual mammograms for women 40 and older are on that list. What's more, I knew that my insurer recently approved the latest screening technology -- three-dimensional mammograms -- which is what I had this last visit. So, it gnawed at me to see any amount due.

It was only $30, but $30 is $30. Plus, it's the principle of it all.

I called my provider who -- despite my Obamacare, no cost sharing-for-preventive services speech -- told me simply that's what my insurance company agreed to pay. So, I called my insurer who -- after my Obamacare, no cost sharing-for-preventive services speech -- told me the issue was how the bill was coded; that the mammogram was coded as "preventive" and paid 100 percent, but a radiologist's fee was billed as "diagnostic" and that $30 was my part of her charge.

I was more than aggravated, feeling like we consumers -- who are being asked to take greater parts in driving our health care decisions and subsequent costs -- are being misled. I mean how many people even know enough of the Obamacare, no cost sharing-for-preventive services stuff to even question their bills.

I'm not surprised that a recent national survey by VSP Vision Care found Americans prefer tax season to the September through November Open Enrollment, and would much rather grocery shop or host a family gathering than suffer through the ritual of choosing their annual medical plan.

Virtually ever year, The Oklahoman offers tips for Open Enrollment. Perhaps the most important is adding up monthly premiums and what you're likely to pay over the coming year for doctors' visits, prescription drugs and other medical services under each of the plan options. Then choose the one with the least out-of-pocket costs that meets your needs. Remember, plans with the lowest deductibles typically carry the highest premiums for richer benefits you may not need.

Though we say "free" annual preventive services, they're far from free. For my daughter and I, I pay a little more than $5,000 in premiums alone; a huge chink in my modest annual salary -- not to mention the taxes you and I pay to cover the uninsured in America or help fund the subsidized premiums that lower-income workers are getting through Obamacare.

My insurance company worked with my mammogram provider, who agreed to submit a new claim coded correctly as "preventive."

Meanwhile, while I was on the phone with them, I asked the customer service rep to check that a gastroenterologist I'm planning to see is still within my network and uses an in-network facility. In a colonoscopy I had five years ago, she removed a polyp. Though it was benign, doctors recommend I repeat the test now five years later -- vs. the usual 10-year gap.

If consumers mistakenly use an out-of-network provider or one that uses an out-of-network facility, they inadvertently could run up health care costs for themselves as well as the industry. Meanwhile, there's a chance I'll owe something on my "free" preventive colonoscopy screening, the insurance company rep explained.

If the GI doctor, during the screening, found she needed to perform surgery, then the procedure potentially could be coded medical versus preventive, and I could owe hundreds of dollars.

It's all just so tedious. Consumer-driven health care is driving me crazy! Quite literally, it's a pain in the b--t.

Mind Your Own Business @ home and @ the office.