The 2016 Democratic debate has focused mainly on differences of degree between Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton.

Sanders wants to provide an expanded Medicare for all Americans. Clinton wants instead to build on the Affordable Care Act.

The Vermont senator wants to break up the big banks and provide free tuition at all public colleges and universities. The former Secretary of State wants to place new restrictions on financial institutions and help students graduate debt-free from public universities.

Sanders would “move as aggressively as we can to normalize relations with Iran.” Clinton wants “more good days before we move more rapidly toward any kind of normalization.”

But Sunday’s last debate before the Feb. 1 Iowa caucuses and Feb. 9 New Hampshire primary showed the real difference is that Sanders is proposing an expansive (and expensive) array of ideal goals, while Clinton is presenting what she terms “a sensible achievable agenda.”

That difference explains why Sanders is waging such a strong challenge to Clinton in Iowa, which has a very liberal Democratic party — one recent poll showed 43 percent of likely Democratic caucus-goers consider themselves socialists, compared with 38 percent capitalists — and leads in sometimes nonconformist New Hampshire, where candidates from neighboring states have always done well.

But it also explains why Clinton remains strongly favored for the Democratic nomination. She holds a much bigger margin among the majority of Democrats stressing candidate experience than he does among the smaller proportion preferring major change.

Each defined his candidacy in terms aimed at those strengths in the NBC News-YouTube-Congressional Black Caucus debate in South Carolina, which also included former Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley.

“We need a president who can do all aspects of the job,” Clinton said, looking comfortable with both international and domestic issues. “This campaign is about a political revolution to not only elect a president but to transform a country,” Sanders said, repeatedly denouncing the political power of Wall Street’s “millionaires and billionaires” and Clinton’s receipt of speaking fees from Goldman Sachs.

Given Washington’s current political gridlock, the near-certainty Republicans will retain at least one house of Congress, and continuing GOP resistance to President Barack Obama’s initiatives, it seems unlikely any Democratic president can produce a revolution. Obama was elected on a platform of sweeping change, but encountered a far different reality, and either Clinton or Sanders would have less Democratic congressional support.

More than previously, Clinton portrayed herself as Obama’s heir, seeking to expand his initiatives, and criticized Sanders as a less committed Obama supporter who sought someone to oppose him in 2012. Her position was aimed at the vast majority of Democrats who support his presidency, especially the large African-American population in South Carolina, whose primary comes right after Iowa and New Hampshire.

Still, Sanders’ more emotional and ideological appeals have resonated among younger voters, independents and liberal Democrats who believe Obama failed to end income inequality and transform the political system.

The candidates’ comments on Sanders’ sweeping health care proposals illustrated the contrast. Soft-pedaling prior criticism he would scrap Obamacare, Clinton said, “We have accomplished so much already…and I don’t want to start over again with a contentious debate. I want to defend the Affordable Care Act and improve it.”

“We’re not going to tear up the Affordable Care Act,” Sanders replied. “But we are going to move on top of that to a Medicare-for-all system,” he added, citing President Franklin Roosevelt’s and Harry Truman’s quest for universal coverage.

A new NBC News-Wall Street Journal poll showed that, of slightly more than half of Democratic primary voters favoring a seasoned, tested candidate, Clinton has a 4-to-1 lead. But among the smaller group wanting a candidate of change, Sanders leads only 4-to-3.

Both recognize the immediate race depends on Iowa and New Hampshire. Past history suggests that a Sanders lead in both would erode her lead in later states like South Carolina. But the general consensus remains that, even with early setbacks, she would probably ultimately prevail.

The difference, said Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia Center for Politics, is “whether Hillary Clinton comes into Philadelphia (for the Democratic Convention) either sweeping or limping. If she loses both Iowa and New Hampshire, and if she loses New Hampshire by a big margin, I think she'll be limping."

But probably still winning.

Carl P. Leubsdorf is the former Washington bureau chief of The Dallas Morning News. Reach him at carl.p.leubsdorf@gmail.com.