4823663

A major national union asked its members Tuesday what they fear if someone who doesn’t stand with working families, like a Republican, is elected president in 2016.

The Service Employees International Union (SEIU) is one of the largest national labor unions in the country. It represents 1.9 million workers primarily in the service and healthcare industries. It is also very politically active and often opposed to Republicans. The union asked its members in an action alert message what they fear most about a president that doesn’t stand with working families.

“What’s your biggest fear if we elect a president in 2016 who doesn’t stand with working families?” the action alert noted. “The stakes couldn’t be higher, with many Republican presidential candidates moving more and more to the extreme right and the GOP-controlled leadership in Congress is joining them.”

Members can list that they are fearful of attacks on immigrant families, attacks on women’s reproduction rights, minimum wages, climate change and voter identification laws. All the policies listed are areas Republicans and labor unions tend to disagree on.

“The Republican-controlled Congress repeals Obamacare and a new president fails to veto it, reversing all the gains we’ve made in getting families covered with health insurance,” the action alert continued. “As a country, we fail to deal with factors that cause the catastrophic climate change affecting our everyday lives.”

At the moment, no major Republican presidential candidate has explicitly said they stand opposed to working families. For instance, while unions and Democrats tend to support raising the minimum wage, Republicans are opposed out of concern it may cause job loss and higher cost for goods and services.

Healthcare is another issue Republicans and unions disagree on. While supporters of Obamacare argue it will help more people afford health insurance, critics warn it is more likely to cause major problems. There have even been reports the law has made it harder for some to get healthcare.

The SEIU did not respond to a request for comment from The Daily Caller News Foundation.

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@ dailycallernewsfoundation.org.