The federal fight over flood insurance rates could be revived this year.

U.S. Rep. Steve Scalise said today he would like to bring back discussion over the controversial National Flood Insurance Program that expires next year.

In 2014, Congress put off reforms officials said would have made flood insurance rates unaffordable for many local residents and others in flood-prone areas across the U.S. The program remains in debt by an estimated $24 billion.

“I want to see something done to help the people of south Louisiana,” the House majority whip said in an interview after addressing legislative issues at the South Central Industrial Association's monthly meeting at Cypress Columns in Gray.

Scalise also hopes for progress on bills that would aid the ailing oilfield industry. Some experts now project the price of crude oil, which reached as high as $114 in summer 2014, could drop as low as $20 this year.

Bills that have passed through the House would open restricted parts of the Outer Continental Shelf in the Gulf to oil and gas exploration and lift the revenue sharing cap on the Gulf of Mexico Energy Security Act, or GOMESA.

GOMESA turns oil and gas royalties into coastal restoration dollars across Gulf states starting next year, with Louisiana expected to receive about $150 million to $170 million annually. But the program is capped at $500 million, which has drawn the ire of Republican congressmen.

During his address to the SCIA, Scalise took shots at President Barack Obama’s plan to defeat ISIS, the president's economic policy and the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

“Small business owners are having trouble hiring people,” Scalise said. “We sent a bill to the president that guts Obamacare and defunds Planned Parenthood. The president vetoed it and we’ll have a veto override on that next week.”

Looking back at 2015, Scalise told the group he was proud of efforts to lift a decades-old ban on exporting crude oil and a six-year transportation bill, championed by U.S. Rep. Garret Graves, that puts projects such as the elevated La. 1 and I-49 South in line to receive federal dollars.

“We had some really good wins for our region, and hopefully we’ll be able to build on that,” Scalise said. “It’s going to be very exciting in 2016.”

Scalise offered only a broad picture of what’s to come this year with a shortened session because of a presidential election.

He said he hopes real solutions present themselves during the race to replace the term-limited Obama. He compared campaigns to date to “championship wrestling” with candidates just trying to scream the loudest.

“Hopefully we see a broader national debate,” he said.

Senior Staff Writer Jacob Batte can be reached at 448-7635 or jacob.batte@dailycomet.com. Follow him on Twitter @ja_batte.