Xi Jinping, the president of China, entertained world leaders in Beijing. He announced an intention to forge a Free-Trade Area of the Asia-Pacific as well as, with President Barack Obama of America, a commitment to bring down greenhouse gases. While America pledged to reduce carbon emissions by 26-28% by 2025, China says its emissions will peak around 2030, the first time it has committed to a date. Mr Xi also met the prime minister of Japan, Shinzo Abe, for the first time since he came to power in 2012. The two sides agreed to manage their dispute over the islands more carefully. See article

Afghanistan’s harvest of opium poppies rose 17% in 2014, to a record high. Some 224,000 hectares (554,000 acres) of the country is given over to poppy cultivation. Billions of dollars have been spent by the West in attempts to eradicate the crop.

In this section Politics this week

Business this week

KAL's cartoon

In South Korea the captain of a ferry that capsized in April, killing over 300, mainly students, was sentenced to 36 years in prison for negligence. Some of the victims’ families wanted him executed.

At least fifteen women in India died after botched sterilisations in a government-run camp. A doctor was arrested.

Victims of an ancient dispute

Two Israelis, one of them a soldier, died after being stabbed in separate incidents amid tension over calls by some Jewish activists for the right to pray atop the Temple Mount in Jerusalem. The site is the third-holiest in Islam, with the al-Aqsa mosque and the Dome of the Rock. Israeli officials say they do not plan to change the status quo, under which Muslims have the exclusive right to pray there. See article

Russia agreed to build eight nuclear reactors for Iran. The deal was announced ahead of a new round of talks on November 18th, aimed at ensuring that Iran’s nuclear programme does not give it the capability to build weapons. See article

Mali reported that two people have died from Ebola in a setback for a country that was initially thought to have overcome an earlier outbreak of the disease. The two dead were a traditional healer, who had crossed the border from Guinea, and a nurse. Médecins Sans Frontières, a medical charity, said new clinical trials to develop treatments for Ebola would begin next month. More than 5,000 people have died from the disease. See article

The lawyer looking into the bids for the 2018 and 2022 football World Cups denounced FIFA’s report, which cleared Qatar, the host for 2022, of bribery. Michael Garcia said that the report, which was based on his work, “contains numerous materially incomplete and erroneous representations of the facts and conclusions.” Meanwhile, Morocco was stripped of its right to host next year’s African Cup of Nations football tournament after it asked for a postponement because of concerns that visitors might bring the Ebola virus. The country’s team has been disqualified from participating.

A less relaxing break

The European Court of Justice ruled that European Union countries can bar immigrants from claiming benefits if they have no prospects of work. The ruling opens the way for EU countries to curb “benefit tourism”. See article

Ed Miliband, leader of Britain’s opposition Labour Party, was the target of criticism and reports in the press of plots to oust him. His personal ratings are low—74% of voters think that he is performing poorly—and his party’s polling lead over the Conservatives has collapsed. See article

NATO and the Organisation for Security and Co-operation in Europe said Russia had moved columns of trucks, artillery and armoured vehicles into secessionist regions in eastern Ukraine. Kiev announced that it was sending reinforcements to the area, as a ceasefire agreed in September appeared to have collapsed. Observers fear the breakaway pro-Russian rebels may launch a new offensive. See article

A spacecraft landed on 67 P/Churyumov-Gerasimenko,a 4km-wide comet. The unmanned lander, called Philae, was launched from Rosetta, a European probe in orbit around the comet. Scientists remain unsure whether it is securely anchored.

The Spanish region of Catalonia held an unofficial vote on whether to become a separate state. Of those who voted, 81% backed independence, but only 37% of the electorate had turned out. The government in Madrid said the poll was invalid. See article

Jean-Claude Juncker, president of the European Commission, denied being the “architect” of Luxembourg’s generous corporate-tax rules. Mr Juncker was the country’s prime minister from 1995 to 2013.

Feeling the heat

The political crisis facing Mexico’s president, Enrique Peña Nieto, is worsening. Protests continued over the government’s handling of the disappearance in September of 43 students, who had apparently been kidnapped by police and murdered by a drug gang in the state of Guerrero. Angry crowds of protesters set fire to the doors of the National Palace in Mexico City. See article

A Mexican news outlet revealed that the $7m mansion that Mr Peña shares with his family belongs to a businessman who has links to a Chinese-led consortium that won a controversial bid to construct a railway. Mr Peña, who cancelled the contract before the report, denies wrongdoing.

Obamacare under attack

America’s Supreme Court said it would hear a case that seeks to hobble Obamacare by enforcing its text. The law offers subsidies to Americans who buy health insurance on state-run exchanges. The Obama administration offers them through a federal exchange, too. Plaintiffs in King v Burwell say that is illegal. If they win, many Americans could lose medical cover. See article

New York City police stopped arresting people for possessing fewer than 25g of marijuana. The drug is still illegal, but offenders will be fined $100—more than for smoking tobacco in a park, but less than for many parking offences.

The Mormon church admitted that its 19th-century founder, Joseph Smith, married up to 40 wives. Polygamy it said, was “difficult for all involved”. For Smith’s first wife, Emma, it was an “excruciating ordeal”. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day Saints outlawed “plural marriage” in 1890.