Buy Photo The April 27, 2011, edition of The Butler Collegian announced that James M. Danko had been hired as the university’s 21st president. (Photo: Matt Detrich / The Star)Buy Photo

When I heard rumblings that Butler University officials had recently dismissed the faculty adviser for its independent student newspaper, The Butler Collegian, and replaced her with the school’s spokesperson, I had immediate concerns about such a bone-headed move.

Guess who I called? Marc Allan, Butler’s associate director of public relations, to ask why university officials had selected him, Marc Allan, to advise the student publication.

See the immediate conflict there?

I have no doubt that Allan, a newspaper reporter for more than two decades and a former adjunct journalism instructor at Butler, was qualified to advise the students. But in his capacity as the university’s public relations professional, his duties are directly at odds with helping aspiring journalists who may need guidance uncovering unflattering news about the university or its administration.

“I’m a person of integrity,” Allan said.

Yes, but he’s not the right person for the job.

Late Friday afternoon, Butler officials finally grasped this fact after feeling the heat from journalists and professional journalism organizations nationwide. Instead of Allan, Nancy Whitmore, director of the Eugene S. Pulliam School of Journalism, will act as an interim adviser while the university searches for a permanent replacement.

Allan had been put in a horrible position by university officials, who were directly violating The Collegian’s staff manual — the publication’s rules, policies and procedures — that require the adviser to be a full-time faculty member in the School of Journalism.

And Allan acknowledged the potential friction the arrangement could have created. He was forced to reach out to a network of professional journalists who would have advised the student journalists if they didn’t feel comfortable turning to him for certain stories.

Earlier this week, Matthew VanTryon, The Collegian’s editor in chief, was told, not consulted, that longtime adviser Loni McKown was being removed from her job and that Allan would replace her. I met VanTryon last month when I spoke at a journalism boot camp for Collegian staffers. He’s a sharp young man, and quickly saw the potential for problems.

“There’s no denying it — there is a conflict of interest there,” he said. “From a journalistic perspective you can’t get around it, no matter what system you have in place.”

Still, VanTryon pledged to keep his staff focused on being student journalists, covering the news and keeping the campus informed. On Friday afternoon, Butler officials finally did the right thing by including VanTryon in the discussions about who should replace Allan. He helped make the final decision. It’s clear, though, that VanTryon respected McKown as his leader.

“I think the loss of Loni as an adviser is a loss to The Collegian,” he said. “I have been greatly impacted by her mentorship, her teaching and her advising. It’s disappointing that those opportunities will no longer be there for me and other students.”

I spoke at length with McKown about her removal. She served as the adviser for six years, and under her leadership, The Butler Collegian earned numerous national, state and regional awards. I also met her at the journalism boot camp for her students, and her passion for journalism and teaching was palpable.

She said she wasn’t given a specific reason for her dismissal as adviser — she’s still permitted to teach her journalism courses — but she admitted to inadvertently forwarding to The Collegian staff an email from Gary Edgerton, the dean of the College of Communication, that had a confidentiality notice underneath his signature. She said she apologized for the mistake. It fell on deaf ears.

McKown has pledged to challenge her removal by filing a university grievance and requesting official investigations by the national College Media Advisers and the Society of Professional Journalists. She is also seeking legal assistance from the national Student Press Law Center.

“I’m pursuing this for student journalists everywhere and for student newspapers everywhere, but particularly for the student journalists at Butler University,” McKown said. “It’s about the right of student journalists to learn how to perfect their craft on the vehicle like a student newspaper, and to have the appropriate support to do so.”

I won’t pretend to know all of the personnel issues between McKown and the university. Both she and Allan worked at The Star for years and are well regarded among my colleagues. But as the former editor in chief of my college newspaper, I do know that the support McKown speaks of is vital. Student publications should not be used as public relations propaganda machines for the administration, nor should student journalists feel pressured to make their universities look good.

I’m not suggesting that’s how Allan would have run the ship, but the fact that his intentions in both seats could have even be called into question was the inherent problem. He couldn’t be the mouthpiece for the university while simultaneously helping his students function as watchdog reporters. Instead, he would have been forced to defer his responsibilities to outside journalists who offered more objectivity.

“I’m willing to do anything for the journalism program here,” he told me.

That is admirable and Allan appears to be a sincere guy who advocates for strong journalism, The Collegian and for all Butler students. But in this case, Whitmore comes without as much conflict-of-interest baggage. I’m happy Butler officials — after being embarrassed nationally — realized she’s the better person for the job. I encourage them to find a permanent adviser soon.

Email Hackney at suzette.hackney@indystar.com. Follow her on Twitter: @suzyscribe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1ULQGcA