Bangalore : Omega Healthcare today announced its plan to hire and train more 1,000 medical coders in the coming quarter. The US Healthcare System, earlier in the month, began the much awaited transition from the ICD-9 to an advanced ICD-10 coding system, which is a part of the International Classification of Diseases and Related Health problems, under The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. This development has led to an exponential growth for the healthcare BPOs both in the US and India.Being a major beneficiary of this sweeping change, the 9,000 employee-strong Omega Healthcare, expects to see a 30% rise in its revenues accompanied by a substantial increase in its staff strength by the end of the FY16.Popularly called as ObamaCare, the Act, which became a Law five years ago, provided access to insurance protection to a significantly higher number of US citizens. The law, now, has made it mandatory to adopt ICD-10, from the 1st of October this year. ICD-10 will effectively address the limitations of ICD-9, the older coding system. The latter, which is 30 years old, has outdated terms, besides being inconsistent with the current medical practice in the US. ICD-10 will have more than 120,000 available codes, with flexibility to add new ones in comparison to the older system that had only 16,000 codes with limited space for any addition.Announcing the new development, Gopi Natarajan, Co-founder and CEO, Omega Healthcare, remarked, "It is predicted that the adoption of this new coding standard will reduce a coder's workload by half, but the coders will need to be well-trained before being deployed on the assignment. This has led to increase in demand coupled with tremendous growth opportunities for skilled and certified coders." He added, "Our hiring plans are in place and we at Omega, plan to add 1,000 coders to the already 2,500 coders by the end of next quarter to be able to serve our clients more efficiently."At present, India has more than 10,000 medical coders, out which Omega Healthcare has the largest share of more than 2,500 medical coders serving across its three facilities - Bengaluru, Chennai and Trichy. Last year, Omega Healthcare launched 'Omega Medical Coding Academy (OMCA)', which offers world class training on medical coding to fresh Life Science graduates. Till date, it has trained more than 1000 certified medical coders, most of whom have been absorbed by Omega Healthcare.The U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) predicts stable employment outlook for medical billing and coding specialists' upto the year 2022. The period now is a great opportunity for coding specialists to pursue a career in healthcare BPOs