James H. Roberts once compared his work as a commercial photographer to that of a general practitioner in medicine, saying that he was subject to call at any time and took photos or worked in the darkroom at all hours.

From 1955 through 1992, Roberts was hired by Boulder businesses and event planners to showcase their products and activities. He might not have been aware of it at the time, but his photos captured an era.

"The images, especially those from the 1950s and 1960s, have a special appeal to those with a nostalgia for the past," said Roberts' son, Tito Roberts, who has preserved his late father's collection.

James Roberts was born in Tlaxiaco, Oaxaca, Mexico, in 1910. His mother was Mexican, and his father was an American civil engineer who surveyed and laid out railroads in both Mexico and the United States. Following his father's interests, Roberts graduated from Texas Tech University in Lubbock, Texas, in 1935 with a degree in engineering.

After marrying his wife, Rita, and living and working in Alaska, Guatemala and Mexico, Roberts moved his family (which then included three children) to Boulder in 1951.

When he was interviewed a few years later by Boulder historian Sanford Gladden, Roberts explained that he had gotten into the habit of taking photos while documenting the progress of his construction projects. Eventually, he let go of his engineering work and made photography his career.

In addition to commercial photography, Roberts freelanced for the International News Service and United Press. Tito remembers his father rushing out to photograph the wreckage of a United Airlines flight that had been blown up over Longmont on Nov. 1, 1955. The tragedy was particularly newsworthy, as it was the first sabotage of a passenger plane anywhere in the world.

In his interview, Roberts estimated that 20 percent of his work was outside doing photography with his Linhof Technika 4x5 camera, while 80 percent of the work was darkroom technique. He kept his darkroom in the basement of the family's home on University Hill.

"I used to like to go down there and watch him work with his images," Tito said. "He taught me about exposure and other mechanics of photography."

Roberts also was a pilot. He would remove the door of his Piper Cub and take aerial shots while leaning out the side of the plane. When he wasn't handling the controls, he leaned out of a friend's old military plane. For some of the aerials, he even mounted his camera on a helicopter.

Still, Roberts had time for additional personal interests and hobbies. He played the saxophone and the organ, and he spent late nights talking with others on his ham radio.

Roberts died in 1999 and is buried next to his wife in Boulder's Sacred Heart of Mary Cemetery.

I'll be accompanying Tito at a Boulder Bookstore event on Thursday as we discuss a joint project — our recently released 2015 Boulder in the 1950s calendar. It features Roberts' photos exclusively and includes fashion, cars and an aerial view of the sold-out Colorado-Nebraska football game in 1956.

"Already in the works," Tito said, "is a 2016 calendar of Boulder in the 1960s."

Roberts captured that era, too.

Silvia Pettem and Carol Taylor write about history for the Daily Camera. Email Silvia at pettem@earthlink.net, Carol at boulderhistorylibrarian@gmail.com or write to the Daily Camera, 5450 Western Ave., Boulder 80301.