Buy Photo Reporter Joseph Gerth (Photo: , Jessica Ebelhar/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

Kentucky’s race for attorney general is a contrast in old school politics and modern politics.

It’s also a case study for the potential of old school corruption and the potential for modern corruption.

Old school is Andy Beshear, the son of the governor and a Louisville corporate lawyer who is making his political money the old fashioned way: He’s traveling the state begging for it.

And boy has it worked.

Thumb through his most recent fundraising report and you’ll see coal executives, road contractors and lawyers. Lots and lots of lawyers.

And if you’ve gotten an appointment to the University of Kentucky or University of Louisville board of trustees from Daddy Beshear, there’s a pretty darn good chance that you’ve written a check to the son. My colleague, Tom Loftus, reported that 22 of 31 Steve Beshear appointments to the two boards gave to Andy Beshear this summer.

Beshear has amassed a war chest of $2.7 million using a very structured campaign to go out and hit up friends of his father and people who do business with the state. In the process, he’s piled up more money than anyone has ever piled up in Kentucky for a down-ticket race.

It has allowed him to go on television early and run ads, touting his family values and his family ties – which frankly make him much more of a political player than he would be if his name was Andy Smith.

An outside group calling itself the Bluegrass Alliance for Consumer Rights went up on the air with a $630,000 ad attacking Beshear’s Republican opponent. It gets its money from the Bluegrass Democratic Attorneys General Association, which gets its money from the Democratic Attorneys General Association.

The Democratic Attorneys General Association gets the vast majority of its money from corporations, according to its most recent filing with the Internal Revenue Service. Its biggest donors this year, contributing $50,000 each, are Monsanto, Visa, Anthem and Pfizer; and eBay, which has given $60,000.

If you are a pessimist, you’d believe that raising the money that Beshear has raised opens the door for corruption, since many of the people donating to his campaign are still dependent on his father for government contracts and appointments, and many others could have cases involving the attorney general once Andy Beshear is swept into office.

If you’re an optimist, you might say that if Beshear works half as hard as attorney general as he has raising money, then he could be the best ever.

But hold on there. A win for Beshear is anything but a certainty. The son doesn’t always also rise.

New school is Republican State Sen. Whitney Westerfield, who has raised a paltry $151,000.

Don’t cry for him for too long.

See, instead of going out and asking people for $1,000 checks, the limit one can give to a state campaign in Kentucky, Westerfield is allowing a super PAC to almost completely fund his race.

According to fundraising reports filed this week, The Republican Attorneys General Association has sent $2.2 million to the Kentucky Republican Attorneys General Association to help him. The national group gets is funding largely from conservative groups, corporations and wealthy business people.

Most of that money has been spent trying to convince Andy Beshear and Barack Obama are the same person.

According to reports filed with the IRS, the national organization’s biggest contributors include the conservative Judicial Crisis Network, which has contributed nearly $2.9 million; The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, which has given more than $2.5 million; and Las Vegas casino operator Sheldon Adelson, who has given $1 million.

Neither the U.S. Chamber of Commerce nor the Judicial Crisis Network disclose the names of their donors. But according to the website opensecrets.org, one group that has contributed to the Justice Crisis Network is a mysterious dark money group called the Wellspring Committee, which has raised more than $24 million in recent years and given money to conservative political causes.

The Wellspring Committee doesn’t disclose its contributors, either.

Money, no matter where it comes from, can be a corrupting influence.Democrats believe that the Republican Attorneys General Association is prepared to sink up to $5 million into television ads and mailers in an effort to beat Beshear.

Both old-style fundraising and new-style fundraising can lead to political corruption. The question becomes, do you prefer the devil you know, or the devil you don’t?

Joseph Gerth can be reached at (502) 582-4702 or jgerth@courier-journal.com. Follow him on Twitter at @Joe_Gerth.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1RAaYWl