Five stories that have North Texas talking: Dallas is in the movie spotlight tonight, a person of interest is in custody in connection with the Fair Park serial rapist case, the final investigative report for DISD is due today, and more.

Dallas isn’t exactly a prime location for a film debut; that honor goes to Los Angeles or New York. But the film Money For Nothing: Inside The Federal Reserve will debut this weekend in the Big D before it hits theaters in the Big Apple. The film takes viewers inside America’s central bank and examines the impact of federal policies on our lives. The cast is filled with current and former Fed officials, including Paul Volcker, who was Fed chairman from 1979 to 1987.

Money For Nothing is the directorial debut for Jim Bruce, who’s worked on X-Men: The Last Stand, The Incredible Hulk, Insomnia, and Dambe: The Mali Project. Of course, there is some star power behind the film. Liev Schreiber narrates.

Catch Money For Nothing at 7 p.m. at the AMC NorthPark movie theater. A special Q&A will follow with Bruce and financial expert John Mauldin. The film will have showings throughout the next week at AMC NorthPark before its wide release.

Final Report On The DISD Kerfuffle Due Today: Investigators will deliver their report today on whether DISD Superintendent Mike Miles interfered in a bidding process to hire a district contractor. KERA’s Bill Zeeble explains the district was seeking a contractor for parent services, a program that trains parents to get more involved in their kids’ education. But can Superintendent Miles can still be effective after this controversy? Some aren’t so sure, Shelley Kofler reports. And if you’re completely lost on the happenings at DISD, Stella Chavez compiled this list of the superintendents in the last 20 years.

Person Of Interest In Fair Park Case In Custody: There were some developments overnight in the Fair Park serial rapist case. A person of interest was arrested around 3 a.m. today at an Arlington apartment complex. The Dallas Morning News reports that a tipster told police that the man had said he needed to get out of town and that he wears gold-rimmed glasses – the same kind that police say the suspect wore. Since June, nine victims have come forward to say they had been sexually assaulted in southern Dallas.

A Little Bit Of Blue In All That Red: In today’s local Democrat vs. Republican showdown: Clay Jenkins, the Democratic Dallas County judge, wrote a guest column for the Texas Tribune that defends the Affordable Care Act in light of Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz recently saying that the government should be shutdown if Obamacare isn’t defunded.