"I've run my last election. Michelle is very happy about that. But that doesn't mean I stop fighting."

Here's an early report, as part of coverage required for the press pool on President Barack Obama's speech Thursday night at the Sentinel hotel. A more detailed report will be published soon.

President Barack Obama spoke for 26 minutes, warmly recalling the massive rally he held in Tom McCall Waterfront Park during the 2008 campaign, which attracted an estimated crowd of more than 80,000.

He joked that it was the only rally he held that included kayakers. "I just have fond memories of this place," he said.

Obama also talked about the spectacular blue skies that greeted him and the clear view of Mount Hood as he came in on Air Force One. Then he made the obligatory joke about it never raining in Oregon.

"I don't want to go. But it turns out I have this job; it is really demanding."

The president cycled through a series of what he sees as his greatest accomplishments as president, including the Affordable Care Act, economic recovery and the increased use of wind, solar and other clean energy.

He touched only slightly on his push for a new free-trade pact with 11 other Pacific Rim nations – which is the main purpose of his trip to Oregon.

Here's what he said on trade:"One of the things that we need to do to put people back to work is to make sure we are accessing the markets of the future.

"So part of what I'm going to be doing at Nike tomorrow is talking about how important it is that 95 percent of the world's markets are outside our borders. We've got the best workers in the world, the best universities in the world, the most innovative companies in the world, the best science and research in the world.

"So we are not afraid of competition. We are concerned if the playing field is not level. And that's why we've got to have the kinds of enforceable, tough, fair trade deals that are going to make sure that American workers and American businesses aren't locked out of these markets.

"That's part of a middle class economic agenda. And it is a priority for us. We've got to make sure it happens."

The event was a Democratic National Committee fundraiser in a Sentinel Hotel ballroom reportedly attended by 300. The crowd included several people who said they got in free. It was unclear how successful the fundraiser was. Tickets to the event -- with rows of chairs and no meal -- went for $500 and up.

The president was introduced by Rep. Earl Blumeneauer, D-Ore. Rep. Suzanne Bonamici, D-Ore, was also in attendance. Together the two represent nearly all of the city of Portland.

Obama repeatedly said that more work needs to be done and that he needs the kind of energy from supporters he saw in that rally on the Portland waterfront years ago.

"We all know we have a lot of work to do," he said. "Wages and incomes still aren't going up as fast as corporate profits. The middle class still feels squeezed and the ladders to get into middle class have become scarcer for a lot of people who are willing to work harder but can't seem to get ahead.

"I've run my last election. Michelle is very happy about that," Obama told the crowd. "But that doesn't mean I stop fighting."

He quoted Brandeis as saying that citizen is the most important position in a democracy and added: "Pretty soon I'm going to be a citizen myself...I'll be alongside you."

Obama left the Sentinel about 7:30 p.m., and his motorcade took him a few short blocks to the Hotel Monaco, also in downtown Portland where he was scheduled to spend the night.

-- Jeff Mapes

jmapes@oregonian.com

503-221-8209

@Jeffmapes