Sioux Falls, SD

The former head strength and conditioning coach for the University of Wisconsin men’s basketball program has joined Sanford POWER as its new manager. Scott Hettenbach, CSCS, began his duties last month after 19 years on staff at Wisconsin.



Most recently the associate director of sports conditioning at Wisconsin, Hettenbach led strength and conditioning efforts for the Badger men’s basketball program from 1995 to 2013. He oversaw all facets of strength, speed, agility, conditioning, testing, recovery and nutrition and worked with team physicians on injury prevention and return to play protocol and progressions.



In addition to his duties with men’s basketball, Hettenbach also worked with football, women’s basketball, women’s volleyball, men’s soccer track and field, golf and swimming at various points in his career with the Badgers. He was also served as Wisconsin’s sports nutrition coordinator from 1994 to 1996, managing all aspects of nutrition education and supplementation for more than 700 athletes.



“Scott’s dynamic background has allowed him to gain expertise training athlete at all levels,” said Kevin Lampe, corporate vice president for Sanford Orthopedics and Sports Medicine Practice. “His leadership will allow POWER athletes to continue to reach—and exceed—their personal goals and maximize results.”



Men’s basketball teams Hettenbach was associated with at Wisconsin made 15 consecutive NCAA tournament appearances, including a visit to the Final Four in 2000, and won three Big Ten titles. He coached numerous NBA, NFL, NHL and Olympic athletes while with the Badgers. Among that group are current NBA players Devin Harris, Michael Finley, Alondo Tucker and Jon Leuer.



Hettenbach’s 23-year resume also includes a stop at Brookfield Central High School in Wisconsin, where he coached four sports.



Hettenbach earned his bachelor’s and master’s degrees from the University of Wisconsin-LaCrosse, where he was a hurdler on the track and field team. He is a Certified Strength and Conditioning Specialist (CSCS) and a member of the National Strength and Conditioning Association (NSCA).

Courtesy: Tim Gerszewski, Sanford Health