Buy Photo Theda Clark Medical Center has been part of the downtown Neenah landscape for more than 100 years. (Photo: Wm. Glasheen/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)Buy Photo

APPLETON - ThedaCare’s recent announcement that it will explore consolidating its two largest hospitals is part of a nationwide trend of health care operations merging.

The trend is largely due to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama’s controversial health care reform legislation passed in 2009.

“We believe this is occurring because these companies are facing new operating challenges in the wake of health reform and the U.S. Affordable Care Act (ACA),” said a June 2015 report from Standard & Poor’s rating services. “While the concept of health care reform is not new, it’s now firmly in place. Health care service companies are motivated to pursue (mergers and acquisitions) for the same reasons as other industries: They seek economies of scale, improved competitiveness, diversification, revenue growth, and ultimately increased profitability.”

RELATED | Tax impact unclear for ThedaCare move

ThedaCare announced Feb. 17 that its board of trustees voted unanimously to explore whether to build a single regional hospital and replace both Theda Clark Medical Center in Neenah and Appleton Medical Center. A decision on whether to proceed with a new hospital could come in two or three years, said Dean Gruner, ThedaCare president and chief executive officer, and it could take another two years to design and build. Potential locations and cost estimates for a new hospital were not disclosed.

Gruner said the goal is not only to improve the delivery of health care in the community, but to control costs by minimizing duplicate services.

“We haven’t driven health care costs down the way we would like,” Gruner told USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin. “We think this might be part of the solution to that.”

Buy Photo The ThedaCare Regional Cancer Center is part of a larger infusion of cancer-related services in the Fox Cities. (Photo: Wm. Glasheen/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

John Davis, chairman of the board of trustees, said the decision to build a new hospital must be financially prudent or Theda­Care would keep the current arrangement of two hospitals. It feels like a good economic model, he said.

The Affordable Care Act has changed how hospitals are reimbursed, from being paid on the basis of diagnosis to more incentive-based care, said Marianne Udow-Phillips, director of the Center for Healthcare Research & Transformation (CHRT) at the University of Michigan.

This has led hospitals to push for more efficiency in providing care or increasing the number of patients, she added.

It’s also a trend that emerged not just from the Affordable Care Act, but back to negotiations with insurance companies in the 1990s, according to Martin Arrick, managing director for Standard & Poor’s financial services.

“The driving forces for that were often, ‘if we get bigger, we can have better leverage in negotiations with managed care providers,’” Arrick said. “It’s very market specific.”

RELATED | Timeline: History of Theda Clark and AMC

Research on consolidations of multiple health care systems show mixed results in terms of whether health care costs decreased.

A 2012 study from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation found “hospital consolidation generally results in higher prices” and that competition between health care providers lowers the cost of care.

A 2014 report from the Harvard Business Review said hospital systems can merge or partner to harness more buying power for expensive medical equipment, standardize practices or share research — ultimately saving money.

Wisconsin has seen multiple mergers of health care companies in recent years — one between Glendale-based Wheaton Franciscan Health and Ascension Health last fall; another between Madison-based UW Health and SwedishAmerican Health System in 2014.

Almost all research on the consolidations in the health care industry is focused on the merging of two health care companies, not the merging of two facilities within one company, as ThedaCare would do under its potential plan.

It makes comparing the effects an apples-to-oranges comparison, Udow-Phillips said.

Buy Photo Appleton Medical Center has been a mainstay in Appleton since 1958. (Photo: Wm. Glasheen/USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

“They’ve already been a single entity for many years,” said Allan Baumgarten, author of the Wisconsin Health Market Review. “The question is, does it make sense to combine their operations at a new facility?”

Baumgarten argued having procedures done at one facility rather than two can ensure better quality care by ensuring that “practice makes perfect.”

Merging two hospitals from the same system can also create better efficiency in sharing medical records, said Udow-Phillips.

But the best way to lower the cost of care is by improving the quality of care, she added.

On the other hand, the emotion from the loss of a community hospital can be a detriment to residents, both Udow-Phillips and Baumgarten said.

“A lot of community hospitals have closed in recent years because the scale is too small to manage the demands of efficient and quality care, but many communities feel the loss of those facilities because they were the community hospital, a neighborhood center for them,” Udow-Phillips said. “That can be a downside for communities.”

RELATED | ThedaCare plan draws praise, emotions

Easy access and short drives for patients, paired with quality health care, is a fair argument for keeping two facilities, Baumgarten said.

The futures of AMC, which opened in 1958, and Theda Clark, which opened in 1909, are unknown. Should a new hospital be built, Gruner said ThedaCare would look for ways to reuse the buildings. He said Children’s Hospital of Wisconsin-Fox Valley, which is located on the Theda Clark campus, is interested in relocating to the new hospital.

An aspect of ThedaCare’s potential plans is its no-layoff policy that’s been in place for the last 15 years, said Mark Graban, a Dallas-based health care efficiency consultant.

“Hospitals are under a lot of financial pressure, which is the one thing that drives mergers and acquisitions — to cut costs,” said Graban, who’s previously worked with ThedaCare’s Center for Healthcare Value. “Other health care providers are quick to fire and slash services. They’re carving a different path, more so than most other hospital systems.”

Madeleine Behr: 920-996-7226, or mbehr@gannett.com; on Twitter @madeleinebehr

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/212SVeT