Buy Photo Tom Arvidson was among about 50 people in shirts supporting Gov. Steve Bullock’s Medicaid plan Friday during a House committee hearing. The Missoulian said he is concerned for the young people and a few older ones he knows who lack health insurance. Sen. Ed Buttrey, R-Great Falls, pitches this week an alternative bill that also would cover 70,000 Montanans who make too much for Medicaid now and too little for subsidized insurance through the new heath care exchanges. (Photo: TRIBUNE PHOTO/KRISTEN INBODY)Buy Photo

A Great Falls Republican lawmaker debuts this week a Medicaid compromise bill that may be the best positioned to win this session’s health care debate.

Sen. Ed Buttrey’s Montana HELP (Health and Economic Livelihood Partnership) Plan combines health care with economic development.

The plan takes federal money to stretch Medicaid to cover 70,000 Montanans — the equivalent of the populations of Great Falls, Havre and White Sulphur Springs — who make too much money to qualify for Medicaid and too little to be eligible for subsidies on insurance through the health care exchange.

That is coupled with opportunities for job training, education and help finding a job match.

“We’re tasking government with focusing on how people get to higher income levels,” Buttrey said. “We’re going to touch every individual to improve their health and economic livelihoods.”

Buttrey’s bill will call on the Montana Department of Labor to do economic development assessment on individuals willing to participate and develop workforce plans for training, schooling or even just matching the right person with the right job opening. The goal is to make Medicaid assistance temporary and a bridge to federally subsidized health insurance through the online marketplace or employer-sponsored insurance.

“This bill says, ‘Hey, our job is not only to increase access to health care, but also let’s get people off social programs,’” he said.

Some of those jobs, Buttrey said, likely will be created by the $700 million in federal funds that would come into the state over the next two years alone with expanded Medicaid. The projection is for 12,000 new jobs. The federal government covers the cost of expansion until 2016 and then 90 percent of the costs by 2020.

“This is a Republican bill crafted by conservatives,” he said. “There’s more personal responsibility and accountability. Everybody pays.”

The plan includes co-pays and premiums. Buttrey said the plan catches people hiding assets. For example, people with multimillion-dollar farms who pays themselves a small salary would have to pay a “fraud and abuse fee.”

The plan also has incentives for the newly covered who take physicians’ wellness advice and who participate in the economic program.

“The Affordable Care Act is a lot of money for Montana when it’s implemented. That’s tax dollars coming to Montana, more than we pay in because we have such a large working-poor population,” he said.

Buttrey said the big focus of the proposal is for the state population in need to match the tax money Montanans pay to the federal government for the program, at which point Montana would be self-sufficient and could have a state-funded insurance program.

“The end goal is to get people self-sufficient and to get to where we take care of our health care needs without the federal government,” Buttrey said.

“When you consider the cost sharing, the personal responsibility and the economic development aspect, it’s a Republican-crafted bill more conservative than any other plan in the U.S.,” he said.

The federal government would have to grant waivers for some of the more innovative aspects, Buttrey said.

“This is a unique-to-Montana plan,” he said. “That was the whole point. Let’s get people out of poverty.”

The legislature has seen two other proposals to expand Medicaid.

The plan backed by the Republican leadership would expand Medicaid for nearly 10,000 people at or below the federal poverty level of $11,770 a year for individuals and $24,250 for a family of four, targeting parents, the disabled and some veterans. It relies more on state funds from the get-go, more than $20 million a year.

Democratic Gov. Steve Bullock’s “Healthy Montana” plan would cover 70,000 Montanans making less than $16,200 for a single person and $33,465 for a family of four. Twenty-eight states have expanded Medicaid to that level through the Affordable Care Act.

“This Medicaid expansion makes for strong communities,” state Rep. Mitch Tropila, D-Great Falls, a supporter of the governor’s plan, told the Tribune last week. “It’s a win-win all around.” Tropila said an infusion of nearly $1 billion per year into the Montana economy would be “phenomenal.”

However, after a six-and-a-half hour hearing Friday from more than 200 supporters and about a dozen opponents, the House Human Services Committee voted 10-7 along party lines against the governor’s bill, which the Democrats may revive with a fight over the rules or by bringing the bill to the House floor.

Testimony on Friday included accounts of those who fell into the coverage gap while starting businesses, readjusting to life after military service, caring for family, grappling with medical conditions or simply working in lower-wage professions. An estimated 20,000 in the gap are Native Americans. Doctors and others in health care told the committee that the costs of the uninsured are passed onto other consumers, typically at a higher rate because delayed care leads to more serious conditions.

Opponents have objected to the escalating cost of the program as the federal contribution slips to 10 percent and to coverage of “able-bodied adults.”

Reach Tribune Staff Writer Kristen Inbody at kinbody@greatfallstribune.com. Follow her on Twitter at @GFTrib_KInbody. Tribune Staff Writer Rich Ecke contributed to this report.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1GgPjMS