New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie may have played catcher in high school, but he manned third base at a charity softball match Monday at Yankee Stadium.

“I’m a team player, wherever the captain wants me to go, I go,” he said before the game, which pitted Mr. Christie, athletes and radio-show personalities against Yankees alumni and members of the Wounded Warrior Amputee Softball Team.

The game was part of the Bombers Boomer Broadway Softball Classic, which benefited the Boomer Esiason Foundation and the Actors Fund.

Mr. Christie, a Mets fan, said he would rather be playing at Citi Field, “but this is where they’re playing the game.”

New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, left, high-fives teammate radio personality Eddie Scozzare. Andrew Lamberson for The Wall Street Journal

Morning radio co-host Boomer Esiason said he chose to put Mr. Christie on third. “I know from his days when he was younger he was a hell of a baseball player,” Mr. Esiason said, “so that’s why I put him at the hot corner.”

Craig Carton, Mr. Esiason’s co-host, said Mr. Christie made a couple of errors early in the game and “we were eating him up about it in the dugout.”

But he did note a play the governor made when he fielded a ball with players on first and second. “He bobbled [the ball] a little bit, but he made the play and got the out,” Mr. Carton said.

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie plays third base. Andrew Lamberson for The Wall Street Journal

Josh Wege, a member of the Wounded Warriors team, said he tried unsuccessfully during the game to hit the ball to Mr. Christie so he could “see some of his moves.” He added that he was overall impressed with the governor’s performance.

“He made some pretty good plays out there,” Mr. Wege said.

In the end, Mr. Christie’s team won, 7-6, in nine innings.

Before the game, Mr. Christie was asked about the Supreme Court’s rejection of New Jersey’s bid for sports betting.

“It’s always a long shot to get certiorari from the U.S. Supreme Court. That’s the way it goes,” he said. “They said no, so we have to move on.”

New Jersey Governor Chris Christie, right, after the charity softball game played at Yankee Stadium on Monday. Andrew Lamberson for The Wall Street Journal