"We are delighted with the progress Rutgers has seen this past year, and we thank you for your dedication," said Gerald Harvey, of the Rutgers board.

NEW BRUNSWICK — By all accounts, Rutgers President Robert Barchi had a difficult freshman year leading the state’s largest university.

He weathered several sports scandals and calls for his resignation, while overseeing Rutgers’ massive merger with the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and the school’s move to the Big Ten athletic conference.

Now, as a reward, Barchi will get a $90,000 bonus — though he plans to give back the money to the university in the form of a donation, according to campus documents.

The president, who earns a $650,000 annual base salary, was told about the bonus last week after a favorable closed-door performance review by the Rutgers Board of Governors, the documents show. The board’s executive committee reviewed a set of goals it had set for Barchi as well as a self-evaluation prepared by the president.

The committee recommended a $90,000 bonus, slightly less than the maximum $97,500 in annual incentive compensation Barchi is eligible for under the terms of his contract.

"We are delighted with the progress Rutgers has seen this past year, and we thank you for your dedication and leadership," Gerald Harvey, chairman of the Rutgers Board of Governors, wrote Monday in a letter informing Barchi of the bonus.

Barchi responded two days later with a note thanking the board for their "ongoing confidence" in his administration. But the president and his wife — Francis Harper Barchi, a Rutgers assistant professor of sociology — plan to donate the bonus money to Rutgers to help students pay their tuition.

"Given that we are currently in a year of fiscal restraint and that we are asking our faculty, students and staff to do more with less, Francis and I intend to gift the net proceeds of this incentive compensation to Rutgers," Barchi wrote to the board. "It is our intention that this money be used to augment student aid for undergraduate students at our university."

Barchi, 66, isn’t the first Rutgers president to return his bonus. In 2008, his predecessor, Richard McCormick, donated his $100,000 performance bonus back to the university, campus officials said.

After that, McCormick and the board agreed to forgo his $100,000 yearly performance bonus for several years, citing Rutgers’ ongoing budget problems. But last year, McCormick was awarded — and kept — a $66,667 bonus for his final year as president.

Barchi’s bonus is another show of support for the embattled president from the Board of Governors, which publicly backed him when some lawmakers, alumni and faculty called for his ouster earlier this year.

Barchi, an Ivy League-educated physician and researcher, took over as Rutgers president on Sept. 1, 2012, after a stint as president of Thomas Jefferson University in Philadelphia. He has described his first year at Rutgers as one filled with "infuriating distractions."

Last spring, Barchi was embroiled in a sports scandal when video footage emerged of Rutgers basketball coach Mike Rice shoving and kicking players and using gay slurs at practices.

Barchi fired Rice in April as the video became a national story. The president admitted he made a mistake by not watching the video months earlier when it was first given to Rutgers. Instead, Barchi said he relied on the advice of other campus officials who recommended allowing the coach to keep his job after a suspension.

The controversy eventually led to the resignations of three university officials, including Rutgers athletic director Tim Pernetti. Barchi repeatedly declined to say whether he considered resigning over the incident.

A few weeks later, Barchi was in the spotlight again when The Star-Ledger reported Julie Hermann, his choice as Rutgers’ new athletic director, had also been accused of being abusive toward her players while a coach at University of Tennessee. Barchi resisted calls to ask Hermann to step down from her new post.

Barchi faced additional scrutiny in July when several lawmakers called on him to step down from the boards of two private companies — the lab supply company VWR International and the pharmaceutical research firm Covance — that do business with the university. Barchi earned more than $317,000 in fees and stock awards last year serving on their boards.

The Rutgers Board of Governors said they knew about Barchi’s role on the boards and he has recused himself from university business related to the companies.

Amid all of the controversy, Barchi has also overseen one of the most successful years in Rutgers’ history. On July 1, Rutgers took over most of UMDNJ in one of the biggest mergers in higher education history. Though the complex merger involved billions of dollars in assets and thousands of tasks, there have been no major glitches.

Barchi is also overseeing Rutgers’ move into the larger and more prestigious Big Ten athletic conference. That move, which Barchi announced last year, is expected to net Rutgers at least $200 million over 12 years, school officials estimate.

Despite his successes, Barchi remains controversial. At last week’s gubernatorial debate, the candidates were asked about Barchi’s first year.

Democratic Sen. Barbara Buono, a Rutgers law school almuna, said she lost confidence in Barchi during the basketball scandal.

"He’s the opposite of a brilliant leader. This is a man who has fallen down on the job time and time again, and unfortunately Rutgers’ reputation has suffered," Buono said.

But Gov. Chris Christie defended Barchi, calling him a brilliant professor and a great leader.

"I support Bob Barchi because he’s the best man for the job, and he’s leading Rutgers from good to great," he said.

Nationwide, performance incentives and retention bonuses are becoming more common as colleges look for ways to meet goals and hold on to their presidents.

Earlier this year, the Chronicle of Higher Education, a national weekly publication covering colleges, looked at presidential pay at 191 public research institutions. The study found the median total compensation for public university presidents was $441,392, a nearly $20,000 increase from the previous year. Four presidents earned more than $1 million.

Barchi had not been at Rutgers long enough to be included in the survey. If he had, Barchi’s combined base salary and bonus of $740,000 would have placed him among the top 15 highest-paid public university presidents in the nation.





RELATED COVERAGE

• New Rutgers president could earn a $97,500 bonus

• Rutgers board OKs $66k bonus for former president

• Contracts for presidents of N.J.'s public colleges packed with lucrative bonuses and perks