NEW YORK -- At the second-ever national summit devoted to "geroscience" -- an effort to harness together all the biomedical disciplines to understand what makes some of us age more quickly than others -- there's a lot of heady talk about phenotypes and glial cells and mitochondrial metabolic failure.

But what these highly specialized researchers are saying to each other is that they really, urgently need to find a common language that will pull them out of their separate, "organ-driven" focuses. This is something you already know if you're old enough to have made the rounds of doctors' offices trying to address all the different but somehow connected ways your body is managing to let you down.

"We call these multiple chronic conditions," says Caroline S. Blaum, director of geriatric medicine and palliative care at the New York University School of Medicine. "But if you're a patient, it feels like one thing."

The first summit, a year and a half ago in Washington, D.C., was a sort of public debut for the "geroscience hypothesis:" that by focusing on the aging process itself, scientists can find ways to blunt the miseries of age-related chronic illnesses. So for this second summit, the participants are looking at three specific disease categories -- cancer, diabetes and HIV -- searching for commonalities while realizing that the relationships between them are complicated and involve a lot of unknowns.

Felipe Sierra, director of the National Institute on Aging's Division of Aging Biology and founder of the National Institutes of Health interest group that jumpstarted this ambitious conversation, lays out the geroscience hypothesis in simple terms: "If we were to attack aging, we would be reducing the impact of all the diseases. The question always comes, Can we do it? In humans, we don’t know, of course. But at least in mice, we know that dietary restriction, for example, reduces the process of aging."

Like most academic meetings, this one gives rise to more intriguing questions than solid answers. Why and how does chemotherapy for cancer patients accelerate the process of aging? What are the possible downsides of drugs known to extend the "healthspan" -- not just longer life, but symptom-free life -- in lab animals, such as rapamycin and the diabetes drug metformin? What can we learn from the experience of people living with HIV, whose bodies respond in dire ways to their necessary treatment regimens?

And uppermost, the chicken-and-egg question: Does aging make us vulnerable to these diseases, or do the disorders themselves accelerate aging? The answer, at this point, is looking like yes and yes.

"It makes it very complicated but very exciting at the same time, because everything is interconnected," Sierra says. "What happens with age is you don’t get one disease; you get three or four or five. We need to re-examine the 'war on disease' approach. We have been doing that for a long time; it worked very well for infectious diseases. But for these complex, chronic diseases, it's not likely to produce as much as a holistic approach."

Follow Barbara Peters Smith on Twitter @BarbaraPSmith.