The House Natural Resources Committee will begin on Wednesday to mark up legislation aimed at saving Puerto Rico from a massive debt crisis.

Lawmakers have been working to make significant changes to the measure, which is expected to unveiled as early as Monday night, since the panel released a discussion draft on March 29.

ADVERTISEMENT

The Puerto Rico measure, which will put the island's finances under federal oversight and will authorize a restructuring of some of its debt, will need to strike a balance and attract bipartisan support and the backing of the White House to move forward.

The mark up is set to begin at 4 p.m. Wednesday with plans to reconvene on Thursday morning, the committee announced Monday evening.

The House has already missed Speaker Paul Ryan Paul RyanLGBT fight dooms spending bill on House floor Feds can learn lessons from states about using data to inform policy House passes resurrected LGBT measure MORE's (R-Wis.) March 31 deadline to produce a measure.

But efforts were aimed at moving quickly with lawmakers returning from a two-week spring recess this week.

Democrats and Republicans have sparred over how much control should be given to a fiscal oversight board that would be created by the bill.

Republicans want tough oversight, while Democrats are concerned about undermining the authority of the Puerto Rican government.

Puerto Rico has $70 billion in total debt and will owe $422 million on May 1, with another $1.5 billion in debt payments on July 1.

Obama administration officials have said there is no way for the island to make those upcoming payments.

Several lawmakers, including Senate Finance Committee Chairman Orrin Hatch Orrin HatchHatch reacts to Garland meeting before it happens Senate amendments could sink email privacy compromise Overnight Defense: VA chief 'deeply' regrets Disney remark; Senate fight brews over Gitmo MORE (R-Utah), have asked Puerto Rican officials to turn over more financial documents so they can get a better idea of what the island is facing in its fiscal crisis.