There is always a sense of urgency for minor league baseball players, but Charleston RiverDogs pitcher Alex Robinett is particularly pressed for time. The Class of 2015 West Point graduate leaves for basic training in Fort Sill, Okla., when the season ends Sept. 7.

RiverDogs homestand When: vs. Rome Braves — Monday, 7:05 p.m.; Tuesday, 7:05 p.m.; Wednesday, 7:05 p.m. vs. Augusta GreenJackets — Thursday, 7:05 p.m.; Friday, 7:05 p.m.; Saturday, 6:05 p.m.; Sunday, 5:05 p.m. Where: Riley Park Tickets: 843 577-DOGS, riverdogs.com

After that, the recently commissioned second lieutenant is off to Fort Bragg, N.C., to hone his expertise — directing 105-milimeter howitzer shells as a field artillery officer — before a two-year deployment.

Afghanistan is a strong possibility.

“I’m definitely eager to do it,” Robinett, 22, said at Riley Park, where the RiverDogs start a seven-game Class A South Atlantic League homestand Monday night against the Rome Braves. “It’s part of what you sign up for, and I spent four years at West Point getting ready for that.”

The Yankees took a flier on Robinett in the 32nd round of the Major League Baseball Draft in June, knowing of his five-year active duty commitment. But if the Bronx brass likes the 5-11, 190-pound right-hander enough, they can alter his Army contract to two years of active duty with eight years in the reserves.

“I just want to show the Yankees that I’m a good investment and just make minor tweaks to my game and work with the staff to improve,” Robinett said.

It’s been a slow start in the South Atlantic League (0-1, 16.71 ERA and one save in five games). But among the things to like about Robinett’s five innings of relief are eight strikeouts with only one walk.

The key going forward will be development of a changeup to go with his 91 mph fastball and breaking pitches.

“I was promoted up to here, so that’s a good sign,” Robinett said. “But I’m definitely not happy where I am. There’s room to improve, always.”

Robinett has already defied convention.

He became the 12th drafted player in West Point’s long history.

He was born in Saudi Arabia. He spent his first 14 years living inside a walled international compound in Dhahran while his father worked for oil giant Saudi Aramco. Robinett, his parents Mike and Lynne, and sister Hayley moved to Bend, Ore., before he started high school.

His parents are now retired in Daytona Beach, Fla. Hayley attends Emory University in Atlanta. They are thrilled with Robinett’s 2015 baseball whirlwind.

Though the steely and modest pitcher says the Patriot League is “pretty awful,” a no-hitter and a 21-strikeout game are good in any league. While going 6-5 with a 2.01 ERA as an Army senior, Robinett threw a no-hitter against Longwood and struck out 21 batters in an 8-0 victory over Air Force. It was the most strikeouts in a college game since current Washington Nationals pitcher Stephen Strasburg fanned 23 Utah batters while playing for San Diego State in 2008.

“It was the last start I ever had at West Point,” Robinett said, “so it was just a good way to finish my career there. To be able to do that for our team was a good feeling.”

It’s been a busy introduction to professional baseball for Robinett since the Yankees picked him in the 32nd round of the draft in June. He pitched in three games for Pulaski in the Appalachian Rookie League and six for Staten Island in the short-season Class A New York-Penn League before a promotion to Charleston.

Eventually, Robinett wants to land a management-level job with Raytheon, Lockheed Martin or another company with close ties to the military.

But that third career will have to wait while he wholeheartedly pursues the other two.

Koerner a RiverDog

Former Clemson right-hander Brody Koerner has joined the RiverDogs after getting five saves for Pulaski in the Appalachian Rookie League. Koerner, 21, was the Yankees’ 17th-round draft pick in June.

He is best known at Clemson for his four-hit shutout at South Carolina this March, a 7-0 victory in the rubber game of a three-game series.

Toussaint start

Rome right-hander Touki Toussaint (3-4, 6.33 ERA) is scheduled to start tonight against RiverDogs’ right-hander Joey Maher (4-4, 2.22). Toussaint, 19, was the Arizona Diamondbacks’ 2014 first-round draft pick. He was acquired by Atlanta in a June trade sending infielder Phil Gosselin to Arizona.

Follow Gene Sapakoff on Twitter @sapakoff