It is ironic that just as Washington, D.C. and New York City–the two centers of cluelessness in American life–are convulsed with a mini-scandal involving lane closure on a bridge, two more major Obama administration scandals have come to light. The first is Obama’s nomination of Debo Adegbile to head the Justice Department’s Civil Rights Division. We might have guessed that Obama couldn’t do worse than Adegbile’s predecessor, Tom Perez, but we would have been wrong.

Adegbile is a race hustler who is best known as the mouthpiece for guilty-as-hell cop-killer Mumia Abu-Jamal. The “free Mumia” movement is one of the most disgraceful episodes in the history of modern leftism, and Debo Adegbile was not just a participant in, but a ringleader of that that contemptible cause. The Fraternal Order of Police has objected vigorously to Adegbile’s nomination:

As word of this nomination spreads through the law enforcement community, reactions range from anger to incredulity. Under this nominee’s leadership, the Legal Defense Fund (LDF) of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People volunteered their services to represent Wesley Cook, better known to the world as Mumia Abu-Jamal — our country’s most notorious cop-killer. There is no disputing that Philadelphia Police Officer Daniel Faulkner was murdered by this thug. His just sentence – death – was undone by your nominee and others like him who turned the justice system on its head with unfounded and unproven allegations of racism. We are aware of the tried and true shield behind which activists of Adegbile’s ilk are wont to hide – that everyone is entitled to a defense; but surely you would agree that a defense should not be based on falsely disparaging and savaging the good name and reputation of a lifeless police officer. Certainly any legal scholar can see the injustice and absence of ethics in this cynical race-baiting approach to our legal system.

Actually, I think the police are barking up the wrong tree if they think Obama objects to race-baiting.

This nomination can be interpreted in only one way; it is a thumb in the eye of our nation’s law enforcement. It demonstrates a total lack of regard or empathy for those who strive to keep you and everyone else in our nation safe in your home and neighborhoods — sometimes giving their lives in the effort.

But Obama’s base likes it when he humiliates law enforcement. They think his politicizing the Department of Justice is terrific.

It is hard to see Obama’s nomination of Adegbile as anything other than an endorsement of the campaign on behalf of the homicidal Mumia. Which implies, doesn’t it, an endorsement of Mumia himself? Because the campaign that Adegbile spearheaded was not primarily a legal defense, it was a PR effort premised on the absurd claim that Mumia was an innocent who was convicted because of “racism.”

Obama’s nomination of Adegbile is what I call a scandal. Another scandal, even more important, was revealed by former Defense Secretary Robert Gates in Duty. Obama ordered an intensification of our effort in Afghanistan, while admitting privately that he expected it to fail. Approximately 80% of the fatalities our military has suffered in Afghanistan have taken place on Obama’s watch, not because he was pursuing a strategy that he sincerely believed to be in America’s interest, but because he cynically calculated that sending Americans to die in a useless campaign (as he assessed it) would benefit him politically. This is a scandal approximately a billion times more newsworthy than the Christie administration’s closing a lane on a bridge.

Michael Ramirez sees Obama as the Commander in Chef, stirring up 30,000 pounds of sacrificial lamb. Click to enlarge: