Danilo Gallinari returned to the Nuggets’ lineup Friday night, in a manner of speaking, feeling better about his surgically repaired knee.

Gallinari removed himself from Denver’s game Wednesday at Phoenix because of soreness in the knee. After a day of rest and treatment, he declared the problem was nothing serious.

“It was the first time that we increased the minutes a little bit; it was the first back-to-back,” Gallinari said. “The knee was not used to it for a while. So it got a little sore.”

Gallinari said he will take a wait-and-see approach to playing in upcoming back-to-back games, but he hasn’t been ruled out for those. The Nuggets’ next set of back-to-back games comes Monday and Tuesday, when they’re at Utah and home against the Portland Trail Blazers.

Gallinari didn’t sound worried.

“It depends on how the knee responds,” said the forward, who came off the bench Friday against the Suns. “But I think the more we get through the season, the more I’ll be able to play back-to-backs. It’s just the first one, and the first one after playing a lot more minutes in the last few games.”

Lawson’s minutes. The minutes haven’t gotten out of control for Nuggets guard Ty Lawson, but he did enter Friday night’s game averaging a career-high 36.1 minutes per game.

Balancing having Lawson, the team’s most important player, on the court with not wearing him out is of high importance for Nuggets coach Brian Shaw.

“I don’t want to burn him out, especially early on in the season,” Shaw said. “And especially in light of now Randy (Foye) is out, so in terms of point guards there’s not a whole lot of options. So I am concerned about him getting the minutes that he’s getting. Maybe what I’ll have to do is sub Ty out a little bit earlier, get someone else to finish the first quarter and start the second quarter, and then bring Ty back with about eight minutes to go in the half and finish the half, and work it that way.”

Lawson has played 40 or more minutes three times, going into Friday, but one of those was an overtime game in Los Angeles against the Lakers. Christopher Dempsey, The Denver Post