F. Scott Fitzgerald never met any of today’s Republicans, but he summed them up perfectly in the bittersweet last line of "The Great Gatsby:" "So we beat on, boats against the current, borne back ceaselessly into the past."

While the GOP certainly has a Donald Trump problem these days, it also has a much deeper problem: How to get onto the right side of facts, empathy and history itself.

[READ: GOP Talks the Talk but Fails the Walk on ISIS]

So far the party has held on to Congress and maybe it will even win the White House next year. Yet it is on unsustainable political and policy paths. Republican candidates up and down the ticket espouse positions that are often outdated, impractical, cruel or contrary to evidence. They complain about deals they consider terrible and insist they could have done better. They denounce laws and policies meant to solve problems, and offer little in the way of alternatives.

There are exceptions, obviously, but not enough of them. Lest Democrats get too gleeful, however, they should remember that many broadly held GOP positions carry real consequences for the country and the world. The list is long:

Climate change. As President Barack Obama and others have noted, the U.S. Republican Party may be the only major conservative party in the world that does not accept the need for action to stop the warming of the Earth. That’s even as rising seas threaten coastlines and island nations, even as droughts and other extreme weather are already contributing to global instability.

The Paris climate agreement involving nearly 200 nations is a huge achievement that rests largely on Obama’s ability to use rules, regulations and deals with the auto industry to help the United States meet its commitment to curb emissions. Republicans have tried to stymie him at every turn. They are still at it, vowing to undercut the climate deal in the GOP Congress or under a new GOP president. That’s far easier said than done, and it’s sad that they’re even trying.

The Iran nuclear deal. Republicans were apoplectic about the agreement Obama signed with the aim of making sure Iran does not develop a nuclear weapon. They say they would have negotiated a better deal – one that didn’t give Iran any money impounded under economic sanctions, one that would have secured the return of several Americans held in Iran. They insist Iran will cheat. They don’t, however, seem to have an alternative other than war.

[SEE: Republican Party Cartoons]

The Islamic State group. The GOP field is brutal in its assessment of how Obama is battling the barbaric terrorist group. But as a number of analysts have noted, most of their prescriptions are similar to what Obama is already doing.

The economy. The GOP’s hand-picked head of the Congressional Budget Office says the evidence shows that “tax cuts do not pay for themselves.” Regardless, tax plans from the party’s presidential candidates rely on 1980s-style Reaganesque supply-side tax cuts that pamper the wealthy and balloon the federal debt. The conservative American Enterprise Institute concluded that Republicans don’t care as much as they used to about deficits and ventured that they’d probably do better next year “if their plans weren’t quite so favorable to the rich.”

Cuba. Obama decided that it was time to engage with the communist island nation rather than continue trying to isolate and punish it. Many conservatives complained that he was wrongheaded, that he didn’t negotiate the best deal, that he was betraying Cuban dissidents. Their alternative was to continue a 50-year-old policy that had not produced results.

Immigration. While Obama is attacked for being soft on border control, he has deported some 2.4 million undocumented immigrants – already far more than George W. Bush’s grand total of 1.6 million. Bush’s compassionate approach to the dilemma of the undocumented, meanwhile, has ebbed. Trump wants to deport all 11 million currently in the country – an expensive proposition that would require a whole new police force – and make Mexico pay for a border wall. Most GOP contenders are trying to sound as tough as Trump, making it increasingly unlikely they’ll improve their showings with Latinos and Asians.

The Affordable Care Act. Conservatives in some states are blocking expansion of Medicaid to cover people just above the poverty line, leaving several million without access to insurance. In Washington, there is still conservative resolve to repeal the whole law, although it has driven down the share of uninsured Americans and has not crashed the economy as the GOP predicted. But the few Republican alternatives by and large are even more flawed than the imperfect law.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – December 2015]

Other predictions and policies that turned out to be wrong or backward-looking include the Iraq War that turned into a nightmare of unintended consequences, the auto bailout that succeeded beyond all expectations, the tired “war on coal” rhetoric that allowed Hillary Clinton to showcase a plan to help coal communities transition to different economic models. A plan for the future, not the past.

Obama’s aspirational candidacy in 2008 often drew mockery, no more so than when he said he hoped that “generations from now, we will be able to look back and tell our children that this was the moment when we began to provide care for the sick and good jobs to the jobless; this was the moment when the rise of the oceans began to slow and our planet began to heal; this was the moment when we ended a war and secured our nation and restored our image as the last, best hope on Earth.”