Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

Jessie Bolger, 17-year-old senior at Fairview High School

Jessie was chosen as one of about 670 students across the nation who will sing in the 2015 National Association for Music Education's All-National Mixed Choir Honor Ensemble. Jessie will sing at a gala concert at the Grand Ole Opry House in Nashville on Oct. 28. Eligible students have qualified for their state-level honor ensemble program and competed against top students for a spot in these national honor ensembles. She also was selected last year, as well as performing at the 2015 Colorado and 2014 Pennsylvania All-State Choir Festivals.

What's it like to perform with the ensemble?

It's amazing to sing with people from all over the United States who have such a high level of musicianship. You walk into your rehearsal room, and when everyone starts singing the pieces, it's like the group has been rehearsing together for weeks. Since the pieces are pre-learned, the group gets to focus on the dynamics and detailed technique.

How long have you been singing?

I have been singing for thirteen years. My first performance was a youth production of "The Jungle Book" when I was 5. I was a monkey.

What do you like about performing?

I love the way that I can express anything through performance, from crippling sadness to elation. Music is a universal language.

Advertisement

Favorite song to perform?

I love to sing so many different genres of music, and every song that I sing, I fall in love with it. My favorite classical piece to sing is "Va Godendo" by Handel. My favorite musical theatre piece to sing is "Green Finch and Linnet Bird" by Sondheim. My favorite choral piece is, ironically, one I've never performed in concert but have heard many times. It's "Tap-Tap" by Sydney Guillaume.

Favorite subject?

I love all subjects in school — yeah, I'm that kid. But if I had to choose a favorite, it would be chemistry. I've always had a passion for science, and I understand everything in chemistry very well.

What's your dream job?

I would love to go into a medical field, like medical research or surgery. My dream life would be to perform surgery or conduct medical research as my job and continue to perform in local musicals or operas on the side.