Ash Carter is heading to Saudi Arabia on April 20 to try and improve the complex relations between the two countries.

The U.S. Defense Secretary will meet with Mohammed Bin Salman al-Saud, the deputy crown prince who will likely succeed his father, King Salman, to the throne. President Obama will also meet with the Saudis in Riyadh the day after Carter, during a Gulf Cooperation Council summit, according to Bloomberg View.

Last year Obama met with the group at Camp David, where Saudi leaders expressed their disdain at the nuclear deal between the Iran, the U.S. and world powers. They also disagree on how to deal with the civil war in Syria.

Saudi Arabia believes Iran is the biggest threat to the Middle East and wants the U.S. to provide more arms to Syrian rebels, including shoulder-launched anti-aircraft missiles. The White House does not like that idea. As reported by TRUNEWS, Saudi Arabia wants Syrian President Bashar al-Assad removed from power. Iran is an ally of Assad, along with Russia.

While both the U.S. and Saudi Arabia claim the discussions will involve ways to fight ISIS, especially in Syria, they disagree on the approach. The U.S. is in favor of airstrikes.

President Obama has said Saudi Arabia and Iran “need to find an effective way to share the neighborhood”, and explained the U.S. could not side with Riyadh on every issue.

“For the Saudis, they see that as they have to continue fighting Iran, just from a weaker position, ” said John Alterman, from the Center for Strategic and International Studies, as reported by Bloomberg.

In a further sign of strained relations, Saudi Arabia did not send senior officials to last week’s Nuclear Security Summit in Washington.

Saudi Arabia sees some of the actions of the Obama administration as insults. Prince Mohammed met with Carter in February and allegedly tried to call him afterward to discuss a follow-up, but it took the Defense Secretary several weeks to return the call.

In 2002, referred to Saudi Arabia as a “so-called” ally of the U.S.