Jonathan Weber, the administrator at Theater for the New City in the East Village, started looking into Obamacare coverage for the venue’s employees after hearing about it from colleagues in the arts.

“It was recommended as a new, cheaper option,” Weber said.

He went to the New York State of Health website and studied the choices at SHOP, the Small Business Health Options Program offered on the exchange to small businesses and nonprofits.

He ended up dropping the theater’s existing insurance plan and signed up for a SHOP plan from Health Republic Insurance of New York to cover himself and one other employee. “It lowered our costs — not by thousands, but by a little bit,” Weber said. “For a small business and for a small nonprofit, any cent you can save is helpful.”

Theater for the New City is one of about 3,000 small firms (about 10,000 employees and their dependents) that had signed up for SHOP coverage at New York State of Health as of April 2014.

Launched in October 2013, the program is open to small businesses with 50 or fewer employees, a group that is not required by law to offer health insurance to its workers.

The program aims to lower small businesses’ health insurance costs, while providing flexibility and convenience.

So far, SHOP has been far from a hit.

In New York, and in many states nationwide, enrollment has been significantly lower than expected, according to a report from the Government Accountability Office.

The reason: Many don’t qualify for the tax credit and even those that do don’t see it as a big enough motivator. Some simply don’t know about the new exchange.

With the Obamacare marketplace offering hefty subsidies to individuals, some small business owners have stopped offering health insurance altogether. Others have chosen to stick with their off-exchange, small-market insurance plans.

Dr. Jay Neuhaus (top c.), owner of Gramercy Dental Arts near Gramercy Park, who recently checked out SHOP said his initial experience on the website was 'negative.' (Jeff Bachner for New York Daily News)

“My clients take the well-being of their employees very seriously and they are hesitant to move to a carrier that doesn’t have the strongest network available,” said Kyle Sloane, a broker with Newtek Insurance Agency.

But as more small businesses learn about SHOP, enrollment could grow.

In addition to the tax credit, there are other potential advantages.

Small businesses can offer employees a single insurance option or a choice of options and let them choose the plan they want.

Business owners have the ability to contribute whatever they want toward coverage, including nothing at all.

There is no minimum employee participation requirement, either. New York State of Health manages the administration, handing a small business a single monthly bill.

To participate, a firm must offer coverage to all eligible employees. Enrollment in SHOP is available all year long.

“The whole idea is choice,” said Danielle Holahan, deputy director of New York State of Health. “There is a lot of flexibility for employers.”

Jon Gabel, a senior fellow with the independent research organization NORC at the University of Chicago, who conducted a recent study on SHOPs nationally, found prices on these small business insurance exchanges to be lower than non-SHOP prices for the same metal tier.

“I would tell (small business owners) to go online and see what’s available,” Gabel said. “Particularly for small employers with large numbers of low-income workers, there are a number of advantages to buying on SHOP.”

James Shanahan, the owner of printing and graphics firm Gotham Color, enrolled in a SHOP small business health insurance plan last year. (Marcus Santos)

Some insurers are improving their offerings. For 2015, Health Republic launched a plan, Total Freedom, which allows small businesses to use out-of-network providers, said Health Republic CEO Debra Friedman.

Barry Sloane, CEO of Newtek Business Services, said he likes the idea behind public and private exchanges, though in the long run he would want to see the government get out of the business of providing health insurance.

“It’s good to have a place to go to compare choices,” Sloane said. “The great thing about technology is it makes information a lot more available.”

Dr. Jay Neuhaus, owner of Gramercy Dental Arts near Gramercy Park, has been thinking about replacing the insurance plan that covers his employees. He recently checked out SHOP.

His initial experience on the website was “negative.”

“They were asking for a lot of information,” Neuhaus said. “I thought it would be pretty easy to see if you qualify. Instead, it wants every single detail on every single person.”

But SHOP has been a good fit for James Shanahan.

Facing escalating health insurance costs, the owner of Gotham Color, a printing and graphics company in the Garment District, had been thinking about dropping employee coverage.

Last year, he went shopping on SHOP and signed up for a Health Republic plan that is now covering five employees, including Shanahan. By switching plans, Shanahan said, he has seen a meaningful drop in his insurance costs. He expects to be eligible for the tax credit.

“The key for me is, I am able to continue to offer health insurance,” Shanahan said.