Dr. Angela Uba chose her location wisely – her new primary care clinic, Health First Family Medicine, is across the street from the future South Hillsboro development, where 25,000 people are expected to move in the coming years.

The clinic, behind the Reedville Café at the corner of Cornelius Pass Road and Tualatin Valley Highway, represents the culmination of a long journey for Uba.

She attended medical school in her native Nigeria, graduating from the University of Jos' School of Medicine in 1985. She practiced there for two years before joining her husband – Gerry, also a Nigeria native – in Oregon, where he was working for Metro. (He still works there, as a project manager.)

But before she could practice in the United States, Uba had to leave Gerry and her children for four years, completing an internship at Howard University Hospital in Washington, D.C. and a residency at St. Clare's Hospital (now Ellis Hospital) in Schenectady, N.Y.

At a ribbon-cutting ceremony on Saturday afternoon, Uba became emotional when she thanked her family for persevering through her absence.

"I just was not there for them because I had to do this to go get educated," Uba said. "They understood that I had to do this, not just for me but for them as well."

Uba previously worked at Tuality Hospital and with Providence Medical Group, and said many of her patients have followed her to her new location. Many of them, Uba said, come from underserved communities, and she said the timing was right for opening Health First Family Medicine, since many people newly insured under the Affordable Care Act are looking for a doctor. She added that she likes the independence and the personal responsibility that comes with owning her own clinic.

She also continues to support the community in her small Nigerian village, organizing efforts to bring medical equipment and care to people in need there.

Attendees at the ribbon-cutting ceremony included Metro Council President and former Hillsboro Mayor Tom Hughes, current Hillsboro Mayor Jerry Willey, Washington County Commissioner Dick Schouten and Hillsboro Chamber of Commerce President Deanna Palm.

-- Luke Hammill