With the playoffs within reach, each fantasy matchup is important. Here are your starts and sits for Week 10.

Start

Justin Forsett, RB, Baltimore Ravens

Baltimore Ravens back Justin Forsett has cooled off in recent weeks, posting just one touchdown in his last three games. Expect things to turn around Sunday when the Ravens face Jacksonville who has allowed some big days to opposing running backs. Last week, Chris Ivory had just 48 scrimmage yards but had two rushing touchdowns against Jacksonville. Texans back Arian Foster had 125 scrimmage yards and rushing and receiving touchdowns in Week 7 against the Jags before tearing his Achilles tendon. Doug Martin had 123 yards rushing yards and two rushing touchdowns alongside 35 receiving yards and touchdown in Week 5. Start Forsett with confidence Sunday.

James Starks, RB, Green Bay Packers

James Starks owners rejoice! Green Bay’s head coach Mike McCarthy named Starks the No.1 running back over Eddie Lacy. “I would say James is our No. 1 back right now going into Detroit,” McCarthy told the Green Bay Press-Gazette . “He’s played very well. He’s earned that opportunity. I’ve never been, and we talked about this a number of times in the past, I’m not a big believer in just riding one running back the whole season. We’ll stay with the one-two punch.” Starks was impressive last Sunday against Carolina. While he only had 39 yards on the ground, he added another 83 receiving yards and a receiving touchdown to that total. He’s got a great matchup coming up against the Detroit Lions who allowed 97 rushing yards and a touchdown to Kansas City back Charcandrick West in Week 8. Detroit’s defense is allowing 134 rushing yards per game this season. That puts them at 30th in the league.

DeAngelo Williams, RB, Pittsburgh Steelers

If I had to choose a start of the week, Steelers back DeAngelo Williams’ matchup against the Browns would be it. Cleveland has the league’s worst run defense, allowing an average of 148 yards per game. After running back Le’Veon Bell injured his MCL, Williams picked up right where he left off in Week 2, rushing for a huge 170-yard, two-touchdown day against the Raiders last week. He could very well go off again on Sunday.

Ryan Mathews, RB, Philadelphia Eagles

In last Sunday’s game against the Cowboys, Eagles back Ryan Mathews racked up 67 rushing yards and a touchdown, marking his third time in four games he’s rushed for at least 60 yards and a score. While his teammate DeMarco Murray will continue to lead the team in carries, Mathews has made the most of his carries. That trend should hold true Sunday when the Eagles host the Dolphins who are allowing 142 rushing yards per game, which is the second-most in the league.

Sit

Larry Fitzgerald, WR, Arizona Cardinals

Wide receiver Larry Fitzgerald has been resurgent this year with 706 yards and seven touchdowns on the season. He’s a top-five fantasy wide receiver for the first time since 2011. The good times are rolling for Fitzgerald and the Cardinals, but the 32-year-old won’t have much success in Seattle for Sunday night’s primetime tilt. In his last five games against Seattle, Fitz has averaged just 27 yards. He’ll probably draw cornerback Richard Sherman who has been very effective in limiting Fitzgerald’s production.

Latavius Murray, RB, Oakland Raiders

Latavius Murray and the Oakland Raiders have been one of the bigger surprises in real and fantasy football. While the Minnesota Vikings are far from impenetrable on defense, they excel in limiting backs to mediocre outings. The Raiders rank 18th in rushing offense with 105 yards per game. The Vikings rank 14th with 112 yards allowed per game. That looks good on paper but Minnesota has limited Matt Forte, Charcandrick West and Melvin Gordon to less than 70 scrimmage yards in past weeks. St. Louis running back Todd Gurley had a big day against them last week with 89 rushing yards, 20 receiving yards and a touchdown. However, that was Gurley’s first sub-100-yard rushing game since Week 3. The Vikings have allowed just five rushing touchdowns on the season and I believe they’ll rebound defensively against Oakland.

Russell Wilson, QB, Seattle Seahawks

The last time quarterback Russell Wilson squared off against the Arizona Cardinals, he threw for 339 yards and two touchdowns while rushing for 88 yards and another score. That was the Wilson of old however. Through eight games this season, Wilson has thrown for multiple touchdowns just once (Week 2 at Green Bay). Wilson hasn’t rushed for 88 yards at all this year, and he doesn’t have a rushing score on the season. A lot of that drop off has to do with the fact that Wilson’s offensive line isn’t what it used to be during the team’s Super Bowl seasons. This year, the Cardinals give up the sixth fewest points to quarterbacks in fantasy according to NFL.com.

Jeremy Maclin, WR, Kansas City

Last week was a wake up call for the Denver Broncos and the defense will be eager to rebound from the loss to Indianapolis. Last week, Andrew Luck and the Colts had 252 yards of passing offense, well above the 181 yards per game average allowed by the Denver defense (honestly that average went up because of what the Colts did last week). With the defense reeling, expect them to return to form against Chiefs. Wide receiver Jeremy Maclin will probably line up against Chris Harris where he will be limited. Maclin had just 57 yards in the last meeting between the Broncos and Chiefs.

Curb Your Enthusiasm

Marshawn Lynch, RB, Seattle Seahawks

Seahawks running back Marshawn Lynch has been far from beastly this season. Lynch has just two touchdowns over the course of the year. He has only one game in which he rushed for more than 100 yards this season. If he plays–reports have him at a 50 percent chance–I don’t expect him to start being the Marshawn of old against the Cardinals. The Cardinals have only allowed three rushing touchdowns all season and an average of 91 rushing yards a game. Sunday night’s game may be a low scoring affair with Beast Mode’s numbers limited.

Hugh Johnson: 303-954-1037, hjohnson@denverpost.com or @HughJohnsonDP