When Jerletha Cosby signed her lease at Tymber Skan, she knew she wasn't getting the Ritz. But she thought she was at least getting a safe, functioning home for her four young children.

Instead, she got exposed wires, rodents in the walls, an upstairs shower that leaks through the ceiling, and constantly tripping fuses. Her 2-year-old narrowly missed being injured by a falling closet door. Her fiancé fell through the stairs.

Plywood covers holes in the wall separating the condo from the neighboring unit, which has been condemned and boarded up by Orange County Code Enforcement.

Her fiancé, who does handyman work, made fixes to the stairs and bathroom at his own expense because Cosby's landlord, James F. Hurley of Apopka, wasn't making many repairs, she said.

And Cosby's not alone. She and other tenants describe Dickensian living conditions in condo units rented out despite having been declared unsafe by the county.

The problems of the complex in Holden Heights, not far from Orange Blossom Trail west of downtown Orlando, are chronic and well known. But the day-to-day struggles of those who live there — most of them renters with few other options — are not well known.

(Joe Burbank)

County code-enforcement chief Bob Spivey calls the situation at Tymber Skan "unprecedented" in terms of people living in unsafe structures.

"The county's never seen anything like it before," he said.

And while Tymber Skan may be an extreme case, it's symptomatic of a wide-scale shortage of affordable housing in Central Florida, said Robert Brown, president and CEO of the Heart of Florida United Way. That shortage can leave residents essentially trapped.

"People get into a situation like Tymber Skan and they can't get out, because they don't have the first month's rent, last month's rent, utilities and deposit to go someplace else," he said. "It's a perfect storm for those who want to exploit low-income people, because they have no other options."

Tymber Skan neighborhood hopes to turn things around Tymber Skan neighborhood hopes to turn things around. Tymber Skan neighborhood hopes to turn things around. See more videos

Cosby, 27, moved into Tymber Skan about five months ago, after recovering from a car accident that left her with memory loss. Her mother insisted she find a stable residence, and not a short-term hotel, before returning her kids to her.

"I wanted to get them back so bad that I just took anything," she said.

Now she feels victimized, and has stopped paying rent as she figures out where to go.

Hurley, she said, has been "preying on the weakness of people with children in desperate situations."

Spivey, the code-enforcement chief, is well aware of the repeated complaints about landlords failing to fix serious problems. He sees those complaints frequently. And he points to Hurley and Eugene Radice of Orlando.

"Mr. Hurley and Mr. Radice are exhibits No. 1 and 2 in terms of not maintaining their units and not paying their assessments," Spivey said.

The county has taken both before a special magistrate over code violations. The total number of fines levied against the complex exceeds $21 million.

"Most people are motivated by a lien and a fine. Liens work," Spivey said. "But it only works if you've got a property owner who cares. And that is a fundamental problem with Tymber Skan."

Hurley, who owns 36 units, insists he promptly pays any fines levied against him, and that he's trying to keep his units up.

"I'm having some real trouble with my vendors, partially because my vendors don't want to go to the neighborhood, in part because of safety concerns," he said, referring to the high-crime area.

He also said he will immediately let unhappy tenants out of their leases.

"The neighborhood's not the best, that's why the rent's where it's at," he said. "'I'm not here to be a bad guy."

Hurley said he's lost in excess of six figures on his Tymber Skan properties.

"I've put a lot of money into that community trying to be part of the solution, and apparently failing," he said.

Radice, who owns 19 units, protests that he's no longer in a position to make repairs.

"None of them has paid rent to me in the last year," Radice said of his tenants. "They pay rent to the association and the receiver."

Radice, 80, estimates he's lost more than $400,000 since buying into Tymber Skan about 15 years ago. He knows his units are unlivable, and says he'd be glad to see the county demolish them. Instead, he said, he's being fined for a situation he's powerless to fix.

"I'm barely making it as it is now; I lost everything," he said. "I made a mistake. I should have bought better property."

Across the street from Jerletha Cosby's family, Leon and Tanvia Blackwell, both 47, have lived in their unit for 18 months. In October, the county put a condemnation notice on their front window.

"Unsafe structure," it reads. "This structure is deemed unfit for human occupancy." Hurley continues to charge them rent.

Tanvia Blackwell is disabled and uses a scooter. The unit has no ramp, so her husband must lift the scooter over the front step and into the unit, then help her inside. So far she's fallen twice. On cold nights, they turn on the stove for heat.

Leon Blackwell works "on and off," but can only take jobs that offer him flexibility to care for his wife. They don't have the money to move out of Tymber Skan.

"Once he gets you in here, he doesn't care anymore," Leon Blackwell said of Hurley.

"He's the worst slum lord I've seen," his wife added. "He's still coming around threatening to serve people with eviction notices."

Susie Hopkins has a different landlord but similar complaints, including flickering lights and broken pipes. Crime is also a problem in her area of the complex. Her two kids have health issues that she blames in part on the high-stress environment.

"Nothing works, but they still want money," Hopkins said. "And I can't get renters insurance because it's high risk."

Her situation is more complicated because she lives in a part of the complex that's in receivership. Payments are supposed to go to court-appointed receiver Frank Barber, but her landlord still wants to be paid directly.

"We don't know if it's safe to give our money to anybody," she said. "When I try to pay Frank Barber, she tries to evict me. I can't win for losing."

Like Cosby, she's stopped paying her rent out of frustration, and is trying to move.

"There's nothing to be done," she said. "I wouldn't blame them if the county just knocked it down."