Amid the perpetual turnover in the team’s offense, the constant has been Henry, who in four and a half seasons with the Red Bulls has become the franchise’s assists leader with 41.

It is a different sort of achievement for Henry, 37, who built an illustrious résumé as a goal scorer in Europe before arriving in M.L.S.

“As the athlete in him has slowly become less and less dominant, the genius in him is shining more,” said Kyle Martino, a former player who now works as an analyst for NBC. “It’s his incredible vision, inventive mind and a touch and weight of passes that many people maybe didn’t give him as much credit for before.”

Henry said his mentality on the field had not changed since his heyday as a predatory striker for Arsenal and Barcelona. And Wright-Phillips — an Englishman who grew up watching Henry — pointed out that during the 2002-3 Premier League season, Henry played 37 games and finished with 24 goals and 23 assists.

But Henry said the style of play in M.L.S. and the demands of the Red Bulls in particular meant that he found himself inhabiting different parts of the field from his play in other leagues. Instead of leading the attack from up front, he can more often be found roaming and playmaking.

Photo

“The game is asking me to do that here a bit more,” Henry said.

Petke said he would never think to shackle a player as gifted as Henry, who sometimes drifts back into the team’s defensive half to find the ball. “At times, it hasn’t been pretty,” Petke said of giving Henry the reins to the offense. “It hasn’t always worked out perfectly. But when it does, it’s beautiful.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It has worked out quite a bit of late, largely because of Wright-Phillips, a London native whose father, Ian, preceded Henry as Arsenal’s top striker. Wright-Phillips signed with the Red Bulls on July 23, 2013, after bouncing around five clubs in England over the previous eight seasons. But it took some time for him to find his place.

In games and practices with the Red Bulls, even earlier this year, Wright-Phillips chased the ball too much, roaming across wide stretches of grass, trying to make things happen. He said that he played like a headless chicken at times, and because of that was rarely in the right place: He scored only twice in nine games.

Petke started to pressure Wright-Phillips about refining his movement, at times setting up an imaginary electric fence between the two opposing central defenders and discouraging him from wandering outside it. Wright-Phillips embraced the instruction, focusing on making short, darting runs across the defense or looping behind it, and the strategy quickly began to pay dividends.

Wright-Phillips locked down the starting job for this season in mid-April after a three-goal performance against the Houston Dynamo. At the time, he said he knew a goal or two would greatly help his standing in the team, and the pressure weighed on him.

“I wanted a chance, and at the same time, I was scared to miss it,” Wright-Phillips said. “But Thierry put one on a plate for me. I just remember thinking, Get on the end of it. And it went in, and from then, I haven’t really looked back.”

Wright-Phillips, whose next goal would tie the team’s single-season record, said that Henry gave him advice daily, but that he learned just as much from watching him.

Wright-Phillips’s growing confidence was clearest during a five-day stretch this month. On Aug. 2, he scored a spectacular goal against the New England Revolution, controlling a long ball on the run, wiggling his hips and cutting the ball onto his left foot to lose a defender before curling a shot inside the far post.

Four days later, against Bayern Munich in the M.L.S. All-Star game, he bounded onto a bouncing ball, settled it with a single touch and blasted a left-footed shot that knuckled under the crossbar.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I don’t know if he would have done that six months ago,” Henry said of the two goals. “But that’s just the way it is. When you’re in the zone, everything goes.”

Wright-Phillips has two years left on his deal with the Red Bulls, and whether he remains in this form could hinge in part on Henry, whose contract expires after this season.

Andy Roxburgh, the team’s sporting director, said that he and Henry had discussed the player’s future at various times. But nothing has been decided, he said, and neither wanted to discuss it publicly.

Many people, including Gérard Houllier, the head of soccer operations for Red Bull, which owns clubs around the world, have speculated that Henry will retire after this season. Henry could also join a European club over the winter and finish his career on the continent where it began.

“We have a long, long, long off-season,” Henry said, smiling. “So I can think. I have the time.”