Cameron Keith, 8, of Boulder Friends' School wins with 'tilapia'

Henry Stauch, 9, Niwot Elementary, is hugged by his mother Hadley Solomon during a break before the final rounds of the Barnes & Noble Regional Spelling Bee held Saturday at Monarch High School. ( David R. Jennings / Daily Camera )

Synchronous, coffle and kohlrabi were only some of the words that stumped many in the audience, but were spelled without a problem Saturday by the students competing in the Barnes & Noble 2015 Regional Spelling Bee.

After numerous rounds, the word 'tilapia' at the contest's conclusion was no sweat for the well-studied winner of the spelling bee, 8-year-old Cameron Keith.

The spelling bee had 52 students competing this year ranging from third to eighth graders who all won their schools' spelling bees. The spelling bee was held at Monarch High School and was sponsored by Barnes and Noble, Boulder Valley School District, Rotary International and the University of Colorado College of Arts and Sciences.

Cameron is a third grader at Friends' School in Boulder, and is tied as the youngest student to ever go on to nationals.

Quickly after winning, Cameron happily posed with his trophy, which was about half his size.

"I feel really great," Cameron said after his win.

He also revealed his study methods that helped his victory in Saturday's bee.

"I basically studied in the evenings each day and I used the Spelling Bee website and the 'Spell It' list," Cameron said.

The spelling bee was filled with talented students as the event began around 10:30 a.m. and did not finish up until well into the afternoon.

The event's pronouncer, former Denver radio host Jim Conder, complimented the amount of work each participant put into the competition.

"I love seeing the incredible time and dedication that young people, who usually get a bad rep, put into this endeavor," Conder said. "People in the past have gone on to have incredible high school and college careers. It's very encouraging."

New to the competition this year was the vocabulary test administered before the spelling portion began.

"They added it last year in the National Bee, so we decided to do it this year," Jeff Oliver, the Barnes & Noble business development manager said. "We did it for educational benefits. I think educationally, knowing the meaning of a word is important."

The vocabulary test consisted of 25 words that were taken from the 2015 Spell It! list and was combined with the students' scores after the first two rounds of the competition. The test was worth 50 points while each round was worth 25, so the students with a total of 70 points or higher went on to compete in round three.

As the winner, Cameron will enjoy an all-expense paid trip to the Scripps National Spelling Bee in Washington, D.C., along with a few other, smaller prizes.

Oliver was amazed and excited that such a youthful competitor will go on to compete contend at the national level.

"It's unbelievable," Oliver said. "He's 8 years old and beat eighth graders. He could go to nationals potentially six times.

"He's a prodigy and a talent."