No wonder we’ve been winning international beauty titles right and left! It seems to me that the main preoccupation of our ladies in the metropolis is getting themselves to look beautiful at all times. Even social events lean towards highlighting Filipino pulchritude, as in these gatherings I attended a few moons ago.

Jing Monis

This renowned hairstylist and make-up artist has taken the metro by storm when he hosted a smashing party entitled Pretty Young Things, to introduce the new endorsers of his very own Jing Monis Salon. High-profile personalities trooped to the Vue Bar of The Bellevue Manila, which sponsored the event, as the Salon’s new phalanx of endorsers paraded before them—Olivia Medina, Sam Sadhwani, Mica Javier, Catriona Gray, Valerie Weigmann, Kylie Padilla, Andi Eigenmann, and sisters Jasmine Curtis-Smith and Anne Curtis.

Performances from Abby Asistio and Mica Javier entertained the crowd while the talented hairstylist ended the evening’s festivities with an audio-visual presentation and brief discussion of his future plans for making his Salon the number one in the country.

Belo

The leading dermatology and cosmetic surgery center in the country unveiled, at the start of the year, its most talked about 2014 calendar, at a fun and colorful event held at the opulent Makati residence of its founder and chief executive officer, Dr. Vicki Belo.

As expected, the clinic’s famous endorsers were on hand to show their Belo-fied persona—Edward Mendez, Derek Ramsay, Tom Rodriguez, Alden Richards, Matteo Guidicelli, Ruffa Cutierrez, Angeline Quinto, and Grace Lee.

Aside from the spread of healthy culinary treats, guests also sampled the Detox Solution and Fat Flush juices from Sexy Solutions, the sister company of the Belo Medical Group.

Dr. Belo also briefly discussed with everyone the different Belo procedures featured in the clinic’s colorful and attractive calendar.

Mr. & Ms. PATTS

The highlight of PATTS College of Aeronautics’ 45th Anniversary celebration was the much anticipated search for Mr. & Ms. PATTS 2014.

Fourteen good looking candidates, seven male and seven female, from different Programs competed for the twin title, in Street Wear, Swim Wear and Evening Wear categories at the jam-packed Gymnasium. The Board of Judges was composed of Robert Frederick P. Hayden, Jr., of Lyceum of the Philippines University as chairman; Jason C. Denosta, Mr. PATTS 2006; Antonio “Marc” Dungo, Print and TV Model, Irene May D. Fernandez, Ms. PATTS 3rd Runner Up and Dianne Bernadette M. Hernandez, GMA 7 Talent.

College president and chief operating officer Engr. Jose Eduardo S. Valdez (shown, leftmost), together with vice chair and chief financial officer Ma. Felisa S. Valdez (shown rightmost), proclaimed Christopher Gabriel T. Certeza (second from left) as Mr. PATTS 2014 and Kimberly B. Dologuin, (second from right) as Ms PATTS 2014. Other winners were John Michael P. Uy and Angelica Denise V. Domingo – 1st Runners-Up; Mark Anthony Antic and Jaclyn Mae O. Gacutan—2nd Runners-Up; Arjay R. Bularin and Wynnona Chin Leyson—3rd Runners-Up. The title holders received scholarship grants and cash prizes

------------O----------

YOUR MONDAY CHUCKLE:

Old is when you don’t care where your spouse goes just as long as you don’t have to tag along.

------------O----------

For feedback, I’m at bobzozobrado@gmail.com