The Tennessee Hospital Association is starting Tennesseans for a Responsible Future to lead a grassroots Insure Tennessee campaign. (Photo: Thinkstock)

The Tennessee Hospital Association is establishing a separate organization to fill a hole in the state’s roster of health care entities: a group devoted to educating at the grassroots level about Insure Tennessee.

There are people across the state who are unaware that Insure Tennessee, as a proposal, ever existed. Others aren't sure how the program fits into the complicated landscape of health insurance — how it differs from Medicare, TennCare and exchange-bought insurance, or how it could complement some employer-sponsored insurance. Gov. Bill Haslam proposed Insure Tennessee, a tiered system, to use federal Medicaid funding to expand health insurance coverage.

Craig Becker, president of the Tennessee Hospital Association, wants the new organization, Tennesseans for a Responsible Future, to tout Insure Tennessee as a “very Republican approach to health care with premiums, with copays, with personal responsibility.”

“That’s right out of the Republican playbook,” he said. “It’s not Obamacare.”

Tennesseans for a Responsible Future is initially funded by Tennessee Hospital Association. It will have its own staff and leader. Becker expects to solicit funding and potential partners in the future but plans to be selective because he’s not looking to build a coalition.

Tennessee is one of 19 states that hasn’t accepted Medicaid expansion funding made available under the ACA. Louisiana is the latest state to move forward on an expansion plan, which according to analysts could propel other Republican-led states to expand.

Indiana, which implemented its plan around the same time Tennessee legislators blocked Insure Tennessee, and Louisiana have found inspiration in the plan that Haslam negotiated.

“What you’re seeing is other states are taking Gov. Haslam’s ideas and putting them into practice,” Becker said.

Distrust of the federal government played a large role in killing the plan, said state Sen. Richard Briggs, R- Knoxville, on a national Families USA conference call about how Medicaid expansion impacts workers. The association with Obamacare and concerns about adding to the national debt were also reasons for opposition.

Proponents of Insure Tennessee, ranging from the health care industry and many business leaders to politicians on both sides of the aisle, maintain it's a plan that will help reduce the number of uninsured in the state.

The number of uninsured people in the state is hard to calculate because many people come in and out of jobs or relationships, which can change whether someone can access insurance. About 600,000 people are projected to qualify to buy insurance on the federally run exchange, many of whom may lack insurance now in addition to those who fall into the coverage gap.

A recent report from the Center for Business and Economic Research at the University of Tennessee-Knoxville estimates 426,301 people were uninsured in 2015, down from 611,368 in 2013, which coincides with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act.

A record number of Tennesseans had selected insurance plans on the federally run exchange as of Jan. 23. But there are still many who fall into the coverage gap — the space between qualifying for TennCare and buying a plan on the exchange — and don’t know it.

People who work minimum wage jobs — including many retail and restaurant workers, truck drivers, hair stylists and landscapers — are among those who likely fall into the coverage gap.

Tennessee saw a 15 percent reduction in uninsured workers from 2013 to 2014, compared with a 19 percent average drop across the country, which includes states that expanded Medicaid, according to a study from Families USA, a nonprofit and nonpartisan group focused on health care.

About a quarter of the 74 people who came to the Lentz Public Health Center on Jan. 31 to get help enrolling in a plan fell into the gap, according to Sandy Dimick, Get Covered Tennessee program director at Family and Children's Service in Nashville.

Briggs, a heart and lung surgeon, said the state could do more to reduce its uninsured worker population if it passed Insure Tennessee.

Becker thinks more people will lobby legislators to pass the proposal if they gain an understanding of it.

The Beacon Center, a conservative Nashville nonprofit think tank that led the fight against the proposal, will continue its campaign against Insure Tennessee if it comes back up in the legislature, said spokesman Mark Cunningham.

“I think in 2016 we’re pretty sure it’s not going to go forward. It’s a tough slog — it’s an election year,” Becker said. “We’re going to be pushing hard this year and next year. We’re not going to give up.”

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SZRrlT