ENLARGE Photo: F. Martin Ramin/The Wall Street Journal; Lettering by Angela Southern

ONE THING TO LOVE straight away about a good pumpkin beer is that it’s made in part from pumpkin, a nourishing squash, rich in beta-carotene. This means one can wrap up the morning’s work and 95 cups of coffee with a pumpkin lunch. The beer my editor at The Wall Street Journal had sent to me, the Great Pumpkin Ale from Seattle’s Elysian Brewing Company, is also made with pumpkin seeds, further nourishment. The main question in my mind as I prepared to drink it was whether this would indeed be lunch or, instead, dessert.

Because I am not a pumpkin beer fan. Too often it tastes like pumpkin pie seasonings. When I want to drink beer, even in the fall, even on pumpkin-carving, seed-roasting Halloween, I want to drink ale, not pie.

Dutifully, I shut down my computer at 12:30 and poured a glass of lunch and took it to my fire escape in New York City’s West Village. The air was cool, the smell of drying leaves had arrived and I, without hope, took a gulp.

Related Recipe: Steamed Pumpkin Puddings With Tennessee Rum Hard Sauce

Happiness! Without question, this pumpkin ale was dry and light on the palate despite its amber color and 8% alcohol. The pumpkin was more an aromatic, a background note, but distinctly pumpkin itself. And the spices, so easily overdone, had been infused with a confident but not-overbearing hand, clove/allspice the dominant note rather than cinnamon, which is too often used with the grace of a sledgehammer.

So, while I wouldn’t normally reach for a pumpkin beer, for this assignment I did, and it fit a lovely fall afternoon, and allowed me to reflect on the noble pumpkin and, to my surprise, beyond.

I’d thought adding pumpkin flavor was simply a gimmick begun when craft beers hit the American mainstream, in the late 1980s, by companies looking for ways to distinguish themselves. Elysian Brewing sent me four different pumpkin beers! Including a good, well-balanced and hearty stout; the unnecessary coffee-and-pumpkin flavored Punkuccino; and one called Night Owl, which I planned to take back to my hometown of Cleveland to share with my pal Les, a trick-or-treating partner and ace candy-acquiring strategist since second grade.

In fact, however, pumpkin beer is not a gimmick but a centuries-old tradition in American beer making. Pumpkins’ flesh was often fermented into beer by our forefathers. The early colonists couldn’t be picky. They used a squash that had always grown in this land naturally, one of this continent’s earliest foods.

Nothing brings the mood of fall to me more than pumpkin, and importantly pumpkin seeds, roasted in butter till golden brown, which my mom always prepared after we’d carved the jack-o’-lantern. I was glad to learn that actual roasted seeds were included in the mash for the Elysian ale. We eat these seeds only once a year, when the leaves are falling and the first smells of winter’s approach are in the air. It’s the kind of food I love best, because it can take on genuine power to move us.

Above all, to drink a pumpkin beer, when it’s made with the finesse of Elysian Brewing Company’s, is to be transported via flavor and even more powerfully, by aroma to a specific time and place. Because this beer tasted definitively of pumpkin, rather than pumpkin pie (which would have brought me back to my Grandma Spamer’s Thanksgiving table), it returned me to my youth at Halloween, and memories of my father, Rip. Returning now to those memories it seems amazing that I trick-or-treated only seven times. The ritual seems a fixture of my entire life.

My trick-or-treating began at the age of 5, in 1968, when I dressed as a television set. The costume’s cardboard box with its cellophane window was so large I couldn’t touch my two little hands together. And then the paper shopping bag I was carrying broke just before I got home due to the cold rain that had begun to fall, spilling my cherished booty out onto the wet sidewalk.

We were all, Mom, Dad and me, novices at this trick-or-treating business, clearly.

The next Halloween I remember solely because, as we walked home in the dark, Dad spotted a couple of kids on our doorstep, raising our lovingly carved pumpkins above their heads and smashing them on our stone stoop. My father cried “Hey!” and bolted after the pranksters. I wondered what on earth my father intended to do if he caught them? Or worse, what if they were murderers and he never came back—a thought that filled me with a sudden dread on that dark night, now empty of trick-or-treaters, trees bare and the wind blowing, my Spider-Man costume useless protection from the random uncertainties of life. Of course, he returned.

When I became an adult with my own family—carving pumpkins and roasting the seeds, as ever, giving the assurance that fall is here and life’s routine carries on—my father anticipated Halloween with the eagerness of a child. Rip was goodness personified, so much so that he once wished aloud to have a dark side. He thought it would make him more interesting. Halloween, when goblins and spooks roamed our sedate Cleveland suburb, was a time when he could indulge that longed-for dark side, roam our streets in a rubber creepy-old-man mask, following his grandchildren on this, his favorite night of the year.

In 2007, as I followed behind my 8-year-old son along with a few other neighbor dads with kids, I kept an eye out for my father. An obligation delayed him so that he found us on the streets just as the kids were tiring. He wore his favorite creepy-old-man mask, a denim jacket, jeans and running shoes.

“There you are,” I said. “The kids are getting tired, we’re just about to head back.”

I could see the disappointment in his posture. He walked with us to our house and, having missed half the night’s goblins and witches, said, “I’m going to walk around a little more,” his voice muffled behind the mask. I watched him head off into the darkness, not to chase pumpkin smashers this time but rather to enjoy his favorite night, America’s great pagan holiday.

As he departed, I did not wonder, as I had as a boy, if he would ever come back. But, in a way, he never did. He was dead in less than a year from lung cancer; that was his final Halloween.

And so as I finished my pumpkin ale on a New York City fire escape, far from the suburbs of my fortunate youth, I was reminded again how flavors and aromas can take us back—even to those chilly Halloween nights, when all was well and life was certain.

ENLARGE Michael Ruhlman

—Mr. Ruhlman is the author of “In Short Measures: Three Novellas,” published this month by Skyhorse Publishing.