For demolition: As one of more than 1000 Mr Fluffy homes, this 1926 house with its beautiful original features and unique character is to be bulldozed at some point within the next five years. Around 20 Mr Fluffy homes are believed to be heritage listed. Photo: Graham Tidy

The first public gathering of Mr Fluffy homeowners since the $1 billion concessional loan scheme was announced has called for an Australia-wide taxpayers levy and threatened protests outside Parliament House.

Friends of the Fluffy Owners and Residents Action Group Brianna Heseltine said she had not seen members so fired up and angry at the town hall-style meeting, most especially men angry at being forced to take their families out of their homes.

Real Estate Institute ACT president Ron Bell suggested owners stagger buying alternative homes to avoid creating an artificial boom in home prices.

Using a $1 billion Commonwealth loan the ACT government will buy homes at market value based on unimproved value and give owners first option of buying back cleaned blocks at market rates.

Jorge Woods of Weston, who came with his wife Claudia and two children from a developing country to Weston in 1991, said the scheme was a real estate developer's, not that of a community-orientated leadership.

"The tone is we want you out as quickly as possible," Mr Woods said. "We came here, put money down in good faith. Our confidence in the institutions of Australia have collapsed, we don't have any trust anymore.

"I don't care what (Minister for Employment Senator Eric) Abetz says, the Chief Minister (Katy Gallagher), I don't care about her tears or non-tears, the bottom line is no one had the guts to close down one minuscule company in 1968, so to me this is quite unfortunate.

"The government wants to kick me out as if I were in some Soviet land. My options are to resist with everything I have and stay on the land for as long as I can. "

Lisa Ziolkowski, said the family had purchased their home, which contains the more dangerous blue asbestos, with the help of a deferred stamp duty scheme, which they would not have if they re-purchased the cleaned land.

"I'm pretty furious, to be honest," she said. Mrs Ziolkowski said the mood had changed among Mr Fluffy owners, who now felt trapped, lost and angry.

Kevin and August Cole are 78, have lived in their Melba home for 32 years, and after overcoming serious health decided to remain and sought assurances they would not be thrown out.

Mr Cole said the ACT government's taskforce had left them reassured, until an information package arrived.

"It knocked the sails right of us," Mr Cole said. "Suddenly we found we are going to have to live in a house without heating, we can't use air conditioning in summer, all the vents must be closed, we know downstairs is completely clear, upstairs the only place asbestos has been found is in cupboards in the bedrooms and a linen cupboard."

He is angriest about the Commonwealth's refusal to accept responsibility.

"We are talking about a time when you couldn't sneeze without government approval, of what sort of materials were used in a house. Someone in the federal government system allowed this (asbestos) to be used."

The owners and residents group will ask the Commonwealth to revise its response, and include a tax-levy as it had done after the Queensland floods to help people. The group also wants to see the legal advice that relieves the Commonwealth of obligation to remedy the problem.

Ms Heseltine said people wanted relief from living with the risk of a deadly disease.

"The issue is not always playing out on the basis of logic, it is people being under enormous psychological strain and wanting to regain some sense of peace and they are prepared to pay any price for it."

Mrs Heseltine said one elderly woman had said she was prepared to pay hundreds of thousands of dollars to be rid of that level of stress.