President Barack Obama took over a segment of The Colbert Report, guest hosting as, well, Stephen Colbert. President Obama delivers a special edition of “The Word” – or in this case, “The Decree” – proving that he is perfectly capable of doing Stephen Colbert’s job.

In a previous report by the Inquisitr, and on a more serious note, President Obama may decide to take on Vladimir Putin. Lethal aid to Ukraine has been authorized by recently passed United States House Resolution 758, which calls for President Barack Obama to send both lethal and non-lethal aid to the Ukrainian military. If the U.S. Senate passes similar legislation, it’s possible Obama may choose to escalate the confrontation with Russian leader Vladimir Putin.

In the middle of the The Colbert Report, President Obama jumped onto the show and interrupted Stephen Colbert, playfully shooing him from the stage. “You’ve been taking a lot of shots at my job,” the president said. “I’ve decided to take a shot at yours.” After taking a seat he joked, “How hard can this be? I am just going to say whatever you were about to say.”

Obama took over the anchor chair offering a presidential take on the Colbert segment, The Word, given a new name The Decree for the night by the President. The Word is a segment where Colbert, in this case Obama, says a line or two before a witty word or phrases flashes to the right.

“Nation,” Obama said, referring to his audience like Colbert does, “as you know, I, Stephen Colbert, have never cared for our President. That guy is so arrogant. I bet he talks about himself in the third person.”

After talking about Obamacare, the President asked, “How do you stop something that more and more people are starting to like?”

Next to Obama flashed “Move it to CBS,” a nod to the fact that in two weeks Colbert will be stepping down from his Comedy Central show to take over for David Letterman at the The Late Show on CBS.

The President went on to detail how Republicans could stop Obamacare.

“They could pass a bill repealing Obamacare. But the President still has the veto and if I know that guy, he is willing to use it,” Obama said. “And let’s face it, even if Republicans somehow did repeal it, they would have to replace it with their own health care plan. Once they touch it, they own it, and then if anything goes wrong, suddenly everybody will be complaining about Mitch McConnell-care.”

“Walk It Off.gov” then flashed next to the President.

Near the close of the segment Obama joked, noting that last year’s Obamacare rollout was “a little bumpy.”

“I think that is where Disney got the idea for Frozen,” the President said to laughs.

Obama stayed in character for the end of the segment, too.

“We will be right back with the leader of the free world,” the President said, looking at his page like he couldn’t remember his own name before adding, “Barack Obama.”