The Rockies fast start this spring almost made history in the oldest sport played in Colorado. Ever since the 1860s, Denverites have found various ways to celebrate base hits. The Denver Athletic Club, for instance, inspired players with kegs of beer at each base. Ardent fans also showered DAC home-run hitters with gold pieces.

Incentives for better play also came in the form of new and better ball parks, more professional pay, and slowly evolving tolerance allowing athletes of all colors to play ball. Early city games were played at Denver Park at 32nd and Larimer before moving to River Front Park in the mid-1880s. River Front’s ball park came from John Brisben Walker, the ubiquitous developer behind Red Rocks and the Denver Mountain Parks system.

Walker constructed a ball field and bleachers near the junction of the South Platte River and Cherry Creek (today’s Commons Park and the rip-roaring Riverfront residential and retail development). To winning teams, Walker awarded cherry pies.

Another early venue, Broadway Grounds, lay at Colfax and Broadway. Denverites also dubbed that area Walter Scott Cheesman’s million-dollar cow pasture. Cheesman, the city’s leading real estate tycoon, put together the Union Station parcel and many other pricey, prime sites. On his pasture at Colfax and Broadway, he grazed a cow as evidence that it should be taxed as agricultural land. Perhaps the cow and the souvenirs it left on the field led to its replacement in 1889 by Broadway Park at Sixth Avenue and Broadway. That field would remain the home of Denver professional baseball until the 1920s.

Amateur baseball proliferated as the opening of other new playing grounds attests. Besides the Larimer Street Field, Wynkoop Field went up at Wynkoop Street and 36th Avenue. Sonny Lawson Field opened between Welton and California streets and 23rd and 24th avenues. Lawson launched one of Denver’s first black pharmacies and became a political leader instrumental in steering black Republicans into the Democratic Party.

After a 2013 revamping with new bleachers, lighting and fencing, Sonny Lawson Field shines as Denver’s oldest active ball park.

Denver’s professional and semi-professional teams did not shine, however, as they lacked the high pay used to attract and motivate star athletes. Denver’s M&O Cigar Company came to the rescue, financing teams in Denver, Greeley and Phoenix. M&O clubs won four Denver Post tournaments, an invitational event begun in 1915 for the best local semipro and amateur teams.

Merchants Park, the old 1901 Union Park, was upgraded and renamed after a local baker pitched in substantially. It stood at South Broadway and Exposition Avenue.

Merchants Park reigned as Denver’s professional ball field from 1922 to 1948. In 1995, the Mile High City opened one of the nation’s finest ballparks, a vintage-style brick-and-stone Coors Field. It has inspired many a slugger to smack home runs on a team nicknamed the Blake Street bombers.

Not only better parks, but greater tolerance motivated players. The Denver Post Tournament made history in 1934, according to Jim Whiteside’s book, “Colorado: A Sports History,” by inviting a Negro League Team, the Kansas City Monarchs, to compete. Before this, few Coloradans had seen black baseball players, although the African-American community had fielded a team, the Black Diamonds, during the 1890s.

The most famous Denver African-American club, the White Elephants, played from 1921 to 1935. Denver’s Great Western Sugar Company sponsored minority teams, including Japanese and Hispanic beet workers. Playing America’s favorite sport became a popular way for people of color to demonstrate their patriotism.

Tom Noel welcomes your comments at dr-colorado.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.