5 Loveland art galleries are hosting the exhibit to display art rejected from the Governor's Art Show

Julie Gillen places an oil-on-canvas painting called "Islands in the Fog" by Lyse Dzija on display on an easel Tuesday at Lola's Fresh Patina, 1349 N. Cleveland Ave. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Salon des Refuses art show. When: Now through Tuesday, June 30. Where: Five art galleries: Art of the Rockies, 233 E. Fourth St.; Hart Gallery, 135 E. Fourth St.; Independence Gallery, 233 E. Fourth St.; Lincoln Gallery, 429 N. Lincoln Ave.; Lola's Fresh Patina, 1349 N. Cleveland Ave. Special events: Artist reception, 5:30-8:30 p.m. Thursday, June 11; A Night on the Town, 6-9 p.m. Friday, June. 12.

Some of the artists in past Governor's Art Shows got the dreaded rejection letter this year, earning them a spot in the second annual Salon des Refuses, or Exhibition of Rejects.

But that doesn't mean their work is a reject or of poor quality, said Billie Colson, Loveland artist and owner of the Independence Gallery.

"Some of the rejected pieces, they're by professional artists. Their work is incredible as well," Colson said.

More than 300 artists applied to be in the 24th annual Governor's Art Show, a fundraiser for the Loveland and Thompson Valley Rotary clubs that kicked off with a gala Saturday, May 30, and will run through Sunday, June 28. Fifty-three artists were picked to show up to four pieces of paintings, photography, sculpture, ceramics and other mediums at the Loveland Museum/Gallery.

Advertisement

Nearly 70 artists who applied but were rejected for the Governor's Art Show are showing their work — they each get one piece — at five galleries through Tuesday, June 30, as part of the Salon des Refuses, tagged as "That's French for 'What you won't see at the Governor's Art Show.'" The main guideline for entering the show is getting a rejection letter and applying on time for both shows, so a half-dozen artists were rejected from the rejection show for not following instructions.

The five galleries are Art of the Rockies, Independence Gallery, Lincoln Gallery, Lola's Fresh Patina and the Hart Gallery, which is new this year. The hope is to expand the show to additional galleries for future shows, Colson said.

"It's a cool community cooperative thing between these galleries," Pearce said. "People come in just specially to look at those pieces when they hear they were rejected from the Governor's Art Show. It gives them a bit more je ne sais quoi. ... The meaning is that little something, a quality that alludes description."

Colson worked with the Governor's Art Show to publicize the alternative venue and agreed to donate 5 percent of the proceeds to the Rotary clubs, which raise funds for scholarships and other programs. She and Carolyn Pearce, president of the Thompson Valley Art League that owns the Lincoln Gallery organized the show last year after several artists were commiserating over their rejection letters.

"I said why not have our own show," said Colson, who displayed her rejection letter last year on an easel at the Independence Gallery. "It's a space thing as much as anything else."

The name Salon des Refuses comes from a famous show Emperor Napoleon III founded in Paris in the 1830s that displayed rejected works from traditional salons, Colson said.

"The artists think it's great fun. They enjoy another way to showcase their work in relation to the Governor's Art Show," Colson said. "It's a little bit of a novelty, but it's novelty with great art."

Loveland painter Rae Ann M. Garrett, who has her work on display at the Independence Gallery, has a piece in the Salon des Refuses at her home gallery.

"I applied to it, because, why not?" Garrett said. "The Salon des Refuses gets a huge turnout. It's worth it. They want to see the rejected art."

There will be an artists reception, Thursday, June 11, and a reception during A Night on the Town Friday, June, 12, for the show.

"Its a great way for us to collaborate as an art community and all the other galleries that are participating," Colson said. "Why not come to the galleries for the spin-off show?"

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm