Sioux Falls, SD

Hundreds of people walked along the streets of Downtown Sioux Falls admiring and buying art Saturday to celebrate the 52nd annual Sidewalk Arts Festival.

From music to arts and crafts and even face painting, there was something for the whole family in downtown Sioux Falls Saturday.

The annual Sidewalk Arts Festival adds a new splash of color this year with 75 new artist to display their creativity.

"It's all kinds of art. It's folk art, crafts, fine art, photography, ceramics. If you can think of it, I'm pretty sure it's here," Michele Wellman of the Washington Pavilion said.



Over 250 vendors were in downtown Sioux Falls showing off their arts and crafts. The catch? Everything they make has to be made by hand.

Artist are restricted from buying and selling products. Some people who came today say they're amazed by the variety of art.

"Oh I love it. I love all the neat stuff that people can make and I really enjoy looking at it," one passerby said.

Mud-Hen artist Mary Cameron makes leaf sculptures out of crumbled leaves and cement. She says arts and crafts has been a part of her life since she was a young girl.

"I was inspired actually by my father who did a lot of cement work growing up. The leftover cement I would make things out of and he called me mud-hen, hence the name," Cameron said.

Cameron says her sculptures have been a popular sale. She's just glad people admire her work just as much as she enjoys making it.

The vendors may be gone but the benefits of the event continue here in KELOLAND. The money raised goes to the Washington Pavilion's Visual arts Center. The funds raised will be used to bring musical artists to the premiere exhibitions.

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.