The City of Industry pays more than double the state average for health care benefits for many of its 33 employees.

In 2014, the city paid $57,773 — $4,800 a month — for health, vision and dental insurance for a dozen employees each, according to data provided by Transparent California, which compiles information on public employee compensation.

“It’s astronomical,” said Robert Fellner, research director for Transparent California. “This is definitely top of the mountain, so to speak.”

Industry paid individually between $20,330 and $44,962 for another 15 employees. That brings the average cost of health insurance per employee to $42,770 in 2014. By comparison, Los Angeles paid an average of $13,889 per employee, while Beverly Hills averaged about $23,000.

The recipients of Industry’s highest cost health benefits ranged from its top executives to its lowest assistants. Even two planning commissioners, who earned less than $9,000 a year in salary, received the costly benefit, according to a compensation report. Other employees with similar titles or even identical positions received lower contributions, sometimes less than half what their colleagues got.

Some Industry employees also benefit from significantly below-market city housing. The revelations are the just latest in a series of news stories scrutinizing the city, whose $140 million in revenues serve about 400 residents.

City Manager Paul Philips, hired six months ago, offered little explanation for the high health insurance costs.

He said Industry doesn’t cover anything unusual or exceptional in its benefits, which are provided through Aetna. City staff are in the process of reviewing the insurance costs, he added.

“We are digging into it. I should know more in a month,” he said.

He also questioned the accuracy of the numbers.

Like it does for cities across the state, Transparent California directly requested the compensation and benefit information from Industry through a public records request.

When Fellner saw Industry’s numbers, he thought someone had made a mistake. He sent an email to Industry Deputy Clerk Cecelia Dunlap requesting confirmation. In a subsequent email exchange, which included Philips, Dunlap made minor adjustments to the numbers but confirmed their high amount.

Fellner said his organization found that Industry’s spending topped every other city in the state — by a lot. The runner-up, Sonoma, had an average nearly $20,000 less than Industry’s average, according to their ranking.

Advertisement

“City of Industry is off the map,” Fellner said.

The high cost left some experts scratching their heads, too.

Nadereh Pourat, director of research for UCLA’s Center for Health Policy Research, called the benefits “very odd.”

“It boggles the mind, I don’t know what that money could be spent on,” she said.

She said an employer’s contribution increases when it doesn’t split the cost with its employees, when the plan covers specialized services — such as fertility treatments — and when it reduces the out-of-pocket expenses for employees.

“If you don’t pass on any of the cost to the employee, then the premium price will go up,” she said.

Even then, Industry’s contributions were high, she said.

Nationally, the annual premiums for employer-sponsored health coverage cost an average of $16,834 in 2014, including both the employer and the employee’s contributions, according to an annual survey by the Kaiser Family Foundation. The survey doesn’t include dental and vision, but even when the average is doubled, it’s still nearly $10,000 away from Industry’s numbers.

California Healthcare Foundation crunches the state’s average through its own survey. In 2014, employers contributed an average of $13,109 per employee annually for family plans in California. Employees paid $4,499 of that cost.

“It just seems like a lot for a city,” said Robbin Gaines, senior program officer for the California Healthcare Foundation.

Like Pourat, she said an employer’s costs rise if they pick up more of the share. Other factors that could raise the price include having high-risk employees, having older employees and just offering better coverage, she said.

As part of the Affordable Care Act, the Obama administration pushed a “Cadillac tax” on expensive healthcare plans, with the aim of discouraging employers from buying overpriced plans. It imposes a 40 percent excise tax on healthcare policies above a certain cap: $10,200 for an individual and $27,500 for a family. The tax was expected to go into effect in 2018, however, the omnibus budget passed in December delayed the implementation until 2020.

Other cities and government agencies in Southern California could also be subject to the tax, according to a recent report by Transparent California.