Health care, sequester cuts and debt limit confront the Republican.

Sen. Mitch McConnell, R-Ky., addressed about 75 employees of St. Elizabeth Healthcare at the group's Florence, Ky., location Aug. 12, 2013. (Photo: The Cincinnati Enquirer) Story Highlights Federal government faces potential Oct. 1 shut down if appropriations bills aren't passed

McConnell, who brokered a deal with the vice president last year, may not be able to do so now

Senator under attack to lead on defunding the Affordable Care Act

WASHINGTON — As Congress faces a potential meltdown over the budget and spending, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell is staring at tough political choices.

Should the Kentucky Republican get involved in trying to cut another budget deal and open himself to charges from the right that he is giving in to President Barack Obama? Or should he let others negotiate and be subjected to criticism that he gets nothing done?

With a series of battles looming over spending, budget cuts, health care and the debt ceiling — as well as the threat of a government shutdown Oct. 1 — McConnell will be "caught between a rock and a hard place," said Steve Ellis, vice president of Taxpayers for Common Sense, a nonpartisan spending watchdog group.

"It's really going to come down to where he sees the political calculus turning out," Ellis said. "Does it benefit him more to be statesmanlike or more intransigent?"

With millionaire Matt Bevin challenging him in the Kentucky GOP primary next spring, McConnell has "far less room to maneuver," said Stan Collender, a former staffer on the House and Senate budget committees who is a partner in Washington-based Qorvis Communications.

Rep. John Yarmuth, a Louisville, Ky., Democrat who is a member of the House Budget Committee, said McConnell "is in what I would call the quintessential political quicksand: Whichever way he moves, he's going to sink with somebody."

McConnell, who declined requests for an interview, has given few hints of how he thinks the budget disputes should be resolved, beyond a brief statement Thursday after meeting to discuss the crisis with House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio; House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif.; and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.

While Boehner and Reid spoke separately to reporters and made it clear there was no sign of a resolution, McConnell's statement said only, "We need to start by keeping the cuts we've already agreed to."

Shutdown looms

The federal government starts a new fiscal year Oct. 1 and needs new authority to spend money. Without the passage of appropriations bills in some form — a temporary, stopgap measure known as a continuing resolution that keeps spending at current levels, or a longer-lasting package that incorporates new spending — most federal government functions could shut down.

“It's really going to come down to where he sees the political calculus turning out. Does it benefit him more to be statesmanlike or more intransigent?” Steve Ellis, vice president Taxpayers for Common Sense

And an August test of political will on a lone spending bill — $54 billion for transportation and housing — produced a Senate defeat that deflated prospects for bipartisan agreement on the bigger spending picture.

Further complicating the budget debate is GOP disagreement about how far to push an effort to defund the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, and continuing partisan divisions over how to deal with automatic spending cuts, known as the sequester, in the next budget.

Several GOP lawmakers in the Senate and House — including Sen. Rand Paul and Reps. Thomas Massey and Andy Barr of Kentucky — insist they will vote against any spending that would allow further implementation of the health care program, a step other Republicans who oppose the law, including McConnell, say is not realistic.

McConnell has proposed an amendment to an energy bill that would delay implementation of Obamacare for a year, saying he would continue to fight for the law's outright repeal. But the senator has come under direct attack from two conservative groups and Bevin over Obamacare, despite McConnell's frequent speeches on the Senate floor criticizing the program.

ForAmerica produced a video depicting McConnell as a chicken in the Obamacare battle.

"Senator McConnell," the video says, "conservatives don't need a chicken when it comes to Obamacare. Leaders lead. But if you fund it, you own it."

Bevin issued a statement saying: "If Mitch McConnell is serious about defunding Obamacare, he will stop talking about it, and start leading the charge."

'Primary headache'

If GOP intransigence over Obamacare is strong enough, the Republican-controlled House might block any spending deal, forcing a government shutdown.

Some GOP leaders fear that would be a political disaster for their party, as were Republican-led shutdowns in late 1995 and early 1996 during Bill Clinton's presidency. In the 1996 elections, Clinton won a second term and the Democrats picked up nine House seats, while losing two in the Senate.

“Cutting another deal with Biden as he did in the fiscal cliff days is going to be much more difficult. The tea party is completely anti-compromise. ... (And) in a Republican primary where only activists vote, it could be devastating for him to be seen as a capitulator.” Stan Collender, a former staffer on the House and Senate budget committees

"The McConnell case is a microcosm of a larger Republican problem: On the one hand, you have to win primaries; on the other hand, you have to govern," said Jared Bernstein, senior fellow at the nonpartisan Center on Budget and Policy Priorities. "Often those two objectives are in opposition."

McConnell has played deal maker in previous fiscal crises, most recently in December. At the time, the nation was facing the expiration of tax cuts enacted during the presidency of George W. Bush and the start of the automatic spending cuts under the sequester — two events dubbed "the fiscal cliff."

McConnell and Vice President Joe Biden crafted an eleventh-hour compromise under which the tax cuts were made permanent for all Americans except individuals with incomes more than $400,000 and couples with incomes of more than $450,000. The deal also delayed the spending cuts by two months.

"Cutting another deal with Biden as he did in the fiscal cliff days is going to be much more difficult," Collender said. "The tea party is completely anti-compromise. ... (And) in a Republican primary where only activists vote, it could be devastating for him to be seen as a capitulator."

Bernstein said McConnell now has a "primary headache that wasn't part of the problem last time."

Chances of deal

The sequester cuts, meanwhile, remain a sticking point in budget talks. Efforts by Republicans to shift automatic cuts away from defense to other social programs have run into fierce resistance from Democrats, many of whom want to junk the sequester and start fresh.

As if those budget problems aren't bad enough, the federal government will, a few weeks into October, reach its $16.7 trillion debt limit and require authority to raise it. Many Republicans in Congress vow to oppose raising the debt limit despite warnings from economists that such a step would endanger the nation's credit rating and upset the economic recovery.

Treasury Secretary Jack Lew warned Aug. 26 that the government's ability to borrow money will expire in mid-October. He urged Congress to approve a new ceiling quickly.

"The president's been very clear: We are not going to be negotiating over the debt limit," Lew told CNBC. "Congress has already authorized funding, committed us to make expenditures."

Yarmuth said the fiscal uncertainty normally would be a ready-made situation for McConnell's negotiating skills.

Instead, Yarmuth said, "his political dilemma could end up hurting an opportunity to come to a deal."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eD4rdT