State Sen. Bill Stanley expects that he and Del. Danny Marshall will seek state funding for the planned College of Henricopolis School of Medicine, Stanley said Wednesday.

Stanley made the remark while speaking at the Martinsville-Henry County Chamber of Commerce’s post-legislative luncheon at the Virginia Museum of Natural History. Other featured speakers were 9th District U.S. Rep. Morgan Griffith, Marshall and fellow Delegates Les Adams and Charles Poindexter. All the legislators are Republicans.

Stanley, majority whip in the Senate, said the dream of a medical school in Martinsville must become a reality with state support.

Marshall didn’t address the medical school during his comments at the luncheon, but in an interview he said the governor will introduce his proposed budget in December, and legislators can introduce budget amendments when the session convenes in January of next year.

Marshall said he and Stanley have asked Dr. Noel Boaz, president of the medical school, to put together a funding plan, including the total amount needed and how the money would be spent. Marshall said funding may be sought from multiple sources, including the General Assembly, Virginia Tobacco Indemnification and Community Revitalization Commission, the Harvest Foundation and possibly federal funding sources.

As for the need for the medical school, Marshall referred to a point that Stanley had made. Marshall said: “If you look at rural Virginia, every two to three doctors who retire, only one is coming back to rural Virginia. We’ve got to turn that around so we can get more doctors in rural Virginia.”

Boaz said after the luncheon that he was glad to hear the support expressed for the planned medical school, which is targeted to open in fall 2016, pending approvals by accreditors.

“I was very pleased with the general amount of support we got,” Boaz said. “Sen. Stanley is going to the forefront with this. That is very good. What is unique today, that is new, we are going to have a matching appropriations bill originating in the House with Del. Marshall. This is a significant development.”

Boaz estimates that $24 million to $25 million in funding is needed for the medical school to open, which potentially could come from such sources as the General Assembly, the tobacco commission, private foundations and sale of preferred stock.

During his luncheon remarks, Stanley also discussed some of his bills that became law in 2015, including increased funding for rural health care, expanding eligibility for scholarships for medical school students who agree to practice in rural and underserved areas of Virginia, and providing access to a financial literacy course for Virginians who receive public assistance.

He also mentioned his bill to create the Interstate 73 Transportation Compact between Virginia, South Carolina, North Carolina, West Virginia, Ohio and Michigan to develop and plan for the construction and completion of Interstate 73, to advocate for federal and other funding resources for such projects, and facilitate plans and programs for such projects between those states.

Stanley said that despite naysayers, “I say it (I-73) will be built in our lifetime.” He said the project will create tens of thousands of jobs and increase tourism and economic development.

Marshall said the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency’s proposed regulations for carbon dioxide emission limits for existing electric power plants would put Virginia’s performance emission goals at a more stringent level than some other states, putting Virginia at a disadvantage. He also said several coal-fired power plants in Virginia would have to close, Virginia would have to compete with other states to import electricity, and prices would increase.

In addition, those proposed EPA regulations are unconstitutional, Griffith said, citing the opinion of legal scholar Laurence Tribe of Harvard Law School. Griffith also said he feared the proposed regulations would result in some brownouts.

Griffith said of I-73, “It’s a huge economic driver,” and he commended local officials for supporting the project. “I can’t tell you how proud I am of you,” he said.

Adams talked about various bills that he supported — as patron, co-patron or committee member. For example, he was chief co-patron of HB 1550, which would make local school boards responsible for setting the school calendar and determining the opening date of the school year, and eliminate the post-Labor Day opening requirement and “good cause” scenarios for which the Virginia Board of Education may grant waivers of that requirement. The House passed the bill, but it was defeated in a Senate committee, according to the General Assembly website.

Adams said he thinks there is momentum for the bill, and he looks forward to pushing forward with it.

He also supported a higher education bill to address reporting of on-campus sexual assault. And his HB 1854 was approved. It seeks to prevent nonqualifying corporations from using straw companies to win bids set aside for small, women-owned, and minority-owned businesses, he said.

Poindexter said the state budget approved by the General Assembly during the 2015 session increased funding for state retirement and teacher retirement programs; restored aid to local governments; provided raises for the state work force, teachers and support staff, college faculty, state police, state-supported local deputies, constitutional officers and registrars. It also provided additional funding for health care and the safety net, and increased funding for the rainy-day fund, among other things.

Poindexter said Virginia’s state revenues have been hurt by federal defense cuts and effects of the Affordable Care Act.

In interviews, several local officials seemed pleased with the legislators’ remarks.

Henry County Administrator Tim Hall praised the legislators for being responsive to the area’s needs and good to work with. He also said that economically, things “are starting to turn around” locally and in the state.

Martinsville Schools Superintendent Pam Heath said: “It validates things we are trying to do. It’s all about the economy and quality of life. We understand the role of K-12 (education) in that, and that role is very clear to our legislators.”

Joe Keiper, executive director of the Virginia Museum of Natural History, said that anything helping tourism “is important to all museums. I-73 will drive that.”

He said the legislators are passionate about the area, and he stressed the need for a “can-do spirit.”

William Wampler, executive director of New College Institute, commended the legislators for “understanding the importance of K-12, the community college and NCI working together.”

Chamber President Amanda Witt said some of the legislators discussed issues that could impact local businesses, and the chamber is an advocate for local businesses.