Got a vegan or vegetarian guest coming to Thanksgiving dinner? Don't banish them to the Brussels sprouts! Award-winning vegan chef Chloe Coscarelli (you might recognize her as the surprise winner of Food Network's "Cupcake Wars") shows us how to whip up healthy and delicious recipes that'll entice even the biggest meat lovers at your table.

Coscarelli teamed up with Farm Sanctuary, the country's largest farm animal protection organization, to create Thanksgiving recipes. In addition to serving these goodies, if you really want to make one of your animal-loving friends happy this holiday, save a turkey through Farm Sanctuary's Adopt a Turkey Project. Who says you can't please everyone?

For Coscarelli's entire menu visit Farmsanctuary.org

From Chef Chloe’s Compassionate Thanksgiving Table inspired by Farm Sanctuary

Quick Biscuits

2 cups all-purpose flour, plus extra for work surface

1 tablespoon baking powder

3/4 teaspoon salt

1/2 cup vegan margarine, plus extra for brushing

3/4 cup soy, almond, or rice milk

Whipped Maple “Butter”

1 cup vegan margarine, at room temperature

1/4 cup maple syrup

Assembly:

1. Preheat oven to 375 °F. You can make the dough by hand or by using a food processor.

2. By hand: Whisk together flour, baking powder, and salt in a large bowl. Add margarine and cut it roughly into the flour using a pastry cutter, until mixture is the texture of coarse meal with a few larger margarine lumps. Work quickly, so the margarine does not melt. Add non-dairy milk and stir with a wooden spoon, until just combined. Do not overwork.

3. Food processor: Combine flour, baking powder, and salt in the food processor and pulse for about 5 seconds, until ingredients are combined. Add margarine and pulse, until mixture is the texture of coarse meal with a few larger margarine lumps. Work

quickly, so the margarine does not melt. Add non-dairy milk and pulse a few times, until just combined. Do not overwork.

4. Transfer the dough to a lightly floured surface and pat into an oblong shape, about 1 inch thick. Using a 2 1/2-inch floured cookie or biscuit cutter, cut the biscuits out and place them on a baking sheet. Brush the tops lightly with melted margarine and bake for about 12 to 15 minutes, or until they begin to turn golden brown. Remove biscuits from oven immediately and transfer to a wire rack to cool.

5. Make the maple “butter”: In a mixing bowl, using a whisk or electric mixer, whip margarine with maple syrup, until light and fluffy. Refrigerate until serving.