Get a detailed breakdown of the ways you can have the best quality of life by maintaining your physical and mental health, regardless of your age.

Get a detailed breakdown of the ways you can have the best quality of life by maintaining your physical and mental health, regardless of your age. Bluebird Care

It’s no secret that good health leads to a good quality of life. As we grow old, our bodies naturally become weaker, with our skin, brain, and lungs aging in our 20s, and the rest of our body parts losing their battle with time. Health concerns may take a backseat for the young, but it’s never too early to let them take front row in our daily lives.

More Americans are living longer these days, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, with the average life expectancy at 81 for women and 76 for men. Although we may be living longer, though, the incidence of chronic diseases, such as heart disease and cancer, has contributed to a decrease in lifespan. Chronic diseases affect approximately 133 million Americans, which is almost half of the adult population.

This doesn’t mean disease and disability has to be an inevitable consequence of growing old. Adults, even in their twilight years, can reduce the risk of developing chronic diseases and avoiding injury through diet and exercise. Increasing longevity can be in our control starting with the foods we consume.

A 1999 study published in the Journal of The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition found the intake of plenty of whole grains helps to prevent coronary heart disease in women. This held true after the researchers adjusted for age and smoking. This finding is significant since heart disease is the leading cause of death for both men and women of most ethnicities in the U.S.

Explore your own fragility and the best ways to maintain your physical and mental health with this infographic from Irish care home establishment Bluebird Care to have the best quality of life, even in your twilight years.