Children as young as 4 participated in 5K event.

The Brantley family, Aaliyah, 14, Relena, 12, Nate and Milla, run south on Fifth Street, on the final stretch of the Color-ween 5K run/walk Saturday. The event started at the Skyline Drive entrance and ended at the Fallen Officer's Memorial Park at Colorado Territorial Correctional Facility. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

A banner for the Color-ween 5K run/walk Saturday. The event started at the Skyline Drive entrance and ended at the Fallen Officer's Memorial Park at Colorado Territorial Correctional Facility. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

More than 100 participants took part in Colorado Territorial Correctional Facility's inaugural Color-ween 5K run/walk Saturday.

The run began at the Skyline Drive entrance and ended at the Fallen Officer's Memorial Park at CTCF. Many families sign up for events like this to participate in as a family, with some walkers/runners as young as 4.

The Brantley family, Nate, Milla, Aaliyah, 14, and Relena, 12, ran the entire trek together. Nate said he and the couple's oldest daughter participated in the Color Me Rad 5K Run in Longmont, but Saturday's event was the first color run for the rest of the family.

"Going up Skyline was the hardest part, but going down wasn't as bad," Milla said.

Participants run the trek while periodically being "painted" by people along the route.

"None of these runs are competitive," Nate said. "It's just for fun."

Mike Ingo and his family drove from Pueblo West just to participate in the run/walk. His children, Colton, 7, and Lindsay, 4, even made the whole journey.

"My wife ran a race a while back and the kids wanted to run, but she didn't enter them, so after that she saw this one and we signed up the family," Mike Ingo said.

He said the family enjoyed the view from the top of Skyline Drive, and they even saw a few deer.

The event was organized to benefit the CTCF Council and Department of Human Services.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/cariecanterbury