PROVIDENCE, R.I. — The debt from his wife’s thyroid cancer treatments — $18,000 and mounting — drew Jaime Yepes to the industrial park on Little Royal Drive. On Oct. 2, the day after the full launch of Obamacare, he arrived at the walk-in and call center of HealthSource RI, the state’s health exchange vendor, looking weary, with mussed salt-and-pepper hair and an un-tucked plaid shirt. He sat in a brand-new armchair in a brand-new waiting room, eager to try out America’s great experiment in health insurance.

Yepes, a 49-year-old food-service worker from Colombia, has followed the Obamacare debate via the Spanish news channel Univision. He’d been looking forward to the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and was therefore “frustrated with the [government] shutdown. I thought it was gonna create problems for Obamacare, but I was glad it didn’t.”

He and his wife and four children were hoping to purchase a reasonably priced plan under the ACA, without fear of lifetime caps or restrictions on preexisting conditions. But he waited until the second day: “I didn’t want to go the first day because they wouldn’t know what’s going on.”

At the walk-in center, Yepes was called into a small back room. A woman trained as a health care navigator sat with him at a computer, going through each screening step at healthsourceri.com. “They had to get so much information from me,” he said. “These people have to know what I eat for lunch!” At one point, Yepes had to go home to retrieve some documents he hadn’t thought to bring, like his income tax return and Social Security card.

Yet after three hours with the navigator, Yepes left HealthSource RI without having enrolled or gotten a sense of what a decent plan might cost his family. The system would not process his wife’s green card number, and because he did not have all the information the exchange needed, “They couldn’t give me any information at all about the plans,” he said. This, he found frustrating.

“I’m buying a product, and they have many different products, so why can’t they get that information to me?” His plan now is two wait “two or three months” before trying again. “I think they’ll be in good shape by then.”