Lisa Quigley, left, and her daughter McKenna Harrington. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Tennessee lawmakers have already refused to cover hundreds of thousands of our citizens.

Tennesseans who get health coverage through the federal exchange could lose it with high court case.

Our very lucky legislators won't feel a thing if King v. Burwell goes the wrong way.

Last September, days before her 16th birthday, my daughter was diagnosed with Type 1 diabetes.

Through no fault of her own — diet and exercise are not a factor in Type I diabetes — her pancreas stopped working.

Suddenly, she was insulin dependent for the rest of her life. A few more days without treatment and she might have died. Multiple injections, every day, are now the rhythm of her life.

In the hours after her diagnosis, through my own tears, I went to pick up her lifesaving prescriptions.

As I reached across the counter for two armloads of meds, I handed over $60. If we had been uninsured, the cost would have been more than $1,100.

I want everyone to have good insurance just like my family has.

The Tennessee legislature has already refused to cover hundreds of thousands of our citizens by refusing to expand TennCare.

That expansion would have cost taxpayers nothing. Our neighboring state of Kentucky chose to help its citizens, unlike Tennessee.

Now our state is apparently ready to exclude hundreds of thousands more because the legislature still refuses to authorize a state "exchange."

Tennesseans currently get health coverage through the federal exchange, but that system could come to an end if the U.S. Supreme Court rules the wrong way in King v. Burwell this month.

Kentucky has an exchange, and it works great. So our neighbor has already taken both steps to protect its citizens. Why not Tennessee?

My daughter is one of the lucky ones. She is managing her illness well. Because of Obamacare, she can remain on our insurance plan until she turns 26, and when she ages out of our insurance, she cannot be discriminated against because of her pre-existing condition.

Of course, even those guarantees are in jeopardy if the court rules the wrong way and the insurance market collapses.

The implications for my daughter are real.

She may no longer live in a state that allows affordable access to health insurance. Instead of my husband and me advising her to follow her dreams, I will urge her to seek a job that guarantees health insurance, marry someone who has a family plan or move to a state like Kentucky.

She will not be able to assume the risk to her health by continuing to live in Tennessee.

Our very lucky legislators — almost all of whom have taxpayer-paid coverage for themselves and their families — won't feel a thing if King v. Burwell goes the wrong way.

But hundreds of thousands of currently covered Tennesseans will be dumped from their plans. Many have lived with insurance and peace of mind for years. And when they receive a diagnosis like my daughter's, what will they say to their loved ones?

The answer may very well be "Goodbye."

Don't force my daughter to leave our state. Don't force our adults with health problems to leave. Tennessee must start taking care of its own. If Kentucky can do it, surely we can too.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1JQOu2L