Feeling fit in a fresh space

The new location of the Anytime Fitness-Brainerd location sits across the parking lot from Cub Foods at the East Brainerd Mall. (Brainerd Dispatch/Steve Kohls)

Anytime Fitness-Brainerd manager Rick Bartkowitz (right) leads Sam Miller through a workout prior to the start of football season. (Brainerd Dispatch/Steve Kohls)

Anytime Fitness-Brainerd owner Jeremy Pollock explains Anytime Fitness’s corporate mission statement, which emphasizes fitness for everyone, regardless of shape or size. (Brainerd Dispatch/Steve Kohls)

Jeremy Pollock is a believer in the benefits of fitness because he sees them outside his office window every day.

Pollock owns the two local Anytime Fitness franchises, the location in Baxter and the other, newer location in Brainerd across the parking lot from Cub Foods.

Pollock's office in the Brainerd location looks out at the gym, and with a slight swivel of his office chair, he can see people of all shapes, sizes and ages sweating and working at bettering themselves.

---

“We’re a for-profit business, but we do change lives,” “It is cool to be able to see that.” -Jeremy Pollock, Anytime Fitness-Brainerd owner

---

He sees people everyday who are excited to go to the gym, instead of dreading it. They like to come to the gym because of the "clean, exciting, feel-good" environment Anytime Fitness provides, Pollock said.

"It's not easy and it's not fun, but you'll never be disappointed after you do it," Pollock said.

Corporate Anytime Fitness had opened the Brainerd gym and when Pollock asked them about it, "one thing led to another," and he ended up buying it in November of 2007. Shortly after acquiring the Brainerd location, he opened the Baxter gym in January of 2008.

Pollock said he saw his purchase as a business opportunity. He was coming from the declining mortgage business and was looking to diversify. He's an active person who likes health and fitness, so it seemed like a good industry to get into.

"Back when (Jay) Leno was on TV and everyone, they all joke about how fat America is getting, unfortunately," Pollock said. "Everyone needs it, whether they know it or not."

He first got into the gym business because a friend wanted to open a gym in St. Paul. Together, they opened a gym near the Xcel Energy Center in September of 2007, but he wanted to be in Brainerd.

"I wanted to kind of be where I lived, it was kind of far away," Pollock said.

Pollock grew up in St. Cloud, but also spent many of his summers here at a cabin, before moving to the area in 2002. He doesn't hunt or fish, but he loves boating and pulling his two kids on tubes or skis.

"That's kind of what I grew up doing," Pollock said. "The rest of my family is up here, too."

Building on a fresh idea

The new location for the Brainerd gym came about because Pollock's lease was nearing the end at his old location. Anytime Fitness's corporate parent requires a reinvention every six years, Pollock said. He would have had to repaint, recarpet, add bathrooms and remodel the old space.

"I just leased it, so I wasn't really excited about sticking a whole bunch of money into something I was leasing," Pollock said. "I was kind of motivated to try to own my own real estate instead of paying a lease to somebody."

Pollock met with Clint Nelson, the building's owner, to discuss leasing the space the gym now occupies. Nelson instead brought up the idea of creating a commercial condo association for the building, with Pollock buying a section. With expensive lease costs and low interest rates, the condo idea worked well.

"I knew what I could afford ... it just kind of all made sense," Pollock said. "Being young as well, I liked to own and have an asset."

---

Anytime Fitness-Brainerd

Location: 302 Fifth Ave. NE, Brainerd.

Owner: Jeremy Pollock.

Employees: Two employees at the Brainerd gym.

---

Nelson owned the building for eight to nine years, he said, and it sat vacant for 12-18 months before Anytime Fitness moved into the space.

"We were frustrated finding a large enough user to utilize the building," Nelson said.

The situation with Pollock worked out well and both sides were able to find a solution that worked for them both, Nelson said.

"It made a lot of sense for him to buy," Nelson said. "And that's what he wanted to do."

Breaking the larger building into smaller spaces makes it more affordable to buyers, Nelson said. It also has plenty of parking space available, as well as the advantage of locking up a low interest rate.

The remaining space could attract "any type of businesses that are out at the mall and a plethora of other ones," Nelson said.

New opportunities

The highlight of the new gym is the group fitness room, which allows Pollock to offer complimentary fitness classes to members at the Brainerd location, which it couldn't do at its old space, such as Zumba, yoga, kickboxing, basic training and Insanity classes.

Pollock said he's yet to try the classes, but is doubtful he'll give Zumba a shot. The same goes for the yoga class, which meets at 5 a.m.

"I don't know that I'll make the yoga class," Pollock said with a laugh. "But definitely would take the Insanity or (kickboxing)."

Pollock is looking into offering a class tailored for older clients to supplement the current personal training sessions for older members. Those offerings are vital in an area with an aging population, Pollock said.

---

By the numbers:

6,400 square feet

Seven treadmills

Five elliptical machines

One cross training machine

Two stationary bikes

One rowing machine

More than 2,000 pounds of free weights

---

The Baxter gym offers virtual fitness classes, where someone can select a class and go through it in a room with a screen and speakers, projecting the class in full-size in front of the client.

"It's a really nice option for people that have more of a tight schedule," Pollock said. "That's the hardest thing with live classes, is finding the right time that works for the majority of people."

Construction on the new gym started in March and was done around June 25, Pollock said. One construction goal was to add as few walls as possible, which makes the gym more open. A large front window combined with high ceilings give the gym an open, bright feeling.

"Members definitely appreciate that, all the openness and not walled off and separate rooms," Pollock said.

Why it works

Anytime Fitness is a great option for fitness fans because of its 24-hour availability and 2,600 worldwide gyms a member can access, Pollock said. They're also clean and secure, with a friendly staff who greet members by name.

"I'm not here every day so I don't necessarily know everyone by name," Pollock said. "But I know the people that generally come in when I'm here."

Members enjoy the clean, reliable facilities, as well as the ability to come at any time, Pollock said.

"Get in, get out and get on with your day," Pollock said. "It's not a long process."

Some members work at resorts and don't get off work until 2-3 a.m., Pollock said. Still energetic following their shift, they'll come work out before going home to go to bed. Other more body-conscious members may want to come at off-peak hours when there are less people at the gym.

Working with Anytime Fitness as a corporate parent has "definitely been a positive thing," Pollock said. Having the name and support makes looking for new equipment easier, as they've already set up pricing with certain vendors.

"You don't have to wonder if this vendor is good or not," Pollock said. "They've already done the work, they've already negotiated pricing."

Remodels also become easier, as they've picked out certain design elements and make sure an owner doesn't miss anything in the process, Pollock said.

"They have lots of support behind you," Pollock said.

Anytime Fitness co-founder Chuck Runyon has worked to make memberships tax deductible, Pollock said.

"They really are trying to do a good job of focusing on making America and the world healthier," Pollock said.

Insurance companies wouldn't offer a fitness center credit if it would cost them money in the long run, Pollock said.

"If people work out, they're going to be healthier," Pollock said. "(The insurance companies) have said, it's a proven fact that if you work out, you're going to be healthy and you're not going to go to the hospital as much."

Gyms wouldn't be in business if members didn't see benefits, Pollock said. He has an uncle who's a testament to the progress someone can see from a regular workout schedule.

Pollock's uncle went from not working out to now going to the gym six days a week. He's 68 years old and recently went through treatment for prostate cancer.

"He says, 'Life's too short, I need to be healthy,'" Pollock said. "And he's loving it."

People can be worried about "fitting in" at a gym, or looking like they belong there, Pollock said. It's still hard for people to take that first step and "walk through the door."

"Our number one way to get people through the door is our members, word of mouth and referrals," Pollock said. "Once they come through the door, that's the hardest part for a lot of people."

People can still be concerned about not fitting into a gym atmosphere or feeling judged for not appearing fit, Pollock said.

"That's more of the stigma that I would like to see changed," Pollock said. "Being healthy isn't about how you look."

Fitness goals don't have to be about looks, it's about becoming healthier on the inside and outside, Pollock said.

Buying two Anytime Fitness locations may have started as a business opportunity, but Pollock's approach to it has changed over the years.

"We're a for-profit business, but we do change lives," Pollock said. "It is cool to be able to see that."

SPENSER BICKETT may be reached at 218-855-5859 or spenser.bickett@brainerddispatch.com. Follow on Twitter at www.twitter.com/spenserbickett.