Graham says Dems “bit off far more than they can chew” when they passed Obamacare. | AP Photos Graham: 'I am not Nancy Pelosi'

TALLAHASSEE, Fla. — Gwen Graham, one of the top Democratic House candidates of this cycle, said she would oppose Nancy Pelosi’s candidacy for the party’s top leadership slot.

“No, I would not,” Graham said without skipping a beat, when asked if she would vote for Pelosi (D-Calif.). “And this is why. I believe we need to have new leadership on both sides of the aisle. The leadership that we have today has become so polarizing and so politicized that I’m not blaming either of them, it’s just the reality. So we need new leadership that Democrats and Republicans feel comfortable working with so we can start getting things done for our country again.”

Story Continued Below

She didn’t stop there.

( QUIZ: How well do you know Nancy Pelosi?)

In a debate here in the bowels of the Donald L. Tucker Civic Center, Graham also said her party should stop “framing” Republican policies as a “war on women.”

She said Democrats “bit off far more than they can chew” when they passed Obamacare, and said it was “shoved through without any bipartisan support.”

She touted her support of a Republican change to the health care law. And she said President Barack Obama was “way too slow” to react to the threat of the Islamic State of Iraq and the Levant.

( Also on POLITICO: Is Bill Cassidy too boring for Louisiana?)

Graham, the daughter of former governor and Sen. Bob Graham (D-Fla.), is running to unseat Rep. Steve Southerland (R-Fla.) in a northern Florida district that’s become one of the tightest — and nastiest — races for the House in the country.

“I am not Nancy Pelosi,” Graham said to applause in the debate, which was hosted by the Capital Tiger Bay Club in the state capital.” Neither am I Barack Obama or Harry Reid. I am Gwen Graham. And I am going to go to Washington and represent this district so incredibly well, and represent all of the counties of this district.”

The debate between Graham and Southerland was cordial, a marked departure from their previously rancorous interactions.

( Also on POLITICO: House Democrats in retreat)

That the seat is even in play has surprised Republicans in D.C. The district — Florida’s 2nd Congressional District — is a Republican seat. Mitt Romney won it by 6 points in 2012 and John McCain won by 5 points in 2008. Both Republicans and Democrats say that Graham and Southerland are in a dead heat with just three weeks until Election Day.

To be sure, Graham isn’t looking to cozy up to House Republicans. She blamed them for the government shutdown and said that the GOP voted 54 times to repeal Obamacare, and, therefore, put the insurance companies back in control of the health care system. Graham also sharply criticized Southerland for voting against the Violence Against Women Act and gender pay equity.

When asked if he would support Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio), Southerland said yes . He quickly noted there’s no one else.

“Because I’m there, and I am a part of the conference, I know that you can’t replace somebody with nobody,” he said. “You just can’t, and I know that there is no one that is mounting a challenge to John Boehner. So therefore, the chances are very likely … that we will go to the floor and you will have two choices: one choice, will be perhaps John Boehner, and I think there’s a very good likelihood that that’s going to happen. And the other choice will most likely be Nancy Pelosi. And I’ve made it crystal clear: I’ll never vote for Nancy Pelosi to be speaker of the House. Ever.”

Authors: