EAST LANSING, Mich.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Medical Advantage Group, a leading health care consulting and management company headquartered in Michigan, has announced the appointment of Paul MacLellan as their new CEO. He will assume this new role beginning June 25, 2014.

He most recently served as a director at Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan (BCBSM), where he supported several key business systems for BCBSM’s commercial products, including:

Provider incentive programs – Physician Group Incentive Program ( PGIP), Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH), Provider Delivered Care Management (PDCM), Organized Systems of Care (OSC), and specialist uplifts

PGIP), Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH), Provider Delivered Care Management (PDCM), Organized Systems of Care (OSC), and specialist uplifts HEDIS / NCQA accreditation

New risk adjustment processes introduced with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA)

(PPACA) Employer group customer reporting

Clinical analytics

Prior to working at BCBSM, Mr. MacLellan played a key role in the launch of two startup organizations. At RouteOne LLC, he held product management responsibilities for a number of solutions in the North American automotive finance industry. At RealAge.com Inc., he led the team that launched a highly innovative health risk assessment product.

Mr. MacLellan holds a Bachelor of Mathematics from the University of Waterloo in Canada.

Simultaneously, The Doctors Company, the nation’s largest physician-owned medical malpractice insurer, has completed its acquisition of Medical Advantage Group.

The Doctors Company owned a large stake in Medical Advantage Group prior to the acquisition, along with Physician Holding Company and about 200 independent physicians. Under the terms of the transaction, Medical Advantage Group joins The Doctors Company as a wholly owned subsidiary and will continue to operate out of its Ann Arbor, East Lansing, and Flint offices.

Mr. MacLellan predicts that Michigan physicians will benefit from the merger. “With the resources available from the state’s leading health care consulting organization and its leading medical malpractice insurer, Michigan physicians are positioned to create a better climate in which to practice medicine. I am pleased to be joining Medical Advantage Group at such a pivotal point in its history.”

About Medical Advantage Group

Founded in 1996, Medical Advantage Group (www.medadvgrp.com) consults with independent physicians and physician groups to improve quality and efficiency of care by helping providers achieve performance excellence, adopt healthcare technology, participate in managed care contracts, and achieve clinical integration. Since its founding, Medical Advantage Group has helped develop and manage more than 55 IPAs and PHOs in Michigan and more than 6,000 physicians statewide.

About The Doctors Company

Founded by doctors for doctors in 1976, The Doctors Company (www.thedoctors.com) is relentlessly committed to advancing, protecting, and rewarding the practice of good medicine. The Doctors Company is the nation’s largest physician-owned medical malpractice insurer, with 75,000 members and $4.3 billion in assets, and is rated A by A.M. Best Company and Fitch Ratings.