Graduate student Shuchen Feng tests lake water for contamination at UW-Milwaukee’s School of Freshwater Sciences. Credit: Angela Peterson

By of the

The state's two public doctoral research universities are stepping up efforts to more effectively compete for top graduate students who play key roles in research and teaching undergraduates.

But a plan for how to make the University of Wisconsin-Madison more competitive is highly controversial and has been delayed until May 2017 because confusion was interfering with recruiting.

The plan allows the Graduate School to establish a minimum, but not a maximum, stipend that will be uniform for teaching assistants, program assistants and research assistants. Schools and colleges, together with departments and programs, will then have the ability to establish stipend rates above the minimum.

The university says this would allow for market flexibility and help it be more competitive with peers. The graduate assistant labor union, however, wants an across-the-board raise and criticizes the plan as "a privatized form of market-based 'merit' pay."

Raising graduate assistant stipends is essential for UW-Milwaukee to continue as a research university, a group of 25 distinguished professors at UWM said in a statement also endorsed Thursday by the Faculty Senate. UWM has had difficulty competing for high-quality graduate students for years because of below-market stipends, the statement said.

UWM boosted its total allocation for graduate student stipends by $942,000 over two years: $692,000 this year, in addition to $250,000 in one-time funds added last year. It will take a total of $2 million to $2.5 million to bump UWM stipends to where they need to be, according to UWM faculty and officials.

Research isn't all that's at stake. The quality of teaching for undergrads also depends on attracting top graduate assistants to teach class discussion and lab sections, said David Petering, a distinguished professor of chemistry.

"Stipends are utterly uncompetitive now," he said.

Graduate students teach labs, lead discussion sections, help students with questions, grade assignments and exams, and provide context beyond lectures given by professors. Some teach entire courses. Others do scholarly research or work in administration and community service.

UW-Madison graduate students rallied last week in front of Bascom Hall to ask the administration to abandon the policy before it's implemented.

"Instead of ensuring that all of their employees are paid fairly, administration has instead turned to a privatized form of market-based 'merit' pay where a lucky few might receive a bit more, but the majority of grad workers will continue to fall behind," said Sergio González, a history PhD student and co-president of the Teaching Assistants' Association.

The policy was delayed because uncertainty about it "is introducing impediments to attracting the strongest possible graduate students to Madison," Graduate School Dean William Karpus wrote in a memo this month.

UW-Madison sets stipends based on percentage employment, with 100% considered the full-time rate. Units adjust individual appointments between 1% and 75% to get to either the necessary number of work hours or desired amount of compensation.

Peer institutions don't base stipends on an appointment percent. They use a range of rates.

Under UW-Madison's new policy, the appointment percent would no longer be used to set the stipend. Rates would depend on market factors within fields. UW-Madison administrators say it will avoid confusion when graduate students are comparing offers between competing schools.

The new pay structure would not reduce grad student pay or benefits, said Meredith McGlone, a UW-Madison spokeswoman.

"No graduate assistants, including TAs, will lose their jobs, face increased teaching loads or have their pay reduced as a result of this administrative change, and it will have no impact on health insurance or other benefits received by any graduate assistants, including TAs," McGlone said.

In fiscal 2015, the average 50% full-time equivalent pay rate for teaching assistants at UW-Madison was $15,535 — nearly $1,800 below the peer median. For research assistants, the average was $17,365, similar to the peer median in an analysis of 19 peer public institutions in the Association of American Universities.

UW-Madison employs 5,465 gradate students. Of that number, 2,082 are teaching assistants in classrooms. In fall 2014, graduate assistants taught 3,067 discussion sections at UW-Madison.

UWM's starting stipend is $10,681 for project assistants and $11,838 for teaching assistants, while the minimum research assistant stipend is $15,000. Research assistant stipends are differentiated by fields, and are close to the national average tracked by the Oklahoma State Graduate Assistant Stipends Survey, according to the Graduate School.

As part of their compensation, graduate students at both UW-Madison and UWM with a set percentage employment — 33% — receive health insurance and do not pay tuition. They still pay more than $1,100 in annual segregated fees.

Editor's note: An earlier posted version of this story incorrectly said graduate students at UWM must have a 50% employment in order to receive health insurance and free tuition. The threshold is 33%.