The Dudek Abides Journal Sentinel TV and film critic Duane Dudek looks at life on the small and big screen, and some of the cool stuff on both. SHARE

By of the

Records, like boilers, are made to be broken. When the boiler at the Landmark Oriental theater, 2230 N. Farwell Ave., broke during the recent cold snap it closed the theater until further notice.

Which means this month's 36th anniversary showing of "The Rocky Horror Picture Show" tonight is canceled.

But does this mean the theater's streak of continuous showings is also broken?

It depends on your definition of the words continuous showings, according to Lyn Leannis Kream, a 23-year member of Sensual Daydreams, the performance group behind the rowdy stage show that accompanies the campy 1975 comedy horror musical.

According to Kream, "technically" the streak is not broken: "It's been canceled a couple times in the past because of the weather," she said. "And it didn't affect the streak. Our theater still holds the record because it has been on the schedule and shown (for) that long."

Missing a month does not affect the record, she said. The next showing is Feb. 8.

The Oriental holds the record for the most continuous showings of the film in the US, according to Rockypedia.org, said Kream.

It currently shows the second Saturday of each month. Kream said no theater has "consistently played it week after week without a break."

In a Facebook message, Annaleigh Vytlacil, Sensual Daydreams director wrote: "The only way the record would break is if The Oriental Theater decided to remove The Rocky Horror Picture Show permanently. We will be back next month for our scheduled Lingerie show but with also our added Anniversary celebration we have every January. "

The 86-year old Oriental is expected to re-open Monday.

Cast members of Sensual Daydreams act out scenes of "Rocky Horror Picture Show" in 2002 while the movie plays in the background at the Landmark Oriental theater. (Journal Sentinel file photo)

Jerry Dunk gets a group hug from fellow performers before an October 2000 performance of "Rocky Horror Picture Show" at the Oriental theater.