EDINBURG — Doctor’s Hospital at Renaissance is seeking to double the number of beds at its main campus within the next two years, but only if federal regulators bless its plan.

There are 513 licensed beds at the main campus and the application seeks to expand to 1,102 beds — large enough to become the biggest hospital in the Rio Grande Valley. The planned expansion is expected to cost $200 million.

“There is a problem with intermittent care (in the Valley), if individuals fly in (for procedures) and out of the community who does the after care?” asked Dr. Carlos Cardenas, co-founder of Doctor’s Hospital at Renaissance and chairman of the hospital’s board of directors.

Often, large corporate hospitals may have a specific surgeon on staff but their primary residence is often in larger cities. Cardenas said the hospital has been focused on recruiting and retaining specialists so local residents don’t have to travel to San Antonio for specialty medical care.

For DHR to expand, it must petition the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to allow its growth — a restriction enacted under the Affordable Care Act that prevents doctor-owned hospitals from expanding without government approval.

Doctor’s Hospital wants to have a Level I Trauma center — the highest level — which would be able to handle large-scale motor vehicle accidents or gunshot wounds, providing treatment for patients from prevention to treatment, all the way to rehabilitation.

But before that can happen, DHR needs to catch up with its local peers by becoming a Level III trauma center — a hospital that shows it can perform emergency intensive care and stabilization of patients.

McAllen Medical Center, Rio Grande Regional and Knapp Medical Center are all Level III trauma centers. The closest Level II trauma unit is in Corpus Christi and the nearest Level I trauma center is in San Antonio.

DHR is still applying for its level III certification, but officials expect to receive the certification soon.

“We believe that the community in South Texas deserves that level of care and we are willing to invest in it,” said Israel Rocha, chief executive officer at Doctor’s Hospital at Renaissance.

HEALTH CARE NEED?

Ahead of any decision by the federal government, DHR faces opposition from other local, privately-owned hospitals, which criticized the doctor-owned hospital model and how much it contributes to providing healthcare for the poor.

Several Rio Grande Valley hospitals have fought against the request, with nearly all local hospitals submitted scathing letters during the public comment period that closed last month.

If approved by the government, DHR would grow larger than South Texas Health System — currently Hidalgo County’s largest hospital owner — which has 848 beds at several local hospitals.

“DHR currently does not contribute its fair share of uncompensated and charity care to the people of Hidalgo County,” wrote Douglas Matney, regional vice president of South Texas Health System. “While it may not be DHR’s policy that the hospital does not discriminate…it is clear that DHR permits its medical staff physicians to discriminate against such beneficiaries.”

Representatives with Knapp Medical Center in Weslaco provided the government with photographs of new buildings at Doctor’s Hospital’s campus where a new outpatient surgery complex was being built and asserted that the hospital was already expanding outside of the law.

“Allowing DHR to expand, especially the magnitude of expansion its requesting will in no way expand access to care for uninsured patients in Hidalgo County,” wrote Bill Adams, regional chief executive of Knapp Medical Center in a June 5 letter.

Adams claimed that physician-owned hospitals are likely to “self-refer” patients and there more services used and higher costs as a result.

“Physician-owned hospitals often cherry-pick the most profitable patients, creating a destabilizing environment that leaves sicker and less affluent patients to community hospitals,” Adams wrote.

Doctor’s Hospital officials deny that the buildings under construction skirt the requirements and provided amended hospital bed licenses they say allow for the new construction.

Most of the other hospitals also argued that data provided by DHR to the federal government was misleading, including its nondiscrimination policy, which they claim is spotty. Hospital administrators signed affidavits, saying they called the offices of three DHR-affiliated doctors asking if they accept Medicaid, the federal insurance program for the poor, and saying they do not.

Medicaid typically reimburses hospitals less for medical procedures than private insurance companies. More than a third of Hidalgo County residents live below the federal poverty line and qualify for Medicaid if they have legal immigration status.

The Monitor verified those offices reported they did not accept Medicaid, despite being listed as DHR-partner doctors.

But one local cardiologist contacted Friday afternoon affiliated with DHR said it accepts Medicaid, as did a local DHR specialist, saying they would accept the federal insurance referred by the patient’s primary care doctor.

Rocha defended DHR-affiliated doctors’ practices regarding Medicaid patients.

“Every physician who is on our medical staff is required to see those patients — if they choose not to participate in the Medicaid program, they have to treat them free of cost. I think they were splitting hairs on that fact,” Rocha said. Out of 22 public comments submitted, the majority of them came from Rio Grande Regional officials and physicians that signed a similar letter.

“It is dangerous to approve a request to double the number of physician-owned hospital beds absent clear evidence that such an increase is in response to the healthcare needs of the community,” wrote Cris Rivera, chief executive officer at Rio Grande Regional Hospital. Rivera argued that local hospital occupancy rates average between 50 to 60 percent and there are plenty of open beds available for patients and suggested the application is just a power play.

There was also a schism between using Texas Department of Health and Human Services data acquired from an annual hospital survey or information collected by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services through its Hospital Cost Report Information System.

“That tool is already used to distribute federal funds too and we believe it’s a valid form of data,” Rocha said.

DHR argued that the state statistics are more accurate because it included Medicaid patients enrolled in managed care — something that was missing from the federal data.

In 2012, DHR reported to the Texas Department of Health and Human Services that 47 percent of its total admissions were Medicaid patients.

But for that same year, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services reported that Doctor’s Hospital had only about 27 percent of its patients used Medicaid.

DOCTOR DECISIONS

Beyond hospital administrators, several local doctors also penned letters opposing DHR’s application.

Dr. Kondapavuluru Chowdary, a gastroenterologist with admitting privileges at McAllen Medical Center and Rio Grande Regional Hospital, called on the agency to deny the request, claiming that other hospitals would be forced to close.

“Currently, the majority of physicians in Hidalgo County (particularly specialists in high demand) have a financial interest in or a financial relationship with DHR,” Cowdary wrote.

Often, doctors will only treat patients at DHR, he continued.

Richard Guerra, the CEO of the restaurant division and senior vice president of operations for the hotel division of Costillas LTD, or Tony Roma’s, also serves on the board of directors for the Rio Grande Regional Hospital.

He initially penned his name to one of the letters in opposition but later changed his mind.

“I have no financial interest in either hospital but I think they are both very good and complement each other,” Guerra said.

The first letter was signed hastily and he didn’t take into account economic impact of a hospital expansion after visiting DHR, he said. “

“I think it’s important that we continue anything that is advancing the medical technology in the area so people don’t have to travel outside of the Valley for services,” he said.

kmosbrucker@themonitor.com