SAP SE is hiring more Millennials and building deeper ties with startups as part of its strategy to make its software more user-friendly. It’s a logical bet given the rise of younger employees in the workforce, many of whom demand well-designed apps that are both functional and easy to use.

The company is pushing a message of simplification at all levels of the business, and has acknowledged a need to improve the user experience. Now the question remains whether that push will give SAP a legitimate competitive advantage against newer and more nimble startups.

Steven Norton / WSJ Pat Bakey, SAP’s global GM for retail

The company has been around for a long time, and “every year we get a lot older,” says Pat Bakey, global general manager for SAP Retail. “So we’re very aggressively pursuing Millennial hires across all dimensions of our business.” Bringing in younger talent can help the firm spot new technology trends, build apps using the latest development tools and sell to customers in new ways.

“The challenge is we deal with C-suites, and they don’t like to see a 23-year-old coming in and telling them how to run things,” Mr. Bakey says. “We’re in a different business, and it’s the high end of the spectrum.” To prepare new recruits, SAP runs a specialized training program to “get them as smart as possible on this complex business of ours and mentor them and turn them loose.”

Mr. Bakey says building deeper relationships with the developer community underscores SAP’s understanding that it needs to focus not just on applications, but also supporting its broader platform and ecosystem. In the retail sector specifically, SAP is working with more than 200 startups focused on how to build apps using SAP’s HANA platform.

A longstanding gripe for SAP customers is that while the software does what it is supposed to do, the user experience is less than stellar. In February, the company’s chairman and co-founder Hasso Plattner said the firm has “to be a little more like Google.” As one CIO noted, SAP may also benefit from taking a page out of Apple Inc.’s design book.

CEO Bill McDermott acknowledged as much when he spoke with CIO Journal in June. “If you can take beautiful business software and make it easy to consume on a device like an iPad, you can change the game.”

Usability isn’t an issue to be downplayed. Last year, Avon Products pulled the plug on a $125 million software system rollout after a test of the system in Canada drove away representatives the company relied on to drive sales.

SAP should be given credit for its strong push to change its culture, and its significant foothold in the marketplace will give it an advantage, said Robert Hetu, an analyst at Gartner Inc. who covers retail. Still, the company must overcome its reputation for being an end-to-end solution with a somewhat cumbersome implementation. “Retailers are less concerned about buying everything from SAP or Oracle, and more interested in best of breed,” he said. “SAP is going to have to prove they’ve got the same level of capability and quick development and being really cutting edge and being leaders in some of these specific sectors.”