Clemson cornerback Mackensie Alexander guards during the Tigers' win over Georgia State on Nov. 22, 2014 at Memorial Stadium. (Clemson athletic communications)

CLEMSON – Mackensie Alexander, in the library, with a candlestick.

The victim: coachspeak. The charge: murder. The surviving: fans and media, who have no qualms with any of this.

In a world of “we take it one game at a time” and “we’re all just working hard” and – gag me – “everybody’s on the same level,” Alexander was refreshing, resplendent, relentless and real.

(Real talk: we all know Division I college football players are, by and large, confident in themselves. That’s a nice way of saying they’re cocky. That’s also the reason they’re capable of being Division I college football players. It’s OK for said college athletes to show that every now and again.)

Besides his bold proclamation Wednesday, here are seven snippets from Alexander’s interview – his second as a collegian, following only the postgame scrum after the Russell Athletic Bowl – as he held court with attentive reporters for 11 minutes Wednesday.

1) Since I used library and candlestick as the examples – you’re welcome for the classic Clue references, by the way – it’s easy to actually imagine Alexander working late in a library with the use of a candlestick.

Why? Because Alexander takes notes. A lot of them. On wide receivers.

“I got a drawer at home that’s full of stuff. I just moved into my new place,” Alexander said. “I even got notes of our receivers, so that tells you it all.”

Yep: in the unlikely event Alexander ends up facing off on Saturdays vs. Mike Williams or Artavis Scott – or the more likely event he does so someday on Sundays – he’s researched their strengths and weaknesses. He’s done the same for receivers he’ll see this year with Wofford, Louisville, Notre Dame, Florida State and South Carolina.

“It shows you my competitive nature,” Alexander said. “It’s not just about college. It’s about doing it at the next level also, preparing my mind to be that good and be where I need to be.

“Right now, I’m just focusing on fall camp, but I do got my mind on those guys. I got my notes written down. It’s going to be good to attack them this year, see how good they really are.”

2) Head coach Dabo Swinney says things like “I don’t even know if he showers” after games Saturday before Alexander has gone to watch film of himself in the game that just finished.

That was as a redshirt freshman. Now Alexander is a third-year sophomore, and one who could feasibly declare for the 2016 NFL Draft.

“It’s even worse now that I’m putting in more hours and more time, like a quarterback,” Alexander said. “I’m just trying to be a better man, also. Even now, every day, after these camp practices, it’s a routine every day, and it never stops. The more hours I put into this, I can be a better player and put up better numbers than last year.”

3) Why does Mackensie Alexander do it? Why does he get out of bed in the morning and eat, sleep, breathe football?

“My preparation pushes me. Because what’s mine is mine. I don’t want to let anybody take what’s mine,” Alexander said. “I thrive on competition. I thrive on one-on-one matchups. I’m a competitor.

4) Like most players, family ties are a major factor as well.

“My parents have really driven me to be me,” said Alexander, who’s from Immokalee, Fla. “Watching my mom and dad picking tomatoes in this hot sun, doing it out here – I’m not going to say it’s pretty easy, but I make it look easy because I work hard.”

Alexander said he speaks with his father, who’s still a tomato picker, every other day.

“It’s good for me when I hear that,” Alexander said. “We’re a blue-collar family – we don’t come from much. For me to see my dad keep doing those things, for me to come out here, it’s pretty easy. That’s where the motivation comes from.”

5) Here’s what fans probably don’t realize and, honestly, media probably hasn’t harped on nearly enough: for all the deserved daps the Tigers’ front seven got last year, Clemson’s secondary was a really, really instrumental cog in the No. 1 total defense machine.

Alexander joined the chorus, which includes Jayron Kearse and Jadar Johnson, in touting the Tigers’ defensive backs.

“We’re so talented in the secondary, it’s not even funny,” Alexander said. “Now it’s more about being smarter than opponents, understanding down and distance, how they want to attack you, where you’re at on the field.”

6) For all his bluster, Alexander doesn’t want to be portrayed as a me-me-me guy. He points no further than his willingness to assist younger players like Mark Fields and Kaleb Chalmers after practice to work on their craft – and the pressure put on by Brent Venables has a little bit to do with that.

“It’s about understanding our d-coordinator. He’s a little crazy; he’s in tune with every coverage, every call that we’re in. He’s emotionally invested in it,” Alexander said. “So it’s hard for a young guy to come in and understand Coach V.

“All the young guys after practice, every day I’m with them. If they want help, they’re always free to join me whenever.”

7) As Alexander was pulled from the media circle to go eat lunch before Clemson’s second practice Wednesday, a reporter rattled off one last question: Mackensie, who’s your favorite cornerback?

The question meant to indicate NFL cornerbacks. Alexander took it differently.

“Me,” Alexander answered, with a smile, before leaving the public interview world for a duration of time to be determined.

-AB