“A growing number of people recognize that the Affordable Care Act will leave too many Americans inadequately covered with unaffordable private insurance policies,” said HCFA-WA president Chuck Richards.

Everyone interested in universal health coverage is invited to a gathering in Seattle on Saturday, November 9 for the annual meeting of Health Care for All - Washington, a statewide organization working to establish a single-payer publicly funded system of health coverage. http://www.healthcareforallwa.org

Dr. John Geyman, professor emeritus of family medicine at the University of Washington and author of "Health Care Wars: How Market Ideology and Corporate Power Are Killing Americans" (2012), will give the keynote address, “Single Payer in Washington State: Challenges and Approaches”. An additional talk, “Our Path to Winning Is Paved with Values,” will be given by Sandra VanderVen, a senior organizer with the progressive advocacy group Fuse Washington.

“A growing number of people recognize that the Affordable Care Act will leave too many Americans inadequately covered with unaffordable private insurance policies,” said HCFA-WA president Chuck Richards.

Jeff Johnson, President of the Washington State Labor Council, emphasized this point in his testimony at a legislative hearing for House Bill 1085 in Olympia in February 2013, the 2-minute video of which can be viewed at: http://www.healthcareforallwa.org/health-care-videos/hb1085-hearing-testimony-videos/#anchor4.

The meeting will take place from 1 to 4:30 p.m. in Hildebrand Hall at Plymouth Church, U.C.C., 1217 6th Ave. All are invited to attend. Refreshments provided.

The goal of HCFA-WA is to obtain secure, affordable, and comprehensive health coverage for all Washington residents. Coverage would be provided through a unified health care financing system, the proposed Washington Health Security Trust. In the 2013 legislative session, a bill establishing the WHST, HB 1085, had a hearing in the House Health Care and Wellness Committee. Video clips of the hearing can be viewed at http://www.healthcareforallWA.org.

"The annual meeting is especially important this year as we consider where we are on our goal to achieve coverage for all Washingtonians," said HCFA-WA president Richards. "We will learn how each of us can participate in the 2014 strategy."

The nonpartisan U.S. Congressional Budget Office estimates that about 30 million Americans will remain uninsured even after full implementation of the ACA. President Obama himself stated, at a 2009 press conference, that "Unless you have what's called a single-payer system in which everybody is automatically covered, then you're probably not going to reach every single individual."

Plymouth Church, U.C.C., is in downtown Seattle, across from the Seneca Street I-5 off-ramp at 1217 6th Ave Seattle, WA 98101. Free parking is available in the church's garage, on University Street approached from Fifth Avenue. The Metro No. 2 bus runs on Seneca; many other bus routes run nearby.

For more information about HCFA-WA or the WHST, visit our website above or send email to info(at)healthcareforallwa(dot)org.

Contact: Lou Templeton

707-742-3292

outreach(at)healthcareforallwa(dot)org