Let me get this straight, our governments have just spent $21 million (and are seemingly proud of it) to renovate the former remand centre in downtown Vancouver.

This project resulted in 96 small living units with bottom-line appliances and fixtures at an average cost of $219,000 or over $400 per square foot, and that does not include the property value. When is this insanity going to stop? At what point do we demand government quit wasting money trying to house the poor, disadvantaged and low-income earners in an area that gives so little value for service?

Priority one should be decent affordable housing for all, and if that means displacing someone from a rat-infested hole in Vancouver and providing them with comfortable accommodations in New Westminster or Surrey, then that is what should be done.

We could house triple the amount of people for the money that is now being wasted on developing ghettos in Vancouver.

Ron Luft, New Westminster

Don’t undermine farms

Re: Don’t let Canadian dairy lobby freeze us out of trade pact

There has been a surplus of anti-supply management rhetoric in the news of late. I would like the opportunity to correct some of the misinformation.

For centuries, agriculture was guilty of an endless cycle of boom and bust, first oversupplying a market causing low prices and bankruptcy, then undersupplying causing very high prices to the consumer.

Supply management is a system farmers use to provide the correct amount of product at the right time and the right place. This way, there are no huge surpluses needing subsidies to carry on (read USA milk and EURO butter and cheese). Should oversupply of one country be “dumped” in another country, it throws the supply side out of balance, resulting in below production cost to the country receiving this “excess” product.

Supply management is a sensible and sane form of producing and marketing dairy and poultry.

Let’s talk about jobs. We are down to just 17,000 dairy and poultry farmers in Canada. Yet we create 332,000 jobs from these farms. Agriculture has a huge multiplier effect. Yet every product we import means a reduction in these jobs.

Countries that have discarded similar systems now have their farms in total disarray (read: Australia and England). With the burgeoning world population, food and water are already scarce in many areas. To cripple your domestic food supply in this era would be sheer folly.

To undermine our farms is not how you reward your those who have worked hard to see that Canadian plates have always been full.

Peter Malowney, BScA, dairy and turkey farmer in South Surrey

Election ads don’t inform

At a time when our under-funded health, education, social services and veteran’s affairs programs are desperate for more support, could there be a better example of an egregious waste of money than the $150 million the major political parties will spend trying to sell their brand of toothpaste (sorry, candidate) to the voting public?

These marketing and advertising campaigns don’t offer any truly informative, factual or relevant information about the candidates’ philosophies or real agendas. If we allow ourselves to be influenced by these messages, we are doing nothing more than justifying the use of all this money to propagandize, camouflage facts and create illusions that have no substance.

The advertising and media industries may reap great profits, but the net return for the public is really zero.

Ray Arnold, Richmond

Try another hobby

Illegal drug use as a recreational activity?

Recreational activities are usually listed as skiing, boating, camping, hiking, reading, painting, sewing, knitting, gardening, etc.

Maybe someone can explain it to me.

Bonnie Mitchell, Vernon

The editorial pages editor is Gordon Clark, who can be reached at gclark@theprovince.com. Letters to the editor can be sent to provletters@theprovince.com.