SOUTH BOSTON — Casino magnate Steve Wynn of Wynn Resorts held court with the press during a break in the suitability hearing for his proposed Everett casino in Boston Monday.

Wynn sounded off on everything from the inexperience of the gaming commission to Obamacare to the time he spent in Revere as a child. Here are some of the takeaway quotes from the CEO's digressions.

The Massachusetts health care law commonly known as Romneycare

"Listen, I am going to have to put up with Massachusetts and the opportunities and the liabilities of being a corporate citizen of Massachusetts and, if they're acceptable, we will be a corporate citizen."

"I think the opportunity in Massachusetts, in Boston, is really terrific. And I think, you know, there's a lot that has to go on between us and the commission to get everything just right to launch an enterprise that has real job security for the thousands of people that work in it, directly and indirectly, and it has a steady and dependable tax screen and profitability. I'm certainly not going to come here to lose money."

His hopes for the casino he wants to build in Everett

"In our conversations with the state, we're attempting to get issues resolved that will comfort us. It's a big investment for us. This is not a box of slots, this is a 'wham-bam-thank-you-ma'am' fancy hotel, and we're expected to make unequivocal commitments both in the way we do our business financially, and everything else, to the state of Massachusetts. We want to make sure that we have the same thing in return."

"I am crazy for this place because it's a great hotel town and it's a big international destination. I think if we do a good job here we can get business from China."

Wynn's place in the domestic casino market

"In Las Vegas, a great big competitive market, we are dealing in over 75 percent of our business at the tables with international business. We are an international destination resort at Wynn and Encore. So 52 percent of my business is Asia, 24 percent is Latin, 25 percent is domestic at the tables. The slot machines are $180 to 200 million, maybe and $40 to 50 million is international."

"I think Wynn, depending on New Year's, will be the first company in the history of Nevada to go over $800 million in casino revenue. We do $850 (million) in non-casino revenue. We were the first ones to go through $700 (million), we hold the record in every category. Let's say it's $800 (million), $500 (million) will be from outside the united states, $300 (million) will be from within."

Wynn's ties to Revere and Boston

"I am from Revere, the whole family is from Revere, except me." The only reason he was not born in Revere, he says, is because during his father was assigned to Marlin Firearms in New Haven, Conn., during World War II, where he was born and raised in a tenement house. His family in Revere has ties to Dana Street and Shirley Avenue.

Where did Suffolk Downs go wrong?

"I don't know. My friend Robert Kraft talked me into Foxborough. We met everybody but the people there were not embracing the idea ... I didn't want to be in a place where half the community wasn't in favor of us. That's an uphill battle if that happens."

Is Wynn getting his money's worth by hiring former Gov. William Weld as his attorney?

"Absolutely, even if we lose."

Obamacare's impact on business

"I've been a health care provider for 45 years. Everything about the 2,700 pages is incorrect. Not the notion that it would be nice to make health care affordable -- everybody in America agrees on that -- but God lives in the details. You want to go do something, you have to do it correctly. Everything about Obamacare is incorrect. The underlying premise is incorrect, the notion that you can do it, it's all coming out now that it was all baloney. We told him (President Barack Obama) about it, we told everybody."