Some 2016 presidential hopefuls have reached out through social media to express their dismay over the violence in Ferguson, Mo. Scott Olson/Getty Images

Amid the ongoing unrest in Ferguson, Missouri, there's been an early sign of political consensus between major leaders in both parties on the tactics being employed by law enforcement.

The political community had been markedly quiet in the aftermath of the shooting death of 18-year-old Michael Brown by a police officer after an altercation over the weekend. President Barack Obama had not even remarked on the matter until Tuesday. The racial, socioeconomical and legal land mines of the developing story were clearly evident to every politician, on the left and the right.

But as the standoff between militarized police and bands of angry and frightened protesters stretched on and saturated cable television, the stark silence began to break.

Early Thursday, two senators on polar opposites of the political spectrum were among the first to speak forcefully on the matter.

Sen. Elizabeth Warren, D-Mass, sent a tweet that expressed her dismay with how law enforcement was attempting to diffuse the chaos.



This is America, not a war zone. The people of #Ferguson just want answers. We all want answers. — Elizabeth Warren (@elizabethforma) August 14, 2014



Almost around the same time, Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, took to Facebook to lament the arrests of reporters on the ground covering the situation.

"Reporters should never be detained – a free press is too important – simply for doing their jobs," Cruz said in part. "Civil liberties must be protected, but violence is not the answer. Once the unrest is brought to an end, we should examine carefully what happened to ensure that justice is served.





Neither of these musings on social media included specific policy proposals, and Cruz notably began his message with the point that police officers "risk their lives every day to keep us safe."





But taken together, the two distinctly different ideological warriors – and oft-mentioned potential presidential contenders – wanted to convey that they thought police in Ferguson were overstepping their boundaries.

For the media, the most anticipated reaction was that of Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky., who has made a concerted effort to make inroads with African-Americans on issues like drug sentencing and education reform.

Paul ended up issuing the most extensive comments on the situation of any potential 2016 White House candidate, through an op-ed published by Time.

Like Cruz, Paul made sure to note that police had a right to keep the peace, but also squarely stated that "there should be a difference between a police response and a military response."

Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen People protest as tear gas canisters detonate around them on Wednesday in Ferguson, Mo. Protests in the St. Louis suburb turned violent Wednesday night, with people lobbing Molotov cocktails at police who responded with smoke bombs and tear gas to disperse the crowd. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Chris Lee/AP x of x Full Screen A demonstrator throws back a tear gas container after tactical officers worked to break up a group of bystanders near Chambers Road and West Florissant Avenue in the Ferguson area on Wednesday. Nights of unrest have followed the fatal shooting of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown on Saturday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Full Screen Lesley McSpadden, right, the mother of 18-year-old Michael Brown, watches as Brown's father, Michael Brown Sr., holds up a family picture of himself, his son and a young child during a news conference Monday in Ferguson. Officials have refused to release the name of the officer who shot and killed Brown, which has sparked violence and frustration in the St. Louis-area community. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen Protester Anthony Shahid leads marchers as they confront Missouri State Highway Patrol troopers on Monday in front of the Ferguson police station. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Full Screen Civil rights leader Rev. Al Sharpton, center, stands with the parents of Michael Brown during a news conference outside the Old Courthouse Tuesday in St. Louis. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen Protesters try unsuccessfully to light a Molotov cocktail Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Chris Lee/AP x of x Full Screen A protester takes shelter from smoke billowing around him Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Full Screen Protesters raise their hands in front of police atop an armored vehicle on Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x Full Screen A protester kicks a smoke grenade deployed by police back in the direction of police on Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen A member of the St. Louis County Police Department points his weapon in the direction of a group of protesters on Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen People raise their hands in the middle of the street in Ferguson as police wearing riot gear move toward their position Monday, trying to get them to disperse. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen Protesters appeal to motorists for support Monday while rallying in front of a burned QuikTrip gas station in Ferguson. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Full Screen A device deployed by officers goes off in the street as police and protesters clash Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Full Screen Officers arrest a man who refused to leave when police in riot gear cleared an area Monday in downtown Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Full Screen A man leaves a store Sunday night in Ferguson during violence sparked by the killing of Brown. The looting and vandalism followed a vigil for Brown and angry protests earlier that day. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Full Screen Lesley McSpadden, left, is comforted by her husband, Louis Head, after her son, Michael Brown, was shot and killed by police on Saturday in Ferguson. The officer has been placed on administrative leave, and the FBI has taken over the investigation. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Huy Mach/AP x of x Full Screen Activist Anthony Shahid tells the crowd to put their hands up on Sunday morning as part of a protest against the police shooting of Brown.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x Full Screen A fire is seen at a QuikTrip convenience store and gas station in Ferguson on Sunday. Car windows were smashed and stores were looted as people carried away armloads of goods following a vigil for Brown. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Full Screen Protesters confront police during an impromptu rally on Sunday. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Full Screen A man leaves a store in Ferguson during the violence on Sunday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Full Screen St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar, left, delivers remarks about Brown's shooting as Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson listens during a news conference Sunday in Ferguson. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Full Screen Police officers stand near a crowd gathering by the scene where Brown was fatally shot on Saturday. A spokesman with the St. Louis County Police Department didn't give the reason for the shooting, nor provide the officer's name or race.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Full Screen Meghan O'Donnell, 29, from St. Louis, prays on Sunday evening at the spot where Brown was killed.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x Full Screen Piaget Crenshaw adds a message to items left at a memorial for Brown on Sunday. Crenshaw, who lives in the apartment complex where Brown was shot, said she was a witness to the confrontation. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Full Screen Protesters confront police during a rally on Sunday. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Full Screen Jamahl Spence, right, pleads his case with a Normandy, Mo., police officer in front of the Ferguson police station on Sunday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Full Screen Police officers patrol Sunday in Ferguson.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Photo Gallery x of x People protest as tear gas canisters detonate around them on Wednesday in Ferguson, Mo. Protests in the St. Louis suburb turned violent Wednesday night, with people lobbing Molotov cocktails at police who responded with smoke bombs and tear gas to disperse the crowd. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Chris Lee/AP x of x A demonstrator throws back a tear gas container after tactical officers worked to break up a group of bystanders near Chambers Road and West Florissant Avenue in the Ferguson area on Wednesday. Nights of unrest have followed the fatal shooting of unarmed black teenager Michael Brown on Saturday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Lesley McSpadden, right, the mother of 18-year-old Michael Brown, watches as Brown's father, Michael Brown Sr., holds up a family picture of himself, his son and a young child during a news conference Monday in Ferguson. Officials have refused to release the name of the officer who shot and killed Brown, which has sparked violence and frustration in the St. Louis-area community. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Protester Anthony Shahid leads marchers as they confront Missouri State Highway Patrol troopers on Monday in front of the Ferguson police station. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Civil rights leader Rev. Al Sharpton, center, stands with the parents of Michael Brown during a news conference outside the Old Courthouse Tuesday in St. Louis. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Protesters try unsuccessfully to light a Molotov cocktail Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Chris Lee/AP x of x A protester takes shelter from smoke billowing around him Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Protesters raise their hands in front of police atop an armored vehicle on Wednesday in Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x A protester kicks a smoke grenade deployed by police back in the direction of police on Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x A member of the St. Louis County Police Department points his weapon in the direction of a group of protesters on Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x People raise their hands in the middle of the street in Ferguson as police wearing riot gear move toward their position Monday, trying to get them to disperse. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Protesters appeal to motorists for support Monday while rallying in front of a burned QuikTrip gas station in Ferguson. Sid Hastings/AP x of x A device deployed by officers goes off in the street as police and protesters clash Wednesday in Ferguson. Jeff Roberson/AP x of x Officers arrest a man who refused to leave when police in riot gear cleared an area Monday in downtown Ferguson. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x A man leaves a store Sunday night in Ferguson during violence sparked by the killing of Brown. The looting and vandalism followed a vigil for Brown and angry protests earlier that day. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Lesley McSpadden, left, is comforted by her husband, Louis Head, after her son, Michael Brown, was shot and killed by police on Saturday in Ferguson. The officer has been placed on administrative leave, and the FBI has taken over the investigation. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Huy Mach/AP x of x Activist Anthony Shahid tells the crowd to put their hands up on Sunday morning as part of a protest against the police shooting of Brown.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x A fire is seen at a QuikTrip convenience store and gas station in Ferguson on Sunday. Car windows were smashed and stores were looted as people carried away armloads of goods following a vigil for Brown. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Protesters confront police during an impromptu rally on Sunday. Sid Hastings/AP x of x A man leaves a store in Ferguson during the violence on Sunday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x St. Louis County Police Chief Jon Belmar, left, delivers remarks about Brown's shooting as Ferguson Police Chief Thomas Jackson listens during a news conference Sunday in Ferguson. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Police officers stand near a crowd gathering by the scene where Brown was fatally shot on Saturday. A spokesman with the St. Louis County Police Department didn't give the reason for the shooting, nor provide the officer's name or race.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, David Carson/AP x of x Meghan O'Donnell, 29, from St. Louis, prays on Sunday evening at the spot where Brown was killed.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, J.B. Forbes/AP x of x Piaget Crenshaw adds a message to items left at a memorial for Brown on Sunday. Crenshaw, who lives in the apartment complex where Brown was shot, said she was a witness to the confrontation. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Protesters confront police during a rally on Sunday. Sid Hastings/AP x of x Jamahl Spence, right, pleads his case with a Normandy, Mo., police officer in front of the Ferguson police station on Sunday. St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x Police officers patrol Sunday in Ferguson.

St. Louis Post-Dispatch, Robert Cohen/AP x of x ×

"The images and scenes we continue to see in Ferguson resemble war more than traditional police action," he wrote. He slid into a more ideological frame by diagnosing the militarization of police as a product of "big government." Since the terror attacks of Sept. 11, Washington has sent millions of dollars to local municipalities to bulk up their weaponry, producing what Paul referred to as "small armies" in the name of homeland security. This was Paul's fairly direct pitch to conservatives that his argument for a police force with a lighter, less aggressive footprint is something they can sign on to.



But the core of Paul's message seemed to align with Warren, who said Ferguson looked like "a war zone."

"When you couple this militarization of law enforcement with an erosion of civil liberties and due process that allows the police to become judge and jury – national security letters, no-knock searches, broad general warrants, pre-conviction forfeiture – we begin to have a very serious problem on our hands," Paul wrote, broadening his argument.

His specific policy prescription appeared to be a call to roll back federal funding for advanced weaponry more suited for the streets of Baghdad, not for a suburb of St. Louis.

This will undoubtedly meet resistance from some Capitol Hill lawmakers, many of whom remain sensitive to local security needs in their states.

But perhaps Paul's first ally in the endeavor could be Warren, another leader with a large megaphone who sits far across the aisle.