Last summer, lawmakers churned out news releases using the term Obamacare, 530 of them in June, July and August.

This summer? 138.

A year ago, the individual mandate for what is officially known as the Affordable Care Act had yet to go into effect. Federal and state exchange websites had yet to go live, and congressional appropriators were still writing government spending legislation with an eye toward defunding the law (leading to the partial government shutdown later that year).

In a typical expression of sentiment from last summer, John Culberson, a Texas Republican, published an email to constituents entitled “My Day Is Not Complete Unless I Vote to Cut Spending and Repeal Obamacare.”

This summer, not only are there fewer Obamacare-related news releases, but the tone is also different. Constituents are more likely to read statements on judicial decisions on the law, news about bills intended to trim around the law’s edges, or descriptions of lawmakers’ requests for information from the Department of Health and Human Services.

Congress Loses Interest in Obamacare Congressional news releases with “Obamacare” in the title 300 200 100 0 2013 2014 June July Aug. 300 200 100 0 2013 2014 June July Aug.

Although the occasional statements praising the law have been issued by some congressional Democrats, most in that party still appear to shy away from the topic. The database of congressional news releases maintained by The Upshot contains just two positive statements mentioning Obamacare in the title last summer, from José E. Serrano of New York and Carol Shea-Porter of New Hampshire, both Democrats.

Congressional opponents of Obamacare haven’t given up, of course. But the relative dearth of Obamacare-titled statements this August shows that they have found other issues to raise with constituents as the midterm elections approach, like investigations into the Internal Revenue Service and Department of Veterans Affairs.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Congressional news releases mentioning “veterans” in the title have jumped more than 105 percent this summer compared with 2013.