Last June, I devoted a post to the improving favorability numbers of former President George W. Bush. Gallup had just released a survey showing that for the first time since April 2005, a plurality of Americans had a positive view of Mr. Bush, who left office in January 2009 with some of the lowest approval ratings ever recorded for a departing president.

With that in mind, The Hill newspaper has published a story noting a significant number of former Bush administration officials – including Connecticut’s own Tom Foley – have launched House, Senate and gubernatorial campaigns this year. The story indicated many of these individuals actually are playing up their ties to the 43rd president.

That’s a significant development because for several election cycles, few, if any, candidates sought to use Mr. Bush to bolster their chances. The willingness of Republican candidates to make their ties to Mr. Bush known is the best indication yet that the rehabilitation of his reputation is well along.

I attribute the turn-around to two factors.

Mr. Bush, like many of his predecessors, seems to be held in greater esteem in retirement because he has acquired a relatively apolitical image. Indeed, when Mr. Bush makes headlines these days, it often is because he took part in a charity event for military veterans, attended a sporting event or released photos of himself and his infant granddaughter. That seems to have softened some of the critics.

At the same time, it doesn’t seem coincidental that Mr. Bush’s numbers have improved as President Obama’s have eroded.

Memorably, in 2008, candidate Obama was elected in part by convincing millions of Americans that he would easily right the perceived wrongs of Mr. Bush. Since many of the Bush-era problems remain and Mr. Obama is hobbled by predicaments of his own making – think Obamacare, the various scandals and the 2012 attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya – it seems many are thinking the Bush years weren’t so bad after all.

Indeed, Americans seem to be answering the first of the above questions in the affirmative.