Photo

Readers discuss the president’s style and accomplishments.

To the Editor:

As someone who voted for Barack Obama twice, I have long been perplexed and disheartened by his seeming inability to use the powers of the presidency. This lack of leadership has enabled a coterie of Republican zealots to control the political agenda of the nation.

This is shocking, since Mr. Obama need only study the legacies of two Democratic giants, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Lyndon B. Johnson, to see how much can be accomplished by vigorous presidential leadership.

Both Roosevelt and Johnson were masters of politics. They knew how to exercise power because they knew the art of the game: cutting deals, horse-trading, flattery, threats and understanding the needs — and strengths and weaknesses — of friends and foes alike. The New Deal legislation, civil rights and voting rights laws, and the enactment of Medicare were accomplished because Roosevelt and Johnson understood the nature of presidential power and used it decisively.

Unfortunately, Mr. Obama seems strangely detached from the political process. He rarely meets with legislators — even those in his own party. He shuns the hard bargaining, wheeling and dealing, and compromise that are the essence of politics. He even delegated the No. 1 priority of his presidency, the Affordable Care Act, to Congress and the pharmaceutical and insurance companies to work out the details.

On issues such as gun control, immigration and health care, Mr. Obama’s speeches often call for the “unleashing” of technology and America’s best and brightest individuals, but his soaring rhetoric soon crashes to earth. His foreign policy stances, particularly regarding the Middle East, have shown him to be indecisive, vacillating and backpedaling — damaging his and the nation’s credibility.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The president’s leadership style is one of disengagement, disdain for the political fray and an aloofness that borders on arrogance. He seems to think that if a policy is self-evident to him, then it follows that everyone else should see it the same way. Unfortunately, the real world doesn’t work that way.

STEVEN MORRIS

East Hampton, N.Y., Oct. 28, 2013

Readers React

Politics is like theater. You are known by the part you pick and how well you play that role. Obama the candidate was Mark Antony, an ideal blend of fiery rhetoric and an ability to move crowds. However, Obama the president chose to play Henry Higgins, trying to civilize the rowdy kids in Congress by lecturing to them. Mark Antony could win elections, but Henry Higgins cannot govern.

It is true that no president has had to go through the heckling and bullying that Mr. Obama has from the Tea Party. But a good leader knows he has two options. He can find ways to endear himself to the opposition — Presidents Clinton and Reagan were good at it. Or he can get down and dirty and fight. Mr. Obama has neither skill. He insists on bringing the Marquess of Queensberry rules to a street fight and complains that the other side is not playing nice.

The current Congress is not one you play nice with. Mr. Obama needs to learn that and do what Bill Clinton did. Talk directly to the people. He needs to articulate his vision and persuade the men and women of this country, not Congress.

This country needs Obama the campaigner back in order to rescue Obama the president.

SUKUMAR VIJAYARAGHAVAN

Denver, Oct. 30, 2013

Mr. Morris’s frustration with our current politics is palpable, and I hear many Democrats expressing similar sentiments. However understandable, their complaints are based on misapprehensions of history and of political realities. Mr. Morris’s comparisons with Presidents Roosevelt and Johnson are not apt: New Deal legislation was enabled by Democrats’ control of both houses of Congress. Democrats also controlled both houses of Congress under L.B.J. Were this the case today, the administration’s legislative achievements would obviously be far greater.

Further, many Republican politicians will do anything to promote claims that President Obama is a failure and to foil his legislative goals. Their shutting down government to try to overturn legislation that was itself based on Republican health care models and principles is only the latest example.

Moreover, despite Republicans’ obstructionism, including unprecedented numbers of Senate filibusters, the administration’s achievements are substantial. This president has achieved more on health care reform than any of his predecessors. If immigration reform also passes, historians are likely to judge his administration quite successful. As for gun control, effective presidents do not fight losing battles.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Finally, as was never the case with a previous president, Republicans’ antipathy toward Mr. Obama is largely based on racial resentment that is not amenable to compromise and negotiation. We would be blind to ignore this elephant in the room.

DANIEL LIEBERFELD

Pittsburgh, Oct. 30, 2013

The writer is an associate professor in the Graduate Center for Social and Public Policy at Duquesne University.

Mr. Morris, I suspect, was hoping for the revenge of the liberals after the abuses of the Bush-Cheney years. However, the last thing this nation wanted or needed was another political animal with an ideological agenda. Moderates want exactly what President Obama has provided — moderation and a break from the unending ideological assaults.

Mr. Obama’s disengagement has allowed him to remain above the fray, an admirable place to be when the conduct of governance has descended to the level of juvenile delinquency. He may not be doing the best that could be done with the mess he inherited, but he could be doing far worse.

LORI MILLER

Cordova, Tenn., Oct. 30, 2013

There are many of us who share Mr. Morris’s viewpoint and frustration. Like many voters back in 2008, I was desperate for a message of hope after the disastrous Bush administration but ignored a glaring problem with Mr. Obama’s résumé: his voting record as a state legislator and his lack of experience and accomplishments in the Senate. He operates as president like his state legislative voting record — “present” but disengaged.