Southern California Health Clinics Preserve Compassionate, Agenda-Free Philosophy Throughout Rebranding

ALISO VIEJO, CA--(Marketwired - Mar 17, 2015) - Birth Choice Health Clinics -- a California-based network of medically licensed, life-affirming health clinics offering free community health care and patient education programs -- today announced its rebranding to the new name: Obria Medical Clinics.

Known for providing no-cost sexual health care, Obria will continue offering the same compassionate service to patients at every existing and future location under its new name. This rebranding is expected to allow the company to broaden the focus of its current network of five standing medical clinics and one mobile clinic in Orange and Los Angeles counties. The medical clinics will continue to provide a variety of crucial health services free-of-charge and free-of-agenda to young women and men, only now through enhanced partnerships with like-minded primary healthcare providers which will allow Obria to treat a greater number of underserved, low-income patients.

With a goal of becoming a top provider of free, comprehensive reproductive health services, Obria Medical Clinics will foster expansion by partnering with local community clinics to offer patients primary care services, joining forces with like-minded health centers under one unified brand and establishing additional community clinics by interoperating with local hospitals -- all while maintaining its nationally recognized accreditation from the Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care, Inc.

Since its inception in 1981, the brand's compassionate doctors, nurses and patient advocates have provided free healthcare services and unconditional support to more than 65,000 young people. Today, Obria Medical Clinics will continue this work by expanding its footprint to provide more care and support to those in need.

Young people, ashamed by an unplanned pregnancy or sexually transmitted disease, often feel they have nowhere to turn -- making the free and confidential specialized health resources Obria Medical Clinics provide life changing for many. As a caring alternative to big government-run centers, Obria's fully-licensed, comprehensive community clinics provide a truly personalized approach and unbiased, fact-based education for patients and their families, helping them make informed decisions about their health while remaining steadfast in providing alternatives to abortion and contraceptives.

"Today we give birth to our new name, Obria Medical Clinics. This relaunch has been in development for two years, based on research from Pepperdine University and focus groups composed of patients we seek to serve. Ultimately, the name change will help us better connect with young people in crisis within their own psychological framework," says founder and CEO Kathleen Eaton-Bravo. "We are expanding our work throughout the geographies of greatest need with safe, judgment-free care."

Young men and women can turn to Obria Medical Clinics for pregnancy testing, ultrasounds, pregnancy care, STD and HIV/AIDS testing, well-woman exams, breast and cervical cancer screenings, health education and emotional support. With Obria's enhanced model of care, more services will soon be available to communities throughout California.

"With the advent of the Affordable Care Act, it became vital to enter into a medical collaboration model -- joining our clinics with like-minded care providers in order for our patients to continue receiving compassionate care and life-saving education at no cost," adds Bravo. "These partnerships will not only save crucial funding, they will also provide Obria's most at-risk patients with access to even more healthcare services and specialized resources."

Current and future patients of Obria can take comfort in knowing that they can still receive the care they need for things they don't expect -- and now, with Obria Medical Clinics, they'll have access to primary care for prevention too.

For more information on Birth Choice's transition to Obria Medical Clinics, please visit www.obria.org.

ABOUT OBRIA MEDICAL CLINICS: Founded in 1981 and headquartered in Aliso Viejo, Calif., Obria Medical Clinics -- a 501(c)(3) non-profit, fully-licensed community health care organization -- relies on a collaborative medical model to grow its footprint, expand its reach and care for those throughout California without access to life-affirming sexual health care. Its six southern California clinics offer free pregnancy-related medical services and STD testing in Long Beach, Mission Viejo, Orange, Placentia, Santa Ana and a mobile unit, with current plans to grow by opening 25 new clinics throughout the state of California by 2020. Obria's services include pregnancy care, pre-natal care, STD testing/treatment, ultrasound, well-woman care, breast and cervical cancer screening, PAP smear testing, HIV/AIDS testing, primary care through its partner clinics and referrals to community resources and health education resources for low-income and underserved individuals in the community. These services are provided in a compassionate and non-judgmental manner to all women and men in need of high-quality care regardless of their creed, race, sexual orientation, national origin or age. For more information, visit www.obria.org.