JERUSALEM (AP) — The latest developments in ongoing violence between Palestinians and Israelis (all times local):

8:55 p.m.

Israeli police say an Arab stabbed an Israeli soldier on a bus and tried to seize his gun before he was shot and killed by an officer.

Spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said the Arab had fought with another officer before he was killed.

It was the latest in a series of Palestinian attacks against Israeli soldiers and civilians.

Earlier on Monday, two teenage Palestinians stabbed and seriously injured an Israeli man before stabbing an Israeli teenager riding a bicycle, critically wounding him. One of the attackers was shot dead by police while the other was wounded and taken to a hospital.

5:21 p.m.

A Palestinian official says a visit by a delegation of international Mideast envoys has been postponed.

The official said the delegation from the "Quartet" of Mideast mediators had put off Wednesday's planned meeting at Israel's request. The official spoke on condition of anonymity pending a formal announcement.

The Quartet includes the United States, the European Union, Russia and the United Nations. A new date has not been set.

The announcement was a new setback to efforts to halt weeks of Israeli-Palestinian unrest.

— Ian Deitch in Jerusalem

___

4:46 p.m.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu has lashed out at Arab lawmakers in the Israeli parliament, accusing them of participating in what he says is incitement fueling a wave of unrest sweeping the country.

In an address to parliament Monday, Netanyahu accused Arab parties of "undermining" the country, saying that certain lawmakers have spoken in favor of violence against Israelis.

He called on Israel's Arab citizens to "kick out the extremists among you."

Israel's Arab minority has full citizenship rights, but often suffers discrimination. Netanyahu, who just a few months ago warned his supporters that Arabs were voting in large numbers on election day, said he was committed to coexistence.

___

4:33 p.m.

Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu says Palestinian accusations that Israel is plotting to take over a sensitive Jerusalem holy site are an "absolute lie."

The Palestinian claims against Israel have been a driving force in the wave of violence sweeping through Israel and the Palestinian territories in recent weeks.

In a speech to parliament Monday, Netanyahu dismissed the claims as "incitement" and said a series of stabbings of Israelis "stems from the desire to annihilate us."

He called on the Palestinian president, Mahmoud Abbas, to condemn the violence.

The holy site in Jerusalem is sacred to Jews and Muslims, and has long been a flashpoint in the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.

___

4:00 p.m.

Israeli police say that in the latest Palestinian attack in Jerusalem an Israeli teen was stabbed while riding a bicycle.

Spokesman Micky Rosenfeld said two Palestinians stabbed a 20 -year-old as he walked down a street. They then stabbed a 14-year-old Israeli riding his bicycle, wounding him critically.

Police say an Israeli civilian chased the two Palestinian attackers.

One of the attackers was apparently hit by a car and wounded. Police say they shot the other attacker and killed him when he ran at officers with a knife raised and ignored calls to stop.

The attack took place in Pisgat Zeev, a Jewish settlement in traditionally Arab east Jerusalem, which Israel seized in the 1967 war and annexed shortly thereafter. Palestinians want east Jerusalem as the capital of their future state.

Israeli media had previously reported different ages for the teen who was stabbed.

__

3:20 p.m.

Israeli police say two Palestinians stabbed two Israeli teens in Jerusalem in the latest such assault in over a week of bloody attacks.

Spokeswoman Luba Samri said one of the Palestinian attackers was "neutralized" after stabbing the Israeli youth while his accomplice was caught after he ran away. She said the two Israeli victims are minors.

Israel's Channel 10 TV reported that Israeli forces shot one of the Palestinians after the attack Monday afternoon.

Eli Bin of Israel's emergency service said the two Israelis and the Palestinian attacker were treated for injuries.

The attack was in Pisgat Zeev on the outskirts of Jerusalem.

It was the latest in a rash of Palestinian attacks against Israelis.

___

2:45 p.m.

Israeli police say a Palestinian woman has lightly wounded a police officer in a stabbing attack in Jerusalem.

Police spokeswoman Luba Samri says the officer shot and wounded the woman, whose condition was not immediately known.

Samri says the attack took place near Israeli police headquarters, in an area between the city's predominantly Arab eastern district and the predominantly Jewish western district.

___

9:15 a.m.

Israeli police are reporting that a Palestinian man attacked an Israeli officer with a knife and was shot dead by police.

Police said the attack early Monday took place near a gate of Jerusalem's walled Old City on the predominantly Arab eastern side of the city.

Israeli police spokeswoman Luba Samri says border police officers ordered the Palestinian to take his hand out of his pocket. She said the man then attacked the officer with a knife, but he was wearing a protective vest and was not injured.

The attack comes amid a recent wave of Israeli-Palestinian violence, marked primarily by Palestinian stabbing and shooting attacks.

At least 25 Palestinians, including nine attackers, have been killed by Israeli forces, while five Israelis have been killed in attacks.