Boulder council wants more officers to use them; other departments considering the technology

Boulder police officer Ian Compton walks down 13th Street on University Hill as he demonstrates how his body camera works Thursday. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

The next time you talk to a cop in Boulder County, make sure to smile. You might be on camera.

The Boulder Police Department is compiling a report on the cost to equip all of its officers with body cameras that can record video of their interactions with the public. Other agencies in Boulder County are also exploring the use, or expanded use, of body cameras.

Since Michael Brown, an unarmed black man, was fatally shot last month by a white officer in Ferguson, Mo., activists have called for better documentation of police activity nationwide. The Ferguson police department did not have body cameras at the time of the encounter but has since begun using them, and now more than 1,000 police departments around the country use some type of body camera technology.

The Denver Police Department has announced plans to ask the Denver City Council for the funding to buy 800 body cameras to equip its officers.

At a Boulder City Council budget study session in September, police Chief Greg Testa agreed to look into the cost of more body cameras for Boulder officers after the council members said they wanted to expand their use.

"We need to take a look at what is out there," Testa said. "Based on our conversations, there is definitely an interest in wanting to expand our capability to have body cameras."

Now, the department has nine body cameras that are assigned to officers who patrol high-contact areas such as the Pearl Street Mall.

Advertisement

Police bought the cameras for about $400 each a year and a half ago to test, but the department wants more officers to have them.

"It can reduce officer complaints, and it can enhance our ability to gather evidence," Testa said.

The Boulder Police Department estimates a cost of somewhere between $500 to $1,200 per unit for the new cameras. The department — which has 180 officers — plans to have some numbers to present at the council's budget meeting Oct. 7.

The Boulder Police Department now has nine body cameras that are assigned to officers who patrol high-contact areas such as the Pearl Street Mall. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

"I think it's the cost of doing business in today's world of policing," Testa said.

'Is that a camera?'

One of the Boulder officers now assigned a camera is Ian Compton, a neighborhood impact officer on University Hill.

"I look at it as another useful tool to help me do my job," he said.

Compton cited field sobriety tests as just one area the cameras will help, especially in combination with the dashboard cameras most Boulder police units already have.

"Say a person stumbles when they get out of the car," Compton said. "It is one thing for me to observe and write that in the report, but for other people to be able to see it as well would help."

The camera Compton uses now is about the size of a cigarette carton and clips on to the front of his uniform. The camera is typically off, but when he needs to turn it on, he can flip the cover off the lens and it immediately starts recording. Compton downloads the video to a server at the end of his shift and can view the video, but he cannot edit or delete the footage.

The camera stores about four hours of video, and Compton said he has downloaded everything from 90-second clips to 45-minute-long interviews during an arrest.

While on patrol, Compton said most people barely even notice he has the camera on.

"I think I've only had one person ask me, 'Is that a camera?'" he said. "Most people are looking at the badge and the gun."

Budget concerns

The cost is the reason most departments in the county don't have their own cameras.

In Boulder County, only the Boulder Police Department owns body cameras, but Louisville and Lafayette police officers are allowed to use their own if they choose to buy them.

Lafayette police Cmdr. Brian Rosipajla said the department leaves it up to the officers. The department added a set of policy rules for the half-dozen officers who do bring them in.

"A lot of the officers like the protection of stuff that they do being videotaped," Rosipajla said.

Louisville police Chief David Hayes said in his department, about six officers have elected to buy the cameras.

Boulder police officer Ian Compton, with a body camera clipped to his uniform, patrols University Hill on Thursday. "I look at (the camera) as another useful tool to help me do my job," he said. (Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera)

Sgt. Alex Ragulsky, a 30-year veteran of the Louisville police department, bought his own camera for about $100 and said it's been a "great asset."

Not only does the camera help protect him against false complaints, he said, it helps him when he is going back over an encounter to write up reports.

"It's nice to have when you're in the middle of doing something if things get chaotic," Ragulsky said. "You can sit down in the comfort of your own office and review the tape."

He said he thinks soon all departments will realize the technology is worth the money. "It helps me to become a better policeman. You can't put a price on that."

University of Colorado police say they are researching the cost and "actively looking into body cameras."

Longmont police are also exploring their options.

"We're still evaluating it," said Longmont police Cmdr. Jeff Satur. "There are many benefits for it, and it is not lost on us that it would be helpful in a lot of instances."

Nederland police Chief Paul Carrill said he believes in the technology, but his department doesn't have body cameras in the budget.

Hayes, the Louisville chief, said the main cost comes with the server space for the footage.

"It's really not the cost of the cameras anymore; it's the cost of the storage," he said. "It just takes so much just to record a conversation."

But, he said, he thinks police departments will have to start finding ways to afford the technology as demand for it grows, both from the public and from officers.

Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle said the cameras could end up paying for themselves.

"I know that in jurisdictions where they have cameras, it saves money in investigations and lawsuits," Pelle said. He said $300,000 to $400,000 could be saved in one lawsuit, "should someone have an allegation involving a shooting or something like they have in Ferguson.

"It would be nice to have that evidence. There are such wildly different descriptions of what happened there."

Pelle said he hasn't been able to get money from the county for dashboard cams, much less body cameras, for his deputies.

"The thing that keeps tripping us up is the cost," Pelle said. "We haven't been able to purchase anything cool like this."

'It gets really complicated'

Another issue is establishing policies for the use of body cameras and the stored data, officials say.

"It sounds very simple, and when you are talking about one cop and one contact, it is simple," Pelle said. "But we're multiplying that by hundreds and thousands of contacts and storing and retrieving all that data. How are all those images stored, downloaded and searched for? How long are they retained? What happens when an officer doesn't turn the camera on? Does that build suspicion or mitigating circumstances for the defense? It gets really complicated."

CU is looking at Denver's proposed body camera policy to serve as a guideline.

"Does each officer have their own, or will we have a pool they check one out of each night? Where are we going to store the data?" said CU police Sgt. Michael Lowry. "All that is stuff we are looking at."

Testa said there is also a question of whether the cameras should be used when situations arise that might record sensitive information.

"The standard, best practices we looked at really involved enforcement actions and police-citizen type of contacts, and, obviously, any other incident in which an officer feels it should be audio or video recorded.

"Some of the difficulties with those is there are times when officers are speaking to community members on a case that is not criminally related but personal or family related, and the person doesn't want that conversation to be recorded. You have to be aware of that, and you have to develop policy that allows for those type of situations."

Then there will be the challenge of making sure all the officers learn how to use the cameras properly.

"You develop policy and you train employees, but there will obviously be a learning curve," Testa said. "They have to get used to equipment, get used to turning it on, turning it off, and then we go from there."

When asked at what point using the body camera became second nature to him, Ragulsky said, "I'll let you know when I've perfected it. I've been wearing it for two years, and I still sometimes forget to use it."

Compton added there are times even when the camera is on, he moves around so much that the footage isn't helpful.

"I've gotten dizzy before," he said of reviewing tape. "My focus isn't always on getting perfect video; it's on doing my job."

But, he said, "It's like anything else that starts out new.

"I look at it like putting on a seatbelt. Most people get in the car and put on their seatbelt without thinking about it. This is going to have to become like that."

'No reason to fear publicity'

Barry Satlow, chairman of the Boulder chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union, said with Denver taking the lead, other departments in the state need to follow suit. He said body cameras would create accountability for officers and the public and result in more honest interactions.

"It would assure the public as well as the police force and create a better rapport," Satlow said. "There is no reason to fear publicity or making things public if you're not committing some wrongful act."

Satlow said the cameras would help identify problem cops and help create a better police department.

"I think bad conduct drives out good conduct, and vice versa," he said. "When you start weeding out bad apples on the police department, it makes the officers there feel better about themselves and the job."

Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett agreed that body cameras are a good idea.

"Our police in Boulder County, at all the various agencies, routinely do excellent work," Garnett said. "Body cameras will help to document that work for juries and to rebut fabricated allegations of police misconduct."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars at 303-473-1329 or byarsm@dailycamera.com.