Cambridge, MA (WorkersCompensation.com) - The Board of Directors of the Workers Compensation Research Institute (WCRI) has designated Dr. John Ruser as President-elect of WCRI. Dr. Ruser will succeed Dr. Richard Victor as President and CEO. Dr. Victor will retire on January 4, 2016. He has led WCRI since its founding in 1983.

"We appreciate Dr. Victor's leadership that has established WCRI as an exceptional information resource for policymakers and diverse system stakeholders and a catalyst for change," observed WCRI Board Chair Vincent Armentano.

“Dr. Ruser's appointment is the natural progression in the leadership established by the WCRI Board in 2014," said Mr. Armentano. "We are very pleased to have John leading WCRI." Dr. Ruser is an economist who joined WCRI as Executive Director in May 2015 as part of the planned transition.

“John brings excellent leadership, research, and communications skills and experiences to WCRI. Along with a terrific group of colleagues at WCRI, they will take WCRI to the next level,” said Dr. Victor. “Both John and I are especially pleased that Ramona Tanabe continues as Executive Vice President and General Counsel with expanded responsibilities.”

“WCRI work is highly relevant, well-respected, and impactful. WCRI is well-positioned to continue its successes and take on new challenges under the new leadership,” remarked Janine Kral, the Vice-Chair of the WCRI Board of Directors. “This is an excellent time for employers and states to get more involved with WCRI.”

Current WCRI research priorities focus on a wide range of issues including the most important topics debated by policymakers and stakeholders—e.g., the Affordable Care Act, pharmaceuticals (opioids, compounds, physician dispensing), medical treatment guidelines, and others. The research findings are regularly used by policymakers and stakeholders to debate improvements in systems in many states.

ABOUT WCRI:

The Workers Compensation Research Institute (WCRI) is an independent, not-for-profit research organization based in Cambridge, MA. Founded in 1983, WCRI is recognized as a leader in providing high-quality, credible, and objective information about public policy issues involving workers’ compensation systems. WCRI’s diverse membership includes employers; insurers; governmental entities; managed care companies; health care providers; insurance regulators; state labor organizations; and state administrative agencies in the U.S., Canada, Australia, and New Zealand.