Harrington Arts Alliance readies for its next act Harrington changes name and focus, will stage 'Jesus Christ Superstar' opening Friday

Wyatt Suit performs as Simon the Zealot with Jesus' other disciples in the Harrington Arts Alliance production of "Jesus Christ Superstar" during a Saturday rehearsal. (Special to the Reporter-Herald) 'Jesus Christ Superstar' "Jesus Christ Superstar" opens at the Harrington Arts Alliance Nov. 13 through Nov. 22. Times are Fridays and Saturdays at 7 p.m., Sunday at 2 p.m. Tickets are $12 in advance or $15 at the door. Call 568-8370 for tickets or online at website. "The music is beautiful and the message is beautiful," said Steven Harrington, director of the production. "I've done it once before in 2008 and it was one of my best shows ever." The show is a look at the last seven days of Jesus's life in an opera rock style with lots of music and color. Harrington said the actors range in age 13-45 for this production. "The kids in it have learned a lot about those seven days; not just the religion but the history," said Steven Harrington's wife, Marily. Steven added that the students even had to research their characters and give presentations to the group. "People don't have to be religious to see the show," added Kelly Schutte, parent of students at Harrington. "It will touch everyone." Brittany Grim said she think the production is a powerful one because Harrington is also coming together to do something great for the world. "So it's great that we're doing it at this time for this transition and to see kids connect from all religions," Grim said. "We have Catholics, atheists, Buddhists, everyone has found a different sense of their own faith." When Brandon Harrington and his wife founded the Harrington Arts Academy in 2011 along with his sister, Brittany Grim, their vision was to offer performing arts classes to young children and provide a venue for that in Loveland. As the Harrington family has watched their students grow and change, they have realized they want to push for more emphasis on self-confidence, self-esteem, anti-bullying and mental health in their students, said Brittany Grim on Wednesday. So now, Harrington is going through some changes. A committee that includes Marily and Steven Harrington (Grim's parents), Kelly Schutte and Rosanna Houlton changed the name to the Harrington Arts Alliance, redesigned the website, and have applied for nonprofit status. Grim said they changed the name to "be more cohesive that would bring everyone together." "Everyone plays an integral part," she said. Schutte added that they are hoping for growth and change with an emphasis on personal development, and they feel the new name embodies that idea. "We want an onsite counselor (for students) to speak to at any time. We knew that through being a nonprofit we could apply for grants and reach out to the community more, reach out to more of Northern Colorado," Grim said. She said they plan to implement a measurement tool for each performer. Leaders of the effort talked to a licensed psychologist about what to recommend for gauging personal growth. "We took that and what we know about our kids and how we would like to see them grow," she said. Marily Harrington said their classes now strengthen self-confidence, including eye contact and speaking in front of people. "(Our programs) give them a chance to feel good about performing," she said. Schutte and Houlton are both parents of children at Harrington Arts Alliance and say that their children's self-confidence has grown immeasurably because of the classes. Mary Magdalene and Jesus' disciples form a protective circle around him before he is taken away to be put on trial in the Saturday rehearsal for the Harrington Arts Alliance production of "Jesus Christ Superstar." Marissa Dominguez is Mary in front, Jesse Yarbrough is behind her as Jesus in white, Tyler Lund on the left is Peter, and Wyatt Suit is Simon on the right. (Special to the Reporter-Herald) "That's why we're here," Schutte said. "How much they've grown and what they've learned; not just as performers but as people." Houlton added that students tend not to judge each other's clothing, personality or sexual orientation at the center and it is a place where they feel accepted and safe. They also have a lot of responsibilities and go from learning to teaching techniques. Grim said they do bonding activities and "check-ins" at the beginning of rehearsals so students can talk about their lives and the real things going on. "We ask them deep questions that get kids talking about real things, about their day. It's a tie in to what we'll be rehearsing that day," she said. When they're able to apply for grants or business support, Grim and Brandon Harrington hope to offer scholarships to students so that money is never an issue for attendance. She said they'll be able to promote the anti-bullying campaign that her brother Brandon Harrington has presented many times in Thompson District schools as a nonprofit organization. They will also offer more classes at Harrington. The board of directors consists of Michael Suit as president, Kelly Schutte as treasurer and Sarina Baptista as secretary. They put in a request for 501(c)(3) status at the beginning of September and hope to hear something by Christmas. The process usually takes about 90 days. Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.