4095243

Conservative radio host Mark Levin attacked Republican leadership after Congress passed the farm bill and raised the debt ceiling, exclaiming, “We need a new Republican party.”

Fox News host Neil Cavuto spoke with Levin about the conservatives’ tough week in Washington, after Republicans aided Democrats in passing a $1 trillion farm bill and an extension of the debt ceiling. Republican Speaker of the House John Boehner argued it was best to capitulate on these issues and focus on Obamacare, which the party views as a winning issue going into November elections.

Levin thinks a little differently. “I am sick and tired of defeatist Republicans going on and on, ‘You gotta count the numbers,'” he said. “Leaders affect events. Leaders change mindsets. Leaders change trajectory.”

“Whom among Republican leaders is explaining, day in and day out, the coming, the looming catastrophe?” he continued. “You need to communicate this in real, human terms to the people.”

“The American people need to be told if this continues for as many more years, they’re going to use their pensions, they’re going to use their savings, their going to use their college funds, and the value of the currency is going to crash,” he later added. “This is a fact.”

Cavuto agreed. “Yeah, but John Boehner has more or less told the tea partiers, more or less told the conservatives, more or less told the Mark Levins, ‘Look, why don’t you guys just sit on it because we are winning with this strategy, we are getting our way with this strategy.'”

“The country’s bigger than John Boehner, or Mitch McConnell for that matter, or any single man or even political group,” Levin responded. “We’re talking about, here, preserving the republic. Economies do crash. Societies do crash.”

“You don’t just fight a battle three weeks before the battle’s coming,” he later said angrily, referencing the recent debt ceiling deadline. “You need to have a strategy. Example: the next debt ceiling is March 2015. Start today. Make the case. Explain it to the American people. Rather than go on Jay Leno’s show, slouch in the chair and act like an ass.”

“I’ve seen leaders, I’ve worked for leaders,” Levin ranted. “And leaders change events, leaders affect the future, they have arguments. They don’t stand their with marbles in their mouth, trash their own party and so forth.”

“Look, it’s a party right now — we need a new Republican party. We need new leaders,” he contended. “I’ve seen it with Reagan, I’ve seen it with Gingrich, say what you will. There are men, there are women out there waiting in the wings, who can lead this party and make a case.”

Follow Brendan on Twitter

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact licensing@ dailycallernewsfoundation.org.