The Boulder Valley School District is hopeful that it's finally solved a persistent sewer gas smell at Boulder's rebuilt Casey Middle School.

Teachers at the school, rebuilt in 2009-10 for $33 million, have reported an intermittent stink of rotten eggs over the last few years. Air quality testing has found low levels of hydrogen sulfide, with levels well below what's considered harmful, according to a review by Boulder County Public Health.

Still, said Principal Alison Boggs, "We don't want any levels."

Casey was the first Colorado school to be awarded platinum certification in the Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design program. To receive a platinum rating, the building earned points for reducing energy use, day lighting, reducing water use and other sustainable strategies. Taking steps to ensure good indoor air quality is also part of the certification requirements.

Boggs said the smell was strongest the first year the school opened, a problem caused by minor issues with the HVAC and plumbing systems.

"It's just a complicated building," she said.

Boulder Valley staff members have worked with environmental and design professionals to identify and mitigate the source of the gas, trying various fixes, said district spokeswoman Susan Cousins. But while the odors became fainter after each fix, they kept coming back in cold weather.

In March, after the most recent reports, the district conducted air quality tests that found very low levels of the gas, detected only by the most sensitive staff members and students.

Advertisement

On the advice of the health department, the district conducted a pressurized smoke test of the entire plumbing system over spring break, finding four leaks in the system. Those leaks were repaired. Two vents outside third-floor classrooms also were replaced with one-way vents that don't allow sewer gases to escape and waft in through open windows.

The investigation and repair work cost the district about $9,000.

A second round of air quality tests is planned this month.

"We want to find a solution that completely rids the building of hydrogen sulfide," Cousins said. "The safety and comfort of students and staff is a priority. We're hopeful that this fix will be effective."

For more information, including the results of the air testing, go to bvsd.org/maintenance/Pages/H2S-Documents-.aspx.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.