Contests in local bars a good way to use brain.

Trivia 3d Word Collage Game Questions Answers Quiz (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

I like trivia. I always have — whether it was watching Art Fleming host "Jeopardy!", playing Trivial Pursuit or watching "Who Wants to Be a Millionaire." I've played radio contests and trivia contests at school and work. I played in Lawrence University's trivia contest in high school in the '80s, before the Internet totally messed with it. I've never played in the Stevens Point trivia contest, but I know people who have.

I'm good at trivia, too. I don't know why or how, other than I read and I remember things I've learned. I always liked geography and history in school. I read National Geographic religiously. That magazine is a great source of knowledge about all sorts of things. I don't know when I learned that Ulaanbaatar was the capital of Mongolia, but it's served me well from time to time.

I don't study trivia, but I know some who do. I don't know how you can study trivia. Doesn't that go against all that trivia stands for?

For me, It's just knowledge that I've picked up over the years. If I really wanted to know more about "Breaking Bad," I'd watch the DVDs. But I don't, so I get those questions wrong. I don't need to study the top 10 U.S. cities that start with "S." I'll just make an educated guess. One person told me that he was going to study the Billboard Top 100. That sounds crazy to me, but hey, whatever floats your boat. I don't have that kind of time.

I never set out to learn the U.S. capitals or most of the world's capital cities, but I do. I don't know much current pop culture, though. I don't listen to current music very often. I don't have cable so I don't watch "Mad Men," "Game of Thrones" or "The Walking Dead." I don't read People or Us Weekly so I'm not up on the latest celebrity news. But, amazingly enough, I surprise myself sometimes with just how much I do know just by listening to the news, and radio DJ chatter and reading the paper.

About a year and a half ago, I started playing trivia at some local bars and restaurants through something called America's Pub Quiz. You can play for free and win gift certificates to those same local bars and restaurants. What's not to like about that? You're expected to buy something at the locations, which is only fair. Spend $5, win $30. That's a deal I like.

I started playing with one of my brothers and I've added friends along the way. On most Mondays, I play with my son at Scuba's Pourhouse in Appleton and, on most Wednesdays, with my brother at Applebee's in Neenah. Other friends and family join us in a hodge-podge collage.

It's a good time to socialize. The contests take about two hours. You can only use your brain — no Internet tools. We're the defending regional champions. And we will get past those pesky Madison teams to win the state title soon enough.

I don't play more often because 1) I don't have the money to play more often; 2) I don't need to drink five nights a week; 3) Five nights a week of bar food isn't good for you; and 4) I don't have the time. So, two nights a week is generally enough.

After playing for a while, you get to know some of the other teams that compete. It's all a friendly competition. The Matter Destroyers are one of our top challengers, as are Kirish Rbombs, Vandalay Industries and Fargo Woodchippers.

There are some goofy names and some very nice politically incorrect names. What the heck is "The Sound a Giraffe Makes" anyway?

If you'd like to know more about America's Pub Quiz trivia games, go to www.americaspubquiz.com and check it out. Come out to one of the locations all up and down the Fox River Valley. I'd love to beat you — er, I mean "meet" you.

— Jeff Spoehr is a Neenah resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1mRDm4R