For the last few years, Baptist Health System has been the little kid on the medical block - the last state-based health system in Birmingham, surrounded by academic powerhouses and hospitals owned by national chains.

That may be coming to an end. Last month, executives from Baptist Health System announced a plan to partner with Brookwood Medical Center and become part of Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corporation, which owns 80 hospitals across the country. If the deal goes through, all the acute-care hospitals in the Birmingham area not affiliated with UAB will be owned by national healthcare systems.

When it is completed, the deal will immediately change Baptist Health System's status from nonprofit to for-profit. The hospitals and medical practices affiliated with the system will begin paying taxes.

Other changes that will come with the deal may take longer to develop. The merger will give Baptist Health Systems access to an infusion of cash, up to $250 million for upgrades and expansion.

Research has shown that hospital mergers tend to benefit the bottom lines of medical institutions, and financial pressures are driving many of the mergers that are taking place in Alabama and across the country. Smaller hospitals and health systems have been particularly vulnerable to financial problems.

"It's tough to stay financially viable," said Rosemary Blackmon, vice president of the Alabama Hospital Association. "About forty percent of our hospitals are operating in the red."

Baptist Health System shrunk from a network of 11 hospitals to a group of just four during the last two decades. That put it at a disadvantage when competing against other local hospitals that had joined national chains.

The Baptist system is comprised of Princeton Baptist Medical Center, Citizens Baptist Medical Center, Shelby Baptist Medical Center and Walker Baptist Medical Center.

More than just taxes

Dr. Karen Joynt is an instructor in the Department of Health Policy and Management at the Harvard School of Public Health, and she has studied what happens when hospitals convert from non-profit to for-profit. She found that most hospitals improve their financial margins without sacrificing patient care. Mortality rates and patients outcomes remain the same, and the mix of racial minorities and Medicaid patients doesn't change either, Joynt said.

Her study could not measure whether charity care suffered when hospitals changed from non-profit to for-profit. Although non-profit hospitals are required to provide charity care in exchange for not paying taxes, the amount of care varies widely from hospital to hospital, and the amount of charity care is difficult to confirm.

In fact, some for-profit hospitals provide more uncompensated care than non-profit rivals. In 2012, Baptist Health System spent a total of $39 million on charity care, which was about 8 percent of its operating expenses. That's slightly better than the national average of 7.5 percent, according to a study by the New England Journal of Medicine, but less than the 12 percent spent by St. Vincent's Health System during the same period. Brookwood Medical Center did not disclose how much it spent on charity care.

"When you're talking about non-profit and for-profit hospitals, they don't actually act that differently," Dr. Joynt said. "They are both trying to make money."

Baptist Health System CEO Keith Parrott wrote in an email that the hospitals' charity care policy won't change after the merger.

"The merger will not impact our charity care whatsoever," Parrott wrote.

All about the bottom line

Hospitals often say they need to merge in order to improve efficiency. Larger hospital systems may be able to get better deals on medical supplies and services. The Affordable Care Act is also pushing medical providers to share information and integrate services, which rewards health systems with large networks of doctors.

However, critics of health care consolidation say that increasing health system's clout in negotiations with insurance companies can result in higher prices for consumers. Research by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation shows a relationship between hospital consolidation and increased prices. The changes are most noticeable in markets with the least competition.

"What the research shows is that prices do go up as a result of consolidation," said Suzanne Delbanco, executive director of Catalyst for Payment Reform, a nonprofit that works on behalf of large employers who provide health insurance. "The increases tend to average between twenty and forty percent."

Prices at Northern California hospitals are significantly higher than those in Southern California, leading to a dispute with insurer Blue Shield of California, which claimed one hospital system charged as much as 30 percent more for services.

What happened in Northern California is unlikely to happen in Alabama, because the state's insurance market is dominated by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama. The insurer accounts for almost 90 percent of the state's commercial health insurance market, putting it in a very powerful position to control prices.

"Even if you've got all the hospitals in the area, there's not going to be a huge negotiation advantage," said Mickey Trimm, a professor of healthcare management at UAB.

Parrott said the merger will not change Baptist's faith-based nature or focus on the community. As for Brookwood Medical Center, it will gain a larger number of providers in its network. In an email, Brookwood CEO Garry Gause said the merger won't just benefit Baptist, it will help his health system as well.

"Working together through Tenet, a Brookwood-Baptist partnership would create an organization that is well positioned to thrive at a time when the health care industry is facing dramatic challenges," Gause wrote. "We believe it would strengthen our collective ability to provide convenient, high quality care at a greater value. And it would amplify the strengths of both Brookwood and Baptist, creating meaningful opportunities for innovation in health care delivery."

.