Tea Party favorite and potential 2016 presidential candidate Dr. Ben Carson kicked off the Conservative Political Action Conference on Thursday, telling an attentive audience that the next President must “get rid of dependency” that some Americans might have on the U.S. government.

“We need to understand what true compassion is to reach out to individuals who think that being dependent is reasonable as long as they feel safe,” said Carson, the first speaker to address this year’s annual keynote conservative conference. “It’s not compassion to pat them on the head and say, ‘There, there, I’m going to take care of all your needs, your health care, your food.' That’s the opposite of compassion.

“I’m not interested in getting rid of a safety net, I’m interested in getting rid of dependency,” Carson said, prompting one in a series of raucous rounds of applause.

The 63-year-old Carson, a former pediatric neurosurgeon, has gained favor among Tea Party supporters in recent years with his preference for limited government and came in third place in last year’s closely watched CPAC Straw Poll, which always closes the yearly conference.

This year, Carson spent much of his 12-minute address ripping President Obama’s Affordable Care Act as well as other federal entitlement programs, telling the crowd that “Obamacare is about restriction and control.”

“Everything that these programs were supposed to fix has gotten worse,” he said.

Carson went on to briefly touch on a series of ideas that are typically well-received among conservatives, including trimming the national debt and reducing the size of government.

“One of the things that is going to destroy us as a nation is our debt,” he said, as several members of the audience yelled “yes” in support. “The size of our government needs to be going down and the debt needs to be going down.”

Carson also fielded a few questions during the question-and-answer session about his views on foreign affairs, saying that the U.S. must take a stronger leadership role in the world.

“I’m ready for leadership on the world stage and not just sitting around and waiting to see what other people do,” he said.

The four-day CPAC is commonly regarded by conservatives as a testing ground for likely presidential candidates. Carson hasn’t said whether he will run.