Dr. Howard Federoff made international news last year after he led a team of researchers in designing a blood test that predicted the development of Alzheimer’s disease with 90 percent accuracy.

Federoff, 62, who was at Georgetown at the time, plans to conduct the next phase of study from UC Irvine, where he recently started as vice chancellor of health affairs and dean of the medical school.

Last week, Federoff discussed his new role and research from his office at UCI Medical Center in Orange.

He said he came to UCI because of his interest in integrating the academic side of health care with the enterprise side of research, which leads to new treatment. His mission includes: launching three new schools in nursing, pharmacy and public health; hiring a hospital CEO; and training the newest generation of doctors during a time of change and predicted shortage of physicians.

“There’s the issue of what does it mean post-Affordable Care Act to be a provider,” he said. “We have to understand how to train to a new reality, which will be constrained economically but will offer more opportunity for doing more for patients than was ever possible.”

Federoff, a neurologist, first visited UCI more than a decade ago for his work in Alzheimer’s research. UCI was among six schools that collaborated with Georgetown for the blood test study.

“In order to have a potential impact on the natural history of Alzheimer’s disease, you have to identify individuals at the very earliest stage,” Federoff said. “Until recently, the very earliest you could identify was when they already had a cognitive problem. We reasoned we could identify them before.”

The test is based on 10 lipid biomarkers in the blood. Federoff said he is working to raise funds to launch a clinical trial that would follow seniors at high-risk of developing the disease based on the blood test. The study would test whether a lipid-lowering drug can prevent or slow the progression of disease.

“We know that it’s safe and well tolerated,” he said of the medication.

One of Federoff‘s first moves will be to hire a new hospital CEO. He said he hopes to make an announcement next month on a replacement for Terry Belmont, who retired over the summer.

UCI’s medical school admits 104 students each year from more than 6,000 applicants. Federoff said the nation’s medical schools don’t have the capacity to educate enough doctors, especially with millions more Americans newly insured through the Affordable Care Act.

“I’ve started a conversation with some of the other deans,” he said. “We might be able to agree this is in the interest of the UC system, where all of the medical schools could conceivably grow larger. As really great institutions I think we almost have an obligation, but we have to make that work economically.”

Contact the writer: cperkes@ocregister.com 714-796-3686