Obamacare mandates that substitute teachers cannot work more than 30 hours per week at the same district without being offered healthcare benefits. The Central Cambria School District is now faced with a serious dilemma- how they will deal with a teacher’s absence when a regular teacher cannot work and when a substitute teacher is close to exceeding their 30 hour threshold. Lisa Urbassik, a 7th grade Language Arts teacher at the school district is worried about how the Obamacare rule will affect students. “They’re (substitute teachers) going to have a limited number of days that they can work in each district. If you get a teacher that has to maybe be out sick for a whole week for some reason, then how are you going to have one sub in to cover that class, how are you going to have any sort of continuity for the students?” ...Joe Klezek, a long-term substitute teacher in the district, said that substitute teachers rely on substitute teaching to gain experience and eventually get hired on as permanent teachers. “Pretty much all teachers had to pay their dues at some point,” [he said]. The school employs a system called “AESOP” to ensure that substitute teachers do not exceed 30 hours a week. Substitute teachers have not been a problem for them in past years, they said.

Obamacare remains a liability to Democrats this fall. It remains widely unpopular in southern red states where control of the Senate will be determined. It may not be the issue this cycle, but it is still a top negative for Democrats. Plus, the more unpopular the President, the more politically toxic any issue associated with him or his administration. One Republican consultant told me he’s calling this the “O” election: it is defined by views of Obama. And among Republicans and independents, those views aren’t positive.



Democratic Senator Mark Pryor began airing an ad this month that quasi-defends Obamacare -- which mentions neither that word, nor the law's more official name, the Affordable Care Act. The spot ignores the thousands of Arkansans who've lost their existing coverage under Obamacare ("anecdotes," sniffs the Senator), as well as the many consumers who are experiencing significant premium increases. Both outcomes represent major violations of promises repeated by the president and Sen. Pryor, who's voted the Obama line 90 percent of the time. Out in Colorado, home to another contested Senate race, officials have announced thousands of new cancellations, bringing the state's total to roughly 340,000. Sen. Mark Udall's (D-CO) office applied pressure to state officials to "fix" the politically-damaging numbers last fall. Udall's opponent, Rep. Cory Gardner, is among the many Coloradans personally betrayed by Democrats' false "keep your plan" assurances:

If your income for 2014 is going to be higher than you estimated when you applied for health insurance, then complex connections between the health law and taxes can reduce or even eliminate your tax refund next year. Maybe you're collecting more commissions in an improving economy. Or your spouse got a better job. It could trigger an unwelcome surprise. The danger is that as your income grows, you don't qualify for as much of a tax credit. Any difference will come out of your tax refund, unless you have promptly reported the changes. Nearly 7 million households have gotten health insurance tax credits, and major tax preparation companies say most of those consumers appear to be unaware of the risk. "More than a third of tax credit recipients will owe some money back, and (that) can lead to some pretty hefty repayment liabilities," said George Brandes, vice president for health care programs at Jackson Hewitt Tax Service.



The unhappy surprises associated with this law are nowhere near over.