Dissatisfaction with President Obama, along with concern about the future of the economy and a sense the country is on the wrong track, contributed to a wave of Republican pickups, including Republican control of the U.S. Senate and additional gains in the U.S. House of Representatives.

A 59 percent majority feels dissatisfied or angry toward President Obama, while 41 percent are enthusiastic or satisfied with his administration’s performance. This is similar to his job rating: 44 percent approval vs. 54 percent disapproval.

Nationally, a third of all voters said opposition to the president was a reason for their in vote in House races, while only 20 percent expressed support for Obama in their choice of candidate.

Reason for U.S. House Vote

Support Obama 19 percent

Oppose Obama 33 percent

Not A Factor 45 percent

Meanwhile, there is a sense among voters that the economy continues to struggle: 70 percent rate the country's current economic condition as not good or poor, while 28 percent say the economy is in good condition and only 1 percent calls it excellent.

2016 Election Headquarters The latest headlines on the 2016 elections from the biggest name in politics. See Latest Coverage →

Condition of Nation’s Economy

Excellent 1 percent

Good 28 percent

Not good 48 percent

Poor 22 percent

Just over three-quarters of Americans -- 77 percent -- are at least somewhat worried about the direction of the nation’s economy in the next year, while 22 percent said they were not too worried or not at all worried.

Worried About Future of U.S. Economy?

Very 37 percent

Somewhat 40 percent

Not too 18 percent

Not at all 4 percent

More than a quarter say their family’s financial situation has gotten better over the past two years, while a similar number say their situation has gotten worse. Those who say it has gotten better supported the Democratic candidate for Congress by a 60 percent to 38 percent margin. Those who say it has gotten worse went for the Republican candidate, 67 percent to 31 percent.

Financial Situation

Gotten better 29 percent

Gotten worse 25 percent

Same 45 percent

All of that leads to a sense the country is on the wrong track. Only 31 percent say the economy is going in the right direction, down from 46 percent in 2012. Most voters -- 65 percent -- believe the country is on the wrong track. Voters who think things are on the wrong track backed the Republican candidate in their district by a 65 percent to 30 percent margin.

Direction of the Country

Right 31 percent

Wrong 65 percent

This pessimism extends to attitudes toward life for the next generation of Americans. Nearly half think life for their children will be worse than life today, while only 22 percent say it will be better.

Life for Next Generation

Better than today 22 percent

Worse than today 48 percent

About the same 27 percent

Despite the attention to issues such as Ebola and ISIS, the economy remains most prominently on the minds of voters. Nearly half -- 45 percent -- see the economy as the most important issue facing the country. Those economy voters split 49-49 in their House vote. Health care voters went for the Democrat by 60-38 percent, while immigration voters backed the Republican by 73-25 percent.

Most Important Issue Facing Country

Economy 45 percent

Health care 25 percent

Illegal immigration 14 percent

Foreign policy 13 percent

Nearly half of voters nationally feel ObamaCare went too far, nearly doubling the number who say it didn’t go far enough. About one in five (21 percent) say the law is about right. Voters who think the law went too far went for the Republican candidate in their district by nearly 70 points.

Feelings About ObamaCare

Went too far 48 percent

Not far enough 25 percent

About right 21 percent

Only one voter in five says they can trust the government in Washington to do what is right just about always or most of the time. Most voters trust Uncle Sam only some of the time or never.

Trust Government?

Almost always 3 percent

Most of the time 17 percent

Only sometimes 60 percent

Never 18 percent

The key voting group of independents made a big difference again Tuesday. While they made up the same amount of the electorate, they were more likely to back the Republican by 10 points. In 2010, independents went for the Republican in their district by 19 points.

National House Vote

Independents

Democrats 42 percent

Republicans 54 percent

Here are the key findings in some of the most contested states.

Colorado

In a Senate election where women’s issues were central to the campaign, Sen. Mark Udall emerged the leader among that group, but it was Rep. Cory Gardner, the Republican challenger, who won the day.

Women

Udall 52 percent

Gardner 43 percent

Gardner’s support came from many groups, including independents and male voters.

Independents

Udall 43 percent

Gardner 50 percent

Men

Udall 40 percent

Gardner 56 percent

Over half of Colorado voters disapproved of President Obama’s job performance, mirroring results in many other states. Gardner won the support of these voters by an 82-13 percent margin.

Obama Job Performance

Approve 43 percent

Disapprove 55 percent

Finally, almost two thirds of Colorado voters said most illegal immigrants working in the United States should be offered a chance to apply for legal status.

Policy Toward Illegal Immigration

Legal Status 65 percent

Deport 28 percent



Georgia

In Georgia, Republican David Perdue held the open Senate seat for the Republicans, defeating Democrat Michelle Nunn and garnered enough of the vote to avoid a runoff election.

A key to his victory was the independent vote. Independents broke strongly for Perdue. Perdue received 59 percent of the independent vote, compared with 36 percent going for Nunn.

Independents

Nunn 36percent

Perdue 59percent

Swafford 5percent

Georgia voters were sending a message -- 36 percent of voters said a reason for their vote was to show opposition to President Obama, while only 19 percent said a reason for their vote was to show support for the president. Other voters said the president was not a factor.

Reason For Senate Vote

Support Obama 19percent

Oppose Obama 36percent

Not A Factor 43percent

Three-quarters of Georgia voters said who controlled the Senate factored into their vote. These voters supported Perdue by a 53 percent to 46 percent margin.

How Important Is Party Control of Senate?

Very important 76 percent

Somewhat important 15 percent

Not too important 5 percent

Not at all important 4 percent

Iowa

Republican Joni Ernst took the open Senate seat in Iowa away from the Democrats, defeating Democrat Bruce Braley. Ernst played up her farming background, which resonated with Iowa voters. More than four-in-ten voters were from rural areas, and they strongly backed her.

Rural voters

Braley 38 percent

Enrst 58 percent

More voters agreed with Ernst on the issues, than Braley.

Ernst On The Issues

Too Conservative 37 percent

Not Enough 10 percent

About Right 47 percent

Braley On The Issues

Too Liberal 44 percent

Not Liberal Enough 10 percent

About Right 37 percent

President Obama is not popular in Iowa, with 60 percent of voters disapproving of the job he is doing, while 39 percent approve.

Obama Job Performance

Approve 39 percent

Disapprove 60 percent

Kansas

Republican incumbent Pat Roberts held onto to his seat in Kansas today as the party faithful put their support behind him.

Challenger Greg Orman, won a majority of support among fellow independents.

Independents

Roberts 37 percent

Orman 54 percent

Batson 9 percent

However, Orman’s advantage among independents and early deciders was outweighed by Roberts’ advantage among Republicans, who make up 48 percent of Kansas voters. Roberts won Republicans by a 85-13 percent margin.

Party Breakdown

Democrat 25 percent

Republican 48 percent

Independent 28 percent

Despite his win, 62 percent of voters said Roberts has spent too much time away from Kansas to represent the state effectively. Those voters broke for Orman 55-38 percent.

Roberts Away From

Kansas Too Much?

Yes 62 percent

No 33 percent

But the Republican leaning in Kansas remained constant among voters Tuesday. A majority of Kansas voters said they wanted the Republicans to win control of the Senate. Only 29 percent say they prefer the Democrats to win control.

Prefer to Win Control of the Senate

Democrats 29 percent

Republicans 56 percent

Does not matter 12 percent

Louisiana

Louisiana will host a runoff between incumbent Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu and her Republican challenger Bill Cassidy. Cassidy appears to have the advantage, with voters saying they would support Cassidy in a runoff by a 51 percent to 43 percent margin

Runoff Election Vote

Landrieu 43 percent

Cassidy 51 percent

No vote 4 percent

Over half of voters -- 57 percent -- say that Landrieu agrees with the president too often, while only 34 percent say she agrees with the president about the right amount of the time.

Landrieu Agrees With Obama On The Issues

Too often 57 percent

Not enough 6 percent

About Right Amount 34 percent

North Carolina

Incumbent Democratic Senator Kay Hagan was defeated by Republican Thom Tillis in the hotly contested race in North Carolina. One problem for Hagan was President Obama, with more Tar Heel State voters viewing the administration negatively than positively.

Feelings About Obama Administration

Positive 39 percent

Negative 60 percent

Additionally, about half of North Carolina voters said Hagan agrees with Obama too often.

Hagan Agrees With Obama

Too Often 52 percent

Not Often Enough 6 percent

About Right 37 percent

Nearly 40 percent of North Carolina voters were very worried about the direction of the nation’s economy. These voters supported Tillis, 72 percent to 25 percent.

Worried About Future of U.S. Economy?

Very 39 percent

Somewhat 36 percent

Not too 19 percent

Not at all 5 percent

Virginia

In a race that is still too close to call Wednesday morning, Sen. Mark Warner received an unexpectedly strong challenge from Republican candidate, Ed Gillespie. The race was driven in part by dissatisfaction with President Obama’s job performance.

Obama job performance

Approve 40 percent

Disapprove 58 percent

Seniors, who strongly supported Warner in 2008, broke for Gillespie Tuesday, which contributed to the closeness of the race.

Seniors

Warner 46 percent

Gillespie 54 percent

Four out of five Virginia voters are worried about the direction of the nation’s economy next year. Only 40 percent of those voters went for Warner, while 58 percent went for Gillespie.

Worried About Future

Of US Economy?

Worried 82 percent

Not Worried 18 percent

Methodology

Edison Research conducted this exit poll for Fox News and interviewed over 18,000 voters as they left randomly selected polling places around the country.