For the past one and a half years, Elaine Jeffries of East Orange would begin the time-consuming process of getting her husband, Jesse, prepared for dialysis treatments every Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.



After a couple of hours bathing, dressing and feeding the 84-year-old, Elaine Jeffries would see him strapped onto a stretcher and taken by ambulance to a dialysis center.



Then Medicare in December imposed a new condition on transporting non-emergency patients by ambulance and the couple eventually got an unwanted message from their carrier: Find a new ambulance service.



For most of this month, United II Care Medical Transportation Services in East Orange stepped into the breach, getting Jeffries to his life-sustaining treatment.



But last week, Jesse and Elaine Jeffries learned they again need to find yet another ambulance service, as United II Care closed its doors on Tuesday.



Similar shakeups in medical transportation are occurring all around New Jersey. Designed to weed out fraud, the new regulations requiring authorization before transporting the patient have been felt since the government changed course in mid-December. But besides leaving some ambulance companies hanging by a financial thread, the government's move also has left patients scared and confused.



"It's really sad right now," said William Michael Barbee, who laid off 16 employees from United II Care. "It's become a big mess in the industry."



The program change imposed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services is a simple one: Medicare patients in New Jersey and two other states have to get prior authorization for ambulance transportation before payment can be disbursed to ambulance providers. CMS imposed the prior approval program after an audit found unusually high and fraudulent billings for non-emergency transportation here and in Pennsylvania and South Carolina.



But since it began, administrators have been rejecting authorization requests for nearly all applicants, ambulance operators say, forcing them to chase after doctors for new information. Meanwhile, they have to decide whether to transport patients who need non-emergency care such as dialysis, wound care and chemotherapy or continue operating, hoping to be paid at some point.



By regulation, Medicare is only supposed to cover ambulance transportation for non-emergency service if it's medically necessary or if the patient must be transported on a stretcher for some other reason. Medicare patients who can be moved via wheelchair are not supposed to be covered.



The problem is that many patients never should have been approved for ambulance service in the first place, said Chris Davis, executive director of Quality Insights Renal Network, an agency that oversees dialysis services in New Jersey for the Department of Health and Human Services.



"It's a shame because I think the patients were lied to," he said.



In response to questions, CMS spokesman William Polglase referred to a reporter to an agency web page explaining the prior authorization program.

Family members say administrators are cutting off deserving patients, even when doctors indicate ambulance transportation is necessary.



"Whoever is doing this denying, if it was his wife, mother, grandmother, would he be knocking it down?" asked Frank Cannon of Lyndhurst, whose wife's ambulance transportation to dialysis treatment now is in jeopardy. "Would he just deny the people who needed a stretcher?"



Doctors have said 65-year-old Linda Cannon, Frank Cannon's wife, needs stretcher transportation once she gets out of a rehabilitation center, but Medicare so far has shot down authorizations for it, said her daughter Gina.



Linda Cannon has chronic, severe kidney disease, trouble breathing, and lymphedema, swelling in her limbs caused by blockages of her lymphatic system, her daughter said.



"It is medically necessary that she is on a stretcher," Gina Cannon said. "They don't want to pay for the transportation company that is doing an excellent job," she said, referring to Four Sisters Medical Transportation of Tenafly.



Likewise, Darryl Jeffries says his father's doctor has signed off on ambulance transport, but his authorization requests so far have been denied.



"That's insane," Darryl Jeffries said. "My father no longer has his legs under him anymore. He can't carry his own weight. A wheelchair would not work."



The elder Jeffries can do very little for himself anymore, his son said, and he has to be assisted down a flight of stairs to get out of the house.



"He's basically incapacitated, physically," Darryl Jeffries said.



United II Care isn't the only ambulance service to go out of business. Rocket Medical Service in Wayne also shut down in January owner Nedzmi Ibraimi said, because "nothing gets approved."



Ibraimi said he notified the patients he was transporting earlier in January that he might close the business, which he started in 2008.



The state Department of Health, which said one to three ambulance companies go out of business a year, said on Thursday that a third ambulance company also has shut down. It did not identify the company.

Other ambulance owners also have told NJ Advance Media that they are being squeezed unfairly.



"This process has hurt our business because now we can't even do cancer patients, wound care patients," said another ambulance owner who asked to remain anonymous because he feared antagonizing federal Medicare officials. "Repetitive non-emergency transports were the bulk of this business," he said, and he fears that's ended.



It's likely Medicare officials expected fallout from the regulation change, since it had been tried a few years ago in Puerto Rico.



Like New Jersey in recent years, Medicare spending on ambulance transportation in Puerto Rico in 2009 was far above the norm — about nine times above the national average. The government imposed the prior authorization requirement, and in two years, it cut spending by two-thirds.



"It seems to be following the same pattern as in Puerto Rico," said Davis, whose agency has a contract to administer Medicare's end-stage kidney disease program in the island commonwealth, West Virginia and New Jersey. "When they went to the new policy, there was a lot of uproar."



There are signs that a hard freeze on authorizations is beginning to thaw.



Russell Stuart at AmbuTrust in Nutley said in mid-February his company got its first affirmed prior authorization request after trying for a month.



"It seems that if you submit paperwork and it gets denied, then re-submit again with the paperwork they want, it gets denied for a whole other reason," he said. "Then you have to go back and do it all again... It shouldn't take a month for one affirmed decision."



It can be nearly impossible to know what Medicare's claims administrator Novitas is seeking, ambulance officials said.



Heather Radigan, whose Feasterville, Pa., firm IntelliSolve Billing Services, handles ambulance companies' authorization requests, has records that show patients were denied prior authorization in December. When IntelliSolve sent new applications in January for the same patients, they were told prior authorization was unnecessary.



A few authorizations have been approved, "but not many," she said.



A Novitas spokesman referred questions to CMS.



Meanwhile, the Jeffries and Cannon families and others like them wonder about the future of care for their sick relatives.

Even small items, like the steps both families have to walk to get out of their homes, now seem like threats.



Darryl Jeffries said he cannot see how his father could get in and out of his home without stretcher service.



"It's a very, very labor-intensive, logistical situation, getting him to and from dialysis," Jeffries said. "They want you to be an invalid and not be able to lift a finger. That's unfair."

Tim Darragh may be reached at tdarragh@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @timdarragh. Find NJ.com on Facebook.