President Barack Obama will speak at Ivy Tech Community College in Indianapolis on Friday. (Photo: AP)

My most persistent critic on the hard-core left noted a couple of days ago that finally, finally I had written a good column (about Girl Scout Cookies). I responded with a nod to the principle of blind squirrels and broken clocks.

Which brings me to today's news. My fellow Hoosiers, please welcome the president of the United States, Barack Obama.

It's no secret that in much of red-state Indiana, Obama is about as popular as Brian Williams at a VFW lodge.

But I come not to bash the president but to join him in trumpeting an essential message: Adapt or die.

OK, so the president wasn't quite that blunt when he stepped to the podium at Ivy Tech on Friday afternoon. He is a politician, after all.

But by rights he could have been. That's because a large chunk of both the existing workforce and those now preparing to someday enter the workforce are standing before a wave of technological change likely to wash away millions of jobs. And radically change how other jobs are done.

A couple of days before Air Force One landed in Indianapolis, I spoke with Jay Timmons, president of the National Association of Manufacturers. When asked about estimates that 20 percent of manufacturing jobs will be eliminated in the next decade because of advancements in robotics, driverless vehicles and other technology, he didn't dismiss me as someone who has spent too much time watching the SyFy channel.

Instead, he deferred to the virtues of increased productivity. In the language of Hoosier, that means more cars built, but with fewer Janes and Joes on the assembly line to weld the joints and test the brakes.

On the macro level, that can be a good thing. Lower labor costs lead to higher profits, and more money to reinvest in growth and innovation. At least in theory.

But on the micro level — the plain on which most of us feed the kids and pay the mortgage — the creative destruction of technological advance can be devastating. It's true that robots don't need lunch breaks or vacations, and driverless vehicles don't need truck stops or bathroom breaks. They thus possess all the qualities that make the corporate accountants happy.

But they also don't buy groceries at the IGA or homes in the withering small towns that dot the map between Burns Harbor and Tell City.

In short, take another 20 percent of manufacturing jobs out of this state — the most manufacturing intensive state in the nation — and what happens to an already fragile economy? And what happens when other sectors of our economy are transformed as well?

It's likely to be about as pretty as Bill Belichick in a Speedo.

Unless, as the manufacturing chief, Timmons, pointed out, we train and retrain.

Unless more of the workforce is better prepared for the higher-level jobs that often emerge with new technology. (How many companies were hiring, for example, social media managers a decade ago?)

And that's why Obama was here Friday. To talk about the need to prepare for a future in which landing a good job becomes ever more dependent on securing a good education.

Unfortunately, he's likely to obscure that message with silliness about "free" tuition at community colleges such as Ivy Tech. But while there's no free lunch, even at the Student Union, don't get too hung up on that distraction.

The bottom line message — education is the juice needed to close the wage gap and restart the engine of upward mobility — is right, and needs to be shouted from the White House to the Statehouse.

Especially here in a state that ranks only 42nd in the nation in the education level of the workforce.

Granted, we need leaders who can realistically plot how we get from here to there, and Obama has shown that he's often not the right guy to craft the details. But as president, he still holds the power to shape the conversation like no other person on the planet.

And today, on this issue, we need to listen.

Swarens is The Star's Opinion editor. Email him at tim.swarens@indystar.com. Follow him on Twitter: @tswarens.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1D4CbLo