The surprise announcement in the past week that the Statehouse corruption probe tied to former House Speaker Bobby Harrell’s downfall isn’t dormant — but is now in the hands of a special prosecutor — has raised more questions than it answers.

One of the key bits of new information to come out in recent days is that nearly a year ago Attorney General Alan Wilson sought to put up a “firewall” between his office and the investigation into possible misconduct by certain members of the General Assembly, likely Republicans like himself.

Which begs the questions: Who and what is being investigated?

Also what, if anything, has been going on since the release last November of the State Law Enforcement Division’s redacted report on the ethics violations to which Harrell pleaded guilty? And does the recent activity signal other heads might roll at the Legislature?

Background

The ongoing state and federal probe into alleged Statehouse corruption stems from questions raised more than three years ago by the private watchdog S.C. Policy Council in Columbia and The Post and Courier concerning the campaign spending habits of Harrell, R-Charleston.

Much of the case was tied to Harrell reimbursing himself thousands of dollars for flights using his private airplane that he claimed were campaign-related.

One of the several plane trips under scrutiny was a 2009 flight where he took friends and family to Florida for a high school baseball tournament. He later claimed on disclosure forms that he took the trip for “legislative travel.” Authorities determined the trip was personal.

Harrell eventually resigned his office and pleaded guilty to six ethics-related misdemeanors last September. He was sentenced to three years’ probation. As a part of his plea deal, Harrell agreed to cooperate in further public corruption investigations.

Why did the investigation resurface now?

Mark Powell, communications director for Attorney General Wilson, said Friday that the office does not comment on ongoing criminal investigations.

But the possibility that more wrongdoing is suspected can be gleaned by reading emails from last October indicating there was something beyond the Harrell prosecution that officials wanted to explore.

In one of the messages, special prosecutor David Pascoe refers to a lengthy redacted portion of the SLED report covering Harrell’s misconduct.

“I definitely think this is something that should be looked into in regards to any corruption in the Legislature,” Pascoe wrote.

What he’s referring to is unknown because the accompanying passage is blacked out.

In a separate email, Chief Deputy Attorney General John W. McIntosh tells him in connection to Pascoe’s note, “I will request SLED to look into these allegations.”

Last month, a letter from McIntosh to SLED Chief Mark Keel also makes reference to unidentified lawmakers being named in the Harrell report.

“Portions of this report were redacted that involved members of the General Assembly,” it reads. “This is to request that, upon completion of the investigation of those persons, the report be forwarded to Solicitor David Pascoe for a prosecutive decision.”

Who’s the new special prosecutor?

Democratic 1st Circuit Solicitor David Pascoe. Pascoe was the same special prosecutor who Wilson originally named to take over the Harrell case last year after Harrell’s legal team began questioning the attorney general’s impartiality and ethical conduct.

Pascoe said he’s already begun meeting with SLED officials about the scope of his duties in the new probe. But he also has admitted that he was surprised by the appointment, saying the case was given to him by the AG’s office without warning.

Pascoe’s new duties cover only those lawmakers in the redacted report. By inference, it means Wilson’s office is hanging onto other aspects of the probe, possibly to include lobbyists or other figures surrounding the Legislature and state government.

What does the Policy Council say?

Ashley Landess, president of the council, raised the initial ethics issues that led to the investigation of Harrell’s misconduct. She has long held that corruption in the Legislature runs rampant, pointing to what she said are weak campaign disclosure requirements for lawmakers.

In an interview Friday, she was at a loss as to why the case suddenly surfaced now after months of silence, adding that she feared investigators don’t have the motivation to launch a full-on Statehouse crackdown into some of the issues her watchdog group follows.

“I think we thought this was the beginning of what would be a major investigation,” she said. “One thing the Harrell investigation taught me is how incredibly weak state laws are when it comes to corruption, deliberately. So that may be part of the probe, I don’t know.”

Landess declined to say when she may have last spoken with an investigator about what the council has uncovered on its own.

Will the probe affect next year’s elections?

Speed has not marked the investigation so far and there is no announced timetable as to what comes next. If Pascoe identifies multiple instances of Statehouse behavior as legally suspect, that will likely draw out the investigation.

If any new targets are announced, there are two time factors to consider: The Statehouse reconvenes for its 2016 session in January, and lawmakers will begin filing for re-election in March.

What’s Harrell been up to?

As part of his guilty plea last September to the six ethics-related misdemeanor charges, Harrell agreed to cooperate with any state or federal questioning covering matters tied to the probe.

Harrell’s last public comments about the case came in December when he said that he hadn’t spoken with either state or federal investigators since early fall of 2014.

At the time he said he was under the impression they were done with him, though he did confirm he was asked “about a few other members” of the Legislature.

Today, no one is confirming if Harrell has added anything since. In a statement Friday, Harrell said he has moved on from his Statehouse life while building his new insurance business in West Ashley.

“My family and I are working hard and enjoying life these days. That’s really all I have to say,” he said in an email.

Reach Schuyler Kropf at 937-5551.