Both Houses of Congress are trying to hammer out a deal before Thursday's drop-dead date Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

With the possible passage of a "mini" grand bargain to resolve the D.C. deadlock, political leaders on both sides of the aisle will be kicking the can down the road.

Limited success for a Senate compromise bill would address twin federal woes: A government shutdown since Oct. 1 due to congressional inability to pass a budget for the 2014 fiscal year and a rapidly approaching Oct. 17 loose deadline for the debt ceiling.

The agreed-upon bipartisan deal could extend the Treasury's borrowing authority until February, thereby setting a new cap above $17 trillion. It would also re-open the government and send furloughed employees back to work through the beginning of next year.

Republicans are poised to gain a delay in the start of the employer reinsurance tax included in the Affordable Care Act, while Democrats aim for more flexible and reduced sequester cuts — all part of a long-term plan that could take shape by December.

But without such an agreement, the Treasury says the country could face catastrophic results: "Credit markets could freeze, the value of the dollar could plummet, U.S. interest rates could skyrocket, the negative spillovers could reverberate around the world."

Al Jazeera looks at some of the questions at the heart of ongoing fiscal uncertainty:

Has the U.S. ever defaulted on its debt?

Contrary to statements by politicians and financial leaders, the Treasury has indeed failed to meet its obligations before.

In 1814 and 1979, there were two relatively contained examples of U.S. default on sovereign debt.

The first was during the War of 1812, when the capital was on fire and U.S. troops were fighting unpaid. The second occurred at the end of the turbulent 1970’s, when a bureaucratic glitch prevented the federal government from paying $122 million in Treasury bills, costing taxpayers billions.

Bond markets panicked at the “delay” in payments, which investors unambiguously labeled a “default.” There were two additional debatable defaults involving late 18th century war debts and the transition from the gold standard in 1933.

The financial disaster predicted by economic analysts for the coming weeks could dwarf the prior default episodes — and the near-default shock of 2011, after which the U.S. credit rating was downgraded and the market tanked.