A taxing decision for de Blasio

Forest Hills: Bill de Blasio states, “I think a leader leads,” and I agree. But I must add that the mayor-elect must have a backup plan for financing universal pre-kindergarten and other city services. Former Mayor David Dinkins suggested the reinstatement of the commuter tax, which is an excellent idea. That was 0.45% of commuters’ salaries; it generated almost $500 million in revenue annually for the city.

But both proposals would require approval by Albany. I suggest that de Blasio look at an item that is under the city’s control and does not require Albany approval — the deeply inequitable way the city now levies property taxes. Example: De Blasio owns two homes valued at more than $1 million each, yet he only pays $2,900 per property in taxes. I own a one-bedroom coop, valued at approximately $275,000, yet I pay approximately $1,800. Fixing the property tax inequities will provide the city a steady stream of revenue, all under the mayor’s control. Eileen Moran

Simply sick

Brooklyn: No one hates President Obama more than I do, but the crazy people claiming Obamacare is a bigger scandal than the fake wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, where hundreds of thousands of women and children were killed, are the same nutjobs who said Sarah Palin was brilliant and should be vice president. They’re the same people who went after the Salem witches, Galileo, Shakespeare, Mae West, Chubby Checker, Elvis and The Beatles; the same people who have been proven wrong 100% of the time throughout history. Go back and look: conservatives said tobacco was not harmful; lead was not harmful; asbestos was not harmful; radiation is not harmful; and on and on. Republicans are literally mentally ill. Jack Dickenson

Get well soon I

Farmingdale, L.I.: The Affordable Care Act, otherwise known as Obamacare, is not fully understood by us all. However, to state it more simply, if you contact an illness while you are insured, you can no longer be automatically eliminated from insured status. Also, if you already have an illness, you are eligible to be protected from financial ruin by being eligible to be covered by medical insurance. Be patient with the plans to establish the system and you will not be an unhappy patient. Anything worth while is worth waiting for. Mary Ann Coyne

Get well soon II

Far Rockaway: The Affordable Care Act is and will be among the greatest government reforms of the 21st century. President Obama is acting in a moral and Christian tradition of serving the “least of these,” understanding that “there but for the grace of God go I.” So let us pray and hope for the success of the law to heal and save lives. Ronald Torrence

Dog days

Whitestone: The truth is out. Brian on “Family Guy” succumbed to injuries sustained in a car accident. The reason: Obamacare did not cover his injuries. Kim Cody

Never speak his name

Fishkill, N.Y.: The Nov. 26 “Satan’s Gun” cover story asked the question “Why did Adam Lanza kill 20 children and 6 teachers at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Connecticut last year,” and answered: “Unfortunately the answer may never be answered conclusively” The reason he went on his killing rampage is clear: to become famous. And the Daily News and other newspapers and magazines and TV shows have given him all the publicity that he had hoped for. The news media should not print the names and photos of anyone who murders other people. Steve Lynch

Modesty, please I

Staten Island: Voicer Diana Werner is spot on in questioning the reputation of today’s young women. She nails it when she states: “Good, decent, moral, modest women help to determine the morals of a country,” and “Good moral women engender good men and obedient, disciplined children.” I tip my hat to her. Tom Buneo

Modesty, please II

Brooklyn: Kudos to Voicer Diana Werner! Unfortunately, there’s no money to be made by blushing, romantic, virtuous, decent, moral, modest, honeymooning women. Nilonn De Rosario

Mind your own

Bronx: To Voicer Jean Novak: Why should anyone, including Kayla Phillips, explain to you where she acquired the money to purchase a $2,500 handbag? Are you also posing such questions of white shoppers? Remember: This woman resides in the 21 century and not the slave-infested 17th, 18th and 19th centuries. Finally, as for your advanced age and not being financially equipped to purchase a $2,500 handbag, instead of bashing Phillips, perhaps you should politely ask this young woman for a quick Christmas loan. Max Malloy

The trump cards

Bronx: Voicer Monica Marsich wants to know why Barack Obama is still in office. I wonder that everyday. Donald Trump, you held the trump card in your hand: his phony birth certificate. Why didn’t you take steps to impeach him? I have never known you to back off from anything or anyone. Linda Ranallo

Red Madison Square

Forest Hills: Congrats to Democrats and progressives. Now you can paint the town Soviet Red.

A. Del Fava

We’ll look into it

Bronx: I thank Voicer David Cuevas for writing about how not one of his words has been in the paper. I have also written many short letters and none of mine were in the Daily News. I have been reading the Daily News for many, many years. I guess my letters are not gossipy enough. Ethel Brown

What a sellout

Brooklyn: Al Sharpton is giving ultimatums to retail big wigs. Give me a break! Retailers have a right to protect their merchandise from theft, and if racial profiling helps, so be it. Ruth Weiner

Cold-hearted snakes

Bayside: It’s amazing how in the good old U.S.A. all our politicians stand before us declaring human rights for all, especially in foreign lands but do little to zero to assist people in public housing in NYC who are without heat (“That’s cold, NYCHA,” Nov. 26). Maybe if all the heads of city government were to spend just one night and day in these bitterly cold buildings, you just might see a quick end to boiler breakdowns and other problems that result in no heat. This has been a chronic problem with all mayors for decades, with nothing done to correct it. This is a monstrous, inhumane violation of human rights and all politicians from the mayor on down should be held liable and accountable. No one should be without heat. Robert Diehl

Where’s the outrage?

Bay Shore, L.I.: A top hedge fund is fined $1.8 billion dollars for insider trading. Congress does the same thing, but nobody goes to jail. Arnie Pettersen

Best and brightest

Lansdowne, Pa.: Four famous generals urged JFK not to send the infantry into Vietnam: Charles de Gaulle, Douglas MacArthur, Dwight Eisenhower and James Gavin. DeGaulle assured him “North Vietnamese nationalism will be stronger than even the American military.” MacArthur said “Son, do not get bogged down in a ground war in Asia.” Eisenhower advised him to “Secure only South Vietnam’s major airport and capital city. If they can’t win when you have done that much for them, the cost won’t be worth it.” Gavin warned JFK ending the infantry into ‘Nam would be “a major blunder.” JFK thought his Harvard buds knew more about it than the generals. Georgia Makiver

What say you, Quinn?

Belle Harbor: I think it would be a good idea to have term limits on TV. For talk-show hosts like Oprah Winfrey, Regis Philbin, Barbara Walters, David Letterman, Jay Leno, etc., we’d have a simple rule: eight years and you’re off the air. Joseph Manello

Too much Miley

Brooklyn: I have been a reader of the Daily News every day for as many years as I can remember, but can I say: Who is Miley Cyrus? Is she the most beautiful woman in the world? Is she the best entertainer that ever lived? Is she the richest woman in the world? Is she up for the Pulitzer Prize? Has she brought world peace? Why must we see her naked body every day? Nicholas Amato

The fire next time

Floral Park, L.I.: When Obama leaves office, he should apply to the New York City Fire Department for a job. I hear they were forced to lower their standards. John Kiernan