BYRON CENTER, Mich. (WOOD) — Everyone in Michigan who has health insurance through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan saw a rate increase on premiums of about 9% this year, but depending on who is insured, that increase could be even higher.

Joanne Bruxvoort, 64, got a letter from Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan last week that said she could keep her insurance plan, but she would have to pay an additional about $100 a month to cover the premium increase.

Her monthly premium for 2014 was $220 a month, but the letter she received said the premium would increase to $318 a month.

“I just have to now drop to a lower type of care for my insurance, and I still would be paying $20 more,” said Bruxvoort.

There are four levels of health care: catastrophic, bronze, silver and gold. Bruxvoort currently has a silver plan. With the premium increase, she will pay more per month starting in January even if she drops down to a bronze plan.

“It’s just frustrating because now your life is revolving — which mine is now — around medical, and medical bills, and insurance, and Obamacare and Blue Cross, and it has been ever since I signed up,” Bruxvoort said.

The Affordable Care Act — more generally referred to as Obamacare — said insurance companies have to explain why their premium rates go up if they’re hiked by 10% or more. Blue Cross, Blue Shield of Michigan increased premiums across the board by 9%.

Rick Notter, the director of Individual Business for BCBSM, said that premium rate increases are mostly reliant on “increasing health care costs.”

“There are a variety of factors that go into rate increases each year,” Notter said in a phone interview. “A lot of that has to do with the underlying medical costs and the trend in medical costs that cause things to increase from year to year. The Affordable Care Act tried to [level] some of that and keep premiums from going up faster than they have in the past, but those rising medical costs are the biggest factors in terms of premiums increasing year to year.”

The law also allows insurance companies to hike premiums based on special factors like age, geographic location and tobacco use.

That means people like Bruxvoort may see a 28% increase, or even higher.

Younger people are paying more, too.

“This difference is lower than what it was previous to the Affordable Care Act. In the past, you can have as much as a five-to-one or six-to-one difference between someone who’s 21 and someone that’s age 64. Now the maximum difference is a three-to-one factor,” said Notter.

Ssince the law says that older people can’t be charged more than three times the price of younger clients, insurance companies hiked the price for younger clients instead of lowering older people’s insurance rates.

Notter said that some older clients may have seen a slight decrease in premiums after the ACA went into effect.

“Where do you go? You’re stuck. You have to pay. You have to have health coverage so you’ve got to pay it, and it just gets worse,” said Bruxvoort.

Everyone from BCBSM officials to those at Cherry Street Health Services who help with enrollment said that if you aren’t happy with costs or coverage, the best thing to do is to shop around and check HealthCare.gov to see if there’s a better plan to meet your needs.

—–

Online:

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan

HealthCare.gov

Share this: Email

Print

Facebook

Twitter

Google

Pinterest

More

LinkedIn

Tumblr



Reddit