Planned Parenthood, which is receiving taxpayer funding under Obamacare for teen sex education, is the subject of a new undercover investigation that exposes its counselors providing graphic sexual advice to minors.

The undercover video consists of footage with counselors as well as Planned Parenthood’s own promotional materials. Those materials include a Planned Parenthood-sponsored series called “A Naked Notion” that features BDSM—a practice that involves sexual partners beating, lashing, or otherwise inflicting pain on each other—as the topic for one of its segments.

Planned Parenthood’s Obamacare funding is just a fraction of the more than $500 million it receives annually from taxpayers. In addition to sex education, the organization is the largest provider of abortions in America.

The new video spearheads Live Action’s nationwide campaign to spread awareness of Planned Parenthood’s track record: “The motto at Planned Parenthood seems to be ‘sex with no strings attached.’ Teens are told they can have sex whenever, however, with whomever, as long as it’s contracepted.”

In its petition to defund Planned Parenthood, Live Action states, “No one should ever be forced to give his or her tax dollars to an organization that endangers women and children.”

>>> Pro-Life Activist: Abortion Industry Hurts, Not Empowers, Women

Live Action President Lila Rose expects the investigative releases to serve as a “wake-up call for America’s parents.”

“This is not a partisan issue,” Rose said. “Whether people are liberal or conservative, or even whether they’re pro-life or pro-choice, I think we’re going to see a lot of common ground in the outrage over what we’re about to show people.”

Heritage policy analyst Sarah Torre has written extensively on Planned Parenthood’s federal funding and has argued that “policymakers would do well to end taxpayer support for Planned Parenthood and close the seams in the patchwork of existing domestic federal funding prohibitions by making them permanent.”

Planned Parenthood did not respond to a request for comment.