LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, with offices in Vail, Beaver Creek and Edwards, recently announced that only five residential suites remain of the original 50 luxury residences at The Ritz-Carlton Residences, Bachelor Gulch. Considered to be the World’s Best Ski Hotel (WorldSkiAwards.com 2013), The Ritz-Carlton, Bachelor Gulch is the ideal locale for the discerning ski enthusiast looking for unparalleled access to skiing, combined with the amenities of a five-star hotel. Already in 2015, 18 close-out sales were achieved.

“The rate at which the Ritz-Carlton Bachelor Gulch Residential Suites are selling is remarkable,” said LIV Sotheby’s International Realty broker, Kevin Kenney. “I anticipate the final five remaining residences to be sold by the end of the first quarter- especially considering the snow-year we’ve been having.”

Located on Colorado’s Beaver Creek mountain, The Ritz-Carlton, Bachelor Gulch 5-star ski resort touts that ‘every day is a perfect day at the Ritz’. Living up to that reputation, there are only a handful of turn-key residences available to make extending your stay indefinitely possible at what is considered the ‘World’s Best Ski Hotel’.

The Residential Suites are being sold as full-ownership residences, enhanced by the legendary service and amenities that only The Ritz-Carlton can offer. One-and two-bedroom suites feature spectacular vistas of the surrounding mountains and come complete with custom interiors, designer fabrics and carpets, and hardwood flooring.

Kitchens feature granite countertops, custom designed cabinetry, and premium high end appliances. Perhaps one of the biggest benefits to ownership is the amenities offered to residents.

When owners are in residence, all hotel amenities of a 5-star hotel are available to them, including complementary valet service. There are no limits on the number of days an owner can use their home, and residence owners may introduce their residence back into a rental program for added value for years to come.

The five remaining residences range from a studio / 1 bath at 883 sq. ft. for $699,900 (707), and four additional 2 bed / 2 bath residences (613, 728,704, 713), ranging from 1,318 square feet to 1,392 sq. ft., priced between $1,199,900 to $1,299,900.

Located only 2 hours from Denver and twenty minutes from Vail, Beaver Creek Resort is truly a skier’s paradise, offering more than 1,800 acres of beginner, intermediate and advanced terrain.

McCoy Park Nordic Center offers more than 32 kilometers of Cross Country Skiing and Snowshoe adventures and additional winter adventure activities including dog sledding, snowmobiling, ice-skating, ice-fishing, sleigh rides, snow cat tours and horseback riding.

“Prospective buyers are noticing that the window of opportunity is closing for them to be able to purchase new product in Bachelor Gulch at incredible value,” said LIV Sotheby’s International Realty managing broker, Dan Fitchett Jr. “Excellent construction quality combined with the renowned service of The Ritz-Carlton truly make this a rare opportunity to own at the World’s Best Ski Hotel.”

For more information, visit www.worldsbestskihotel.com, or contact LIV Sotheby’s International Realty brokers, Kraig Forbes, at 970-845-0400 or Kevin Kenney, at 970-331-6037. To service all of your real estate needs visit LivSothebysRealty.com.

LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, the exclusive Board of Regent for the Who’s Who in Luxury Real Estate, has 11 office locations in the Denver Metro and surrounding areas, including Boulder, Castle Pines Village, Cherry Creek, Clayton Street, Denver Tech Center, Downtown Denver, Evergreen and the resort communities of Breckenridge and Vail. For more information call 303-893-3200. To service all of your real estate needs visit LivSothebysRealty.com.