There's no need to ever feel left out again at the water cooler conversation. Here's a rundown of the stories currently trending in the world, the country and your backyard.

Here's what's trending

President Obama on ACA: Barack Obama said Monday that the Supreme Court should not have even considered a challenge to a portion of the Affordable Care Act that involves federal subsidy payments. Obama told reporters "the thing is working ...Frankly, it probably shouldn't even have been taken up." The court will announce a decision later this month that could repeal a major part of the landmark health insurance legislation.

Pool party video: Protests were held in a Dallas suburb following the release of a video showing a police officer slamming a girl to the ground at a pool party. There were calls for the firing of the officer who pinned the teen to the ground after drawing his handgun on other teens at the party.

Hastert in court: Former Speaker of the House Dennis Hastert is scheduled to appear in federal court Tuesday. He will be facing charges he lied to the FBI about illegally structured bank withdrawals he made to allegedly pay off someone to keep quiet about decades-old wrongdoing.

Testing dirty bombs: According to a story from Haaretz, the Israeli government spent four years studying the effects of an attack by an enemy using a "dirty bomb," by exploding radioactive devices in the country's desert. The devices exploded were laced with the radioactive material 99mTc – a substance used in medical imaging.

"Goonies" star dies: Actress Mary Ellen Trainor, who starred in films like "The Goonies" and "Lethal Weapon" and had a cameo in "Forrest Gump," died last month of pancreatic cancer, it was announced Monday. She was 62. Trainor is probably best-known for playing the mother in"The Goonies

Apple News: What's new for Apple this year? Apple Music is. The $9.99-a-month music service offers on-demand listening and a 24/7 radio station among other features . The announcement of the new service was made at the first day of the company's developers conference. Also announced Monday were new software features for iPhones, iPads and Mac computers.

Hit it, girl!

Take a look at Today in Pictures

Follow Debbie Lord on Twitter at Follow @DebbieMLord