How the White House plans to fight opioids

THE WHITE HOUSE'S LATEST PLAN TO FIGHT OPIOIDS — President Barack Obama today will lay out a new round of efforts to fight the opioid epidemic in remarks at a major anti-addiction summit in Atlanta. Those efforts include:

— A proposal to double the number of patients that doctors can provide with medication-assisted treatment for opioid addiction from 100 to 200.

Story Continued Below

— A requirement that Medicaid programs cover substance abuse and other mental health services on par with medical and surgical coverage, which builds on earlier efforts to require “mental health parity” from employer-based coverage as well as Obamacare plans covering the individual and small group markets. The change would apply to about 23 million people, CMS says.

— Releasing two new rounds of SAMHSA grants: $11 million to support state expansions of medication-assisted treatment and $11 million to make the overdose reversal drug naloxone more available to first responders.

Meanwhile, more than 60 medical schools have agreed to begin mandatory training of students in opioid prescribing this fall in line with the new CDC guidelines, as a condition to graduate.

Brett Norman has the story for Pros: http://politico.pro/1WTDRPO

The White House fact sheet: http://1.usa.gov/1USc3gL

Another call for more funding. In a preview of Obama's remarks, HHS's Richard Frank and White House drug control official Michael Botticelli again urged support for the administration's request for $1.1 billion in new spending to fight opioid and heroin abuse — saying “the lion’s share” would go to medication-assisted treatment.

You're Invited: POLITICO Pro Health Care Briefing: Changing the Culture of Prescribing Opioids. Join our health care team on Thursday for a conversation on the U.S. opioid crisis.

Who you'll hear from: Speakers include Dr. Jeanmarie Perrone, University of Pennsylvania; Cynthia Reilly, The Pew Charitable Trusts; Dr. Bob Twillman, American Academy of Pain Management & more to be announced.

When: 8 a.m. on March 31

Where: Liaison Hotel on Capitol Hill

RSVP: http://bit.ly/1RnVuXL

THIS IS TUESDAY PULSE — Where we note Gawker has exhumed Ted Cruz's Ice Bucket Challenge and is studying the ALS fundraising video like the Zapruder film. (To be fair, Heidi Cruz does dump the bucket of ice water on Ted's back and to the left.) Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

With help from Brett Norman (@BrettNorman).

THE LATEST THERANOS RED FLAG: THE TESTS AREN'T AS ACCURATE AS COMPETITORS — That's according to researchers who mystery-shopped Theranos' Arizona walk-in clinics last summer, before the Wall Street Journal's investigation of the company broke in October 2015. And Pro's Darius Tahir reports that the results purport to show Theranos falls short in comparison to competitors LabCorp and Quest Diagnostics in three areas: (1) in not returning results for an ordered test; (2) in not flagging abnormal results requiring medical attention; and (3) in displaying more variable results over time. The study in the Journal of Clinical Investigation: http://bit.ly/1PBUjhK

— Theranos pushed back in a letter to the journal, saying the researchers committed many faults — like extracting too much blood from a patient’s arm, or extracting blood from the same finger. See Theranos' response: http://politico.pro/1Si7Rkr

Theranos' rise and fall, in Wall Street Journal headlines. The newspaper helped make Theranos' reputation with a splashy 2013 profile, and then proceeded to unmake the company with an ongoing investigation in the past six months. Ten sample headlines, including

· September 2013 — Elizabeth Holmes: The Breakthrough of Instant Diagnosis

· January 2016 — Theranos Lab Practices Pose Risk to Patient Health, Regulators Say

SANDERS AND FELLOW DEMS TARGET PROSTATE CANCER DRUG — Bernie Sanders and 11 other lawmakers called on HHS and NIH to intervene and lower the cost of Xtandi, a prostate cancer drug that costs more than $129,000 in the United States but just $30,000 in Canada. The group of six representatives and six senators is asking NIH to hold a public hearing to consider overriding the patent on Xtandi to make the drug available at a lower price. But the drug has FDA marketing exclusivity through next summer, so it coudn't be copied until then.

"The United States government should use every tool available to lower outrageously high prescription drug prices," Sanders said in a statement. "NIH has the power to stop this blatant profiteering and put the pharmaceutical industry on notice that the era of charging unconscionable prices must end."

Read the letter: http://1.usa.gov/1RCkusY

DOCTORS GROUP OUTLINES PLAN TO COMBAT DRUG PRICES — One of the country's largest physician groups is calling for sweeping new policies to curb the rising cost of prescription drugs in recommendations released Monday, Pro's Mary Lee reports. The American College of Physicians proposes giving Medicare and other public health programs more authority to negotiate drug discounts, a policy embraced by Hillary Clinton, Bernie Sanders and Donald Trump — but forcefully opposed by the drug industry. More for Pros: http://politico.pro/1pW4v0d

FIRST IN PULSE: CSRxP ADDS AMERICAN ACADEMY OF NEUROLOGY — The National Coalition of Health Care has added yet another organization to its Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing: The American Academy of Neurology, which counts 30,000 members.

"We are glad to welcome the American Academy of Neurology to the Campaign because these doctors are fighting on the front lines to make prescription drugs affordable for patients," John Rother, executive director of the Campaign for Sustainable Rx Pricing, said in a statement.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Expand seniors’ access to prescription drugs. Right now Medicare drug plans force patients to make long trips for medication or to pay more to use their longtime pharmacy. Let Medicare beneficiaries choose the pharmacy that’s best for them. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

WHO KNEW? — Last week's "The Cures" conversation with Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton, Rep. Diana DeGette and The Who singer and Teen Cancer America co-founder Roger Daltrey was two years in the making, POLITICO Influence's Isaac Arnsdorf reports.

— David Schnittger, a former aide to Speaker John Boehner now at Squire Patton Boggs, in 2013 first discussed bringing Daltrey to the Hill to discuss the needs of teens and young adults with cancer in a policy setting.

— The rocker appeared last week, along with Teen Cancer America leaders, to encourage lawmakers to talk with hospitals in their regions about the special needs of teens and young adults with cancer.

— And shortly before The Who took the stage at Verizon Center on Thursday night, the band flashed a special thank you to "our new friends" Upton and DeGette, along with photos of the event on the Hill.

CHAMBER-BACKED AD TOUTS YOUNG'S ANTI-OBAMACARE EFFORT — A new ad from the U.S. Chamber of Commerce boosts Rep. Todd Young in Indiana's GOP Senate primary by boasting of his attempts to repeal Obamacare. "Thankfully, there's one Hoosier conservative standing up to Obama at every step, every turn," the narrator declares. "Todd Young is leading the fight to dismantle the worst parts of Obamacare."

See the ad: https://youtu.be/uB12YE88tHs

— Pennsylvania Senate candidate takes aim at heroin crisis. The 60-second ad opens with Braddock Mayor John Fetterman walking through an abandoned house, stripped of copper and other wiring, before cutting to footage of him driving through Braddock.

"What would our country look like if 30 years ago, we didn't declare war on drugs, but we declared a war on addiction and treated it like the medical condition that it is?" Fetterman asks. "How many millions of families' lives would not have been damaged or destroyed by seeing their loved ones get sent away for years and years through mandatory sentencing?"

See the ad: https://youtu.be/x3MkFvTwEC4.

NATIONAL HEALTH COUNCIL ISSUES PATIENT-CENTERED FRAMEWORK — The organization on Monday released a framework that's intended to help patients, providers and payers evaluate which delivery models are value-centered and best serve patients. See the rubric: http://bit.ly/1pGn1Jc

TWO HEALTH CARE STORIES ARE CAPTIVATING PRO BASEBALL — One item is serious: Reporters are trying to gently navigate HIPAA while sleuthing out the mystery medical issue that's sidelined Mets pitcher Matt Harvey. The other item is juicy: There's visual confirmation that 23andMe cofounder Anne Wojcicki is dating Yankees slugger Alex Rodriguez — who knows a bit about using medical science to improve performance.

WHAT WE'RE READING by Brianna Ehley

Speaking of Hopkins: Former New York City Mayor Michael Bloomberg and a group of other philanthropists today will gift $125 million to Johns Hopkins University for cancer research, the Washington Post reports: http://wapo.st/21Qon05

Ten Canadian drug makers have agreed to share how much they pay doctors and health groups, according to the National Post: http://bit.ly/1RM5AUi

Progress in Vietnam's fight against tuberculosis may be stymied by dwindling resources, The New York Times writes: http://nyti.ms/1WTBzjN

The Washington Post explains why hackers keep going after hospital systems following the latest cyberattack against DC’s MedStar: http://wapo.st/1qcpAmM

As the opioid abuse crisis persists, The Atlantic details how doctors wean newborns out of methadone dependence: http://theatln.tc/1VQf54G

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **