It's absolutely puzzling that it hasn't been a big headline, but Alabama Psychiatric Services (APS) has announced that it will be closing its doors on Feb. 13. The company is the primary provider for Managed Health Care Administration, Inc. and has eleven offices around the state. They provide a wide array of services including behavioral health counseling, substance abuse treatment, inpatient detoxification, medical education, and psychiatric care.

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Clete Wetli is a liberal, political activist and works as the Executive Director for First Stop, Inc. His opinions are solely his own and not representative of First Stop, Inc. or the Madison County Democratic Party. He can be reached at decaturclete@gmail.com.

Clete Wetli is a liberal, political activist and works as the Executive Director for First Stop, Inc. His opinions are solely his own and not representative of First Stop, Inc. or the Madison County Democratic Party. He can be reached at decaturclete@gmail.com. Read more

See more by Clete Wetli

Combine this with Alabama slashing its mental health budget by 35 percent and the recent announcement of shutting down state-run psychiatric hospitals, and it appears that Alabama is working overtime on creating a huge mental health crisis.

Our local mental health agencies, like Wellstone Behavioral Health, do a genuinely amazing job given their lack of adequate funding and have reacted defensively when people have criticized the delivery of mental health care in Alabama. This is probably because they are afraid that speaking out publicly could be seen as partisan political criticism and could result in even deeper cuts to their already insufficient operating budgets.

That's why waiting an average of five weeks to see a psychiatrist has been proffered as "no big deal." That's why we keep making the excuse that everyone's just doing the best they can with limited resources instead of screaming that the budget for mental health care in Alabama is plain crazy.

After all, Alabama is the "pull yourself up by your own bootstraps" and "we dare defends our rights" state. Instead of politically posturing over same-sex marriage and wasting taxpayer dollars on litigation akin to Don Quixote's windmill jousting, maybe our Governor needs to get his priorities in order.

After cutting every conceivable public service agency to the point of absurdity, Gov. Bentley finally figured out that Alabama has a revenue problem. In his insane quest to paint all federal programs as the hideous encroachment of socialism, he has refused to expand Medicaid for Alabama which has cost the state millions and hurt physical and mental healthcare providers, not to mention the hundreds of thousands of citizens who need care.

But, Bentley assures us that government is awful and that the private sector will come to our rescue.

This is why it sounded so great to slash the state's mental health budget because the burden could be shifted to "community-based" resources and the savings could be used for more corporate welfare for companies like Remington and Polaris.

It seemed like a great conservative answer to perceived government largesse until APS quietly announced it was closing. Oh, by the way, they are one of the few mental health care providers that accept Blue Cross/ Blue Shield; which in Alabama is about your only choice for insurance because Gov. Bentley didn't want to play along with Obamacare and promote competition amongst insurance providers.

We're already facing a shortage of psychiatrists in the state and the expansion of Medicaid, in conjunction with allowing more competitive insurance providers in Alabama, may have made a significant difference in retaining the ones we have. It may have even allowed APS to stay in business. But, I suppose that's not a real priority to the Governor and he probably didn't think about all those trifling details.

Apparently, the Governor doesn't think that we have significant problems with our prisons, with funding substance abuse treatment, mental health, or with repairing our crumbling infrastructure. Indeed, it took him years to just muster the thought that we might be facing a revenue problem. In all fairness, this whole same-sex marriage thing and keeping us safe from Federal government overreach thing has probably been a huge, maddening distraction.

Wasn't it the Mad Hatter who astutely observed, "People who don't think, shouldn't talk."?