We’ve all been there.

It started as an itch in the back of your throat. But then came the watery eyes…and that cough that won’t quit, before you know it: you have joined the one in ten Americans who came down with a cold in the last 24 hours.

And, if you’re like 81 percent of adults, your first response will be the same for when your lower back is sore, or when baseball season kicks off your allergies or when you finally quit smoking once and for all. You’ll turn to one of the safe and effective over-the-counter (OTC), or nonprescription medicines conveniently available at your local pharmacy, supermarket or convenience store to treat those minor aches, common cold, and other self-treatable conditions.

ADVERTISEMENT

What you might not realize is that participating in your own health care—in this case, by self-treating your cold—not only means less time spent at the doctor’s office, but savings for you and for the healthcare system. In fact, by reducing unnecessary physician visits, responsibly using lower-cost OTC medicines and engaging in self-care, we could be saving the healthcare system over $100 billion per year

$100 billion. That’s huge!

And it’s not just consumers who benefit—96 percent of physicians agree that responsible use of OTC medicines can help reduce what physicians estimate to be tens of millions of unnecessary appointments each year, meaning doctors can spend more time with patients with more serious ailments. With the relief they bring patients and such savings to be found by turning to trusted OTC products, it’s puzzling why some lawmakers voted to no longer allow the use of voluntary plans funded by our own pre-tax dollars, such as flexible savings accounts (FSAs) to the purchase of OTC medicines.

Because of a section in the Affordable Care Act (ACA), if you’re one of the millions of American families who have relied on FSAs to defray the costs of OTC medicines, you are no longer eligible for reimbursement without a doctor’s prescription.

That means when that cough going around your child’s classroom finally hits home—instead of a quick trip to your neighborhood pharmacy, supermarket or convenience store—FSA plan holders now have to schedule a costly and avoidable visit to their doctor’s office for a prescription or no longer benefit from the pre-tax savings on their OTC medicines.

Not only does this small provision run counter to the intent of the ACA, it has large consequences for our already overburdened healthcare system.

Thankfully, lawmakers are taking bipartisan, commonsense steps—like introducing the Restoring Access to Medicine Act, which would restore the ability for the 50 million Americans with FSAs and other health savings accounts to use their pre-tax plans to purchase OTC medicines without a doctor’s prescription. It has wide support from groups ranging from the American Academy of Family Physicians, to advocacy organizations like Sjögren’s Syndrome Foundation, to the U.S. Chamber of Commerce.

The cost of not acting is clear: millions of unnecessary doctor visits, thousands of additional medical professionals required, and the loss of potential savings for consumers of OTC medications.

So whether it’s quitting smoking once and for all or fighting the common cold, let’s empower Americans to participate in their own health care by passing the common-sense Restoring Access to Medicine Act and reducing barriers to responsible self-treatment.

Varma is regional president, North America, for Pfizer Consumer Healthcare (PCH) and a member of the Global Leadership Team.