Time has a way of designating your next direction. Sometimes, it's the end of something; sometimes, the beginning. Sometimes, it's because we want to finish up; sometimes, it's because we want to start up a new idea, a new concept, a new beginning again. In business, there are those who stay with the same job or with the same business or with the same profession or talent for a lifetime. Sometimes it's a matter of choice sometimes, it's merely because the family depends on a consistent income. To those who do it for family expediency, it is a tribute to applaud their staying power. And then, there are those who deserve an accolade for veering from the path of consistency. This is sometimes done as a matter of preference: sometimes, as a matter of expediency.

Ira Nottonson For the Camera

Among them are the winners and the losers. To which group should we pay homage?

The answer is "to neither." The reason is that each decision is based on things that might change the direction of anyone under the same circumstances. Does this mean that we have no ability to make a choice? Quite the opposite. It means that, in life, we have many choices. It is exactly this decision making process that makes us all different.

The "shoulda, coulda, woulda" game, in hindsight, is easy for those who were lucky enough to have the ground prepared for them. It was more difficult for those who had to start from scratch. True, the ground on which we succeed or fail is not an even playing field. But that is where we play the game. For those for whom the choice was easy due to family circumstance or the like, good for you. For those who had to cultivate the soil in order to make something grow, better for you.

The real courage is exemplified for those who did it in spite of not being so lucky. The real success belongs to those who, in the face of extraordinary circumstance or tragedy, got to the end of life's game by being able to say, "I did it." To those who brought up a family with values that will last for generations — to the mothers and fathers and grandparents who worked hard and made it happen — to those about whom their families will say "they did what they had to do with or without the talent, the education or the experience that others had been blessed with," more credit to ya!

It isn't that they necessarily deserve a pat on the back. But they certainly deserve to know the value of their accomplishments. These are the people who built the foundations for the good life that will endure to the benefit of subsequent generations. You are these people. Don't forget it!

Ira Nottonson is a lawyer, lecturer, author, and consultant. His latest books are Forming a Partnership and Buying and Selling a Business. He can be reached at 720-335-1476 or by email at irabizlaw@aol.com.