James H. Walsh was associate general counsel with the U.S. Department of Justice Immigration and Naturalization Service from 1983 to 1994. Read more reports from James Walsh — Click Here Now .

President Barack Obama promised change, and on that he has delivered.The United States is becoming a rudderless nation.Leadership lapses by the President have resulted in corruption at the IRS, malpractice at VA hospitals, and a Benghazi cover-up at the State Department. Add to these, the national security fiasco at the Tex-Mex border.The United States is facing a humanitarian crisis of epic scale in spite of the “enhanced” border security promised by the President. The reaction by the Obama administration is congestion of thought and action — chaos.Currently 58 percent of Americans say that Obama is failing to control the border. Some assert he purposely created the crisis in 2012.Not all the children crossing the border are unaccompanied; 45 percent of the children have adults with them, according to the Border Patrol.On July 14, 2014, the Washington Post carried a front-page story on an illegal alien mother who had her 10-year-old daughter smuggled into the United States from Honduras in April 2014.The Obama administration then flew the daughter to Washington, D.C., to join her mother and family. The mother, after abandoning her 6-month-old daughter in Honduras, has lived for 10 years as an undocumented alien. In the USA, states would terminate the parent’s rights on grounds of abandoning the child.In the United States, parents who would permit minor children to traverse some 1,200 miles of Mexico alone or with smugglers exposing the children to physical abuse, sexual abuse, hunger, thirst, and death would have their parental rights terminated for child abuse.The Obama administration, however, is rewarding negligent and abusive undocumented parents by providing them free transportation to the border to pick up their child or by flying their child or children to the city where the parents reside. As one Washington, D.C. lawyer and mother of four children observed, “Obama rewards bad behavior by foreigners.The unaccompanied children, if permitted to stay in America, should be placed for adoption. Their "parents," if they are the parents, should answer why their parental rights should not be terminated.”President Obama attended five fundraisers over the last week while there is a humanitarian crisis on the Tex-Mex border, Israel invades Gaza, Iraq disintegrates, and a Malaysian airliner is shot down over Eastern Ukraine.Meanwhile, he offers $3.7 billion to fix the open border, with $1.8 billion going to Health and Human Services (HHS) to care for undocumented foreign nationals of all ages. The rest of the money would go to Homeland Security (DHS) and the Department of Justice (DOJ). Like all Obama proposals, taxpayer money is the answer, and specifics on how the money is spent will be left to his political minions.The William Wilberforce Trafficking Victims Protection Reauthorization Act of 2008 states that child trafficking victims from noncontiguous countries caught in the United States are to be registered with the H.H.S. and are to have a speedy immigration court hearing regarding their immigration status. Child trafficking victims from Canada and Mexico are to be returned immediately to their homeland with no hearing.Today the children crossing the Tex-Mex border are not victims of sex trafficking, although they may be victims of sexual abuse. They do not meet the requirements for refugee or asylum status under immigration laws.Currently, refugee status requires that the applicant must be outside the United States and must prove subjection to persecution or have credible fear of persecution in their homeland because of race, religion, nationality, membership in a particular social group, or political opinion. For asylum claims, these five requirements also apply, but the applicant can apply once in the United States.These border crashers that are apprehended — children and adults — from Guatemala, Honduras, and El Salvador do not meet any of the criteria for refugee or asylee status. Criminal violence in their countries is not a legal ground for refugee or asylum status, as it differs little from what is happening in Chicago on a daily basis.Meanwhile, many states and towns are objecting to President Obama’s transport of these undocumented foreign nationals into their states and locales without advance notice.Senator John Cornyn, R-Texas and Congressman Henry Cuellar, D-Texas, have introduced the Helping Unaccompanied Minors and Alleviating National Emergency Act (HUMANE) to permit the immediate return of unaccompanied minors to their homelands after an expedited hearing. Democrats oppose their bill.President Obama, however, is adept at changing federal law, as he does with Obamacare. Be prepared for the president to continue to change U.S. immigration law without congressional action.