WILLIAMSBURG — The most surprising things about the 96th District House of Delegates race is that there is one.

This is the first time Del. Brenda Pogge, R-James City, has faced a challenger since her first race back in 2007. She won that race with more than 56 percent of the vote.

Now seeking a fifth term, Pogge is having to get used to things she hasn't done in a while.

Like knocking on doors.

"Yes, I've been knocking on doors two or three days a week," she said. "I kind of like it."

But she doesn't like one of the other things an incumbent with opposition has to do.

"It's awful. I hate doing it," she said. "But you have to."

While in a typical election year, Pogge's campaign account rarely tops $20,000, she's raised $64,105 this cycle

Her opponent, Independent Brandon Waltrip, has raised $6,226.

As of the last campaign finance report, posted Thursday, Pogge has $28,917 on hand, Waltrip had $2,910.

Reached last week via email, Waltrip was critical of Pogge for ducking joint appearances.

"Mrs. Pogge withdrew from the scheduled LWV (League of Women Voters of the Williamsburg Area) forum citing the ... Board of Supervisors forum on the same night," Waltrip wrote. "We then offered multiple other dates and she advised that she was not available. The only appearance she has made was at the York County Chamber of Commerce Forum with all of the Board of Supervisors candidates, clerk of courts, and other state candidates where we were asked a total of three questions. Two on transportation and one on the confederate flag."

Pogge said Tuesday that she would be out of town after Oct. 22, visiting a new grandchild.

Pogge said when she's out knocking on doors, she doesn't hear voters asking too many questions about state issues.

"First, they are surprised to see me. Then, when I asked them what issues they are concerned about in Richmond, they kind of draw a blank. They are more focused on the local races, the board of supervisor races in James City," she said.

Waltrip, who knew he faced a tough race in the very Republican 96th, has some ambitious policy proposals.

He proposes to reform the state income tax, which currently taxes all income over $17,000 at the same rate. As outlined on his website the plan would reduce state income tax for those making under $50,000 to zero, reduce rates for those making from $50,000 to $99,999 and increase rates on those making over $100,000.

"This plan if implemented in 2014 would have resulted in over $10 million of additional revenue for the state treasury," he wrote.

Waltrip also promises to work to roll back limitation on the state's Freedom of Information Act and restrictions on the right to bear arms except for convicted felons and those suffering from mental health issues.

He's in favor of accepting funds to cover expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, which Pogge strongly opposes, but only under conditions that would allow Virginia to keep a balanced budget into the future.

Vaughan can be reached at (757)345-2343.

Brandon Waltrip: Attorney, married, with one son. Resides in Toano.

Brenda Pogge: Realtor, 58, married with five children.