Published June 21, 2015 at 9:07 a.m. Tweet

KeyLime Cove in Gurnee, Ill. is ideal for Milwaukeeans and Milwaukee families looking for a quick, easy and entertaining getaway. (As long as waterparks are your thing, of course.)

The perks of KeyLime Cove are plentiful – it's only an hour away, the prices are generally a little less than other waterparks in Wisconsin and it's 84-degrees regardless of what Mother Nature decides.

KeyLime Cove is an entirely indoor experience and contained to one building – a massive building, mind you, that's 65,000 square feet. Whereas other waterparks have an outdoor component and multiple buildings, the fact it's contained to one large space is appealing to some people because it makes the visit seemingly more manageable.

The waterslides range in thrill level, from tame to dramatic, and there's also an onsite arcade, multiple restaurants including D.W. Anderson's Eatery and Ice Cream Parlor, The Crazy Toucan Margarita Grille, Paradise Mist Spa and a large banquet and meeting space.

However, these are the more obvious offerings at KeyLime Cove. During a recent visit – it was Kids' Weekend which meant even more special activities for the little fishes than usual – we found that the simple stuff made our overnight at KeyLime Cove a true treasure trove of fun.

1. Easy-access bar





Obviously, this is good news for grown ups – the proximity of the bar to the waterpark action makes it very easy for the parents of older kids to sip a beer or piña colada while still being able to witness much of the "watch this, mom or dad" stuff.

2. Penny squisher





Next to the Mold-A-Rama, the penny squisher (technically, it's called a "penny press" but "squisher" is a way more fun word) is the most classic old school souvenir maker. This is quite possibly the most fun you can have with 51 cents.

3. Crazy-huge jawbreakers

These jawbreakers range in size from golf ball- to softball-sized. And, best of all, they're on a stick – it's like a little piece of the Wisconsin State Fair in the state of Illinois. (Most likely no one in the history of confectionaries has finished one of 'em.)

4. "The toilet"





Technically, it's called the Hurricane Vortex, but whether you have a 12-year-old boy in tow or are just one at heart, referring to this as "the toilet" is as much fun to say as it is to swirl down. Especially after one of the aforementioned piña coladas from the delightfully-so-accessible bar.

5. Fish faces

Making a "fish face" at least one time while at KeyLime Cove is mandatory. Taking a photo or selfie while doing it earns you bonus points.

6. Relaxing

There is so much going on at a waterpark, you might have to remind yourself to relax. But relax! The lazy river and / or one of the many colorful chairs are ideal for such glorious non-activity.

7. The pineapple dump

Stand under the ginormous pineapple and allow 250-gallons of water to wash over you. It's a tropical baptism of sorts and one most grown ups don't take advantage of often enough. SpongeBob not included in this experience.

8. Wish making

There's a lot to look at on Duvall Street – the faux street in the common area of the waterpark where most of the shops, services, cafes and restaurants are located – including an indoor stream. What if a penny or a quarter really did grant your wish? Only one way to find out.

9. Jumping on the bed

Let's not forget what happened to those naughty monkeys, but bouncing on the bed in a hotel room is a memory maker and a childhood dream come true. Sometimes, the mantra must be "safety second."