By Gil Muñoz

There’s no doubt that the Cover Oregon website has been dogged with problems since it launched last October, but the exchange’s IT problems are overshadowing a major policy success. To date, thousands of Oregonians who were previously uninsured have gained access to health care, benefiting all of us.

Here at Virginia Garcia Memorial Health Center, enrollment workers have already signed up more than 2,000 individuals for health insurance and we’re working hard to enroll as many as 8,000 in the program’s first year.





We have eligibility workers at each of our clinics and at school-based health centers in Tigard and Hillsboro helping families navigate the enrollment process. Virginia Garcia’s eligibility workers are certified by Cover Oregon to assist families as they fill out paper forms while the website is inactive and eventually complete applications online.

Because we recognize that not everyone will be signing up for health insurance in the first year, we plan to make enrollment kiosks a permanent fixture at our clinics. Enrollment workers at the Cornelius Wellness Center are also engaging in “inreach” to uninsured patients to educate them about their options and help them enroll.

A core part of our mission at Virginia Garcia is overcoming the language and cultural barriers that prevent many people in our community from receiving quality care. Enrollment workers have been actively engaging the community – attending community events in Washington and Yamhill counties to educate people about their options for health coverage and walk them through the Cover Oregon enrollment process.

At the same time that Oregonians are signing up for health insurance through Cover Oregon, Community Health Centers like Virginia Garcia are working with Coordinated Care Organizations (CCOs) to update the way we provide care and implement cost-effective measures that improve patient outcomes. We’re establishing patients with a primary care home and providing them with a team of providers and staff who share knowledge and give patients personal attention. This team-based model of care is working for the benefit of our patients and it’s something we continue to expand and improve.

Virginia Garcia currently serves over 36,000 patients, but there are thousands of people in Washington and Yamhill counties who still don’t have access to care. To meet this growing demand, Virginia Garcia is increasing our capacity to provide services for patients where they live and work.

In 2012, Virginia Garcia opened a new Wellness Center in Cornelius that provides medical, dental, and vision services as well as a teaching kitchen and spaces for exercise classes and community meetings. We are expanding our capacity in 2014 with a new dental clinic in Beaverton and new dental and medical clinics in Newberg. By the end of the year, Virginia Garcia will be serving the community with five medical clinics, five dental clinics, and five school-based health centers. As we expand our physical footprint in the coming months, we will be hiring dozens of new employees, including doctors, nurses, and call center staff to join our dedicated team.

Virginia Garcia’s reach extends beyond the walls of our clinics and out into our community. During the summer months, we bring our services to migrant and seasonal farmworkers where they work. Through our mobile clinics, doctors and nurses join with volunteers to provide treatment and connect patients with additional resources. Health educators provide education on sexually transmitted diseases, pesticide exposure, and prevention of work-related injuries.

As we work together to improve our health care system, it is inevitable that there will be bumps along the way. Despite the IT problems we have seen recently, the Affordable Care Act and Cover Oregon have already made a huge difference in the lives of thousands of Oregonians. If we keep our eye on the horizon and focus on solutions, Oregon can continue to lead the nation in innovative health care reform.

More information: www.virginiagarcia.org.

Gil Muñoz is CEO of the Virginia Garcia Memorial Health Center.