Addiction to opioids has been acknowledged as a public health crisis, on local and federal levels. With the widespread practice of prescribing opioids, a class that includes morphine, Vicodin, Percocet and OxyContin, came widespread substance abuse. In 2014, 2 million people in the U.S. had a substance use disorder involving prescription pain relievers and 586,000 had a substance use disorder involving heroin, according to the American Society of Addictive Medicine. Deaths from opioid overdoses, both prescription narcotics and illicit street drugs, such as heroin, reached a record of 28,647 in 2014. Four in five new heroin users started out misusing prescription painkillers. As a consequence, the rate of heroin overdose deaths nearly quadrupled from 2000 to 2013. The rate of heroin overdose increased by 37 percent from 2010 to 2013. In 2014, a survey of people in treatment for opioid addiction, 94 percent said they chose to use heroin because prescription opioids were “far more expensive and harder to obtain.” Several factors are likely to have contributed to the severity of the current prescription drug abuse problem. They include increases in the number of prescriptions written and dispensed, greater social acceptability for using medications for different purposes, and aggressive marketing by pharmaceutical companies. Sales of prescription pain relievers in 2010 was four times those in 1999. In 2012, 259 million prescriptions were written for opioids, which is more than enough to give every American adult their own bottle of pills. “Between 2004 to 2013, there was active promotion of opioids. We had tools to adjust pain in the form of a pill and were told that it was safe and affective, and a common practice evolved,” said Matt Willis, M.D., Marin County Public Health Officer. “We’re now learning the hard way they are neither a safe or affective strategy to address pain.” Local and federal agencies have begun taking measures to reign in the abuse. In March, the Food and Drug Administration announced it will require its most serious type of warning on immediate-release opioid painkillers. In addition, the FDA is requiring all opioids, including extended-release drugs like OxyContin that treat chronic pain over a longer period, to include on their labels new warnings about the potential risks of complications if the painkillers are taken at the same time as other medications. Some 175 branded and generic drugs will be affected. Another measure, the National Drug Enforcement Administration Prescription Drug Take-Back Day is April 30 this year. At the previous nine Take-Back Day events, almost 5 million pounds, or 2,411 tons, of unwanted, unneeded or expired medications were surrendered for safe and proper disposal. The disposal service is free and anonymous with no questions asked. Collection sites and information for every local community can be found at www.dea.gov. Recently, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) distributed $94 million in Affordable Care Act funding to health centers across the U.S., to improve and expand the delivery of substance abuse services, with a specific focus on treatment of opioid use disorders in underserved populations. View as one page 1 | 2 | 3 Next

(page 2 of 3) In the North Bay area, Marin City Health and Wellness Center, Mendocino Community Health Clinic, Petaluma Health Center, Santa Rosa Community Health Centers and West County Health Centers in Guerneville, each received between $300,000 and $400,000. Petaluma Health Center (PHC) was awarded a $325,000 grant, which will help fund staffing at its substance abuse program at the Rohnert Park Health Center. Leading the efforts of the recovery program will be Dr. Yolanda Briscoe, the former executive director of the Santa Fe Recovery Center in New Mexico. PHC has about 27,000 patients, and more than 900 have been screened for prescription drug abuse. “For a long time there was a lot of stigma around addiction, it was one of those silent issues. People are talking about it more now, and seeing it’s much more common than anyone thought,” said Pedro Toledo, acting CEO, Petaluma Health Center. Over the years, PHC has developed strict protocols and procedures for physicians prescribing pain medication. Patients are connected with alternative methods such as therapy and acupuncture, and prescription medication is seen as a last resort. When it is prescribed, the lowest dose possible is given. Prescription drugs are still available on the street, however. “Our opioid abuse problem is a community problem. It’s available on the street and from other medical providers outside the region. We know it exists, and the problem is a much bigger issue with higher incomes,” Toledo said. The program at the Rohnert Park location will be a broader and larger comprehensive out-patient program, addressing other addiction like gambling, and drug and alcohol abuse as well. “There are so many factors with addiction to be addressed. Co-occurring issues are very common. We want to address as many issues as possible. It’s important to the recovery journey,” Toledo said. Reflecting the national average, between 2004 and 2013, the number of narcotic pain relievers such as oxycodone and Vicodin prescribed in Marin more than doubled as did related emergency room visits, treatment admissions for addiction, and prescription drug related overdoses. In 2013, 21 million opioid pills were prescribed in Marin. View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3 Next

(page 3 of 3) “It lead to a high availability in the community, and prescriptions were helping to fuel the illicit trade,” Marin Public Health Officer Willis said. But thanks to a grassroots coalition, narcotic prescription drug dosage within Marin County’s MediCal population has declined 41 percent since 2013. RxSafe Marin grew out of a small group of concerned parents in 2014 to a community-wide coalition comprised of health care providers, educators and others. It also supports partners in law enforcement and is affiliated with and supported by the Marin County Department of Health and Human Services. “We started looking at the numbers and realized it was a real public health crisis, and formalized an imitative in the HHS,” said Willis. “We opened the invitation to anyone willing to help with this abuse issue.” The coalition, which consists of about 100 people on five different teams, took several points of attack: The organization developed communitywide, common prescribing guidelines for emergency room and primary care clinics. Since implementing those guidelines, there has been a significant decrease in the average dose prescribed, Willis said. RxSafe Marin also implemented social media campaigns to raise awareness about the risks of prescription drugs, and policy changes were made to prevent medicines from getting into the wrong hands. Whereas in 2012 and 2013 there were 27 accidental drug overdose deaths each year, that number was down to 10 such deaths in 2014. Marin City Health and Wellness also received $406,250 from the federal HHS initiative which will go towards hiring a team to assist in medically assisted therapy for those addicted. “One of our first goals with RxSafe Marin is saving lives, but it’s too early to celebrate,” said Willis. “We view each drug overdose death as preventable. We still see more deaths from overdoses than from motor vehicle accidents. One year of improvement isn’t enough to call this a trend, and addressing prescription drug misuse remains one of our top public health priorities.” It will be another year before Marin has access to data on privately insured patients, and until then, the community needs to remain vigilant, Willis said. “We’re headed in the right direction,” he said. “... The Medicaid data is very promising, we’ll be waiting with our fingers crossed.” View as one page Prev 1 | 2 | 3

Addiction to opioids has been acknowledged as a public health crisis, on local and federal levels. With the widespread practice of prescribing opioids, a class that includes morphine, Vicodin, Percocet and OxyContin, came widespread substance abuse. In 2014, 2 million people in the U.S. had a substance use disorder involving prescription pain relievers and 586,000 had a substance use disorder involving heroin, according to the American Society of Addictive Medicine. Deaths from opioid overdoses, both prescription narcotics and illicit street drugs, such as heroin, reached a record of 28,647 in 2014. Four in five new heroin users started out misusing prescription painkillers. As a consequence, the rate of heroin overdose deaths nearly quadrupled from 2000 to 2013. The rate of heroin overdose increased by 37 percent from 2010 to 2013. In 2014, a survey of people in treatment for opioid addiction, 94 percent said they chose to use heroin because prescription opioids were “far more expensive and harder to obtain.” Several factors are likely to have contributed to the severity of the current prescription drug abuse problem. They include increases in the number of prescriptions written and dispensed, greater social acceptability for using medications for different purposes, and aggressive marketing by pharmaceutical companies. Sales of prescription pain relievers in 2010 was four times those in 1999. In 2012, 259 million prescriptions were written for opioids, which is more than enough to give every American adult their own bottle of pills. “Between 2004 to 2013, there was active promotion of opioids. We had tools to adjust pain in the form of a pill and were told that it was safe and affective, and a common practice evolved,” said Matt Willis, M.D., Marin County Public Health Officer. “We’re now learning the hard way they are neither a safe or affective strategy to address pain.” Local and federal agencies have begun taking measures to reign in the abuse. In March, the Food and Drug Administration announced it will require its most serious type of warning on immediate-release opioid painkillers. In addition, the FDA is requiring all opioids, including extended-release drugs like OxyContin that treat chronic pain over a longer period, to include on their labels new warnings about the potential risks of complications if the painkillers are taken at the same time as other medications. Some 175 branded and generic drugs will be affected. Another measure, the National Drug Enforcement Administration Prescription Drug Take-Back Day is April 30 this year. At the previous nine Take-Back Day events, almost 5 million pounds, or 2,411 tons, of unwanted, unneeded or expired medications were surrendered for safe and proper disposal. The disposal service is free and anonymous with no questions asked. Collection sites and information for every local community can be found at www.dea.gov. Recently, the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) distributed $94 million in Affordable Care Act funding to health centers across the U.S., to improve and expand the delivery of substance abuse services, with a specific focus on treatment of opioid use disorders in underserved populations. In the North Bay area, Marin City Health and Wellness Center, Mendocino Community Health Clinic, Petaluma Health Center, Santa Rosa Community Health Centers and West County Health Centers in Guerneville, each received between $300,000 and $400,000. Petaluma Health Center (PHC) was awarded a $325,000 grant, which will help fund staffing at its substance abuse program at the Rohnert Park Health Center. Leading the efforts of the recovery program will be Dr. Yolanda Briscoe, the former executive director of the Santa Fe Recovery Center in New Mexico. PHC has about 27,000 patients, and more than 900 have been screened for prescription drug abuse. “For a long time there was a lot of stigma around addiction, it was one of those silent issues. People are talking about it more now, and seeing it’s much more common than anyone thought,” said Pedro Toledo, acting CEO, Petaluma Health Center. Over the years, PHC has developed strict protocols and procedures for physicians prescribing pain medication. Patients are connected with alternative methods such as therapy and acupuncture, and prescription medication is seen as a last resort. When it is prescribed, the lowest dose possible is given. Prescription drugs are still available on the street, however. “Our opioid abuse problem is a community problem. It’s available on the street and from other medical providers outside the region. We know it exists, and the problem is a much bigger issue with higher incomes,” Toledo said. The program at the Rohnert Park location will be a broader and larger comprehensive out-patient program, addressing other addiction like gambling, and drug and alcohol abuse as well. “There are so many factors with addiction to be addressed. Co-occurring issues are very common. We want to address as many issues as possible. It’s important to the recovery journey,” Toledo said. Reflecting the national average, between 2004 and 2013, the number of narcotic pain relievers such as oxycodone and Vicodin prescribed in Marin more than doubled as did related emergency room visits, treatment admissions for addiction, and prescription drug related overdoses. In 2013, 21 million opioid pills were prescribed in Marin. “It lead to a high availability in the community, and prescriptions were helping to fuel the illicit trade,” Marin Public Health Officer Willis said. But thanks to a grassroots coalition, narcotic prescription drug dosage within Marin County’s MediCal population has declined 41 percent since 2013. RxSafe Marin grew out of a small group of concerned parents in 2014 to a community-wide coalition comprised of health care providers, educators and others. It also supports partners in law enforcement and is affiliated with and supported by the Marin County Department of Health and Human Services. “We started looking at the numbers and realized it was a real public health crisis, and formalized an imitative in the HHS,” said Willis. “We opened the invitation to anyone willing to help with this abuse issue.” The coalition, which consists of about 100 people on five different teams, took several points of attack: The organization developed communitywide, common prescribing guidelines for emergency room and primary care clinics. Since implementing those guidelines, there has been a significant decrease in the average dose prescribed, Willis said. RxSafe Marin also implemented social media campaigns to raise awareness about the risks of prescription drugs, and policy changes were made to prevent medicines from getting into the wrong hands. Whereas in 2012 and 2013 there were 27 accidental drug overdose deaths each year, that number was down to 10 such deaths in 2014. Marin City Health and Wellness also received $406,250 from the federal HHS initiative which will go towards hiring a team to assist in medically assisted therapy for those addicted. “One of our first goals with RxSafe Marin is saving lives, but it’s too early to celebrate,” said Willis. “We view each drug overdose death as preventable. We still see more deaths from overdoses than from motor vehicle accidents. One year of improvement isn’t enough to call this a trend, and addressing prescription drug misuse remains one of our top public health priorities.” It will be another year before Marin has access to data on privately insured patients, and until then, the community needs to remain vigilant, Willis said. “We’re headed in the right direction,” he said. “... The Medicaid data is very promising, we’ll be waiting with our fingers crossed.” 1 | 2 | 3

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus