Aetna joined the list this week of insurers voicing concerns over ObamaCare – but what, if anything, will be done as a result?

During an earnings call on Monday, Aetna chairman and CEO Mark Bertolini said he had "serious concerns" about the sustainability of ObamaCare exchanges. Bertolini also questioned the overall stability of the risk pool.

Aetna is the nation's third-largest healthcare insurer, and the concerns come after UnitedHealth, Anthem, and others have signaled that they're either taking losses on the ObamaCare exchanges or their profit margins are thin to non-existent.

OneNewsNow sought comment from Paul Howard, senior fellow and director of health policy at the Manhattan Institute.

Howard

"They're pressuring the Obama administration to make changes to the exchanges to make them more profitable – doing things like closing open enrollment periods, making it harder for people to get exceptions to the penalty for not buying care that they think will drive healthier people into the exchanges," says Howard.

"Right now, the coverage I think they're seeing is very attractive to low-income, sick people; but [it's] too expensive for younger, healthier folks and a lot of those people are sitting it out."

People not on the exchanges may not be sympathetic to the problems of insurers, but problems on the exchanges affect people not on the exchanges in that prices or plans in other areas will be impacted.

Language in the Affordable Care Act to help insurers' bottom lines is due to go away in 2017.

Speaking of 2017, the Obama administration will still be in charge when the enrollment period for that year begins. Does Howard see the administration announcing executive actions or policy changes to help insurers?

"Their hands are a little bit tied," Howard responds. "I certainly think they're going to do the things we talked about in terms of making the penalty a little more biting, making it harder to get exemptions from the penalty."

Howard says those kinds of things are easy to do. But opening up the rating bands and changing some of the restrictions on the type of plans that have to be sold may not be approved by the Obama administration.

"Some of those things that are more market-oriented and might appeal to the insurers and the people who are sitting out the exchanges ... are going to be the kinds of things that the Obama administration is not going to like and is not going to want to push for," he explains.