Nation won’t change until we realize single-payer is best.

Doctor examining baby (Photo: Getty Images)

How long should the farce continue? Look how much treasure it has cost this country to continue the charade. Look how it has divided us.

Haves vs. have-nots. Employer vs. employee. Republican vs. Democrats. Lucky vs. unlucky.

Look how our employer-based health care system has inserted some employers into personal health care decisions of employees. Look how some employees assume that their health care whims are justifiable, without regard to the cost their employer pays. Look how some employers pay a self-imposed tax so their employees have access to health care, while other employers don’t provide coverage.

We’re the only country that does it this way. We’re the only country where the arguments over health care come from so many different points of view that we can’t even politically agree on identifying the “problem” because each of us faces the system differently.

We’re the only country where companies absorb the burden — if they do — sometimes to their competitive disadvantage. We’re the only country where our entire federal budget deficit would be eliminated if we simply had a health care system that was, on average, as expensive as our competitor nations.

A recent New York Times article pointed out that the average Canadian waiting-room time for primary care was now about equal to the United States. And the U.S. had longer waiting times than most European countries for primary care.

Kiss another of the “excuses” used by single-payer enemies goodbye. Citizens of foreign countries don’t wait as long as we do. That is, unless you need a new knee or other non-emergency items. Even some of those knee-replacement times in the U.S. are approaching that of our foreign friends.

But our system isn’t in crisis because of bad knees. It’s in crisis because we citizens stubbornly remain addicted to it, despite the overwhelming evidence that it’s a mess.

So why do we continue with this hugely expensive and burdensome fiasco of a health care system? Everybody complains about it, except for people who get great coverage and don’t pay the cost. They think it’s great.

I’ve talked to employers and CEOs of hospital systems and insurance-company owners and actuaries and, off to the side, when their formal presentation is over, they kind of whisper, “Yeah, it is really a dumb system and will bankrupt us, but it will never fundamentally change.”

It saddens me that this country has given up on change. We’ve given up on great ideas. The Affordable Care Act, after all, was based on Republican ideas and implemented first in Massachusetts under Mitt Romney. Massachusetts could change, but the whole country could not, apparently.

So will we ever take on the big question that our system is built on the wrong foundation, too expensive and too inefficient? Will we ever change?

We won’t change until we’re bankrupt.

We won’t change unless people individually pay for their own health care directly or via a payroll tax — like Medicare — to the best of their ability.

Change won’t come until employers tell their employees to use the health care exchanges.

Change won’t come until we decide that end-of-life care is more humane, spiritual and desirable then end-of-life heroic effort.

Change won’t come until we shake our arrogant attitude that, somehow, our system is better than the rest of the world just because it’s American.

Change won’t come until the majority of the people in this country agree with the premise that everyone has a right to adequate basic health care, regardless of the ability to pay.

— Dave Allen is a Grand Chute resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1mrDfRY