BIA readies 10th Small Business Day

Event to feature lawmakers, others on energy costs, Affordable Care Act, top policy issues

By NHBR Staff

The Business and Industry Association’s 10th annual Small Business Day, which gives New Hampshire’s small business owners and managers the chance to hear from the state’s top policymakers and learn more about legislative issues that could affect their bottom line, is being held this year on Friday, Feb. 13, at the Holiday Inn, Concord.

The event, which will run from 7:30 a.m. to noon, is meant to engage small business owners and managers in public policy discussion and debate, as well as provide them with practical and relevant information to help manage and grow their business.

Gov. Maggie Hassan has been invited to make welcoming remarks, followed by a panel discussion featuring Senate President Chuck Morse, House Speaker Shawn Jasper, Senate Democratic Leader Jeff Woodburn, and House Democratic Leader Stephen Shurtleff.

The state leadership panel will focus specifically on top small business issues of 2015 and how state elected leaders will resolve them.

Three educational sessions will follow the legislative panel.

The first, “Strong Businesses – Strong Profits – Strong Economy,” will feature panelists Jeffrey Rose, commissioner of the state Department of Resources and Economic Development; Kit McCormick, New Hampshire Small Business Development Center; and a representative from TD Bank. They will discuss the NH SBDC’s pilot program to help business owners pinpoint areas in their businesses that would benefit from targeted SBDC assistance, educational resources and accountability, ultimately helping to strengthen their bottom lines.

During the next session, “New Hampshire’s Energy Crisis: How did we get here and what can we do about it?” Maureen Callahan, business development manager for Usource Inc., and Emile Clavet, co-owner of Provider Power, will discuss the circumstances causing New Hampshire’s dramatically rising energy costs and, most importantly, strategies to address this critical challenge.

The final session, “Update on the ACA: Obligations and Opportunities for Small Businesses,” will feature a panel of representatives from the health insurance, small business and broker communities who will discuss the current environment surrounding the Affordable Care Act, requirements for business owners and opportunities to better control their healthcare dollars.

The annual Small Business Day is held in partnership with the NH SBDC, New Hampshire Division of Economic Development and local and regional chambers of commerce and business associations.

It is presented by Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield and is sponsored by TD Bank, ENH Power, Usource and media sponsor New Hampshire Business Review.

Cost to attend Day is $15 per person and includes continental breakfast. To register, visit the events calendar at BIAofNH.com or call 603-224-5388, ext. 116.