As graduate students in Madison, Jami Morton and Claus Moberg began working on a project that has turned into the technology company SnowShoe. Credit: Holly Brobst

SHARE The SnowShoe Stamp interacts with a smartphone to tell it what to do. The stamps are produced in Madison. Andy Manis

By of the

Just a few years ago, Claus Moberg and Jami Morton were graduate students studying air pollution at the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

Now, they are spending their time as entrepreneurs in San Francisco, leading a high-growth technology company called SnowShoe, developing smartphone technology for clients as large as Disney.

"None of us were in school to do what we're doing today," Moberg said. "But we wouldn't be able to do this without the university."

SnowShoe illustrates how quickly a business plan can evolve when it develops new technology. It also shows what can happen when an idea can be primed with seed funding and support from investors.

The company creates pieces of plastic that can unlock digital content when touched to the screen of a smartphone or tablet, acting like a series of human fingertip touches that tell the phone what to do.

The devices, called SnowShoe Stamps, are created by 3-D printers at the company's Madison facilities and have a wide range of uses.

Toy companies, for example, could create physical items or characters that could transfer to mobile games. Picture a toy soldier that appears as an image on a smartphone when touched to the screen.

Theme parks or companies that stage events could also develop stamps that would give guests exclusive access to online information — such as rewards programs — with the touch of stamps to their phones, limiting the need for cash on hand or credit cards.

"It's the link to real-world objects and digital assets," Moberg said.

The stamp costs about $1 to make, although the company is working to cut that down to about 50 cents. The young company has grown to eight full-time employees and a handful of contractors. It also has 20 3-D printers and about 10 pending patents fully held by the company.

It's grabbed the attention of angel investor Don Layden, who saw possibility in using the unique-identifier aspect of the technology to safely access bank accounts or hotel rooms.

With Layden's backing, the company attracted $2.5 million in venture capital and other investment, including from the Milwaukee angel investment network Silicon Pastures.

"We invested because Don Layden was behind it," said Teresa Esser, managing director of Silicon Pastures. "You need a strong champion behind it."

Moberg and Morton opened their offices in San Francisco to gain access to more outside capital, with the goal to either be acquired by a bigger company or open up SnowShoe for a public stock offering down the road.

Class project

It's a far-flung journey for a couple of entrepreneurs who didn't even have smartphones when they were developing the technology.

Moberg and Morton, along with fellow student Matt Luedke, developed the idea for SnowShoe in 2010 as environmental studies students working on a research team at UW's Nelson Institute Center for Sustainability and the Global Environment. They were developing a mobile app that would allow shoppers to calculate the carbon footprint of grocery items.

Their professor, Tracey Holloway, encouraged them to submit the concept to an innovation competition at UW-Madison called the Climate Leadership Challenge.

After winning $15,000 from the competition, they bought their first smartphone to share among the three of them for the project.

By early 2011, the students launched an app in partnership with Fresh Madison Market that allowed people to scan the bar code of grocery items to see if they were produced in Wisconsin and if there were local alternatives.

The plan was to use the new app as a steppingstone to their carbon footprint app and expand to other stores. But they soon discovered that grocery stores all had different cash register systems, making it difficult to develop a blanket system that could scan grocery items with a phone.

"That ended up being the biggest problem, so we came up with technology so we didn't have to solve it," Moberg said.

Hence the SnowShoe Stamp — something else the phone could interact with to avoid using bar codes.

Business springboard

The concept, though, offered a much broader application than just for the carbon footprint project. With some time and business mentorship at the Techstars Boulder accelerator program in 2013, SnowShoe pivoted its focus on the stamp technology.

"The process of them working on this idea steered all of them to get more excited about the company and less about the academic side of the project," said UW-Madison's Holloway.

"The truth is, that's really the goal," she added. "We want them to get out into the world and be successful."

SnowShoe has received a number of honors lately, including a spot in the Techstars Boulder accelerator program in 2013 and the Disney Accelerator mentorship and investment program last year.

UW-Madison is also recognizing the company founders for their accomplishments as alumni.

"Having students work together as a team is really a recipe for success," Holloway said. "Everybody needs to find their own path and, as a professor, it's exciting to see the different paths students take."

While Snowshoe's leadership remains in California, Moberg said he expects the company will preserve its Wisconsin roots.

"We will always have a presence in Madison," he said. "It's a great place to employ really smart people."