Karen Cassidy, M.D., is market medical director for UnitedHealthcare of Tennessee. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights Understanding trends in health and wellness helps us focus our resources and attention.

Too many adults in Tennessee still smoke, are inactive or obese.

In an annual checkup of our nation’s health, Tennessee ranked 43rd among all 50 states in 2015. As a state, we made incremental progress but still need to improve in the areas of tobacco use, level of physical activity, obesity, diabetes, immunizations for children and infant mortality. Those findings come from United Health Foundation’s America’s Health Rankings Annual Report, which has been measuring national and state health for just over a quarter of a century.

As a physician and medical director for UnitedHealthcare in Tennessee, I always look forward to the America’s Health Rankings Annual Report because it offers an overview of where we stand in health, both as a nation and relative to our peer states. The report provides a reflection of Tennessee’s health that is at once sobering and encouraging. While Tennessee performs well compared with other states in its low prevalence of excessive drinking, too many adults still smoke, are inactive or obese.

UnitedHealthcare actively supports Healthier Tennessee, an initiative of the Governor’s Foundation for Health and Wellness. Healthier Tennessee aims to improve the state’s health by increasing residents’ physical activity, encouraging healthier diets and reducing tobacco use.

Another program making a difference in Tennessee is UnitedHealthcare’s Baby Blocks, a proven mobile, interactive incentive program to encourage pregnant women and new parents to make and keep doctor appointments during pregnancy and the first 15 months of their baby’s life. Women who enroll can earn rewards for completing prenatal, postpartum and healthy-baby appointments; receive appointment alerts and wellness-related text messages; and connect directly with maternity nurses. Rewards include gift cards to retail outlets and maternity-related items such as teething rings, diaper bags and thermometers.

Measuring and monitoring our nation’s health has never been more important, and the results of this year’s America’s Health Rankings Annual Report show how far we’ve come in the last 26 years — and how far we still have to go as a country.

Understanding trends in health and wellness helps us focus our resources and attention. This year’s data show that as a nation, Americans are smoking less and living less sedentary lifestyles; however, our country is facing complex health challenges that threaten Americans’ health and quality of life. Obesity and diabetes are at all-time highs, and rates of drug deaths — including illegal and prescription drug abuse — and children living in poverty are on the rise.

In 2016, America’s Health Rankings will publish new reports that will enable us to track these challenges more closely, so that they can be addressed more effectively. These include new reports on the health of select populations, such as mothers and children and our nation’s veterans, as well as “spotlight” reports on key public health topics. The goal is to offer more information to help improve public health.

When it comes to the future of Tennessee’s and America’s health, we are all in it together. Let’s commit now to making the changes necessary to ensure that we build a healthier tomorrow today.

Karen Cassidy, M.D., is market medical director for UnitedHealthcare of Tennessee.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1RI00BA