Topics: Congress, Elections 2016, House of Representatives, Paul Ryan, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

Barring some unforeseen miracle, today the House of Representatives will miss a legally mandated deadline to pass a budget resolution for the fiscal year 2017. It is yet one more remarkably unproductive day in a Congress full of people who won’t successfully work a doorknob if they think there is a chance someone will primary them for doing so.

Sure, the budget resolution is a procedural rule, and therefore mostly symbolic. It does not go to the president for a signature. There are no legal consequences for missing this deadline. Congress has only passed eight budget resolutions in the last 17 yearly budget cycles and government keeps ticking along, mostly.

Broadly speaking, the purpose of these resolutions is to set budget allocations and spending floors for various government departments and functions – national security, housing, federal law enforcement, Paul Ryan’s hair pomade, what have you. Later on, after budget resolutions between the House and Senate have been reconciled and the reconciled versions passed by both chambers, the appropriations committees start writing the actual bills that allocate funding to various government departments.

The major purpose of budget resolutions, from a public-relations point of view, is to signal spending priorities of the House and Senate to voters. And these days, since anyone who has been paying even a little bit of attention knows instinctively what those priorities are — Democrats: We guess we can live with austerity; Republicans: Cut spending for everything except anything that might upset the old people who vote for us — it might seem as if criticizing the House for missing this deadline is worth a resounding “meh.”

Which, along with the hair pomade joke above, brings us to Paul Ryan.

The main reason Ryan cannot pass a budget resolution comes down to four words: The House Freedom Caucus. The HFC is the group of 40 or so far-right windbags that basically pushed John Boehner out of the Speaker of the House job last fall and would have installed a goober like Louie Gohmert as his replacement if they could have. They compromised with the rest of the GOP caucus to elevate Ryan, though not without a lot of grumbling about how they still better get their way, or else.

Since then, thanks in part to low expectations by the public, distractions like the presidential election, and cover like the media’s bizarre fixation on portraying Ryan as some sort of gentle, family-oriented role model and not a soulless, ambitious hack, few people outside of Washington seem to have noticed that his leadership of the House has been nearly as worthless as Boehner’s. His big accomplishment was passing an Obamacare repeal bill, something Boehner also managed to do, by my rough estimate, eleventy billion times.

But his ascension to the Speaker’s chair was accompanied by much joy from Republicans who claimed he was the only entity who could unite their caucus (probably because they never considered Ba’al as a viable alternative). All the raucousness of the Boehner era? The funding of the government through hastily written supplemental bills instead of budget bills passed through regular order? The missed debt-ceiling deadlines that almost blew up the world’s financial systems? That was all in the past. Paul Ryan, failed vice-presidential candidate and Ayn Rand acolyte, cares about helping the poor and good governance. Hey girl, relax, you can trust him!