Connecticut considers marketing its Obamacare expertise













Photo: Carol Kaliff Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Buy photo Carole, 58, and Rufus, 62, Youngblood, of Bethel, Conn., work with Erika Calderon of Danbury, to sign up for Access Healthcare Connecticut at the Danbury Library, Monday, March 3, 2014. Carole, 58, and Rufus, 62, Youngblood, of Bethel, Conn., work with Erika Calderon of Danbury, to sign up for Access Healthcare Connecticut at the Danbury Library, Monday, March 3, 2014. Photo: Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Image 2 of 4 Buy photo Robert Boyd, 41, of Danbury, Conn., works with Monica Caballeros to sign up for Access Health Connecticut at the Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Robert Boyd, 41, of Danbury, Conn., works with Monica Caballeros to sign up for Access Health Connecticut at the Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Photo: Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Image 3 of 4 Buy photo Monica Caballeros, left, an outreach worker and manager for Access Health Connecticut, helps Maribel Garcia, 33, of New Milford, Conn. to sign up for health insurance at Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Monica Caballeros, left, an outreach worker and manager for Access Health Connecticut, helps Maribel Garcia, 33, of New Milford, Conn. to sign up for health insurance at Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Photo: Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Image 4 of 4 Buy photo Joe Spaulding, left, an outreach worker for Access Health Connecticut, helps Crystal Fassler of New Milford, Conn. with the process of signing up for healthcare at Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Joe Spaulding, left, an outreach worker for Access Health Connecticut, helps Crystal Fassler of New Milford, Conn. with the process of signing up for healthcare at Danbury Library Monday, March 3, 2014. Photo: Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Connecticut considers marketing its Obamacare expertise 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

DANBURY -- Robert Boyd, 41, of Danbury is a freelance magazine writer who hasn't had health insurance since he dropped his policy because of the cost last summer.

Crystal Fassler, a New Milford resident in her late 20s, has been looking for a job as a nurse, but would like to make sure she has insurance until she can land a position that includes medical benefits.

Twenty-three-year-old Matthew Gworek of Brookfield lost his job in December, but even when he was working, visits to the eye doctor and the dentist came straight out of his pocket, while Maribel Garcia, 33, of New Milford, was denied insurance coverage in the past because of a pre-existing medical condition.

They were among the dozens of people who attended an enrollment fair at Danbury Library on Monday to find out about the new health care reform law and learn how to obtain insurance through the Connecticut's health care exchange, an operation that has proven so successful that officials are considering franchising the model to other states.

As of March 1, some 58,000 state residents had signed up for private health insurance through Access Health CT, nearly twice the goal of 33,000 established by federal officials for the entire open enrollment period, which runs through the end of the month, according to Kevin J. Counihan, chief executive of the Connecticut exchange.

"We had several states contact us at end of last year," Counihan said.

The functions of the exchanges include evaluating and certifying health plans, providing information about costs and benefits, sending files to insurance companies and government agencies, and collecting the data needed to enroll participants and determine the federal subsidies they may be eligible to receive.

Some states have been experiencing problems with their own exchanges, while others were reluctant to take on the responsibility of running them, and ceded control to the federal government, whose own website, HealthCare.gov, has experienced well-documented problems.

"It struck us as a great opportunity for an exchange in a box," Counihan said. "I think there is serious interest. We're not about to sign any contracts, but there are people that are kicking the tires."

Connecticut could perform all or part of the services, and the fees charged would depend on the size of the state and the amount of services provided, Counihan said.

"I liken it to an Automatic Teller Machine," he said. "Do you care who built the machine, or do you care that the money is given out and the proper balance is kept. If we had this option a year ago, we would have taken it in a New York minute."

The enrollment fair in Danbury was the latest in about 100 such events that have been held throughout the state since the law went into effect in October.

"This is pretty typical," said Monica Caballeros, one of three outreach workers who spent the afternoon guiding people through the process and directing those who wanted to enroll to brokers who would help them find the right plan.

"Obamacare isn't going to work for everyone, but almost everybody who came here has seen some benefit," she said.

Boyd found a policy that was "at least as good" as the $300-plus per month package he was forced to drop last year, and at about a third of the cost.

"I just want to do a little more homework before I sign up," he said.

Fassler said she enrolled in what she said was a "very affordable policy." Although currently in good health, she said she wanted the security of health insurance, "because I'm clumsy."

jpirro@newstimes.com; 203-731-3342