WASHINGTON–It’s been two years since the IRS targeting scandal broke, but Senate Republicans, led by Sen. Ted Cruz, said on Thursday they’re still looking for answers.

The Senate Judiciary Subcommittee on Oversight, Agency Action, Federal Rights and Federal Courts, chaired by Cruz, on Wednesday questioned IRS Commissioner John Koskinen about the agency’s cooperation with investigations, and rehashed accusations of a White House conspiracy to target conservative groups.

“The American people have a right to be angry when an instrument of the american government is used a partisan cudgel,” said Cruz, a 2016 presidential candidate running on abolishing the IRS. “I have to say, Richard Nixon’s ghost must have been smiling.”

A 2014 Inspector General report found that the IRS used inappropriate criteria to scrutinize conservative 501(c)4 non-profit groups, and several Congressional and executive investigations are still ongoing.

Cruz has convened similar hearings on issues he’s fought as a senator and emphasizes as a candidate, like the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the Supreme Court’s rulings to preserve Obamacare and establish nationwide same-sex marriage.

But this hearing comes as House Oversight Committee Chairman Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, called for Koskinen’s firing. Chaffetz claims Koskinen lied to Congress about and failed to hand over emails exchanged by Lois Lerner–IRS’ former head of exempt organizations–during the targeting.

Koskinen said Thursday the initial targeting was “totally inappropriate, it shouldn’t have happened, and it shouldn’t happen again.”

Koskinen insisted he’s has done his best to comply with Congressional investigations and told the truth as he knew it during Congressional testimony. He also said the IRS has turned over 1.3 million documents, and that staff had testified before Congress around 30 times and sat for 52 interviews.

Koskinen also said the agency audits 1 million people each year, none of which for political reasons.

“Some will be Democrats. Some will be Republicans. Some will go to church. Some won’t, and none of it makes any difference,” he said.

Democrats pushed back on Cruz’s accusation of a White House conspiracy .

“These are very serious allegations. There are also unfounded allegations,” said Sen. Chris Coons, D-Del., the subcommittee’s chief Democrat.

While some Democrats said the initial IRS targeting was wrong, they claimed they problem was born from the Supreme Court decision in Citizens United vs. FEC, which unleashed a flood of outside money.

Non-profit 501(c)4 groups earn tax-exempt status by advocating for social good–however they define it–but are barred from participating in elections. Even so, the IRS allows 501(c)4 groups to spend money less than 50 percent of their money on political causes.

Citizens United left the “IRS to stand in the place of the Federal Election Commission,” said Coons.

Coons and his Democratic colleagues also called on the IRS to establish clearer, more easily enforceable rules to regulate 501(c)4 groups.

After nearly two hours of questioning Koskinen, the subcommittee heard from conservative activists who said they were targeted by the IRS.

Jenny Beth Martin, president and co-founder of Tea Party Patriots, said countless attendees at rallies came up to her with “tears in their eyes, fear in their voice and an envelope from the IRS in their hands.”

The IRS “ran roughshod over the fundamental rights of speech and association enshrined in the Constitution,” said Martin. “Free speech in America should never be silenced, no matter what the dollar amount.”

Other panelists called on the IRS to crackdown on political cash flowing through non-profits.

“The IRS should hold political groups on the right and the left accountable if they misappropriate the privileges of the social welfare organization’s structure,” said Stephen Spaulding, policy council for Common Cause–a liberal non-profit devoted to government transparency–according to prepared remarks. “It continues to be wrong for the IRS to look the other way.”