One new question awaits nearly all El Paso County jail inmates as they walk free: Have you heard about Medicaid?

The question is part of a program aimed at dropping recidivism rates by enrolling departing inmates in the federally funded, state-run health insurance program for low-income residents, which expanded under the Affordable Care Act.

By asking people whether they are enrolled in Medicaid and guiding them through the sign up process, organizers say they can help underserved residents access much-needed services, such as mental health care, medical exams and substance abuse treatment.

Case workers have been busy.

During the program's first nine weeks, 243 people enrolled in Medicaid upon their release from jail - roughly a quarter of the people who walked free and were contacted by case workers, said Wendy Habert, who helped organize the program.

The case workers also help connect departing inmates to other federal services, such as food stamps and job placement assistance.

"It's been a great success," said Habert, the El Paso County Sheriff's Office's fiscal and compliance services manager.

Prior to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, Medicaid was largely only open to pregnant women and children.

But under the health law, the program expanded to include everyone earning up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level - roughly $16,200 annually for a single person and $33,500 annually for a family of four - and people who could not afford health insurance before could get it for free.

Already, the county has seen savings from Medicaid's expansion. Earlier this year, the county worked to enroll inmates in Medicaid who were sent to the hospital and had to stay at least 24 hours. Doing so helped push those medical costs onto Medicaid, saving the county about $501,000 since Jan. 1, Habert said.

The enrollment program is slightly different. It's a partnership between the Sheriff's Office and the El Paso Department of Human Services, and it's part of a larger Stepping Up Initiative by the National Association of Counties. That organization, led by El Paso County Commissioner Sallie Clark, is pushing governments across the country to find ways of improving mental health care for inmates and dropping recidivism rates.

At the El Paso County jail, human services workers try to reach each person leaving between 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. It will soon expand those hours from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m.

The service is open to more than just departing inmates, as anyone in the community can visit the jail and speak to an enrollment specialist, Habert said. Still, challenges remain - 171 of the departing inmates contacted by caseworkers declined to sign up for Medicaid, even though they may have been eligible, Habert said.

And measuring the enrollment program's effect will take months, perhaps years. Organizers track the names of every person they help to gauge recidivism rates. Once signed up for Medicaid, departing inmates can work to better manage substance abuse issues that may have factored into their arrest. If people end up back in jail, the county may save money on medical costs if inmates are better able to manage conditions, such as diabetes or high blood pressure, while out of jail.

And for people receiving medications while in jail, the prospect of Medicaid may help them continue treatment upon their release.

"If they don't have that coverage or any way to continue receiving that medication once they're released, then that could lead to bigger problems," said Kristina Iodice, an El Paso County Human Services spokeswoman.