U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio and Rep. Vern Buchanan are both taking heat for their votes over ending the federal government shutdown and raising the debt ceiling Wednesday, but for very different reasons and from disparate directions.

While Rubio was blasted by Democrats Thursday for siding with the Tea Party over mainstream Florida in voting against the legislation, conservative groups — including some in his own backyard — slammed Buchanan for abandoning his political base in voting to reopen the government without changes to the Affordable Care Act.

The reaction underscores how the Republicans’ strategy painted themselves into a corner, said Darryl Paulson, a retired University of South Florida political science professor. No matter which way they voted, Republican lawmakers exposed themselves to new risks for the next election cycle.

“It was really a damned-if-you-do, damned-if-you-don’t vote,” Paulson said.

For Rubio, a Tea Party-backed Republican from Miami who captured just 49 percent of the vote in 2010 to win the U.S. Senate seat, his vote Wednesday marked a gamble with independents. Rubio voted with just 17 other Senate Republicans against the deal to end the government shutdown and raise the nation’s borrowing limit.

Rubio said he opposed the deal to reopen the government because it did not include anything to block the implementation of Obamacare.

Florida Democrats were quick to criticize him for playing to a national Tea Party audience more than mainstream voters in Florida. It was somewhat out of character for state Democrats, who have rarely taken direct shots at Rubio’s votes over the last two years. But state party officials say Wednesday night’s vote was different because of how far Rubio’s position is from most voters in Florida. Public opinion polls have shown voters — particularly independents — with middling views on Obamacare, but few supported shutting down the government over it.

“Rubio has proven he is more interested in scoring political points with the Tea Party and protecting his potential presidential candidacy than doing what is best for Floridians,” Florida Democratic Party chairwoman Allison Tant said of Rubio, considered to be a potential 2016 presidential candidate.

While Rubio’s Senate re-election is still three years off, there are real risks for him in a state that President Barack Obama won twice, Paulson said. Unlike in the Tea Party wave election of 2010, Rubio would be running for re-election during a presidential cycle, when Democratic voters come out in much stronger numbers. Paulson said if voters remember this vote, Democrats could give more Rubio problems than otherwise would have been the case in 2016.

But voting to reopen the government was not a simple call for Republicans either way. In fact, only six House Republicans in Florida joined with the 10 Florida Democrats in the House to end the shutdown. Overall the House passed the bill to end the shutdown by a 285-144 vote.

And the Florida Republicans who voted with Democrats to end the shutdown are taking their lumps.

Within minutes of Buchanan’s vote, the Manatee County Republican Party posted on its Facebook page that Buchanan was on the wrong side of the vote. That provoked scathing criticism from their followers and calls for a primary challenge.

Manatee County Republican Party Chairwoman Kathleen King said she did not authorize the post by an “overzealous volunteer.” The party removed the post nearly 12 hours after it was put up.

“I did not post it and it is not our official position,” King said.

The conservative group Americans for Limited Government has been even rougher, sending statements statewide vowing to hold Buchanan accountable for allowing Obamacare to be funded.

“When it counted, Rep. Buchanan was nowhere to be found in the fight to defund Obamacare,” said Nathan Mehrens, president of the Americans for Limited Government.

That comment came even though Buchanan voted more than 40 times to defund or delay the Affordable Care Act. Buchanan said on Tuesday that he could not allow the threat of a government default to damage the U.S. economy when it is still trying to rebuild after the recession.

Buchanan was re-elected to a fourth term in the House last year with 53.6 percent of the vote in the 16th Congressional District, which includes all of Sarasota County and most of Manatee.

He has not faced a serious primary opponent since his first election in 2006, when he narrowly edged now-state Sen. Nancy Detert, R-Venice.

Buchanan knew the attacks would come on the shutdown vote. Even before the vote he said he was ignoring the politics and just trying to focus on what is best for the voters in his district.

Paulson said some of the six who voted for the bill could wind up facing primary challengers, a situation many Republicans had wanted to avoid.

“It’s a political mess of their own making,” he said.