BY LORETTA SWORD THE PUEBLO CHIEFTAIN

Federal health reform has helped nearly 3,000 formerly uninsured patients at Pueblo Community Health Center to qualify for Medicaid, according to PCHC Director Donald Moore.

Donald Moore

As so-called Obamacare began rolling out, Moore said he and other administrators worked to identify how many of the clinic’s 28,055 patients might qualify for Medicaid under the new, more generous eligibility rules.

They identified 4,500 uninsured patients who might be eligible for Medicaid and began reaching out to them last October, Moore said.

As of last week, he said, PCHC “reached and helped 60 percent — 2,678 of 4,500 patients we believe are eligible for the expanded Medicaid benefit to apply for coverage.”

PCHC helps applicants complete their applications after completing a preliminary evaluation of eligibility.

Completed applications are forwarded to one of three partner agencies — Pueblo County Department of Social Services, Parkview Medical Center or Pueblo StepUp — for finalization.

Those agencies are authorized by the state to make actual eligibility and enrollment determinations, while PCHC’s role is to identify potentially eligible people and help them with the application process, Moore said.

The clinic won’t have final numbers for a while because the state has the final say and some applications still are in process.

“However, we have been experiencing a steady increase in the number of Medicaid patient clinic visits since January,” he said, adding, “For the period January through March 2013, we provided 11,651 Medicaid visits. For the same period this year we delivered 13,438 Medicaid visits — a 15 percent increase. An increase in visits is a good indicator that patients are successfully enrolling.”

The clinic hasn’t seen an uptake in privately insured patients, which is no surprise given that 96 percent of patients seen at PCHC live at or below the poverty level.

“PCHC accepts all commercial plans available in Pueblo but that population is very well-served by the local physician community. We accept private plans because this allows our established patients to maintain their relationships with their primary care providers as they transition from one type of coverage to another,” he explained.

“It’s not unusual for a patient to bounce back and forth between being uninsured, covered by Medicaid or covered by a private plan over time due to job changes and other life events. By taking all plans, PCHC can continue to maintain access for the patient with his or her care provider.”

Moore said patients at PCHC have access to care regardless of their insurance coverage or ability to pay, so any delays in gaining Medicaid coverage won’t negatively affect them.

“We still have a sliding fee scale system in place for patients who have not gained coverage. Maintaining the patient-provider relationship and assuring the patient that they will have access to care regardless of his or her experience gaining coverage is of foremost concern to PCHC,” he said.

lorettas@chieftain.com