Creighton's Goeffrey Grosell (41) blocks a shot from Marquette's Derrick Wilson in the first half at the CenturyLink Center in Omaha, Neb. After playing 10 games between Jan. 14 and Feb. 14, Marquette is off until its matchup next Saturday against No. 6 Villanova in Milwaukee. Credit: Rebecca S. Gratz / The (Omaha) World Herald

By of the

Omaha, Neb. — It may have lasted less than two minutes, but when senior guard Derrick Wilson checked out of the Marquette lineup at 12:56 in the second half Saturday, all three Golden Eagles seniors were on the bench and the underclassmen had the run of the show.

It's a lineup that many Marquette fans have been interested in seeing this season, but wasn't used in Big East play until Saturday's 77-70 loss to Creighton at the CenturyLink Center.

The results over the 1:56 between Wilson subbing out and senior forward Juan Anderson coming back in were mixed. The Bluejays and Golden Eagles traded baskets on five successive possessions, with Creighton holding a 6-4 scoring edge on three layups. Marquette freshman guard Sandy Cohen III had a jumper and sophomore center Luke Fischer had a layup on the Golden Eagles two trips down the court.

"I thought that lineup did a good job," head coach Steve Wojciechowski said. "They gave us some scoring punch and I thought our guys fought. I would have liked to have seen us fight and be a little bit more physical. The young guys are gaining some valuable experience."

When Anderson came back in, redshirt freshman Duane Wilson continued playing point guard. That's a position he could find himself playing a lot next season as opposed to be on the wing. He liked the way it felt taking the ball up the court, albeit for less than two and a half minutes while Derrick Wilson was out.

"I think we played well together ... we executed very well and I felt like it was a good gel between the five players that were on the floor," Duane Wilson said. "It also felt good with Coach Wojo giving me a chance to play the point. He just basically told me to just run the show and be smart."

Duane Wilson finished with 26 points on 8-for-18 shooting, with 20 coming in the second half. Wojciechowski thought that performance was vital in keeping the Golden Eagles in the game. He also saw growth from Cohen as well as some good offense from junior Steve Taylor Jr., who stretched the floor and had 12 points.

Wojciechowski said he will consider using that lineup again down the road. However, that's not as likely to happen when senior Matt Carlino, who has missed three games with a concussion, gets back into the lineup.

"I think our guys are gaining valuable experience, but the reality is, Matt Carlino in Big East play has accounted for 30% of our points," Wojciechowski said. "That's a lot, that's a lot. Not having him is hard. Our guys have gained valuable experience with him out, but certainly we're a better team when he's in."

Kreklow making the most of time at Creighton: After Saturday's game, Creighton senior guard Rick Kreklow entered the interview room with a bag of ice on his right arm. The first question he was asked was about that ice bag, with the reporter wondering if it was to cool down his arm after his hot shooting.

Kreklow claims it was from banging his arm diving to save a ball in the first half, but the other explanation would be almost as believable. He knocked down his first five three-point attempts in the first half, made another that was waved off because he stepped out of bounds and finished 6-for-7 from beyond the arc.

The play where he dove out of bounds was one of the highlights of the game for the Bluejays. With just under four minutes left in the first half and Creighton leading by six, a pass intended for Kreklow in the lane looked like it was going to squirt out of bounds. Instead, Kreklow dove to save it then set up in the corner where he received a pass from Austin Chatman for his fifth three-pointer of the day.

Instead of Marquette getting the ball off a turnover with a chance to cut into the deficit before the half, Creighton got that crucial three-pointer. It rallied the crowd and left Wojciechowski irate with the referees insisting that Kreklow was out of bounds when he made the save.

"Well, it was a big momentum play," Wojciechowski said. "I'd like to watch it on tape but you've got to give the kid credit. He made a tremendous hustle play. Those are huge, those are winning plays and he made a number of them today."

Kreklow's 19 points were a career-high and come as he is getting ready to finish off a career that has taken him all around the country.

The son of Wayne Kreklow, the 1975 Wisconsin high school basketball player of the year from Neenah, Rick Kreklow started his college career at Missouri where his father has been the women's volleyball coach since 2000. He transferred to California after his freshman year, where he played two seasons after redshirting in 2011-'12.

When he graduated in 2014 with a degree in Interdisciplinary Studies he still had one season of eligibility left and numerous suitors — including Butler, Creighton's next opponent — offering scholarships, but chose instead to walk on at Creighton. Creighton's season hasn't gone as Kreklow expected, but head coach Greg McDermott says that doesn't bother Kreklow.

"He's loving every minute of it," McDermott said. "It's a great lesson for all of us to learn when we start to feel sorry for ourselves. Ricky's the one that should be upset. He's here paying his own way and things aren't going as well as he thought or I thought they would, but he's been an absolute blessing for this team."

With the Bluejays standing at 12-14 overall and 3-10 in the Big East, McDermott points to Kreklow as the best thing that happened to Creighton's morale, noting that he doesn't know how the locker room would have survived without him. On Saturday, Kreklow was even more important on the court.

Rare rest for Marquette: After playing 10 games between Jan. 14 and Feb. 14, Marquette is off this week heading into its matchup next Saturday against No. 6 Villanova in Milwaukee.

That break should give the Golden Eagles a chance to recover from their various ailments. On Saturday alone, Carlino missed the game with a concussion, Duane Wilson suffered a bruised nose when he was accidentally elbowed by Derrick Wilson going for a loose ball, Taylor jammed some fingers on his left hand and had to be subbed out, Jajuan Johnson limped off the court with what appeared to be leg cramps and Cohen sported a cotton plug in his nose to stop some bleeding.

It's safe to say that Saturday was a battle and afterward Wojciechowski expressed a need for his players to be more physical. Considering his team's very short bench, though, that's not something they spend much time on in practice. With the number of players that are banged up, that's not likely to increase too much this week.

"It's been kind of tough to have physical practices," Duane Wilson said. "We really only have seven players so every once in a while we'll do like defensive wall-up drills. We get a little bit, like an hour of contact in like once (in a while). We've been playing back-to-back games so one day will be a contact day and another day will be non-contact. We've just got to keep on fighting to be a more physical team and play harder."

Tidbits: Marquette had just eight turnovers Saturday, which is tied for its fewest in Big East play. The Golden Eagles also had eight in their 80-70 loss to Seton Hall in Milwaukee. Their season-low was set in the opener, with seven against Tennessee-Martin. ...

Creighton's win on Saturday was their 86th in a row at home against opponents that entered with records of .500 or lower. It also improved the Bluejays record to 170-30 in 200 games at the CenturyLink Center. ...

The Golden Eagles scored 23 points off 16 Creighton turnovers, but shot just 39.7% for the game. Neither team recorded any fast break points.