One of the biggest upsets in recent NHL history is that there hasn’t been more bellyaching from Eastern Conference teams about the “unfairness” in the playoff format.

This is the third NHL season of the four-division format, with 14 teams in the Western Conference and 16 in the East, and eight teams making the postseason from each. The playoff qualifiers are the top three in each division, plus two wild cards from each conference.

Balances of power swing, and the unbalanced schedule creates optical illusions, but it’s possible that the Philadelphia Flyers, for example, could end up with more points than one or both of the Western Conference wild cards and miss the playoffs.

Given the Eastern-leaning power structure, impactful complaints about that are more likely than if, say, the San Jose Sharks were the “victims” in such a scenario. And an Eastern complaint would be backed with math: 50 percent of Eastern Conference teams and 57 percent of Western Conference teams make the playoffs. When an Eastern Conference team’s ownership is facing going without even a round of playoff gate receipts, the outrage can carry more weight.

There is an easy solution, of course.

It’s the “E” word.

Expansion.

I know that’s anathema to those who not so long ago were arguing for Darwinian contraction. But it’s appropriate now.

Add two teams, whether in Las Vegas and Quebec City, the two markets for which prospective ownerships forked over the $10 million application fee (with $2 million nonrefundable) last summer, or elsewhere if the league reopens the process and the bids, are compelling.

Las Vegas, with Bill Foley and the Maloof family leading the NHL rush as Black Knight Sports, has deposits for more than 14,000 season tickets, and a new building — T-Mobile Arena — set to open in April.

Quebec City, the former home of the Avalanche, has media company Quebecor behind its bid, also with the new Videotron Arena already completed.

If others are allowed to jump in and the NHL can get to Seattle (with what should be the Seattle Totems) ahead of an NBA return, I’m confident that would be a gold mine. Several potential Seattle ownership groups expressed interest, citing possible arena projects both in the city and suburbs of Bellevue and Tukwila, but none submitted a bid last year.

Kansas City — which bombed with the ineptly run, underfunded and terrible Kansas City Scouts for two seasons before the franchise was shifted to Denver in 1976 — has a terrific new arena without an NBA or NHL tenant.

Houston has its proponents too.

These discussions inevitably trigger concerns about watering down the NHL’s talent pool. But adding about 6 percent more roster spots isn’t all that significant, and the internationalization of the player pool has been a mitigating factor during the NHL’s growth. Actually, the biggest potential problem for the talent pool is the increasing cost of the sport turning it into even more of an affluent kid’s game, especially in the United States.

The NHL’s caution on this is understandable. The league hasn’t expanded since the Columbus Blue Jackets began play in 2000-01, and adding teams involves wrestling with revenue and salary cap implications.

But the NHL should do it.

Add two teams, rearrange because of geographical necessity and have four divisions of eight. (Easiest: If it’s Las Vegas and Quebec City, put the former in the West, the latter in the East and switch Detroit or Columbus back to the West.)

Stick with a 16-team playoff field. Quickly shout down any attempt to tinker with that.

And if it’s appropriate …

What happens in Vegas shows up in the NHL standings.

Terry Frei: tfrei@ denverpost.com or @TFrei

Spotlight on …

Alex Tanguay, left wing, Coyotes

When: 7 p.m. Monday, the Pepsi Center.

What’s up: Arizona and Colorado meet a week after making the deal that sent Alex Tanguay and two major junior prospects (2014 draft choices Conner Bleackley and Kyle Wood) to the Coyotes for Mikkel Boedker.

Background: Tanguay, 36, needed to be in the trade to clear a roster spot, among other reasons. The Avs were at the max 50 contracts, plus his deal is up after this season and Colorado wouldn’t have attempted to re-sign him after his struggles in 2015-16. The Avs tried a lot of things to get him jump-started, including entrusting him to play on a line with Nathan MacKinnon and Gabe Landeskog, but Tanguay ended up with four goals this season with the Avs. He was scratched for his first Arizona game, at Anaheim on Thursday, with the Coyotes citing a lower body injury. Then he made a splashy debut for the Coyotes on Saturday, scoring twice in a win over Florida.

Frei’s take: Tanguay, a member of the Avalanche’s 20th anniversary team, is one of the nicest guys in the NHL and always will occupy an honored spot in Colorado hockey lore because of his two stints with the team — and especially his two goals in Game 7 of the 2001 Stanley Cup Finals against New Jersey. He also scored in the Avs’ Stadium Series loss to Detroit last weekend. His huge smile and his joy after getting that goal made for a nice exit line.