Los Angeles’ economy is on the up-and-up, but that won’t last if only a few of its residents are reaping the benefits. The future of our city depends largely on our ability to ensure that all Angelenos rise with it.

That is why at St. John’s Well Child and Family Center, we chose to take the lead in providing our workers with a living wage of $15 an hour, and why our elected officials need to instill a policy that will raise the minimum wage for all workers citywide.

For more than 50 years, St. John’s has worked to provide access to quality health care to some of the most underserved among Los Angeles residents. Our network of nonprofit clinics has grown from just three employees to more than 500 in 14 locations throughout Los Angeles. We now deliver primary care to 100,000 people.

As an organization that advocates for well-being and social justice, we understand the importance of positioning our workers for economic success. So when our patient numbers jumped by 40 percent last year — chiefly due to an increase of the number of people in our communities who were able to get health insurance through the Affordable Care Act — we knew that the right and smart thing to do was ensure we had a stable and well-qualified workforce.

A pay increase was fair, but nonprofits are also businesses, and raising wages was good for our business.

About a year out, we have seen that boosting our workers’ pay has also meant a boost in the level of care we can provide to the community. By investing in our workforce, we have been able to recruit and retain the best talent, and productivity is at an all-time high. Our experience shows that it is possible to manage the bottom line while improving services and ensuring that our employees earn what they need to raise their families. As a federally qualified health center, St. John’s is funded through a complicated patchwork of federal, state, county and private dollars. Even so we made the wage increase work because it is integrated into our business model.

As the country is engaged in a conversation about raising the minimum wage, economists, city residents and community leaders across Los Angeles’ political, advocacy and business spheres agree that the current minimum wage of $9 an hour is not enough to get by in the city.

The Los Angeles City Council is considering a proposal that would raise the minimum wage to $15.25 an hour. The proposal comes on the heels of similar proposals that raised the minimum wage in cities like Seattle, San Francisco and San Diego in the past year. It would also provide workers with earned sick leave and provisions to protect against wage theft, making it the strongest proposal to date to address underlying factors holding back our economy and preventing hundreds of thousands of Angelenos from entering the middle class.

Advertisement

Los Angeles is home to many corporations that net millions of dollars for their top earners. While these companies employ a large number of people, the bulk of workers get paid wages so low that they come to rely on safety net programs to make ends meets. Taxpayers have been effectively subsidizing these companies’ misery wages for years. An increased wage would hold them accountable by forcing them to pay their employees a living wage.

Many employers in Los Angeles aren’t running wide profit margins. I know firsthand. Yes, raising the minimum wage likely means making modest adjustments. That doesn’t mean a higher wage will hurt business or a nonprofit’s ability to serve the community. Nonprofits like mine made the adjustment, and we are benefiting from it. Other businesses and nonprofits can do the same. The increase to $15.25 would occur gradually over the next few years, and Los Angeles businesses are resilient. Businesses and nonprofits will surely benefit when more Angelenos have more money to spend on services, entertainment and goods. A reasonable implementation will give employers time to work out a plan while also enjoying a net positive impact of economic stimulus.

Organizations like St. John’s prove that it is not only possible to pay workers a wage that is on par with the cost of living in Los Angeles, but that we actually stand to gain from the change. That should be enough of a reason for any sound employer to get behind raising the minimum wage. But we must also remember that in order for our city to thrive, the people who are the drivers of its economic engine need to thrive as well.

Jim Mangia is the president and CEO of St. John’s Well Child and Family Center, a network of community health centers and clinics throughout Los Angeles.