Rep. Linda Sanchez, right, talks with Santa Fe Springs Mayor Laurie Rios after presenting a State of the Nation address at a joint Chamber of Commerce luncheon meeting at the Doubletree by Hilton in Norwalk on Wednesday, August 12, 2015. The luncheon was presented by the Santa Fe Springs, Norwalk, Artesia and Lakewood Chambers of Commerce. (Photo by Keith Durflinger/Whittier Daily News)

NORWALK >> It isn’t Democrats and Republicans who need to learn to work together to end Washington gridlock, but GOP senators and house members, said Rep. Linda Sanchez at a State of the Nation address Wednesday.

Sanchez spoke to members of several local chambers of commerce Wednesday, touching upon far-ranging topics including the Affordable Care Act, jobs, higher wages and the gridlock in Congress.

She called the speech before members of the Artesia, Lakewood, Norwalk and Santa Fe Springs chambers of commerce at the Double Tree by Hilton a chance to speak directly to constituents.

“Every August, during summer recess, I have an opportunity to meet and chat with local folks and find out what is happening in the communities I represent, “ said Sanchez, D-Norwalk.

“Unfortunately, she continued, “Washington is still firmly gridlocked.”

How to break the cycle of gridlock

Surprisingly, the source of some of the legislative impasse is not Democrats versus Republicans, but between GOP senators and house members, she said.

“There is an inability for Republicans in the senate and in the house to work together,” she explained. Nonetheless, Sanchez, who is the chairwoman of the Congressional Hispanic Caucus, said there are “glimmers of hope for a breakthrough” regarding the gridlock.

“Most members are working hard for their constituents,” she said. “Consensus is not always easy, but we are trying to find common ground.”

Disconnect between jobs and wages

The good news coming from Washington is a stronger economy and more jobs, Sanchez said.

“The economic recovery has been steady with 13 million jobs created in the last 65 months,” Sanchez said.

Since last year at this time, the unemployment rate has dipped from 6.2 percent to 5.3 percent.

However, she admitted, a lot of people have not directly felt the positive upturn in the economy because wages have remained stagnant.

One potential cure Sanchez supported was raising the minimum wage.

“Paying workers a livable wage makes a great difference,” she said.

Defending the Affordable Care Act

The Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, has proven to be mostly successful since its passage five years ago, Sanchez said.

“The country’s uninsured rate is the lowest ever recorded,” she said. “Medical costs are rising at the slowest rate in 50 years.”

The Latino community, she said, has 4.2 million adults now with coverage.

“The hope is to stop arguing about the Affordable Care Act, and if it’s going to stay, and instead to work to fine tune it.”