Topics: Art, Books, drawings, Fantasy, jennifer thompson, literature, Neil Gaiman, sci-fi, slideshow, Writing, Entertainment News

Bestselling novelist Neil Gaiman is one of the literary world’s most public figures, maintaining an active presence on Twitter, Tumblr, radio and TV when he’s not writing his deeply engaging fantasy books. But with “The Art of Neil Gaiman,” released in hardcover May 20th, Gaimanites will get a more intimate look at the work and life of the celebrated fantasy author perhaps than ever before.

Hayley Campbell’s book digs into Gaiman’s personal archives, illustrating his life story with original drawings by the author and his collaborators, as well as photos of their notes and correspondences. Observe the evolution of Gaiman’s artwork and creative mind with a preview of some of these attempts to, as Neil himself has said, “make good art.”

1 of 10

of Close

Fullscreen

Thumbnails Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Cartoon self-portrait by Neil (page 12). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman, NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Cartoon portrait of Neil Gaiman by Jill Thompson (page 13). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Jill Thompson, NG Archive Image Copyright © Jill Thompson/Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Drawing of Delirium of the Endless by Neil (page 101). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Four-panel strip on sunglasses by Neil for Steve Bissette (page 157). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" “Murders on the Rue Morgue,” song lyrics by Alan Moore, drawings by Neil (page 159). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman, lyrics © Alan Moore. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Drawing of Dream by Jill Thompson from the "Sandman" sketchbook (page 185). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Jill Thompson; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman/Jill Thompson. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Pages of Neil’s notes for "American Gods" (page 227). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; NG Archive Images Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" A Doctor Who-themed postcard sent to a Womanthology Kickstarter supporter in 2012 (page 298). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Previous Next Sketches and notes from "The Art of Neil Gaiman" Drawing of Death and doo-wop by Neil (page 123). From "The Art of Neil Gaiman" by Hayley Campbell; drawing by Neil Gaiman; NG Archive Image Copyright © Neil Gaiman. Published by Harper Design, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers.

Recent Slide Shows "The Bachelorette" men are the worst: 7 reasons why this season is going to be a glorious disaster Script to Screen Donald Trump is a horror movie: No, really! Blood moon magic: 17 amazing images of the supermoon around the world Previous