Third baseman Yunel Escobar was not in the Washington Nationals starting lineup Saturday after leaving the previous night’s game with a strained groin. Though Escobar does not believe he will need to be placed on the 15-day disabled list, he was scheduled to have an MRI exam Saturday.

“He says he feels okay, so the results will tell us more and we’ll be able to make a decision,” manager Matt Williams said. “Right now, we’re just waiting on him to have that test.”

Escobar spoke to reporters Saturday morning with bullpen catcher Nilson Robledo serving as a translator. When asked if he expected to play this week, Escobar said he planned to take one day off, start a routine as prescribed by trainers and go from there. He was also asked whether he believes he needs to go on the disabled list.

SEE ALSO: Craig Stammen remains resolute after likely season-ending injury

“What kind of words is that?” he said, via Robledo. “No, he don’t understand DL.”

Escobar’s injury left the Nationals with no healthy infielders on their bench for Saturday’s game against the Philadelphia Phillies. Tyler Moore took ground balls at third base before the game and was the team’s contingency plan should Ian Desmond, Danny Espinosa or Dan Uggla sustain an injury.

Williams said there is no chance first baseman Ryan Zimmerman, who previously played third, would move back to his old position. Moore has not played at third base in a professional game, nor during his one year at Mississippi State.

“He’s played there before. It’s been a long time, college I think,” Williams said. “But he’s an infielder, so he understands the process of catching it and throwing it. But he looked fine. Just wanted to get him out there in case we have to put him in the game for whatever reason. Get him some groundballs out there. But he looked fine.”

The Nationals are expected to make at least one move Sunday, reinstating Denard Span from the disabled list and moving Craig Stammen to the 60-day disabled list. Whether they make another move involving Escobar remains to be seen.