NewYork-Presbyterian Hospital will fork over $2.2 million to settle a case that involved an "egregious disclosure" of two patients' protected health information (PHI) during filming of a reality TV series.

The Department of Health and Human Services' Office for Civil Rights (OCR) announced the settlement after it found the hospital failed to obtain authorization from the patients and allowed an ABC crew to film a patient who was dying and another who was in significant distress, even after a medical professional urged the crew to stop.

The dying patient's wife was distraught when she watched the television series, "NY Med," starring Dr. Mehmet Oz, and immediately recognized her husband, even though his face was blurred. "I saw my husband die before my eyes," she told ProPublica at the time.

New York legislators were so appalled they took action to impose stricter patient privacy protections.

"This case sends an important message that OCR will not permit covered entities to compromise their patients' privacy by allowing news or television crews to film the patients without their authorization," OCR Director Jocelyn Samuels, said in the announcement. "We take seriously all complaints filed by individuals, and will seek the necessary remedies to ensure that patients' privacy is fully protected."

The hospital blatantly violated the HIPAA rules, the OCR said, by allowing members of the media to film individuals receiving urgent medical care without their authorization. The HIPAA privacy rules prohibit the disclosure of an individual's PHI, including images, in circumstances such as the ones filmed by the television crew, the OCR said.

Furthermore, the OCR found that the hospital failed to safeguard PHI by allowing the film crews "virtually unfettered access to its healthcare facility, effectively creating an environment where PHI could not be protected from impermissible disclosure to the ABC film crew and staff."

In addition to the financial aspect of the settlement, OCR will monitor the hospital for two years to ensure it remains compliant with its HIPAA obligations while clinicians provide care to patients.

To learn more:

- here's the announcement

- read the resolution agreement (.pdf)

Related Articles:

Reality TV controversy reignites patient-privacy debate

NY bill takes patient privacy to the next level after reality TV show flak

Nurse's firing over Instagram photo spurs social media debate

Social media abuse: Clinicians reveal patient info online