Remote patient monitoring devices monitor patient from long distance. Remote patient monitoring device are used for ambulatory healthcare that allows the patient to use an internet capable device to perform a routine test and send the test data to healthcare professionals in real time. Remote patient monitoring devices are used mainly for elderly and chronically ill patients. Remote patient monitoring devices are used for patients with chronic illness to monitor vital signs such as blood pressure, heart rate, ECG, blood glucose, weight and oxygen content.

Request Sample of this Report: http://www.persistencemarketresearch.com/samples/3287

The U.S. dominates the North American market for remote patient monitoring device due to large number of aging population and increasing awareness of advanced diagnostic techniques. In addition, rising healthcare cost and increasing incidence of chronic diseases is also fuelling the growth of the North American remote patient monitoring device market. The North American remote patient monitoring device market is segmented as Implantable and external remote patient monitoring device. The North American remote patient monitoring device market can also be segmented on the basis of end users such as clinics, homes and hospitals.

In recent times there is increased use of remote patient monitoring device due to hospital readmission reduction program by the U.S. Affordable Care Act. Rise aging population and increasing lifestyle associate diseases are some of the key factors driving the growth for the North American remote patient monitoring device market. In addition, a government initiative to reduce healthcare cost is also fuelling the growth of the North American remote patient monitoring device market. However, unstable reimbursement, high technological cost and economic slowdown are some of the major factors restraining the growth for the North American remote patient monitoring device market.

Request to view TOC: http://www.persistencemarketresearch.com/toc/3287

Treatment to proactive monitoring would develop opportunity for the North American remote patient monitoring device market. However, patient safety concerns and resistance to use IT by healthcare professionals could lead challenges for the North American remote patient monitoring device market. The trend for the North American remote patient monitoring device market is increasing mergers, acquisitions and joint ventures for innovation of new monitoring devices. Some of the major companies operating in the North American remote patient monitoring device market are Honeywell Med., Bosch Medical, Intel, Philips Healthcare and Care Matix Products, Inc.

About Us:

Persistence Market Research (PMR) is a third-platform research firm. Our research model is a unique collaboration of data analytics and market research methodology to help businesses achieve optimal performance.

To support companies in overcoming complex business challenges, we follow a multi-disciplinary approach. At PMR, we unite various data streams from multi-dimensional sources. By deploying real-time data collection, big data, and customer experience analytics, we deliver business intelligence for organizations of all sizes.

Contact:

Persistence Market Research

305 Broadway

7th Floor, New York City,

NY 10007, United States,

USA – Canada Toll Free: +1 800-961-0353

Email: sales@persistencemarketresearch.com

Web: http://www.persistencemarketresearch.com