Cassandra Black sings the title role in Skylight Music Theatre’s production of “Tosca.” Credit: Mark Frohna

By ,

At the heart of its story, Puccini's "Tosca" is an intimate piece about love and loss, with some corruption stirred in as a subplot.

Usually seen in grand, stage-filling productions, the Skylight Music Theatre take on "Tosca," which opened Friday under the direction of Jill Anna Ponasik with music direction by Viswa Subbaraman, used the small theater to create an intimacy rarely found in big productions.

Soprano Cassandra Black was a strong, very human Tosca. She sang with an even, clear, powerful sound, crafting musical phrases with drama and nuance. The communicative facial and physical elements of her characterization were perfectly scaled to the small theater.

Tenor Chaz'men Williams-Ali matched Black well as Cavaradossi, moving between big, well-controlled, powerful moments, and scenes of vocal warmth and theatrical intimacy.

Baritone David Kravitz played Scarpia with a warm, even, character-filled voice. Tenor Peter Scott Drackley was a bit uneven in the role of Spoletta, moving between moments of vocal presence and underpowered passages.

The production was set on a simple, small platform, backed by movable panels and painted to resemble fine marble. Designed by Lisa Schlenker, the small set exposed the bare back wall of the stage, pulling the audience's focus into the intimate story. A few simple reconfigurations made it work nicely for the opera's three acts, thanks in part to some creative candle use.

"The leap," Tosca's heartbroken plunge to her death, brought the opera to a close with striking, searing drama. Despite the fact that it's one of the most famous scenes in all of opera, this production's simple, yet powerful, staging elicited gasps from the audience.

Not every part of the Skylight production worked well. The executioners, dressed in biker black, became a bit comic as they lined up to march offstage. The shadow images of Cavaradossi's beating were cluttered by multiple images, creating a curious effect that pulled attention away from the story.

Subbaraman led the orchestra, which was pared down from Puccini's rich score to an ensemble of 20 that lacked power, polish and precision.

Kristy Leigh Hall's costumes for the principals served the story well, with the exception of Scarpia's togs, which had a bit of a space-epic feel. Chorus costumes read like a bit of an afterthought.

Kristen DiNinno, Kaleigh Rae Gamache, Katy Johnson, Eric Madson, Tim Rebers, Joseph Riggenbach, Pablo Siqueiros, Erin Sura, Brett Sweeney and Jesse Weinberg were heard in supporting and ensemble roles.

IF YOU GO

Skylight's "Tosca" runs through Oct. 11. Visit www.skylightmusictheatre.org or call (414) 291-7800.