by: Elsa Gillis Updated: Jan 8, 2016 - 5:16 AM

Protesters were thrown out of a rally for Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump on Friday.

People from across the country and the Carolinas came to Rock Hill on Friday to show their support.

Related Headlines Donald Trump scheduled to visit Winthrop University

Some were not allowed in because the venue was full.

https://twitter.com/ElsaWSOC9/status/685618073920008193

The polarizing candidate spoke on several topics, but stuck to the ideas on which he's focused during his campaign.

"The American dream is dead, but we're going to make it bigger and better and stronger than ever before," Trump said at Winthrop University.

On immigration, he told supporters: "We're going to build a big beautiful wall -- a big beautiful wall."



He spoke of protecting Second Amendment rights, trade deals with China, getting rid of Obamacare and the fight against ISIS.



"Without Hillary Clinton and the stupid decisions she made, along with our president, we wouldn't have ISIS right now," he said.



Trump drew a passionate and dedicated crowd, but a few protesters popped up during his speech, most seemingly peaceful. They were escorted out by police while supporters cheered.



Supporters said it’s the presidential candidate's straightforward and passionate nature that drew them to him.



"He's self-funding. (I) love that. (I) love the fact that he speaks his heart, he speaks his mind, he's a true patriot," Lynette White said.



Charlene Warner said she's seen too many negative changes in the country.



"Something is changed and somebody needs to fix it, (and) that's what he seems like he's going do," she said. "He's a billionaire; he can't be bought."

Security tightens at university for Trump campaign visit

With six weeks to go until South Carolina picks its Republican choice for president, Donald Trump is returning to the state.

The GOP hopeful is bringing his campaign to Rock Hill on Friday, when he plans to hold a rally at Winthrop University.

Trump has been making regular appearances in this early voting state in recent months, drawing crowds in the thousands. On Dec. 30, the businessman was on Hilton Head Island, where he sought to assail Democrat Hillary Clinton by calling her husband, former President Bill Clinton, "one of the great abusers of the world."

https://twitter.com/GSuskinWSOC9/status/685486657836060672

Winthrop University police worked with the Secret Service to provide security for the Trump event. Everyone entering had to walk through a metal detector and people were asked not to carry in bags or backpacks.

Police had a similar security plan in place in November when the three main Democrat candidates for president were at Winthrop for a forum. About 3,500 were in attendance for that event, about half the size of the Trump crowd.

Winthrop police would not discuss specific security plans but did say extra officers were in place throughout the night.

Police also said the Trump campaign asked them to step in and remove protesters if they interrupted the event.​

Bush returns to South Carolina with Upstate stop

Republican presidential hopeful Jeb Bush is spending some more time in South Carolina's Upstate.

Bush is speaking at Dyar's Diner in Pendleton on Friday. Doors open at 5:30 p.m., and the former Florida governor is set to speak an hour later.

Bush is also taking part in a poverty forum being held in Columbia on Saturday. The Jack Kemp Foundation Forum on Expanding Opportunity is being held at the Columbia Metropolitan Convention Center and is moderated by House Speaker Paul Ryan and U.S. Sen. Tim Scott.

Organizers say other GOP hopefuls scheduled to participate include retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, businesswoman Carly Fiorina, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Florida Sen. Marco Rubio are also scheduled to participate.

Be sure to download the WSOC-TV Wake Up app to get the latest breaking news, weather and traffic on your phone first thing in the mornings.