Buy Photo Tina Williquette (hands foreground) and Lou Thao, employees of ABR Employment Services, sort through steel housing parts at Jagemann Stamping Co. in Manitowoc. (Photo: Sue Pischke/HTR Media )Buy Photo

For Blayne Vanderloop, 18, working at Jagemann Stamping through a staffing agency is a bridge from being home schooled as a teenager to going to college in a year or so in robotic programming or audio engineering.

Dan Knutson, 44, is working in the Veneer Department at Eggers Industries on assignment from ABR Employment Services. He would take a full-time staff position if offered by the Two Rivers manufacturer.

So would Jim Dufek, 54, on assignment from ABR working in Eggers door machining operations, also would take a full-time offer.

Teresa Coronado, 62, has worked at Jagemann Stamping via ABR for more than two years and says she "likes all of it" with a variety of assignments at the plant in the Manitowoc I-Tec Park.

Today is the final day of National Staffing Employees Week and Kristin Kracaw, Manitowoc branch manager of ABR, says there are several key reasons why so many job seekers and businesses are turning to staffing firms to fill their flexible work preferences, including:

• Jobs: staffing firms match millions of people to millions of jobs every day. She said the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics reports temporary and contract workers make up one of the fastest-growing segments of the workforce.

Buy Photo Kristin Kracaw (Photo: Sue Pischke/HTR Media)

Kracaw, who has been with ABR for 18 years, said the American Staffing Association estimates some 11.5 million temporary and contract employees were hired by U.S. staffing firms in 2012. ABR is one of about 10 staffing agencies serving Manitowoc County with many of the positions in light or skilled industrial, administrative or call center operations.

• Flexibility: Kracaw says people can choose when, where, and how they want to work. Companies can get the skills they need to keep fully staffed during busy times.

• Bridge: Temporary and contract work may provide a bridge to permanent employment. People can try out a prospective employer and showcase their skills for a permanent job.

• Choice: Many people, Kracaw said, choose temporary and contract work as an employment option. They can select their work schedules and choose among a variety of diverse and challenging assignments.

• Training: staffing companies provide free training to millions of temporary and contract employees to help meet today's demand for skilled workers.

Buy Photo Larry Lang (Photo: Sue Pischke/HTR Media)

Cultural immersion

Larry Lang is a Human Resources generalist at Jagemann Stamping using staffing service workers for more than 20 years, including an ongoing relationship with ABR presently including about 70 of its workers on the staffing firm's payroll.

Jagemann Stamping pays a service charge on top of the worker's pay to ABR. "Kristin and her staff put in a lot of time and effort to find qualified workers for us ... it is like 'plug and play.'

"A lot of the work (ABR employees) perform is not permanent work ... it fluctuates depending on departmental needs," said Lang, who has worked for Jagemann Stamping since 1988.

Lang believes there are several key reasons why ABR employees enjoy their assignments at the manufacturer. "We immerse them in our culture ... when we have celebration achievements they are part of them ... when there are rewards, they receive them, too, like Christmas gift cards," Lang said.

"Another key aspect to our culture is we don't use the word 'temporary' employees ... they are a supplemental workforce," Lang said.

He said the philosophy is ABR employees at Jagemann will perform with the same quality work expectations as its own employees so they are provided the same training with the same performance standards.

Lang said several ABR employees have been brought on full-time for Jagemann Stamping. "If there are opportunities we are looking for whoever wants to go after it," he said of their ability to apply for openings.

Buy Photo Cheng Thao, employee of ABR Employment Services, performs 10mm brass casing size inspection inside the new ammo secondary operations department at Jagemann Stamping Co. in Manitowoc. (Photo: Sue Pischke/HTR Media )

During the recession years of 2007-2010, Lang said many ABR employees kept their assignments at Jagemann Stamping, Lang said, as long as they were performing critical functions adding value.

Benefits offered

Kracaw said ABR employees are offered health, dental, vision, life and short-term disability insurance via payroll deduction. In 2015, those ABR employees working 30 hours weekly or more will be offered health insurance that meets the standards of the federal Affordable Care Act, often referred to as Obamacare.

"As an employer, you need to stay competitive ... there are more jobs than there are people actively looking for work," Kracaw said.

Dufek and Knutson both said they enjoy learning new skills at Eggers with its workers helpful when they ask questions.

Knutson had been self-employed and views Eggers as a stepping stone to getting back into a regular 40-hours-a-week job.

"I am grateful I have gotten a steady job ... it really does boost a person's self-esteem," Knutson said.

Charlie Mathews: (920) 686-2969 or cmathews@htrnews.com

Buy Photo Lucy Xiong, an employee of ABR Employment Services, inspects GE battery cans at Jagemann Stamping Co. in Manitowoc as part of its “supplemental” workforce. (Photo: Sue Pischke/HTR Media )

Read or Share this story: http://htrne.ws/1upxgy4