Advertisers for Super Bowl 50 paid a record $5 million per 30-second spot. The cost has increased by an astounding 75 percent over the past decade. The price is worth it, sponsors figure, to reach one of the few remaining mass audiences in all of media. Super Bowl XLIX in 2015 set a record for viewership, with an average of 114.4 million viewers, according to Nielsen. This year, advertisers leaned heavily on celebrity spokespeople. Among the famous faces making commercial pitches: Liam Neeson, Helen Mirren, Amy Schumer, Seth Rogen, Alec Baldwin, Dan Marino, T.J. Miller, Willem Dafoe and Marilyn Monroe. Puppies, out; Puppymonkeybaby, in. The Denver Post’s Super Bowl ad panel found the Doritos ultrasound spot the most divisive, the Bud Light spots most effective. Which worked for you?

Shock Top Beer

Denver’s T.J. Miller, actor/comedian (“Silicon Valley”), trades insults with the brand’s talking tap handle.

From the panel:

Wagner: Funny dialogue, strong branding with hero product on the screen the entire spot. Enjoyed the humorous banter and will remember the brand name.

Silverman: A lot of valuable time, pretty much all of those very expensive 125 seconds, is spent throwing one-liners back and forth. What makes this beer taste better?

Kamp: I like the tagline, “Live Life Unfiltered.” And the genre of trading insults should work with a football-watching crowd. But this is the Super Bowl. You need a Super Bowl of insults. Something akin to Triumph the insult comic dog sparring with Seth Rogen.

Robinson: T.J. Miller understands the power of language, specifically, details so micro-specific they become absurd. Regrettably, this too, too-specific banter gives way to a vibe of stock repetition; i.e., seems like the same one-liner over and over again.

Sukle: Think the team at Anheuser-Busch team ever saw the Annoying Orange series on YouTube? This spot might have been inspired from that.

Hagan/Marranzino: Laughed out loud because they laughed out loud. Engaging. Lots of humor this year and love the wittiness of the talking beer handle and his bar mate. Thumbs up.

Amazon Echo

An always-on virtual assistant app, employs celebrities Dan Marino and Alec Baldwin as pitchmen

Wagner: This is a waste of good celebrities. What is the message?

Sukle: This spot jams in an NFL great, a celebrity and a big game theme. The only thing they forgot was a puppy. And the amazing things this technology can do.

Silverman: This is a $4.5 million find-the-product-in-this-ad TV commercial. If you don’t know what the Echo is and all it can do, this spot is not going to help you find out.

Kamp: I’m not sure about spending money on an Amazon Echo – a technological wonder whose explanation of a ‘snack stadium’ is roughly the equivalent of a sentence anagram.

Robinson: What’s the deal with grown men being children?

Hagan/Marranzino: No real idea here. Amazon can do better.

Bud Light

Comedians Amy Schumer and Seth Rogen

Wagner: Spot on for the millennial target: quirky, witty celebs that should cut through.

Silverman: A well-conceived, well-written, well-produced spot built around truly funny celeb comedians who are known for not being light – selling a light beer. Enjoyed the over-the-top “Independence Day” spot. One of my few laugh-out-loud moments.

Robinson: Reminds us men and women are actually from the same species, a detail often missed in the world of advertising.

Hagan/Marranzino: Undisputed Super Bowl ad leader. Great matchup.

Sukle: Cast my vote for either Schumer or Rogen. Both will have a better party platform than any of the presidential candidates. And they’d be fun to have a beer with. Great pairing for Bud Light, whose sales have been falling as craft beers rise.

Doritos

Everyone loves Doritos, the ad suggests, including the unborn. When an expectant father snacks on the chips during his wife’s ultrasound, the fetus responds.

Wagner: We know babies work well in Super Bowl commercials. But a fetus? A baby in the womb? Going after the ol’ man’s Doritos? We’ve got a premature birth on our hands? Disturbing versus funny.

Silverman: A winner. The product is featured throughout and is demonstrating its appeal. Entertaining, relevant, memorable.

Robinson: I was rendered speechless. Not only do I not want a Dorito after watching the ad, I can feel the bile rising in the back of my throat.

Hagan/Marranzino: Very attention-getting, almost shocking and very, very funny. Laugh out loud. Can identify with each character in the ad, from the nonchalant dad to the shocked nurse.

Snickers

Continuing the Snickers theme, “you’re not yourself when you’re hungry,” this spot stars a virtual Marilyn Monroe

Wagner: Bring back Betty White. This spot is plain awful. The parody of Marilyn Monroe’s “Happy Birthday Mr. President” is not only in bad taste, the joke falls flat. And it has nothing to do with a candy bar.

Silverman: Missing some key components. Obscure and unrelated to Snickers.

Kamp: Last year’s Snickers Brady Bunch spot was my personal favorite. Unfortunately, Eugene Levy isn’t the inspired equivalent of Steve Buscemi’s Carl Showalter (of “Fargo”) playing the role of Jan Brady.

Hagan/Marranzino: The concept doesn’t work. Millennials won’t get it.

Robinson: Depressing. No one wants the iconic image of Marilyn Monroe to shape-shift into a disheveled, hoarse-voiced old man, even if it is Willem Dafoe.

Our panel:

Janet Robinson, University of Colorado Film Studies Department; Kathy Hagan Brown & Pocky Marranzino, co-presidents, Karsh Hagan; Doug Kamp, executive creative director, gyro ad agency; Chuck Silverman, owner and president at TSA Advertising, The Silverman Agency; Greg Wagner, University of Denver, former creative director, Leo Burnett USA; Mike Sukle, Sukle Advertising & Design.