Citizens United filed a lawsuit against Colorado Secretary of State Scott Gessler in federal court in Denver Thursday, the first step in a legal fight that could rewrite the ways states handle election disclosures.

The Virginia-based conservative group is finishing a movie called “Rocky Mountain Heist,” about those who have influenced Colorado’s political swing to the left over the past decade, calling out advocacy groups and politicians, likely including Gov. John Hickenlooper and Sen. Mark Udall, who are in tough races this fall.

In June, Deputy Secretary of State Suzanne Staiert ruled that the group would need to disclose the movie’s financiers under state campaign laws. The organization contended it deserved the same free-speech protections as traditional media and liberal documentary filmmaker Michael Moore.

Citizens United president David N. Bossie said the organization is fighting on the same principles that won before the U.S. Supreme Court in 2010 after the Federal Election Commission deemed a movie about Hillary Clinton to be “electioneering communication.”

Bossie said the group would fight the case as far as they needed to, and the group will argue the federal decision should supersede state election laws.

“It’s like in the movie ‘The Blues Brothers,’ ” Bossie said. “We’re getting the band back together.”

Citizens United is using the same lawyer as in the first round of redefining campaign finance laws, Ted Olson, who has argued numerous cases before the high court and represented George W. Bush in Bush vs. Gore to end the 2000 recount. Bush picked Olson for U.S. solicitor general during his first term.

In the Colorado suit, Citizens United claims the U.S. and Colorado constitutions prevent the government from discriminating the free-speech rights based on the identity of the speaker, and disclosing exactly who is speaking — in the form of funding — is a violation.

“We filed this lawsuit to vindicate Citizens United’s First Amendment right to engage in political expression and media activities on the same terms as other media entities,” Olson said.

“Colorado’s campaign-finance laws impose burdensome reporting and disclosure requirements on Citizens United and other speakers engaged in political discourse in the weeks preceding an election, unless the speakers happen to own a newspaper, magazine or radio or television station.”

Gessler’s spokesman Rich Coolidge said the office referred to the office’s earlier statement about the decision, in which Staiert stated the “forthcoming documentary is an electioneering communication,” which would require disclosure.

Hickenlooper’s campaign invoked the film in a fundraising appeal last month, in which Hickenlooper said Citizens United had “a penchant for mudslinging.”

His campaign spokesman, Eddie Stern, said that the governor would not do the same in response.

“In 2010, the governor promised to run a positive campaign and he honored that promise,” Stern said. “He’s promised to do it again in 2014, even in the face of negative campaigning against him.”

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch