Published June 7, 2015 at 5:07 a.m. Tweet

Every week in 2015, OnMilwaukee.com and local design company Too Much Metal will join forces to introduce the latest member of the Milwaukee All-Stars – a team of unfamiliar winners living in the city who consistently and diligently make it shine. Each week, a new member will join the team – based on your recommendations – and at the end of the year all will come together in a Rally of the Raddest Milwaukeeans. We're not sure what that means quite yet, so for now, meet …

Kathy Papineau

Riverwest's Kathy Papineau started cooking when she was 10 years old. "That's when I was taller than the burners of the stove," she says.

Today, she operates a commercial kitchen called MkeKitchen, 531 E. Keefe Ave. The 1,100-square foot space is the first kitchen in the city constructed to serve multiple businesses and simultaneously address social, food-related issues.

Papineau has dedicated her life to the earth, community, economy and the individual.

"I believe anyone can eat healthy," she says. "And every day I work towards that."

OnMilwaukee.com / Too Much Metal: What's your favorite time of year in Milwaukee?

Kathy Papineau: Fall because of the river, visits to Urban Ecology Center, the colors of the leaves, comfortable weather and the lack of mosquitos.

OMC / TMM: What is your favorite or least favorite Milwaukee smell?

KP: I love the smell of Colectivo roasting in Riverwest; I can't stand the smell of those dang alewives.

OMC / TMM: What is your hope for the city?

KP: I hope we can all live as one.

OMC / TMM: When did you fall in love with Milwaukee?

KP: In 1977, during my first Marquette University game.

OMC / TMM: What inspires you to do what you do?

KP: I get to combine eating with art – make it look good and taste even better!

OMC / TMM: What is your guilty pleasure?

KP: Mint Oreo Thunder at Culver's.

Do you know a Milwaukee All-Star? OnMilwaukee.com and Too Much Metal are looking for true-hearted folks living in the city of Milwaukee who love what they do – and do it with zest and style. Email fred@toomuchmetal.com or molly@onmilwaukee.com with recommendations.