Hospitals valley residents use charge Medicare double the national average, but facility administrators say the data don't tell the whole story.

Buy Photo Dr. Puneet Khanna, <137,2014/07/05,Toren/c William1>MD,<137> center, a board-certified cardiologist at Eisenhower Medical Center, performs a coronary angiogram aided by Myron Riddick, a scrub technician, on <137,2014/07/05,Toren/c William1>Thursday,<137> Thursday<137,2014/07/05,Toren/c William1>, 2014<137> at Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage. (Photo: Richard Lui/The Desert Sun)Buy Photo Story Highlights Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage billed Medicare the highest on average in the area.

The average charges were $71,310 statewide and $38,289 nationally.

The four hospitals most Coachella Valley residents use charge Medicare nearly double that of their peers on the national level, a Desert Sun analysis of new data shows.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid reimburse significantly less than what hospitals charge, but the data provide the first significant nationwide, year-over-year comparison of Medicare pricing.

The 2011 and 2012 data provide the average charges and reimbursements for the top 100 of Medicare's most common inpatient treatments, representing about 7 million patient visits. The procedures and prices often vary across hospitals and year-over-year, but the data is intended to provide patients better transparency into pricing.

Eisenhower Medical Center in Rancho Mirage billed Medicare the highest on average in the area, $83,195, followed by John F. Kennedy Memorial Hospital in Indio, Desert Regional Medical Center in Palm Springs and Loma Linda University Medical Center, where many valley residents commute for health care. Charges at Loma Linda, $74,433 on average, skewed lower than the other three hospitals almost across the board.

Local hospitals charge Medicare more than state, nation For the most common Medicare procedures in 2012, Coachella Valley hospitals and nearby Loma Linda University Medical Center billed Medicare more than their statewide peers and charged roughly double the amount of their peers nationwide. Hospital's charge

Medicare paid

The average charges were $71,310 statewide and $38,289 nationally.

"There's no method to their madness," said Gerard Anderson, a health care economist and director of the Center for Hospital Finance and Manage­ment at Johns Hopki­ns University in Baltimore. Hospitals "basically don't have a method for determining what the reasonable charge for it is. It's not based upon cost … (or) market. It is just their choice. There are no guidelines that the industry has established."

RELATED:Study: Desert Healthcare District residents worse off

Desert Regional, for example, charged $128,130 for poisoning among those with major complicating or chronic conditions. Thirteen miles away, Eisenhower Medical Center billed $87,584.

But for a specific kind of circulatory system diagnosis, the numbers were almost flipped, with Desert Regional billing $85,635 and Eisenhower charging Medicare $112,310. And in another case, charges for infectious and parasitic diseases with major complications that required an operation ranged from $213,313 at Loma Linda to $313,609 at Desert Regional.

"There are many factors that play into the cost of care," G. Aubrey Serfling, president and CEO for Eisenhower Medical Center, wrote in an email statement. "For instance, in the Coachella Valley, we have a much higher proportion of elderly, retired individuals that are on Medicare and a large number of low-income families on Medicaid."

Eisenhower specifically has been categorized among the top-admitting hospitals in the U.S. for its number of patients on Medicare, he said. The hospital's average patient is nearly 70 years old.

"The losses from Medicare and Medicaid are larger locally than in communities that have a more balanced mix of payers since other insurance plans tend to reimburse at rates that more closely mirror costs," Serfling said. "The disproportionate number of Medicare and Medicaid patients in the region requires cost shifting to accommodate shortfalls that are higher than in other areas of the country and even the state."

Spokesman Rich Ramhoff, speaking on behalf of valley Tenet Healthcare Corp.-operated hospitals Desert Regional and JFK, pointed out that health care advances meant many conditions can now be handled out of the hospital, meaning those who actually go in for treatment are likely to be sicker or have more serious injuries.

Other technology and technique advances also "have allowed hospitals to save lives and reduce disability in ways that were not possible a few years ago," Ramhoff said. "These lifesaving treatments can sometimes add to the cost of care."

He singled out an advanced stroke program at Desert Regional offering 24/7 coverage for stroke treatment that has led smaller hospitals in Southern California to start transferring stroke cases to the hospital over the past two years and complicated the types of cases the hospital sees.

RELATED:Eisenhower Medical doctor makes debut on ABC's 'NY Med'

The hospital is also the Level II Trauma Center for a region from Riverside to Phoenix, receiving victims from incidents such as gunshots or traffic accidents that can drive up costs.

About an hour drive northwest, Loma Linda says it determines its costs by conducting an annual study comparing its prices for specific diagnostic-related groups with other academic institutions and local peers such as health systems at UC Irvine, UCLA, USC and Stanford.

Other hospitals might calculate their prices "a little more randomly," said Loma Linda University Medical Center Chief Financial Officer Steve Mohr.

Teaching hospitals typically provide consultative, specialty and subspecialty care, "higher-end services," and Loma Linda is one of only eight children's hospitals in the state, he said. Statewide and national averages include a lot of smaller community hospitals that generally offer different types of care.

"Because of the types of services we're providing and our costs in a lot of cases, our (charges) are going to be a little bit higher when compared to statewide or national averages," Mohr said.

Mixed bag of data

Though desert Southern California hospitals tended to charge more, they did not see the same high level of price increases among comparable procedures from 2011 to 2012 as on the state and national level. In the region, it was more of a mixed bag.

Some average charges jumped, even drastically. Others barely changed. Some decreased.

Hospital prices for some cardiovascular treatments rose, with average area charges — among those with available data for both years — increasing for various kinds of heart treatments, including those requiring needle entry and stents and major cardiovascular procedures, as well as permanent pacemaker implants and cardiac arrhythmia and conduction disorders.

Mirroring that trend, one of the highest charge increases comparable among all four regional hospitals in 2011 and 2012 was a 17.43 percent jump for treatment of cardiac arrhythmia and conduction disorders without major complications or chronic conditions, with an average charge of $35,754.

Brain hemorrhages or a type of cerebral stroke also saw charge increases in the Coachella Valley and Loma Linda of 13.75 percent, or $68,108 on average in the region.

On the other end, hospitals in 2012 decreased their charges for miscellaneous disorders of nutrition, metabolism, fluids/electrolytes with major complications and chronic conditions by 17.61 percent from the previous year with an average charge of $50,350.

A specific coding of respiratory system diagnosis with ventilator support of fewer than 96 hours was billed at $18,989 on average among the four local medical facilities, a decrease of 16.65 percent from the previous year.

RELATED:Coachella Valley hospitals consider outside contractor

But within this larger arc of hospital pricing were some outliers.

For example, though the charges for chest pain treatment either rose minute amounts at local hospitals or decreased, such as at Eisenhower, they rose 53 percent at Loma Linda.

The academic hospital, though it billed lower across the board, also saw major rises in other charge categories, more than other hospitals — 91 percent for degenerative nervous system disorders without any other conditions, 134 percent for bronchitis and asthma without additional conditions.

Mohr said Loma Linda began using electronic medical records last year that forced administrators to go through and rebuild the hospital's list of charges, revising some charges "more appropriately" based on Medicare reimbursements and what other teaching hospitals charge.

"We had to tweak those as we took a look at all those charges," he said.

Part of that meant accounting for underlying costs of expensive pharmaceuticals and implant­ables like stents.

Charge doesn't equal payment

The Medicare average prices are based off a list of gross charges each hospital determines individually, a decades-old practice.

But hospitals actually negotiate charges with Medicare based on annual set federal rates, as well as with Medi-Cal rates set by the state, and insurance companies to arrive at much lower total payments and prices. They never get back exactly what they ask for.

In fact, the national average for total Medicare payments in 2012 was $8,729, just 22.7 percent of its average charges. Statewide, it was $12,009, 16.8 percent of California average charges.

DATABASE:Coachella Valley hospitals' Medicare charges

Locally, Eisenhower received the least back from Medicare despite charging the most on average, and Loma Linda received the most back although it charged the least.

Area medical facilities pointed out that Medicare reimburses higher for hospitals with graduate medical education such as at Loma Linda and depending on pricing region. Medicare also reimburses more for hospitals such as JFK and Loma Linda that participate in a federal Disproportionate Share Program. The program rewards hospitals for treating high numbers of medically indigent or uninsured patients to help make up the difference between costs and payment for treating them.

"When it comes down to it, the amount we get reimbursed from Medicare … doesn't make up the gap of what the actual cost is for the services we're providing," Mohr said.

On the whole, the amount hospitals receive back has actually been decreasing over the past few years, Ramhoff said, because of "very rigorous" cuts of hundreds of billions of dollars in federal payments that the hospital industry agreed to under the Affordable Care Act to launch a "more rational system where everybody has coverage."

Anderson, the Johns Hopkins economist, said the ACA also gives hospitals more business now by giving more people insurance with which to pay their bills, offsetting the reimbursement gaps; already, hospitals receive a roughly 4 or 5 percent profit margin for Medicare procedures.

Because of the differences in how health care costs are actually doled out, some local hospitals were cautious and somewhat critical of how this data could be interpreted, repeating hospital industry standards that charges do not reflect payments hospitals receive and citing the fact that these figures are averages that can be bumped depending on the severity of patient cases year-over-year.

"No individual patient is going to be 'average,' " Ramhoff said, noting that this could affect the accuracy of comparisons between each year. "Each person has a unique situation that will require a unique medical response.

"Hospital pricing is complex, because medical care is highly individualized," he said.

The discharge numbers could also be very small at certain facilities compared to others, he pointed out, because it's only looking at Medicare patients who receive treatment in the hospitals.

The best way for the insured to figure estimated out-of-pocket costs is their plan, Ramhoff said.

Both Desert Regional and Eisenhower offer charity care and uninsured discount programs for those meeting certain financial eligibility requirements.

"We also will work to provide an accurate estimate of the cost upfront for patients," Ramhoff said.

"We recognize that hospital pricing is often confusing, and we join the state and federal hospital associations in acknowledging that, as an industry, we must evolve toward a system that makes accurate information about the cost of care easily accessible by patients," he said. "However, it would be a mistake for any consumer to choose a provider based upon this (Medicare charge) data by itself."

Mohr said health cost transparency is positive but this data can be misleading because it's not comparing prices at, for example, a Target to a Walmart for a specific item.

Though some advocates see the charge data as outdated, irrelevant and confusing, others believe it's a step away from murkiness over charges that can run more than $100,000.

RELATED:California female inmates sterilized illegally

Anderson said the charge data is still meaningful for the uninsured who might have to pay up to 90 percent of the charges rather than a negotiated one and also for those with worker's compensation, as a baseline for car accidents or for an out-of-network user of health care at a hospital that doesn't accept their insurance plan.

Without a regulatory agency overseeing such charges or the marketplace providing hospitals standard prices, they can be left on their own to "almost make it up" — leaving consumers no critical comparison information, Anderson said.

"It just puts a spotlight on the lack of rationality of hospital charges, and it puts a very strong spotlight on it," he said.

"You need price transparency in all parts of the economy," he said. "You need it at the Walmart. You need it at the grocery store. You need it for everything, and we just don't have it in the hospital industry."

Desert Sun Healthcare Reporter Victoria Pelham can be reached at (760) 778-4649, Victoria.Pelham@desertsun.com and on Twitter @vpelham

Check out the database

Visit DesertSun.com to use an interactive database to see how much the four hospitals charge Medicare and how much they receive in return.

Local hospitals charge Medicare more than state, nation

For the most common Medicare procedures in 2012, Coachella Valley hospitals and nearby Loma Linda University Medical Center billed Medicare more than their statewide peers and charged roughly double the amount of their peers nationwide. This is only the

second year the federal government has released such Medicare figures in an effort to increase transparency

about hospital pricing. Below are the average amounts the hospitals charged Medicare for treatments and how much

Medicare ended up paying. Not all hospitals perform the same exact procedures.

Some highlights

Among the highest charge increases and decreases that were comparable among the four hospitals in 2011 and 2012 were:

• 13.75 percent charge increase for intracranial hemorrhage or cerebral infarction with complications and chronic conditions, with an average charge of $68,108.

• 17.43 percent charge increase for cardiac arrhythmia and conduction disorders without major complications or chronic conditions, with an average charge of $35,754.

• 17.61 percent charge decrease for "miscellaneous disorders of nutrition, metabolism, fluids/electrolytes with major complications and (chronic) conditions," with an average charge of $50,350.

Read or Share this story: http://desert.sn/1m50aCk