David Spisak is like most 8-year-olds, aside from the fact that he has cancer and he isn't afraid of girl cooties.

David Spisak is like most 8-year-olds, aside from the fact that he has cancer and he isn't afraid of girl cooties. Facebook

Finding the love of your life at age 16 is, according to most adults, way too early to do so. But David Spisak, an 8-year-old cancer patient fighting for his life in Chesapeake, Va., has found the love of his life at half that age — and it doesn't seem like he and his girlfriend will be separated any time soon.

David was diagnosed with leukemia when he was two years old, and had beaten the cancer three times before being diagnosed again this past March. He's had two transplants and undergone chemotherapy several times. Of course, another diagnosis meant he's had to take days off school and spend more time in the hospital, separated from his friends and classmates.

Back in March, doctors told David's family that he had only four to six weeks to live. When he ended up living months longer, his parents decided it was time to change his daily routine from one of constant hospital care and isolation to that of a normal child. That included setting up a date with Ayla, a girl in David's second grade class who had been writing letters to him in the hospital.

"We just decided it was time to give him a childhood," Amber Spisak, David's mom, told ABC News. "If the outcome was going to be the same, if he was going to continue to get cancer, we decided that if he wasn't going to win, that we would give him everything right now."

David had spoken about having a crush on Ayla in the past, but it wasn't until she started sending him letters with her phone number written all over them that his parents realized there might be something more. Amber called Ayla's mom to plan a date at a bowling alley for the two kids. David, arriving in a wheelchair, had brought a teddy bear and flowers for his date; Ayla ran forward to meet and hug him, and they've been inseparable ever since.

"We were all so taken aback by their bond, their connection there," Spisak said. "No one else was allowed to touch him. They stayed together the entire time. His dad and I kept trying to stay close behind him to make sure he wouldn't fall, but he kept trying to be with her and taking her help. It was so natural, there was no hesitation from either of them. They just wanted to be together."

David describes Ayla as Snow White due to her kindness and love for him.

"He was just so determined for her, he really pushed himself for her," Amber continued. "Once we realized that this wasn't the typical elementary school crush, once we saw this heartfelt connection that they have, we were so happy that she came into his life and that he came to her life for some reason. We never thought he was going to ever experience this because his time is so limited, but we saw it and it's real."