“She’s missing 1, she has 2, missing 3, missing 4,” the hygienist ticked off. “She’s missing 17. She has 18 through 29. Then she’s missing 30, 31 and 32.”

Ms. Mayhew intended to get Medicaid first thing this year, but faced a delay when the online enrollment system could not confirm her Social Security number. She broke a tooth in August and sobbed when a dentist told her it would cost $1,400 to fix. With an income of $25,000 a year and three children still at home, she braced to ask her mother for a loan. But that same day, an enrollment counselor from Family Health Centers called and helped her get signed up.

“The Lord works in wonderful ways,” she said.

She got an emergency appointment at West Louisville Dental, in a low-income neighborhood known as the West End, where 40 percent of the patients are on Medicaid. Since then, she has returned once a month, getting three teeth pulled, six cavities filled, X-rays, a cleaning and an evaluation for gum disease. Next she will get a deeper cleaning to remove bacteria from under her gum line, and more fillings.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Newly motivated, she is eager for a partial denture to replace some of her missing molars and help her chew. Medicaid does not cover dentures, so she is hoping her tax return next spring will cover the cost, which her dentist said could reach $750.

“How’s that feel?” the hygienist asked after polishing her teeth.

“Wonderful,” Ms. Mayhew replied, serene. “Thank you.”

She is a deeply religious Christian, with a tightly knit family that prays together even at fast-food restaurants and has suffered one health crisis after the next. Her mother was run over by a car and spent six months in hospitals and rehabilitation centers. Then her father got cancer and died within months. And this year, Ms. Mayhew’s cherished grandmother died of complications from a stroke. Her grief, she said, has been hard to bear.

A nurse practitioner at Family Health Centers had prescribed anti-depressants after Ms. Mayhew had her last baby in 2013 — at the time, she had temporary Medicaid for her pregnancy — but she stopped taking them when the coverage ended. Now she is back on them, and feeling good.

“That’s been a big thing for me,” she said.

And yet.

“I don’t love Obamacare,” she said. “There are things in it that scare me and that I don’t agree with.”

Video

For example, she said, she heard from news programs that the Affordable Care Act prohibited lifesaving care for elderly people with cancer.

There is no such provision, although a proposal to pay doctors to engage patients in end-of-life planning — such as whether they would want life-sustaining treatment if they were terminally ill — was removed from the law after it sparked a political firestorm over “death panels.” The misperception remains widespread: A poll this month by the Kaiser Family Foundation found that 41 percent of Americans still believe the law created “a government panel to make decisions about end-of-life care for people on Medicare.” An equal number found the law did not.

“If we have Obamacare and the insurance is available to me, I will use it and be thankful for it,” Ms. Mayhew said. “But would I gladly give up my insurance today if it meant that some of the things that are in the law were not in place? Yes, I would.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

A Silver Lining

For Mr. Elson, with advanced diabetes, chronic high blood pressure and an income too high for Medicaid but too low to pay all his bills, the Affordable Care Act came too late.

He had forgone insulin for most of the year when he arrived at his eye doctor’s office in September, huffing and puffing due to fluid in his lungs. He was off his blood pressure pills, too, and all of his medications except a drug he takes for neuropathic pain caused by diabetes. His swollen legs were covered in painful blisters where excess fluid had seeped out.

In the past he had vowed to keep working through his ailments — installing security systems, a business that he said earned $28,000 in a good year. But now he sounded defeated.

“I don’t have no get-up-and-go,” he said. “I’m getting to the point that now it hurts too much to work.”

He had surgery last winter to stop bleeding at the back of his eyes, a complication of diabetes, and the ophthalmologist, Dr. Inder P. Singal, was pleased with the result. But when Mr. Elson told him he was still uninsured because the premiums and deductible had proved too high, Dr. Singal shook his head.

“What a great intent,” the doctor said of the health care law, “but there are still way too many kinks.”

With the help of a Family Health Centers counselor, Mr. Elson had chosen a midlevel silver plan from Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield, one of the few his kidney specialist would accept. He qualified for a subsidy of $250 a month, but still owed $350 a month toward the premium. He also qualified for a reduced deductible, but it was still $2,600, which nagged at him after he signed up.

Ten days after his eye appointment, Mr. Elson went to see Ms. Elrod, his nurse practitioner at Family Health Centers. He had gained almost 50 pounds in two weeks — water weight, because his failing kidneys were not removing excess fluid and waste. His birthday had just passed, and a medical assistant offered good wishes.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Somebody didn’t make it that extra year,” she said. “You did.”

“I should be grateful,” Mr. Elson replied. “Believe me, I am.”

Ms. Elrod took one look at him and urged him to go to the emergency room. “You’ve let yourself get so sick again,” she said, pointing out that he had not been to see her in 10 months. “I mean, this is coming down to your life.”

Mr. Elson demurred, saying he had “too much darn work” and there was no one to feed his cat.

“If something happens to you, you’re not going to be able to take care of the cat,” Ms. Elrod shot back. She refilled his prescriptions and made him promise to go to the hospital if his condition got worse.

A few nights later, after gaining an additional 10 pounds, he checked himself into University of Louisville Hospital, a safety net hospital that treats the city’s uninsured.

There, he was told something he had been dreading: his kidney function had dropped to less than 10 percent of the normal level, and he had to start dialysis to save his life. That would mean being hooked up to a machine four hours a day, three days a week, to clear the toxins and extra fluid from his body.

“That is an example of what years and years of not taking your blood pressure medication, your diabetes being uncontrolled — that is the endpoint right there,” Ms. Elrod said.

Over 10 days in the hospital, as he received his first dialysis treatments, Mr. Elson fretted about the business he was losing and might continue to lose given the 12 hours a week he would owe to dialysis. Early one morning, as the hulking dialysis machine hummed behind him, he veered between denial and acceptance.

“I’m not used to being set down somewhere, you know?” he said. “I guess it’s a new era. Yep. I just don’t know if I can handle it.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Dr. Lina Mackelaite, his kidney specialist, said she hoped he would remain compliant despite a history of skipping appointments and not taking his medications.

“He didn’t always do what he was supposed to do,” she said.

The bad news came with a silver lining: Because he needed dialysis to survive, he was now eligible for Medicare, the government insurance program normally reserved for people 65 and older. The coverage would begin on Jan. 1 and would pay 80 percent of his medical costs; he would be responsible for the other 20 percent, plus a monthly premium of about $100.

For the kind of dialysis he needs, the per-person cost to Medicare was almost $88,000 in 2011, according to the National Institutes of Health. The cost to Mr. Elson, too, would almost certainly be considerable, but he was not thinking about it yet.

He has settled into a new routine, waking at 4:30 a.m. to get to the dialysis clinic by 5 and finish his treatment in time to put in a day’s work. Usually he sleeps through the treatments, curled under a stained blanket he brings from home, a roomful of other dialysis patients filling identical chairs.

“I don’t think there’s a person in here that really wants to do it,” he said as he arrived at the dialysis clinic one morning. “But if the alternative is being six feet under, or doing it, I’m doing it.”

He has lost 70 pounds of water weight and appears re-energized. He has become more careful about what he eats, he said, and his blood sugars have dropped. He can sleep soundly again, with no pain waking him overnight.

Hooked up to the machine one recent morning, Mr. Elson pulled his new Medicare card out of his shirt pocket and held it to the light before carefully tucking it back inside.

“I finally got insurance,” he said. “What a way to get it.”

Then he drifted into sleep.