Searching for answers. I feel there are as many questions as exclamation points surrounding the Broncos. I’ve had a hard time buying John Elway’s mantra of Super Bowl or bust when it took a rash of injuries for C.J. Anderson to supplant Ronnie Hillman at running back. Can coach John Fox prepare his team to play well under the immense pressure of a big game? Can offensive coordinator Adam Gase and Peyton Manning seamlessly switch gears between the passing and running games, depending on the situation? With all these questions, is it reasonable for Broncos Country to expect a championship this year? I’ve decided to temper my expectations, sit back and enjoy the ride. There were doubts in 1997 after the Broncos stumbled down the stretch and the rest, as they say, ended up being history!

Waylon, Marshall, Mo.

Kiz: With seats for the Colts game listed online Saturday for as little as $98, it seems Broncos Country isn’t entirely bullish on a Super Bowl run. But I seem to recall some knucklehead columnist late in the ’97 NFL season lamenting the fact Elway would never win a Super Bowl ring.

Manning must step up. The playoff game between the Broncos and Colts will be the usual show between an up-and-coming, talented quarterback and the established veteran on his way out. Manning will have to dig deep and muster some quality play in his last days on the stage. Andrew Luck is the real deal and has a lot of things in his favor.

Larry, representing the 303

Kiz: Last days on the stage? Here’s hoping Manning has to lead a late TD drive to beat Luck. A tense situation for Broncos Country? Yes. But wouldn’t it be great drama to see how much the old QB has left in him?

Only one Thomas needed. This time you’ve gone too far, Kiz. Apparently you haven’t seen the last few Broncos games without the “great” Julius Thomas. Or maybe you didn’t see Virgil Green. The Broncos are far better off with a tight end who can block. Let Julius go. The only Thomas we need is Demaryius.

Bill, carries hammer 24/7

Kiz: OK, we here at Kickin’ It Headquarters readily concede the worth of Green to a new-found emphasis on Denver’s running attack. But riddle me this: If the Broncos trail 21-17 with four minutes remaining in the fourth quarter of any playoff game, on which tight end will Manning rely? The grunt that can deliver the big block? Or the tight end who caught 12 TD passes in little more than half a season of good health?

Timofey believer. And today’s parting shot is aimed at anybody who doubts former Nuggets center Timofey Mozgov is bound for NBA stardom.

You watch you clueless (idiot), Kiz. Timofey Mozgov will be a star in Cleveland, because he finally has a coach who knows his game and believes in him. Mozgov will play 35 minutes per game, score 18-plus and grab 12 rebounds per game.

V.K., in Mozgov he trusts