Published Nov. 2, 2013 at 10:59 a.m. Tweet

It's an eclectic batch of recommendations from the OnMilwaukee.com staff this weekend, from computer repair to tasty scotch to a classic news program. The only thing they all have in common? We really like them all. We hope you'll do the same.

Tek365 – I recently wanted to add memory to an old Mac laptop so I could upgrade the operating system. I called around. From one place, I got an estimate of $179 and one week. Another place told me they had to buy new Mac tools, and it would be $150. One place told me it would be about three weeks. Finally, on a fluke, I called Tek365 out on 116th and Bluemound. The guy said bring it in. Dan, the owner, took the laptop out of the case. He took out the battery section. He stuck memory cards in and voila. Done and done. Price? $18.95. Time to complete the task? About six minutes. A little place with big skills and customer service. – Dave Begel

Monkey Shoulder triple-malt blended scotch – This ultra-limited scotch is a blend of three Speyside classics – Glenfiddich, Balvenie and Kininvie – aged in bourbon casks, and is made in small batches of fewer than 30 cases. Add that it's sweet, subtly malty and smooth with hints of honey, vanilla and a dollop of oak, and it's no surprise Monkey Shoulder has been garnering accolades from scotch fans on both sides of the Atlantic. Monkey Shoulder debuted in the U.K. in 2006, but it's now just started to appear in Wisconsin. You could use it as a mixer, but it tastes so good on its own that it seems a shame not to have it straight or with a wee splash of water. Best of all, it's a steal, retailing at under $30. – Bobby Tanzilo

Landmark Lanes' game room – My kids are 10 and 11, and we're always on the search for good, clean, age-appropriate fun. That said, the Landmark Lanes' game room, 2220 N. Farwell Ave., is a new fave. Of course we go during the afternoon hours so we usually have the place to ourselves, and $5 in quarters is at least an hour of pinball fun (especially now that we're getting better at it). As a bonus, I have discovered that I remain extremely gifted at Ms. Pac-Man. – Molly Snyder

"60 Minutes" – Maybe it's just a sign of getting older but I've finally started to DVR and regularly watch "60 Minutes." The news magazine style show was launched in 1968, and its reporter-centered investigations and profiles are now standard for many online and TV shows. The CBS show truly touches a great variety of subjects, and I always feel like I've learned something after a view. Its sister show on Showtime, "60 Minutes Sports," is a bit of a "Real Sports with Bryant Gumbel" clone, but it's equally as entertaining and well-done. – Jeff Sherman

CHVRCHES – Back in September, CHVRCHES played a little lunchtime gig at the Pabst Theater Pub. And since I've just now started listening to the highly buzzed Scottish techno-pop band (because when it comes to music, I'm always the last one to come desperately sprinting after the bandwagon, screaming for it to slow down and pick me up), missing this quick three-song gig has become one of my deepest regrets in life. That's only kind of hyperbole.

The band's 12-song debut album, "The Bones of What You Believe," is packed with freakishly catchy little numbers. "The Mother We Share" is the earworm-y hit that took the Internet by storm last November, and deservedly so. I'm also a huge fan of "Gun" and "We Sink," but really the whole album is great stuff, fueled by lead singer Lauren Mayberry's delicate vocals, strong lyrics and the Iain Cook-Martin Doherty tandem's slick, intricate synth-heavy beats.

In case you needed more reasons to like CHVRCHES, Mayberry wrote an awesome op-ed blog post for The Guardian taking on Internet misogyny. Also: She's an expert at Jawa noises (go to about the 23:20 mark). So between that and their music, you pretty much have no excuse not to love them. I went from "What's CHVRCHES?" to "Who do I have to bribe to get them to come back and play a show in Milwaukee?" in a matter of about two songs. I imagine you'll have a similar reaction. – Matt Mueller