Mountain View Fire Rescue firefighters are seen training for a swift water rescue using a Jet Ski personal water craft. Firefighters used the Jet Ski to rescue people during the flood of 2013. ( Courtesy of Mountain View Fire Rescue / Times-Call )

Watercraft, additional training, and mutual aid relationships are top priorities for local rescue officials six months after the September floods tested their capacity.

Longmont Deputy Chief of Fire Services Jerrod Vanlandingham said the floods have prompted two intergovernmental agreements between the city and Mountain View Fire Rescue that formalize sharing resources for technical rescues and hazardous materials response.

"These types of incidents are what we consider low frequency, but extremely high risk," he wrote in an email to the Times-Call about the new deals.

He said that between five and six firefighters will attend advanced swift water rescue training this spring, as well. He said Longmont Fire has a technical rescue team that is well respected.

The advanced training could help with future challenges, like floods, high wind events, or even car wrecks. Vanlandingham noted that the flood presented situations that required creativity and efforts for rescuers to remain safe and he hopes the extra training will take some mystery out of future incidents.

Mountain View Fire Rescue spokeswoman Amy Tallent said the department's 2012 strategic plan included the development of a technical rescue team, which prompted water-rescue training last summer, ahead of the floods.

"Because this training was completed, MVFR was extremely prepared for the unforeseen September flooding," she said.

Like Longmont, more technical rescue training is planned. Vanlandingham said the teams will work together to beef up response.

Advertisement

Equipment was a big issue for both departments during the flood. Before the floods, Mountain View raised a few eyebrows by practicing rescues using loaned jet skis, but they put that training to use during the flood. They used a jet ski to rescue a woman from her submerged car near the Boulder County Fairgrounds.

Tallent said Mountain View rescuers had to rely on a Colorado Department of Wildlife Boat to rescue another stranded motorist from high and rushing waters along Weld County Road 7.

Tallent said Mountain View plans to buy a military-style boat for rescues. Tallent did not have information about the expected make, model or cost.

Vanlandingham said during the floods both businesses and residents offered up watercraft for rescuers to use. Vanlandingham said Longmont Fire hopes to formalize relationships with watercraft owners in case of additional flooding since the department doesn't have money in the budget to buy boats or jet skis.

"One of our challenges during the flood was that we simply did not have the appropriate water craft to get the job done," Vanlandingham said. "Many of our rescues were done with water craft or large vehicles owned by local businesses and community members. It really was surreal to be scratching your head one moment thinking how we were going to get to a particular family and then all of a sudden someone rides up on a jet ski and says, 'Here, see if this thing will help.'"

Littleton Fire Rescue also sent a fully staffed water rescue team to help out.

Vanlandingham said the city is working to compensate owners whose possessions were damaged during rescues and a formalized agreement would account for those issues in advance.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Pierrette J. Shields at 303-684-5273 or pshields@times-call.com