Consider Curious Theatre Company’s season- opener “After the Revolution” a reckoning.

The regional premiere of Amy Herzog’s familial drama, which runs through Oct. 19, represents the ongoing artistic reckoning that Curious encourages audiences to engage in. Much like spring’s mounting of Tarell Alvin McCraney’s “The Brothers Size,” this production introduces audiences to the work of a young American playwright on the ascent.

Herzog’s “4000 Miles” was a 2013 Pulitzer Prize finalist.

The Lincoln Center production c0-starred local fella made good Gabriel Ebert as the grandson of Vera Joseph, a character in “After the Revolution.” Herzog’s “Belleville” and “The Great God Pan” each had New York productions earlier this year.

“After the Revolution” also represents the writer’s creative tussle — at once personal, political and generational.

In 1999, Herzog’s family learned that paternal grandfather Joe Joseph, who had been blacklisted during the 1950s, had passed secrets to the Soviet Union during World War II.

In “After the Revolution,” recent law school grad and headstrong activist Emma Joseph learns that the grandfather she named her social-justice foundation after was not the person she believed him to be. It’s a revelation that rattles Emma’s foundation. Yes, her organization, but also her sense of familial identity.

“I’ve always ben interested in not just the politics, but the trappings of being a deeper political person,” Herzog says on the phone from New York, where she lives with husband and theater director, Sam Gold, and their baby.

“The word I’ve used before is ‘scaffolding.’ The kind of scaffolding people build for themselves in terms of their own belief systems is a subject of enduring interest to me,” she says.

“I think I’ve always been troubled with questions of how the things we hold dear become the things we hold dear, whether that process is just arbitrary.”

Every family has its stories. Most don’t have a storyteller of Herzog’s observational clarity, sturdy will or subtle wit to tease them, turn them this way and that, take their peculiarities and make resonant sense of them.

Even if we did, we still might not have kin willing to accept a version of itself made public.

“I’m not going to say it wasn’t hard on anyone, but I think — amazingly — people withstood it with a lot of grace.

“Luckily for me, I have a really generous and accepting family,” she says. “Maybe more important than that, they have a sense of humor.”

Lisa Kennedy: 303-954-1567, lkennedy@denverpost.com, twitter.com/bylisakennedy

“AFTER THE REVOLUTION.” A Curious Theatre Company production. Written by Amy Herzog. Directed by Chip Walton. Featuring Lauren Bahlman, Matthew Block, Dee Covington, Gordon McConnell and Anne Oberbroeckling. Through Oct. 5 at Curious Theatre, 1080 Acoma St. 8 p.m. Thursdays-Saturdays, 2 p.m. Sundays. Tickets, $18-$44, via curioustheatre.org or 303-623-0524.