Only in the fresh-faced world of health care tech­no­logy start-ups could a 31-year-old CEO claim to be “a little old” com­pared to his peers, as An­mol Madan, the founder of Ginger.io, sheep­ishly con­fesses over the phone. He has some com­pany in the 28-year-old be­hind RxApps, John Moore III. Each heads a firm that is find­ing a foothold in the chan­ging world of health care tech­no­logy.

“Tech­no­logy is be­ing forced on care or­gan­iz­a­tions,” Moore says, cit­ing the Health In­form­a­tion Tech­no­logy for Eco­nom­ic and Clin­ic­al Health Act of 2009, a pre­curs­or to Obama­care. The HITECH Act for the first time re­quires hos­pit­als to use elec­tron­ic med­ic­al re­cords. “Now that hos­pit­als and doc­tors are be­ing forced to use these fairly ba­sic soft­ware tools, there’s pres­sure to ad­opt more tools,” Moore says.

The Af­ford­able Care Act also shif­ted the in­cent­ives sys­tem for health care pro­viders in a way that en­cour­ages the de­vel­op­ment of new tech­no­lo­gic­al tools, mak­ing fund­ing avail­able for chal­lenge grants to test new care-de­liv­ery mod­els. “With so many people now be­ing in­sured, there is a much grander fo­cus on pop­u­la­tion health,” Moore writes in an email. “This means a big fo­cus on new ana­lyt­ics tools.”

Moore’s Bo­ston-based RxApps is a mo­bile plat­form de­signed to fa­cil­it­ate bet­ter com­mu­nic­a­tion between doc­tors and pa­tients. If a pa­tient is dia­gnosed with de­pres­sion, for ex­ample, Moore says the doc­tor will use RxApps to check in and see how the treat­ment plan is work­ing. The pa­tient will re­ceive a series of texted ques­tions tailored to the in­di­vidu­al and the is­sues he or she struggles with: Did she take her med­ic­a­tion? How many hours of sleep did he get?

The be­ne­fits of these re­mind­ers work both ways. Moore, whose back­ground is in mo­lecu­lar bio­logy and ge­net­ics re­search, was in­spired to cre­ate RxApps after watch­ing friends and fam­ily go through treat­ment for which “doc­tors wer­en’t get­ting all of the in­form­a­tion to make fully in­formed treat­ment de­cisions,” he says. The free-to-use product re­cently went live, which means the firm can col­lect more data on how doc­tors and pa­tients com­mu­nic­ate. That will not only help them im­prove res­ults for users, but will also help the com­pany at­tract in­vestors, for whom cold, hard data is king.

RxApps trains po­ten­tial cli­ents to ask ques­tions that won’t put them at risk of breach­ing the HIPAA pri­vacy rules they are all sub­ject to. The user manu­al in­cludes in­struc­tions on cus­tom­iz­ing text mes­sages ac­cord­ing to those rules: “How is your mood?” rather than, “How is your de­pres­sion?”

Mean­while, An­mol Madan’s com­pany, Ginger.io, looks for pat­terns in phone us­age that could help an­swer that ques­tion. The Bo­ston-based firm is named after the root, with its famed medi­cin­al powers — a kind of in­ter­na­tion­al sym­bol for the kind of pre­vent­at­ive care that Madan would like his com­pany to rep­res­ent. (“.io,” was simply cheap­er than “.com.”)

The start-up har­nesses data from pa­tients’ phones to help pro­viders pre­dict how they’ll be­have dur­ing treat­ment. Us­ing this in­form­a­tion, Madan says, hos­pit­als and doc­tors can gain in­sight in­to how people, par­tic­u­larly with mood dis­orders or at­ten­tion de­fi­cit dis­order, are feel­ing and what kind of med­ic­al as­sist­ance they might need.

Pa­tients with de­pres­sion tend to isol­ate them­selves, which could ap­pear in a di­min­ished amount of out­put and in­ter­ac­tion on their phones. The soft­ware would re­cog­nize such a change in data pat­terns and re­lay this in­form­a­tion to con­cerned parties, which could, if pa­tients opt-in, in­clude fam­ily and friends. “We call it the ‘check en­gine light,’ which goes off when something’s wrong,” Madan says.

The idea for the com­pany came out of Madan’s Ph.D. work at the MIT Me­dia Lab; he wrote his thes­is “on mod­el­ing hu­man be­ha­vi­or us­ing mo­bile sensors.” In the two years since it was foun­ded, the com­pany has grown to 18 Bo­ston- and San Fran­cisco-based em­ploy­ees, most of them sci­ent­ists or en­gin­eers rather than med­ic­al school grads. Madan says Ginger.io cur­rently works with 12 hos­pit­als.

Keep­ing people’s most in­tim­ate in­form­a­tion se­cure is a key is­sue health care tech CEOs like Madan and Moore will face go­ing for­ward. “The whole be­ha­vi­or­al side of health — people are really touchy about that. People don’t want oth­er people to know that they have bi­polar [dis­order] or anxi­ety, be­cause so­ci­ety stig­mat­izes those con­di­tions,” says Moore. “We’ve made sure to en­crypt everything very well.”

“Those are all things that “¦ most en­gin­eers guard on a day-to-day basis,” says Madan. “The big­ger thing is what is your philo­sophy on that data and who [ul­ti­mately] owns that data.” And that’s a de­bate just get­ting star­ted.