Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

RIO DE JANEIRO (AP) — The World Cup is coming to the Amazon.

After months of hype about how the humidity in the jungle city of Manaus will affect the players from England and Italy, and a week of intense attention on the patchy playing surface, Saturday’s match will determine which team feels the heat more.

The contest between two former World Cup winners is one of four matches on day three of the tournament. Colombia and Greece kick off proceedings, followed by Uruguay against Costa Rica. Japan and Ivory Coast should bring it to a close just before midnight in Brazil.

Here are some things to look for:

JUNGLE FEVER: The Italy and England camps have spent weeks doing everything possible to prepare for the conditions, from practicing in humid cities wearing long sleeves to riding exercise bikes in saunas.

The forecast is for temperatures of about 32 Celsius (90 degrees Fahrenheit) with humidity above 70 percent.

What the game really boils down to is three valuable points, with both teams desperate to open their campaigns with victories in Group D.

Andrea Pirlo and Mario Balotelli should lead the Italian charge, while England fans will be demanding big games from Wayne Rooney and Steven Gerrard.

Both squads have young players ready to make a mark, with 19-year-old Liverpool winger Raheem Sterling considered a chance to come off the bench for England and 21-year-old Marco Verratti a contender to join Pirlo in the Italian midfield.

Staff at the Arena da Amazonia had to activate emergency plans to revive the patchy turf during the week, and spent time on Friday using dye to ensure the grass at least looks green.

Venue: Manaus. Kickoff: 6 p.m. local time (6 p.m. in New York, 11 p.m. in London, 7 a.m. in Tokyo)

SUAREZ NO SURE THING: Coach Oscar Tabarez was still unsure on the eve of Uruguay’s opener against Costa Rica if he’d have his biggest star available.

Luis Suarez had arthroscopic surgery on his knee on May 22 and has rejoined regular training, but Tabarez said “we don’t want to jump the gun.”

He has prepared scenarios in case the Liverpool striker isn’t quite ready, with Edinson Cavani and Diego Forlan ready to start.

The 2010 semifinalists don’t want to waste an opportunity to pick up three points before their later group matches against England and Italy.