Richard T. Moore, a former Massachusetts State Senator who represented the town of Sutton, has been selected as President and CEO of the Massachusetts Assisted Living Facilities Association, according to Sharon Ricardi, MassALFA Board Chair, and Senior Vice President of the Northbridge Companies which develops, owns, and manages quality senior living communities throughout New England. Ricardi said Moore’s “expertise in health care policy issues, as well as his record of service to older adults, makes him the ideal candidate for this role.”

Moore assumes the leadership of the assisted living trade association following a long career in public service and higher education. In addition to his service as a state legislator in both House and Senate, and a stint in the Clinton Administration as Associate Director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Moore was Assistant to the President of Bentley College, now Bentley University, in Waltham and Associate Dean of Students at Assumption College, Worcester.

With an extensive record of public policy advocacy, Moore is experienced in working with state executive and legislative branches. In Massachusetts, assisted living facilities are regulated by the Executive Office of Elder Affairs.

“I look forward to working with those who provide housing and supportive services for our rapidly growing population of senior citizens as the “baby boom” generation creates an urgent demand of more, and better opportunities for safe, high quality housing with convenient services and without the burden of care and maintenance of property,” Moore noted.

Considered an expert in health policy, Moore was the lead Senate author of a first-in-the nation state health care reform law of 2006 among his major statewide achievements. Its passage moved the state to near universal health insurance coverage and, concurrent with that expansion, improved access to affordable high quality health care. It became a template for the federal Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

In addition, Moore was lead Senate author of the Massachusetts Health Care Cost Containment Law of 2012, a first-in-the-nation law expected to save as much as $200 billion in health costs during the next 15 years by promoting prevention and wellness and keeping costs at the rate of inflation.

He is also credited with establishing the statewide falls prevention initiative, senior care options (SCO) a program to care for frail, low-income elders; Prescription Advantage state pharmacy assistance for seniors and disabled; and Pharmacy Outreach, a state-funded program operated by the Massachusetts College of Pharmacy and Health Sciences to help seniors obtain affordable prescriptions.

“MassALFA can be a leading policy advocate improving the lives of senior citizens in the state by working with other senior advocate groups on issues such as preventing elder abuse, curbing fraud against seniors, and reducing falls - the leading cause of unintentional injury death for men and women aged 65 and older in Massachusetts and account for nearly one-third of unintentional injury deaths for this population,” Moore explained. “I’m excited by the opportunities and challenges as I begin a new career phase,” he added.

The Massachusetts Assisted Living Facilities Association (Mass-ALFA), headquartered in Waltham, is a non-profit association dedicated to professionally operated assisted living residences in Massachusetts that provide housing and services for individuals with varied needs and income levels. Established in 1990 as a state affiliate of the Assisted Living Federation of America (ALFA), Mass-ALFA has grown to hundreds of members including assisted living providers and associated professionals. Mass-ALFA serves as the voice of assisted living in Massachusetts, providing information and education, and advocating on behalf of our members and the seniors they serve. Mass-ALFA promotes a model of care which treats all residents with dignity, provides privacy and encourages independence and freedom of choice.