By Jose Serrano staff@latinospost.com ) | First Posted: Jun 18, 2015 01:02 PM EDT

NEW YORK, NY - JUNE 16: Business mogul Donald Trump gives a speech as he announces his candidacy for the U.S. presidency at Trump Tower on June 16, 2015 in New York City. Trump is the 12th Republican who has announced running for the White House. (Photo : Christopher Gregory/Getty Images)

0 Subscribe to Newsletter!

The inevitable has happened. Business magnate and haughty TV reality star Donald Trump has entered the 2016 Presidential race.

Trump, who has repeatedly expressed interest in running for office for over two decades, made the announcement Tuesday morning inside a 68-story New York City skyscraper bearing his name. He told a large crowd that the American dream is dead, but "If I get elected I will bring it back bigger and better and stronger than ever before."

In the past, Trump's speeches have touched on numerous hot-button issues like climate change - which he believes to be a hoax - and keeping marriage between a man and woman. American voters, however, may look to Trump's recent comments on health care, immigration reform, foreign policy, and his own wealth when election time comes around.

Here are a few takeaways from Trump's announcement.

Wealth

The real estate mogul flaunted his wealth in confidently proclaiming "I'm very rich," adding that the U.S. needs someone with his attitude after having the country run by "losers."

Though Trump says his fortune is what qualifies him for the presidency, candidates often avoid talking about personal finances because of the risk of alienating middle-class voters. For Trump, it is a way of ridding himself of political contributors and other outside influences.

Instead of fundraisers for campaign coffers, the GOP candidate says he will use the time on the campaign trail. One of the biggest moments of the press conference came when he claimed to be worth $8.7 billion, a figure put together by an unnamed agency.

Unlike a potential 2012 presidential bid when he challenged incumbent President Obama to release his birth certificate, Trump plans on releasing his personal financial disclosure reports -including tax returns - within the mandated 120-day window.

Immigration reform

Trump promised to build a "great, great wall" on the U.S.-Mexico border that he would require Mexico to pay for. Despite his own mother's plight from Scotland, he said immigrants are "destroying the fabric of the country."

"They're sending people that have lots of problems," Trump opined. "They're bringing drugs. They're bringing crime. They're rapists. And some, I assume, are good people."

Unlike a growing chorus among GOP candidates and voters, Trump is staunchly opposed to any sort of pathway to citizenship for undocumented immigrants. He not only called it a suicide mission, Trump scored potential Republican nominee Jeb Bush on his stance, saying "He's weak on immigration...How the hell can you vote for this guy?"

Health Care

Trump called Obamacare such a disaster that "you have to get hit by a tractor, literally, a tractor to use it."

He called for an end to the Affordable Care act, the law aimed at increasing the quality and affordability of health insurance. Trump said Obamacare is a "disaster" which increases deductibles and forces doctors to quit. He added that the law's biggest effects won't take effect until Obama leaves office.

Recent estimates have seen hospital profits reach record levels as a result of fewer unpaid medical bills. Trump, himself, once supported socialized medicine and stated as much in a January 2000 campaign booklet. In "The America We Deserve," Trump said Americans should have universal health care.

Trump calls to repeal Obamacare in order to replace it with "something much better for everyone." He says it must be much better and much less expensive than options currently available.

Foreign policy

Last month, Trump said he had developed a foolproof way of defeating ISIS but refused to delve into plan in fear of enemies finding out. Yesterday, Trump said he wouldn't trust a man like Secretary of State John Kerry "that has absolutely no concept of negotiation" to carry it out.

"Nobody would be tougher on ISIS than Donald Trump. Nobody," Trump said in third-person.

Following his presidential announcement, Trump met with Fox News anchor Bill O'Reilly to elaborate on campaign statements. The plan to defeat ISIS, and take power away from Iran, is to take their oil away by bombing and overtaking oil-rich areas.

Trump said Obama, too, is a bad negotiator, pointing at a potential deal being made with Iran. A Trump presidency would stop Iran from getting anywhere near nuclear weapons.

"I will find the General Patton or I will find General MacArthur, I will find the right guy," Trump said. "I will find the guy that's going to take that military and make it really work. Nobody, nobody will be pushing us around."

© 2015 Latinos Post. All rights reserved. Do not reproduce without permission.