Duncan Scott/DScott@News-Herald.com Ryan DeLuca, a health educator for the Lake County General Health District, speaks to seniors Wednesday at the Fairport Harbor Senior Center about how to enroll in the Health Insurance Marketplace and about Medicare and Medicaid choices.

EDITOR’S NOTE: This is the second in a two-part series looking at how the implementation of the Affordable Care Act is going and is being received in Northeast Ohio. Read the first part on how the health care law is being received in Northeast Ohio.

Willoughby resident Valerie Goetz didn’t have health care insurance when she attended a recent informational meeting at the Fairport Harbor Senior Citizens Center.

Goetz learned at the event that she was eligible to sign up for Medicaid because of her lower income level. So, she planned to enroll for the health insurance coverage when she met individually with a certified application counselor from the Lake County General Health District.

People in Ohio who earn up to 138 percent of the federal poverty level or equal to a $1,321 gross monthly income of per individual are eligible now to receive Medicaid benefits.

The Health District recently received a $35,000 grant from the Ohio Association of Food Banks to help people learn more about their health care options and for assistance to sign up for a health care plan through the new federal Health Insurance Marketplace website www.healthcare.gov or to provide enrollment assistance for Medicaid through the state of Ohio’s website www.benefits.ohio.gov.

“It was an idea earlier in the year that we decided we would do this as a small benefit to the community,” said Sandra Allison, public health social worker unit supervisor for the Health District.

Allison said the grant stipulates at least 100 people be served directly per month along with 350 people served through outreach programs.

Two certified application counselors at the Health District are on hand to help people who want to enroll in health care plans through the federal and state government websites.

She reminds people who don’t have a health plan that qualifies as minimum essential coverage that there is a March 31 deadline to enroll in a plan or face a tax penalty on their tax return that is filed in 2015. People with very low incomes and others may be eligible for waivers.

Outreach programs such as the one conducted at the Fairport Harbor Senior Center will continue throughout the year by the Health District in Lake, Geauga and Ashtabula counties.

Ryan Deluca, a health educator at the Health District, is a certified application counselor who will provide assistance to people who would like to find out more about their options and he can meet individually with people to help guide them to sign up.

“My job is to do marketing and advertise the health insurance marketplace to get more uninsured people covered,” Deluca said. “I can do one-on-one assistance with any consumers that need the help. I can navigate them through the site.”

Deluca has conducted outreach events at other places such as senior citizen centers, Lakeland Community College, Salvation Army locations and other places where people might need help to learn more about their health care options.

“The Medicaid expansion has been a big hit, a lot of individuals sign up with me for that so that’s been a success,” Deluca said. “The Marketplace is still pretty new, haven’t had too many people actually sign up with me, but I’ve had clients come in and we’ve reviewed all the plans because they are unclear on what they want.”

The most common question he answers from people are how much will the insurance cost and what will they be eligible to receive.

“I can’t answer that right off that bat until we get their personal information,” he said. “When they come in it’s pretty straight forward, there is a lot of the less computer-savvy individuals who have trouble creating a user name and password so it can get confusing.

“After that it’s pretty straightforward questions and I’m right there, they’re supposed to be doing it themselves, but I’m right here to support them.”

Many people are eligible for a tax credit when they enroll in the Marketplace and they can take it either in the form of lower premiums or they can pay the full premium and claim the credit when they complete their tax returns, Deluca said.

Providing tax guidance is not something he does as a certified application counselor.

Deluca said some people have expressed frustration with the federal health care website not functioning properly.

“To be honest with you, it has it’s days it’s been up and down,” he said. “There’s been times where I type in the information people are in and out in a half hour, submit it, and it’s good to go.

“Other times it won’t accept the application and they kind of sit there and wonder what is going on. I try to tell them I don’t have any control over the site, I just try to assist and it’s the site everyone is using.”

Deluca was able to answer many questions that Goetz asked during his presentation at the Fairport Harbor Senior Center.

“It went very well,” she said.

“I did not know that with my low income I could go on a different site and go with Ohio’s Medicaid.”

The Health District also will conduct a presentation on the Affordable Care Act from 10 a.m. to 1 p.m. March 10 at the Willoughby Senior Center.

For people who have tax questions regarding health care coverage, a certified application counselor from the Health District will be available along with the Kathleen J. Miller and Associates every Friday in March from 8:30 a.m. to 2:30 p.m. at agency at 7351 Center St., Mentor. An appointment can be scheduled with Miller and Associates by calling 440-255-1541.

For more information about the Affordable Care Act or to make an appointment for direct assistance in enrollment in the Marketplace or through Medicaid call the Health District at 440-350-2056.

Related:

Advertisement

Part One: Is the Affordable Care Act working in Ohio? Area residents sound off