We thought you'd like to know more about the members of the News 9 team who bring you the news that happens in Oklahoma every day. That's why we've started this new feature on News9.com.

First up, we want you to get to know Lacie Lowry. Lacie is a reporter for News 9 and co-anchors News 9 at 4 p.m. Monday through Friday with Robin Marsh.

1. What was your first job in television?

My first job in television news was a weekend reporter in Abilene, Texas, at the ABC affiliate. It was market #165 and I worked my way up from weekend reporter to weeknight anchor. Bless those viewers for all the mistakes they let me get away with.

2. You have 15 minutes of free time, what do you do?

I try to watch one of my homicide detective shows and since I’m a chronic procrastinator, I’d watch 20 minutes of it before doing whatever else I was supposed to do next.

3. What’s in the console of your car?

NAPKINS!!! I spill food or drinks on myself all the time and so I am a napkin hoarder. Open up the console and napkins burst out like biscuits in a canister. Also, I have some mixed tapes that I can’t seem to let go of, even though my car has no tape player.

4. What’s your hidden talent?

You’ve probably heard my singing on News 9 at 4pm, so that’s no longer a hidden talent. However, most people don’t know I’m a pretty good athlete. I’ve played sports all my life and I’m down for a softball or volleyball game anytime.

5. What was your high school mascot?

I grew up in Rockwall, Texas, just east of Dallas and our mascot is the Yellow Jackets and our colors were orange!

6. How would you describe Oklahoma City to someone who’s never been here?

OKC has a little something for everyone in different pockets all over town. It’s easy to find your niche and it’s easy to try something new. It’s a metro area with a great mix of stuff to do and foodies love it.

7. What is the most exciting thing to ever happen to you?

I have a lot of milestones in life I haven’t reached yet, but so far, the most exciting thing to ever happen to me is becoming an aunt. I didn’t know I could love someone so much, but my two nephews have revealed to me that wonderful God-given gift and I’m truly grateful for it.

8. Do you remember your very first pet? What was it and what was its name?

My first pet was a sheltie dog named Penny and she was almost identical to Lassie. I shoved my hand in her food bowl as a child and she bit my eye – leaving a scar that forever reminded me to obey my parents when they told me NOT to do something!

9. What are your guilty pleasures?

Movies, crossword puzzles and bad puns. I’m truly a sucker for a corny quip – I think they’re so….punny. (See what I did there?)

Follow Lacie Lowry on Facebook and Twitter.