Daily planet. Hey, Kiz: Writing about the Rockies makes them think they have even a speck of relevancy in Colorado. Best thing we can do is completely ignore them.

O.T., boycotting baseball

Kiz: OK, maybe the staff here at Kickin’ It Headquarters is a bunch of crazy optimists. But we see the Rockies improving this season. In fact, we boldly predict Colorado won’t lose at least 90 games for the first time since 2013. Mark us down for a record of 73-89. OK, baby steps. At this rate of improvement, the World Series might be back in Coors Field before man walks on Mars.

Shake it up, Avs. As much as Patrick Roy and Joe Sakic are loved and adored as the great Avalanche players they were, as coach and general manager they do not have what it takes to build a championship club. As unpopular as it may be, it is time for a change at the top. Fans will be disappointed for the year to come unless drastic changes are made.

Joe, finishes his checks

Kiz: The honeymoon is over. But I don’t see the Sakic-Roy relationship falling apart. They deserve another season. The question is: If Avalanche ownership wanted to make a change in the future, is the Sakic-Roy combo so inseparable it would require firing both of them at the same time?

Billie Jean is not my idol. I get the feeling most male sportswriters are afraid to comment on the pay issue in professional tennis. Are you afraid your wife or female readers will be upset? Let’s face it: The women play winner of three sets, while men play best-of-five. How is that equal? Secondly, if women are so equal, I wonder how Serena Williams would do against Novak Djokovic? She might win a few points because he hit the ball into the net, but Novak would win double bagel. Equal pay for equal work is valid. But in the case of tennis, it is clearly not equal work.

Greg, misses Bobby Riggs

Kiz: Playing tennis is not stacking bricks. Williams does not get paid by the shot; she gets paid to entertain us. If we apply your logic, then movie actors should get paid by the number of minutes they appear on the screen. Well, I know this: “Batman v Superman: Dawn of Justice” was 2 dreadful hours and 33 wasted minutes of my life I can never get back. Ben Affleck should have paid me to watch it.

Boryla could play, too. And today’s parting shot is a reminder that long before the late Vince Boryla remade the Nuggets fun to watch during the 1980s as general manager, he had skills that made him a hero in the Big Apple.

“I watched him as a player in the old Madison Square Garden during the 1950s and vividly remember the two-handed, long bombs he made for the Knicks. All over New York City parks, kids would launch their own shots and call out “Boryla!” as the ball floated toward the no-net rim and metal-screen backboard.”

Bill, hoops dreamer