University of Missouri graduate students held a rally and silent march through Jesse Hall on Tuesday to show support for the Concerned Student 1950 movement and to push for change.

Sarah Senff, a third-year doctoral student, encouraged the more than 100 students at Tuesday’s rally to keep working for change — a common theme among the rally’s speakers. The Forum on Graduate Rights, a non-university-affiliated student group at MU, organized the rally.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

“Hatred created a moment of coalition,” Senff said. “A moment of solidarity where people are banning together to create change.”

Concerned Student 1950 formed last month after a group of student protesters criticized UM System President Tim Wolfe for not doing something when a car he was riding in during the MU Homecoming Parade bumped into a student protester. Wolfe resigned Monday after a month of students calling for his removal and saying he had been negligent in dealing with race issues on campus.

MU Chancellor R. Bowen Loftin on Monday also said he would resign from his position. Loftin will transition to a research role with MU on Jan. 1.

Eric Scott, a graduate student with the Forum on Graduate Rights, said Wolfe’s and Loftin’s resignations were not enough.

“A few personnel changes does not change the fundamental problems of this university,” Scott told the crowd. “Tomorrow, we need to wake up, and we need to keep working.”

Timothy Love, a graduate student in the English department, spoke during the rally and called for more diversity and inclusion curriculum.

MU officials in October said incoming students will be required to complete diversity and inclusion training starting in January. Loftin said in an interview last month the training likely would involve an online module.

Love said there should be a mandatory course where students receive a grade.

“We must make an interdisciplinary, bipartisan effort to address racial injustice” and “to elevate compassion and empathy,” Love said. “Compassion and empathy should be part of our curriculum.”

Scott said the Forum on Graduate Rights is obligated to stand up for the rights of all of its constituents, adding that Concerned Student 1950 includes several graduate students.

“We want to point out the intersections between these different problems” on campus, Scott said. “While we certainly have lots of problems with the racial climate, there are problems with ableism, with sexism, with homophobia. We want to be sure we’re addressing the needs of all of those communities.”

The Forum on Graduate Rights formed in August after MU told graduate students it could no longer subsidize health insurance premiums because of an IRS interpretation of the Affordable Care Act. That decision later was revoked, and the group has since advocated for other graduate student benefits, including increased stipends and on-campus child care.