WASHINGTON — Two weeks ago, Sen. Ted Cruz asserted that Republican leaders choked off his supply of campaign money 18 months ago as punishment for his role in the 16-day government shutdown.

He’s bounced back.

In his first eight days as a presidential candidate, Cruz raked in $4 million, mostly from low-dollar donors eager to propel his tea party-friendly bid. And it turned out that was a mere pittance compared with the $31 million rounded up last week by a small — and still shadowy — set of wealthy benefactors for a new quartet of pro-Cruz political committees known as super PACs.

Cruz can’t use that money to hire his own staff in Iowa or air his own ads in South Carolina. Direct coordination isn’t allowed. But these benefactors, most of whom won’t be identified before July, can stretch whatever direct donations Cruz pulls in by serving up polls, ads, opposition research and more.

So, sorry, Rick Perry and Rand Paul. This is no shoestring insurgency fueled solely by grassroots, Gadsden flag-waving fans. Cruz may never keep pace with Jeb Bush, who can tap the ultimate network of GOP money men. But despite the GOP establishment’s disdain, Cruz will have plenty of money to remain viable well into the early contests of 2016.

That’s a far cry from the woe-is-me message Cruz was putting out just two weeks ago.

Days after he launched his campaign, Cruz underscored his role as a Washington outsider by telling a crowd in New Hampshire that Senate GOP leaders had punished him after the October 2013 shutdown by pressuring donors to cut him off.

“In 2013, we got quite a bit of money from D.C. PACs,” he said, and when the fight over Obamacare led to the shutdown, “that dropped to almost zero. It was leadership.”

He declined to point fingers at anyone in particular — not his fellow Texan, deputy GOP leader John Cornyn, nor Kentucky Sen. Mitch McConnell, now the majority leader. But Cruz insisted that he and his wingman in the shutdown fight, Utah Sen. Mike Lee, felt the sting.

“We had multiple reports from the D.C. community that they had been told in no uncertain terms, do not write a check to these guys. It’s how leadership disciplines people,” Cruz asserted.

The friction between Cruz and GOP leadership is mutual and well-known. The shutdown was a low point. Cruz prodded House conservatives to force the showdown in a bid to remove funding for the health care law. GOP leaders in the House and Senate viewed the strategy as counterproductive, futile and dangerous. So did most GOP senators and many others.

“You have to appreciate the irony that someone who routinely trashes the ‘D.C. establishment’ is now complaining that they’re not giving him enough money,” said GOP strategist Brian Walsh, communications director for several years at the Republican Senate campaign group. “The reality is that when you play Russian roulette with the economy by blocking the government from paying its bills, you shouldn’t be surprised when the business community in this country stops taking you seriously.”

In fall 2013, Cruz’s next Senate race was five years away. So it’s unclear how much pain he would really endure if PAC donations dried up. In any case, it’s hard to spot a dramatic drop-off in his campaign and political action committees disclosure reports.

Cruz has raised an anemic $51,000 from D.C.-area PACs since the shutdown. But he was never much of a PAC powerhouse. In the six months before the shutdown, he collected just $101,500 from such groups, and whatever he lost, he easily made up through appeals linked to his Green Eggs and Ham 21-hour anti-Obamacare talkathon on the Senate floor.

Well over $220,000 poured in the week after that.

The business community, and its PACs, were less excited about the brinkmanship, no prodding required from McConnell.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce gave Cruz a 63 percent rating for 2013, based in part on his vote against the deal that ended the shutdown. The Chamber sets 70 percent as a minimum to earn its support.

“We expressed our dissatisfaction with the shutdown, and made it clear why we thought that was a very bad strategy,” said spokeswoman Blair Latoff.

Lee doesn’t back up Cruz’s contention that party leaders tried to dry up his funds.

“I’m not aware of any conspiracy to shut us out of anything,” he told reporters Friday.

But for Cruz, this is all a badge of honor. He can proclaim himself the Washington outsider. And laugh all the way to the bank.

Follow Washington Bureau Chief Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.