Now that the Supreme Court has settled the latest challenge to Obamacare, the next big health care news in Washington will likely be the 21st Century Cures Act, a $106.4 billion health care research bill that could come to the House floor in July.

How will Congress pay for it? If you haven’t been watching, you’ve missed one of the stranger decisions of the year: the Energy and Commerce committee proposes to sell off 64 million barrels of crude oil from the Strategic Petroleum Reserve.

The sale of 64 million barrels would reduce the size of the oil reserve by about 10 percent from its current size of 690 million barrels. According to the Congressional Budget Office, it would raise $5.4 billion, and reduce government outlays from the Cures Act over its five-year period by a similar amount.

Congress, always under pressure to pay for new programs out of existing ones, may believe it has found a pot of gold. And given the remarkable expansion of North American oil production, it may also view a reduction in the size of the reserve as responsible cost-effective public policy.

But this is likely shortsighted. According to the U.S. Energy Information Agency (EIA), our economy will continue to rely upon petroleum for many years, and work by EPRINC and many other research groups demonstrates that we will remain vulnerable to severe economic damage from disruptions in petroleum supplies in the world oil market. The SPR remains an important strategic asset for protecting the U.S. economy and security interests from this vulnerability.

The SPR is a large stock of crude oil available for release into the market to address a large loss of supply to the U.S. and our allies. The reserve was created in the aftermath of the 1973-74 Arab Oil Embargo as a strategic counterweight to the power of OPEC, and a way to insulate America from any shocks from future disruptions of the flow of petroleum to the United States and our allies. Congress authorized the construction and operation of the SPR in 1975, and the U.S. has longstanding treaty obligations with many of our OECD allies to replace at least 90 days of oil imports.

One could argue that the U.S. today doesn’t really need a petroleum reserve, or that we could get by with a much smaller one. Today the SPR has the capacity to replace U.S. petroleum imports beyond our treaty obligations by more than 250 million barrels. In addition, well over half of our net imports come from Canada, hardly an insecure supplier. And aren’t we planning to get off of petroleum anyway?

Think again. According to EIA, looking out just ten years, the national economy’s reliance on petroleum will remain substantial and an important driver of our economic well-being. If you think petroleum is no longer important just take a look at the consequences of the recent decline in oil prices. If oil prices in 2015 remain $50 per barrel less than in 2014, we will see a worldwide net shift in income from producers to consumers of $1.5 trillion. U.S. drivers are expected to see annual savings of $500 or more in 2015 from lower oil prices.

But is a smaller petroleum reserve really a prudent policy? Probably not. Our research shows that price spikes in in transportation fuels is highly regressive, with most of the cost disproportionately hitting middle class and low-income groups. This vulnerability remains even thought our work shows that the U.S. and much of the Western hemisphere will largely separate from physical trade flows with Middle East producers in the next few years. We will likely be importing very little oil from the Middle East. But physical trade flows have little to do with oil prices.

A large supply disruption in one place would spike petroleum prices everywhere. And when that happens, the reality of the world oil market is that the brunt would largely be borne by U.S. middle and low-income earners. The very high level of gasoline and diesel prices in Europe (from fuel taxes) and rapid income growth in Asia will attenuate the consequences of a price rise on these economies. Much of the Middle East population is insulated from gasoline price spikes as transportation fuels are heavily subsidized. Nevertheless, any major price spike will drive a decrease in demand, and that decrease will come from reduced gasoline use by U.S. consumers responding to higher prices. The price shock to the national economy will be severe. A large reserve would give the President an effective tool to blunt the price spike and limit damage to the national economy. This is its primary strategic benefit.

Secretary of Energy Ernie Moniz made this very point at the recent annual meeting of energy analysts in Washington, D.C. when he stated that even with our rising domestic production, a sudden loss of oil production from the world oil market, 20% of which still moves through the Strait of Hormuz, would spike world oil prices and inflict enormous damage on the national economy.

Perhaps how we think about the SPR should change, but we certainly should be very cautious in making any assumption that our current good fortune will always be with us. If we have learned anything since the first Arab Oil Embargo, it is that we should have humility when looking at the future of the oil market.

We support a vigorous debate on the appropriate use and size of the strategic petroleum reserve, but we should have this debate openly before we undertake major changes. We would do no less before making decisions on the size of our naval fleet, the number of army divisions, or air force squadrons. It would be a mistake to forget about the “strategic” part of the name and start treating it like a bank.

Larry Goldstein is a trustee at the Energy Policy Research Foundation (EPRINC), a Washington based public policy think tank, its former president and co-founder of Petroleum Industry Research Associates. Lucian Pugliaresi is President of EPRINC and served on the National Security Council staff in the White House under President Reagan.