He was a Freedom Rider. He was a thought leader. He expertly gave credit, where credit was due, to ignored African American chefs who made New Orleans cuisine as storied and as celebrated as it is today.

But to Edwin Lombard, he was a brother and a friend. Rudy Lombard, a prominent New Orleans civil rights activist and author, died Saturday, his brother confirmed. He was 75.

Lombard had been fighting pancreatic cancer for at least a year. His funeral service has not yet been set.

"I'm just taking a minute to grieve," said Edwin Lombard, a state 4th Circuit Court of Appeals judge and former Congress of Racial Equality member. CORE is a Civil Rights organization formed in 1942 that help to steer the Civil Rights Movement.

Rudy Lombard's legacy over seven and a half decades of life is multi-faceted. To some, he is known for walking into the McCrory's five-and-dime on Canal Street and boldly plopping down at the whites-only lunch counter; to others, he is known for his work partnering with local churches to educate African American men about their high cancer risk.

All who knew him describe him as a man extremely passionate about his cause, whatever it may have been at the time.

------

Lolis Eric Elie, author, filmmaker and the son of prominent African American attorney, Lolis Edward Elie, said there was never a time when he hadn't known Lombard. Just before Lombard and others staged sit-ins in New Orleans in 1960, Lombard came to his father, Elie Jr. said.

"He said, 'If we get arrested, will you represent us?' And my father said, 'Well, I will find someone to represent you.' He asked again," Elie recalled. "Long story short, Rudy did the sit-in and my father represented him. And they became life-long friends," he said.

After the McCrory sit-in, Lombard and four others were arrested. The case which bears his name, Lombard v. Louisiana, went all the way to the U.S. Supreme Court. The high court eventually overturned the arrests, and the case was one of several that became precedents for striking down segregation laws and practices.

Though New Orleans had no official segregation ordinances, then-Mayor Chep Morrison had banned all such segregation protests. Morrison's statements "achieve[d] the same result," the Court ruled.

--------

Elie, who said Lombard used to crash on his parents' couch back in the 1960s, has no shortage of stories to share. Neither does former Freedom Rider Matt "Flukie" Suarez, who said he and Lombard were "kindred spirits" and who didn't know about his passing until NOLA.com | The Times-Picayune contacted him late Saturday night.

"You just took me off my feet," he told a reporter. He said he first met Lombard through the local Congress of Racial Equality, or CORE chapter. Lombard was its first president. "He was going to school, and he was back and forth. But he maintained a very strong presence in the Southern movement," he said.

Not everyone did. Some of the college students who helped found CORE left after they'd finished school and started careers. After he left Xavier University and went on to be an author and businessman, Lombard still fought the good fight, those who knew him said.

That's even if that fight looked slightly different, on its face. Jessica Harris, African American culinary historian and cookbook author, best knows him for his 1978 book, Creole Feast. In it, he and author Nathaniel Burton outline who was behind many of the Creole staples that have defined New Orleans cuisine for decades: black chefs.

The introduction to that book, perhaps, is its best descriptor: "The single, lasting characteristic of Creole cuisine is the Black element," the authors write.

Harris said it was unlike anything she'd ever seen during her time as book editor of Essence magazine. "It was written at a time when pretty much every major kitchen in New Orleans, if it wasn't manned by people of African descent, they were in the large majority and in charge," she said. "In the 1970s, that was an astounding thing to hear and know."

----

In later years, Lombard entered the political arena. In 1986, he challenged Sidney Barthelemy for mayor, according to The Times-Picayune's archives. Barthelemy won, but not before Lombard forced him and others to answer tough questions about teen pregnancy, blighted housing and illiteracy.

Most recently, his passions brought him to NorthShore University HealthSystem, where he worked as a research scientist and coordinated health forums and screenings to give African Americans and Latinos access to cancer information and care.

For him, the work was personal. Even before this latest bout of cancer, he had been diagnosed with prostate cancer in 2003. He discussed his work in a Chicago Sun Times column, last September:

"Our hope is to connect those at-risk with local support services and to eliminate the stigma surrounding prostate cancer screenings," Lombard wrote. "I see this as an extension of a lifetime of advocating for change."