AFP/Getty Images

The U.S. government can kill an American citizen abroad if that person is plotting to attack Americans and U.S. authorities can’t apprehend them, according to a newly declassified government memo. The document laid out the legal rationale for a drone-missile strike that killed terror suspect Anwar al-Awlaki in Yemen in 2011.

The 2010 memo, which a court released Monday, has been at the heart of a debate about the legality of the U.S. government ordering deadly force from a drone against a U.S. citizen overseas. The strike that killed Mr. Awlaki also killed Samir Khan, a U.S. citizen who edited the terrorist magazine Inspire.

The document was released with significant redactions, but the general principle behind such a drone strike is evident: When senior government officials conclude a person is actively plotting to use deadly force against Americans, and the U.S. government is unable to apprehend them, officials may use lethal force to kill that person, even if they are a U.S. citizen.

The memo concluded that the use of lethal force is acceptable “at least where high-level government officials have determined that a capture operation overseas is infeasible, and that the targeted person is part of a dangerous enemy force and is engaged in activities that pose a continued and imminent threat to U.S. persons or interests.”

The American Civil Liberties Union and the New York Times had filed a lawsuit in federal court in New York to force the government to release the memo.

The memo was written by Acting Assistant Attorney General David Barron, whose nomination to the federal appeals court in Boston was delayed earlier this year while lawmakers demanded the public release of the document explaining the Obama administration’s legal rationale for a lethal drone strike against a U.S. citizen. Mr. Barron’s nomination was eventually approved after lawmakers were able to examine the memo.

The memo compared the use of a drone strike to a police officer faced with an immediate decision on whether to use deadly force against a suspect threatening to harm others—though it went on to add: “What would constitute a reasonable use of lethal force for purposes of domestic law enforcement operations will be very different from what would be reasonable in a situation like such as that at issue here.”

Continue reading at WSJ.com.