As we enter the peak of the flu season, deaths and hospitalizations have sharply spiked to epidemic levels, resulting in more patients being treated in Intensive Care Units (ICUs) across the country. Combined with recent efforts by hospitals to enhance preparedness for health emergencies, the nation has become increasingly aware of the major role critical care plays in treating the seriously ill and injured. While this acute public awareness has cast a spotlight on an important and distinct segment of our health care system, we need our federal policies to look beyond the immediate impact of a potential crisis and take the long view by supporting a robust critical care strategy for the future.

That is why we introduced the Critical Care Assessment and Improvement Act this fall to ensure that our health systems are prepared to respond to the demands of a growing aging population or the threat of a widespread public health emergency. This bipartisan legislation, which we plan to reintroduce this Congress, calls for a comprehensive evaluation of America’s critical care system to drive policies that will maximize our federal resources to improve health outcomes for families in our nation’s adult, pediatric, and neonatal ICUs.

ADVERTISEMENT

Identifying and addressing our nation's critical care needs is essential for the many Americans who will experience a critical care injury or illness in their lifetime, either directly or through a loved one. By recent accounts, critical care services touch 5 million Americans annually and over half of these patients are above the age of 65, suffering from multiple diseases that require complex care by a specialized team of providers. With more critically ill patients occupying ICU beds and the growing shortage of intensivists who provide critical care services, the need for comprehensive and cutting-edge critical care medicine is pressing.

The use of critical care resources in the United States is quickly expanding. And yet, despite the significant role critical care medicine plays in treating a wide array of diseases and patients, there has been a relative absence of federal policy addressing critical care infrastructure, workforce, research, and quality of care. Our bill seeks to fill that gap by evaluating and assessing current critical care delivery systems, including an assessment of workforce capacity. This will help us begin to rectify the nationwide dearth of intensivists, nurses, and other providers of critical care services, which will lead to improved patient outcomes.

If the United States is to lead in innovation, we must understand and address our strengths, capabilities, and weaknesses. Our bill would establish a Critical Care Working Group at the National Institutes of Health to identify gaps and strengthen partnerships to expand cross-cutting collaborative critical care research. The bill would also authorize a demonstration program at the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation to advance the quality and efficiency of care for critically ill patients. To meaningfully improve treatments and outcomes for these patients, it is essential that we elevate the science of critical care by supporting a research infrastructure that produces new insights and drives innovation.

Our Critical Care Assessment and Improvement Act -- supported by more than twenty organizations across the country, including American Family Children's Hospital, Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, Cincinnati Children's Hospital Medical Center, Gundersen Health System, The Ohio State University Wexner Medical Center, and the University of Wisconsin School of Medicine and Public Health -- will help address the issues that confront the critical care infrastructure, and serve as the foundation upon which to build initiatives to strengthen and reform the delivery of critical care now and in the future.

Portman is Ohio’s junior senator, serving since 2011. He sits on the Budget; Energy and Natural Resources; Finance; and Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs committees. Baldwin is Wisconsin’s junior senator, serving since 2013. She sits on the Appropriations; Budget; Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs; and Health, Education, Labor and Pensions committees.