An Adams County SWAT officer did not commit a criminal act during an incident this spring in which a drug suspect was shot in the thigh, according to the Adams County District Attorney’s Office.

The shooting happened on May 17 when SWAT officers executed a non-knock search warrant at 8510 Corona St., according to investigators.

Officers were looking for Joseph Manuel Flores III, a suspected drug dealer and gang member, according to the DA’s “decision letter” on the shooting released Tuesday.

A physical struggle between SWAT officers and Flores ensued and Adams County Sheriff’s Deputy Jeff Stovall’s M16 rifle, which was set on “full automatic,” discharged a three-round burst. One round hit Flores.

Flores was treated at Denver Health Medical Center for the wound and released the same day.

Stovall, a 14-year-veteran of the sheriff’s office and a ten year SWAT officer, used “verbal commands before the physical force” before the incident in an attempt to apprehend Flores, the letter said.

“There is no evidence that Deputy Stovall had his finger on the trigger during the incident,” investigators said. “It is evident that an object other than Deputy Stovall’s finger pulled the trigger during the struggle.

“Because there was no evidence that Deputy Stovall made a conscious decision or failed to perceive a risk that resulted in the injury, there will be no filing of criminal charges against him,” the letter said.

“The evidence is clear that this all happened in a matter of seconds and (Stovall) did not have time to activate the safety on his rifle before going hands on with Mr. Flores.”

The 17th Judicial District Critical Incident Team investigated the incident and presented its finding to the DA’s Office.

Investigators found three bags of cocaine, weighing a combined 376 grams, a loaded 9mm handgun and and $2,300 in the residence.

Flores was free on a $250,000 bond pending sentencing for a felony conviction in Denver involving a drive-by shooting when the officer involved shooting occurred.

Kieran Nicholson: 303-954-1822, knicholson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kierannicholson