Topics: florida state, florida state university, jameis winston, Misogyny, Police brutality, police violence, Racism, Rape, seminoles, Sexual assault, Violence Against Women, Politics News

This weekend, the New York Times published a lengthy and damning report on the Tallahassee Police Department’s history of obstructing investigations or outright ignoring alleged crimes committed by Florida State University football players. According to the Times, “law enforcement officers are finely attuned to a suspect’s football connections,” and those connections are “cited repeatedly” in police reports. After all, Seminoles football means big money for Tallahassee. Each home game brings a reported $10 million to the local economy, and some of that money directly lines cops’ pockets, as many on the force collect extra pay guiding traffic on game nights. And plenty of these cops are Seminoles fans, plain and simple. But beyond the fandom and the economic incentives to look the other way when it comes to players, it’s not hard to imagine how a police force — which, like all police forces, is already empowered to act with impunity — would view a similarly powerful community presence like the FSU athletic department and its student athletes as equally above the law.

The reporting from the Times’ Mike McIntire and Walt Bogdanich paints a frightening portrait of how the “towering presence of Florida State football” repeatedly, systematically “cast a shadow over justice in Tallahassee.” Frightening, but not entirely new. Earlier this year, the Times also published a piece on how the Tallahassee police department, officials within the athletic department and administrators at FSU obstructed or otherwise delayed the sexual assault investigation into one of its star players, Seminoles quarterback Jameis Winston. An investigative report from Fox Sports, also released this weekend, exposed more about the extent of the alleged misconduct.

Both reports reveal a string of events in which the police and the university knowingly obstructed and manipulated the progress of the case. After the assault was reported, police did not contact witnesses (one who happened to have video of the alleged assault), did not obtain a DNA sample from Winston because doing so would “create publicity,” and, according to the woman’s attorney, warned that “Tallahassee was a big football town” and tried to pressure her into dropping the case. (This is a woefully incomplete list of everything wrong with the investigation.)

The timeline at which these events unfolded is just as galling. After allowing the case to go dormant for months, the police waited nearly an entire year after the initial report before sending it to the prosecutor’s office, at which point prosecutor Willie Meggs declined to charge Winston, citing a lack of evidence. (Meggs has said the police department’s handling of the case actively hindered his ability to do his job.) And according to multiple reports, school officials waited to meet with Winston until late January 2014 — a full 12 months after they knew Winston was the suspect in the case, and a month after the 2013 football season ended — to discuss the alleged crime, a blatant violation of its obligations under Title IX.