No. 1 Wildcats rally from 1-0 hole to defeat No. 2 Idalia 3-1

Fleming senior Timmi Keisel hugs sophomore Shaylee Johnson (No. 10), while seniors Rachel Frantz (No. 9) and Saige Herbert (No. 3) also hug in the background following the Wildcats Class 1A state championship win. (Jonathan Seib)

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

»

The Fleming volleyball program is very superstitious when it comes to its routines.

Whether that means a certain volleyball tie that makes frequent appearances around the neck of head coach Derek Herbert, a particular Arby's order, or the designated seating chart along the Wildcats' bench.

Maybe that's why the No. 1 seeded Wildcats, who have routinely found themselves inside the Denver Coliseum playing for the Class 1A state championship in eight of the past nine seasons, lost the first set of Saturday's Class 1A title match, 25-17, to No. 2 seed Idalia.

They came back from a first-set loss in last year's championship match to beat Caliche. And the Wildcats stuck to that script again against the Wolves on Saturday as they stormed back to win the final three sets 25-16, 25-17 and 25-15 to claim back-to-back Class 1A state championships, cap a spotless 30-0 season, and bring home the program's fifth state title.

The undefeated record for Fleming marked the third time it had accomplished that feat in school history — the other two came in 2007 and 2008 when it won its first pair of state championships.

Advertisement

“It's a completely different feeling than last year's championship,” said Fleming senior setter Rachel Frantz, who was masterful with five aces, eight kills, nine digs and 31 assists. “Last year, we were the underdogs (No. 4 seed). This year, we were on top and we had to be mentally tough to stay there. And this is a great way to go out and end the year.”

It doesn't get much more mentally challenging than dropping the opening set of a state championship game, but it's a scenario the Wildcats had prepared for.

Fleming players pile on top of each other after defeating Idalia 3-1 in the Class 1A state championship match. (Jonathan Seib)

“One of the things we work on in practice is, going against our JV, we play down 22-18 and force ourselves to get mentally tough. We knew if we lost the set, we could come back,” Frantz said.

Idalia was the aggressor in the first set as it led by as many as nine points, blocked well, and were taking huge swings against the Fleming block, which had trouble timing the Wolves to begin the match.

“We got a little frustrated and were just hitting hard and straight, as hard as we could, and Idalia is so big that when you hit hard into its block, it's bad news,” Herbert said. “Then we weren't getting the blocks on the other side. We were a little bit late and were lining kids up a little bit wrong.”

Fleming, which finished with six solo blocks, would figure out the Wolves' tendencies in the second set, though.

The Wildcats took back control at the front of the net — jumping out to a double-digit 13-3 lead following an ace by senior Timmi Keisel. And they had seniors, outside hitter Deborah Kurtzer and libero Megan Chintala, seemingly digging every ball that crossed the 10-foot line as the two finished with 33 digs and 23 digs, respectively, en route to a convincing 25-16 win that stole away all the momentum Idalia previously had.

“Everybody did their jobs,” said Chintala about the turnaround in the second set. “And everybody took part in what they were supposed to do, stayed positive, and kept encouraging each other.”

Idalia tried to regroup in the third set as it held a lead as late as 12-10. But an 8-2 blitz by the Wildcats, aided by a block from Frantz and kills from Keisel and Kurtzer, created all the separation Fleming needed to take the set 25-17.

Keisel, the reigning Class 1A Player of the Year, took over in the fourth and final set as she rattled off seven on her match-high 17 kills — including a bullet she spiked down on match point — to help the Wildcats polish off the 25-15 win, 3-1 championship win, and 47th straight victory overall dating back to last season.

Fleming's last loss was a five-setter to Class 2A foe Akron on Sept. 28, 2013. Since then, it has lost just 15 total sets.

Fleming senior Timmi Keisel hits against two Idalia blockers during Saturday's Class 1A state championship match. Keisel had 17 kills in the Wildcats' 3-1 win over the Wolves. (Jonathan Seib)

“It's a surreal feeling right now,” said Keisel, who got to share the moment this year with her little sister, Alli, who had a breakout freshman season. “Going into this match, I was remembering how I felt last year after winning the state title and hoping we could feel that way again.”

For senior Saige Herbert, who was limited to being a cheerleader on the bench as a junior last season, it was a completely new feeling.

“Last year, the girls were so supportive of me when I got hurt, so I just wanted to come back and help as best as I could,” said Saige, who did her part with an ace, four kills, a block, and 13 digs. “I'm so proud of this team, this family, that I can't even put it into words.”

It was a magical ending for the Wildcats and to the careers of their eight seniors: Timmi Keisel, Frantz, Kurtzer, Chintala, Saige Herbert, Sabrina Lousberg, Emily Muller and Elayna Muller, who chipped in five digs in Saturday's championship win, as well.

“They are just an unbelievable group,” said Derek Herbert about his senior core. “This shows the character of these girls. They got the highest GPA of all Class 1A schools in the state this year and we got the academic state championship, as well, this year. That shows they are smart, they care about working hard and doing what's right, and to be able to have had them and coach them is truly a blessing.”

And with Alli Keisel and sophomore Shaylee Johnson (eight kills against Idalia) headlining a list of returning underclassmen who saw consistent varsity time this season — including juniors Justice Bretz and Jessica Stone, sophomores Kalyn Serrato and Jessica Sigmon, and freshman Bailey Chintala — the ingrediants are there for the Wildcats to be a threat again for a three-peat in 2015.

It's just part of the routine up in Fleming.