I WAS about to step out of the auditorium disappointed – once again – when suddenly I heard louder cheers; I turned around and saw the host, Steve Harvey onstage and Miss Colombia just standing there. I wondered, ‘Isn’t she supposed to take her first walk as Miss Universe?’ Then Harvey confessed about what seemed to be the most wonderful ‘mistake’ that will change the course of the ‘universe.’

Last December 20, the Miss Universe 2015 Beauty Pageant held at the Planet Hollywood Resort and Casino in Las Vegas scored yet another unforgettable moment in the pageant history – and perhaps in the hosting arena – when Steve Harvey announced the winner, only to take it back five minutes after. Miss Colombia, Ariadna Gutierrez was initially crowned as Miss Universe 2015 but by some twist of epic-failure made by the host, the crown was taken off her head and was put on the head of its rightful bearer – our very own – Miss Philippines, Pia Wurtzbach. I was there watching it all unfold right before my eyes. It was like watching a documentary slash prank show slash Telenovela! The surrealism is just unexplainable.

A few months before the unimaginable happened, I was preparing to leave for Vegas to watch the pageant. I didn’t want to keep my hopes up because I have not gotten over Janine Tugonon’s placing 1st Runner-Up in Miss Universe 2012; I was confident that she was going to bring home that crown – only, it didn’t happen. So here I am three years after, and sworn never to expect anything at all. When I got to the hotel, I was touched by the support of fellow Filipinos who flew all the way there to cheer for our lovely candidate. The men were all wearing Barong Tagalogs while the women slipped into their most fashionable Filipiniana. So much love and patriotism, I thought.

The competition started with the usual parade of beauties in their national costume. All the women were stunning and very confident. But the one thing that stood out like the rest of the candidates, is the loudest cheer you will ever hear from the Filipino supporters. As most foreigners described it, it did seem like we (Filipinos) brought the whole country there. Pinoys were waving Philippine flags and screaming their lungs off whenever Miss Wurtzbach’s about to strut her stuff. It was so moving. It is very evident that most Filipinos, regardless of gender, still go gaga over the Miss Universe pageant. As I call it in one of my past columns, this is the “Superbowl” of countless Filipinos worldwide.

As I watched Ms. Wurtzbach beam with pride as she introduced herself, I affirmed her place in the top 15. I was sure she would make it. It was later confirmed through the pre-judging results that she indeed made it to top 15. Then came the swimsuit round. Slowly but surely I started breaking my vow of not expecting anything as I confidently told myself that this lady is definitely going to be on the top 10, and she actually did. I was so excited and have moved on from the disappointment I felt 2 years ago. When it came down to the top 5 where the ladies were asked their individual questions, I was holding on to my seat like a passenger on a fast-and-the-furious-race car. In the same breath, our Kababayans too were all praying and hoping that Ms. Philippines would give a good answer. Then the question was asked. I held my breath as I listened intently to Ms. Wurtzbach’s answer to the question of US military presence in the Philippines. To which the brilliant half-Filipino, half-German beauty concluded with, “…we are very welcoming with the Americans and I see no problem with that at all.”

That was it. All it took was a wise answer and I knew, we (Ms. Philippines) are going to be on the Final 3. Not very long after that, the final question was asked to each of the candidates. Ms. Philippines’ answer was by far the most honest, precise and straightforward. I was so sure we are going to take home the crown.

We all know that the moments that followed the last Q&A portion were the most intense; yet at the end of it all, beauty, grace and humility resigned. Ms. Pia Alonzo Wurtzbach was crowned Miss Universe 2015.

I want to congratulate Ms. Pia Wurtzbach’s Mentor, Jonas Gaffud. And To Aces and Queens, More power and be encouraged.

To the new Miss Universe who has both beauty and brains, Ms. Pia Alonzo Wurtzbach: Mabuhay Ka! You are indeed ‘confidently beautiful with a heart.’

***

Monet Lu is a Marikina-born, award-winning celebrity beauty stylist with his own chain of Monet Salon salons across Southern California and Las Vegas, Nevada. Ultimately, Monet is known as an all-around artiste who produces sold-out fashion and awards shows as well as unforgettable marketing campaigns. Monet is also the founder of the revolutionary all-natural beauty products such as Enlighten, your solution to discoloration. To contact Monet, please visit www.monetsalon.com or email him at monetsalon@aol.com