Sioux Falls, SD

Sioux Falls Police are investigating a home invasion that led to a stabbing early Sunday morning. It’s an incident that has some neighbors concerned.



Around 4:00 a.m. Sunday, Sioux Falls Police got a call from people living on the 4800 block of S. Louise Ave.

Several people with guns and wearing masks forced their way into the home, according to law enforcement. The victims barricaded themselves in a bedroom and called police.

After a few of the masked intruders left, the victims left the room and began fighting with the intruders. One of the suspects was stabbed and cut repeatedly by a resident of the apartment. The victims managed to drag the teenage suspect outside, barricaded their front door, and waited for the police to arrive.

Logan Bonen was awake when the intrusion happened, and he heard police officers talking outside.

"They were looking around in the bushes and inside windows, looking like they were looking for somebody I suppose," Bonen said.

Bonen says this type of violent crime is unusual for this mostly quiet neighborhood.

"I think they were trying to break into garages about a week or two ago, but other than that, not much goes on around here," Bonen said.

Samantha Hulstein and her husband Derek say hearing the news of a home invasion so close to them was shocking.

"I moved to this part of town, thinking it was very safe, and you know, I have met a lot of our neighbors, we've had cookouts, so it was really surprising to wake up this morning and to see all the commotion and news cameras and police detectives, and the whole shebang," Samantha Hulstein said.

A situation that prompted the couple to call their landlord and request a deadbolt lock on their door.

"With a burglary going on, we don't really feel safe in this area at this moment, at least until we find out more details about why it happened, and whether it was a random event, or whether this is kind of a forecast of things to come," Derek Hulstein said.

The injured teenager was admitted to the hospital and is expected to be okay.

Police say the investigation is ongoing, and more information will be available at police briefing tomorrow morning, which we'll be streaming live on our website.

News

Crime

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.