HARTFORD — Access Health CT will premiere an innovative television series that brings the benefits of Health Care Reform directly to the uninsured and underinsured Latino populations of Connecticut.

The program, MERCADO DE SALUD (www.MercadoDeSaludCT.com), is a long-form edutainment series of shows, segments and capsules and will debut Sept. 7 at 11 a.m. on Univision 18 Hartford and will air through March 2014. The driving mission behind MERCADO DE SALUD is to engage, entertain and educate the Latino community of Connecticut about enrolling in quality, affordable health insurance plans through Access Health CT, the state’s official health insurance marketplace.

“A staggering 344,000 people are uninsured in Connecticut and approximately 25 percent are from our Latino community,” said Access Health CT CEO, Kevin Counihan. “To help reverse that statistic, we created MERCADO DE SALUD, a culturally relevant TV series that informs the community about how to gain access to the coverage they need. MERCADO DE SALUD provides the necessary knowledge and tools to engage and empower Latinos for a healthier tomorrow.”

The television segments are only one component of a robust state-wide marketing and outreach campaign. The campaign includes high-impact, high-visibility vehicles such as broadcast, cable, radio and print, plus community outreach via fairs, festivals, neighborhood canvassing, storefront locations and in-person Assisters – all with the goal of educating, engaging and enrolling the uninsured of Connecticut.

MERCADO DE SALUD television segments will provide essential details about the Affordable Care Act (ACA) and what it means for Connecticut’s Latino community. The program features experts who will provide details about how the new law impacts individuals, families and small businesses. MERCADO DE SALUD will be co-hosted by Ana Alfaro, the beloved and well-known public advocate and host of “El Show de Analeh.”

“As a trusted broadcast partner to the Latino viewers, Univision 18 Hartford is proud to be a part of this unprecedented initiative to bring engaging educational content to the Latino community,” said Sulma Avenancio, General Manager for WUVN. “Access Health CT’s innovative approach marks a new milestone in our mission to offer Latinos culturally relevant local content that makes a difference in their lives.”

Access Health CT will support the series with a comprehensive communications and outreach plan that includes a toll-free number for viewer questions and enrollment, a web page with show schedules and clips, online banners, text and mobile blasts, and public relations outreach.

For more information visit: www.MercadoDeSaludCT.com