We get it. The effort to appeal to millennials by trying to appear hip.

There’s Michelle Obama’s latest stint dancing with Big Bird in a supermarket on comedian Billy Eichner’s frenzied game show “Billy on the Street.”

Or the president’s interview with a woman who bathes in a tub full of milk and Froot Loops.

Or the commander-in-chief filming himself with a selfie stick for a BuzzFeed video that came with the catch-phrase: “You do you.”

We get it.

It’s. Just. Not. Cool.

Let us count the ways…Remember Pajama Boy? This was the hipster man-child who tried to sell ObamaCare while wearing a red plaid onesie with the ad: “Wear pajamas. Drink hot chocolate. Talk about getting health insurance. #gettalking”

Or the “Life of Julia,” a cartoon slideshow of how Obama sees a woman’s life? From ages 3 to 67, it illustrates how the government (and Obama) was there at every stage to make it better?

And let’s not forget the “Got Insurance” ad campaign throughout Colorado — you remember, the one with the college guys standing on kegs with the caption: “Not sure how I ended up here perched on top of this keg. I could totally fall, but that’s OK. My budget will stay balanced even if I don’t, because I got insurance.”

Again, we get it. The youth vote was crucial to Obama’s election as president in both 2008 and 2012, and he feels he needs to prove he still has the connection.

But at a certain point, even a president and a first lady can look less like hip adults and more like middle-aged moms and dads trying just a little too hard.

Mostly the Obamas have tried to use their millennial vibe to persuade the young it’s their duty to sign up for ObamaCare.

That’s because without a whole lot of healthy, young people to fund sick, older people, it would collapse.

But guess what? Millennials might be inexperienced, but even they’ve figured out this isn’t such a great deal. And even the most liberal millennial will not appreciate getting an IRS fine in the mail for failing to sign up.

In the end, millennials aren’t running to sign up for ObamaCare in droves; they’re taking to Twitter to tweet about how silly and embarrassing the president looks.

You do you, Mr. and Mrs. O.