University of Notre Dame officials hope to have a plan in place and begin construction on phase two of Eddy Street Commons in 2016.

Phase one is nearly complete.

Tenants were told during a meeting last week that Embassy Suites has been secured to build a full-service hotel on the vacant site between McAlister's Deli and the Fairfield Inn & Suites on Angela Boulevard.

Embassy Suites construction is expected to start next spring.

Notre Dame officials have been surveying faculty, staff and students about what they want to see in the next phase of the mixed-use development south of campus.

"No specifics have been determined," says Greg Hakanen, Notre Dame's director of Northeast Neighborhood Redevelopment. "The collaborative planning process takes time."

But we know that phase two will extend south on Eddy Street from Napoleon Boulevard toward Indiana 23.

And like phase one, Hakanen anticipates the new development will comprise a mix of restaurants and stores, as well as rental and for-sale housing.

The exact amount of commercial space and precise number of residential units have yet to be determined, however, and no tentative ground-breaking date or construction timetable has been released.

But it's unlikely the two phases will mirror one another.

Rather, they will complement each other.

"The amount of each product in phase two will be based on current market demand," Hakanen says. "We've heard what you've heard, particularly interest in more restaurants — especially unique locally owned and operated concepts — and a grocery store."

Notre Dame officials are planning to meet with Kite Realty Group to seek the Indianapolis-based company's input.

The upcoming discussion, however, does not mean Kite has been selected for the second phase.

"Kite has earned 'first look' at phase two, but formal selection will depend on identifying a mutually agreeable development plan," Hakanen says.

Once Notre Dame is ready to share development concepts, university officials say they will reach out to the community through the Northeast Neighborhood Revitalization Organization and the Northeast Neighborhood Council for input.

"Engaging those constituents most affected by development results in a plan that has broad support, and therefore actually streamlines the approval process," Hakanen says.

Sonia Stancombe, who owns Nicholas J. Salon & Spa on Eddy Street, relays tenant excitement about the hotel.

"Everyone is thrilled to see what Embassy Suites will bring to our area," Stancombe says. "It's so important that every business that comes to Eddy Street realizes that it's part of something special and it can be an amazing move for the company, like it has been for us."

Nicholas J. Salon is adding stations and stylists to accommodate the growing demand for its services.

"We employ 18 and are looking to add four to five new stylists. I know several businesses on Eddy Street are hiring," Stancombe says. "We underestimated the amount of traffic Eddy Street would bring."

Mall updates

What child doesn't enjoy a bounce house? A new inflatables center now offers kids the chance to have fun and burn off energy at University Park Mall in Mishawaka.

Benton Harbor-based Colby Event Services offers bounce houses, a double slide and an obstacle course in its space near the U.P. Mall food court. Kids from walking age through age 12 will be in Colby Bounce, which also operates locations at Concord Mall in Elkhart and Orchards Mall in Benton Harbor.

The cost is $6 for 15 minutes, $8 for 30 minutes or $10 for an hour of play. Adult or parent supervision is required. Socks are also required and can be purchased for a dollar.

In other mall news, the Starbucks kiosk is now open near the Apple store. The kiosk offers hot and cold beverages, food, and seating for about 20. The Barnes & Noble Starbucks cafe will remain open. Gloria Jeans provides another coffee option at the mall.

Little Princess Treasures also has opened its doors at the former Ann Taylor space near Barnes & Noble. The locally owned children's boutique closed its Granger store several weeks ago at 12435 Indiana 23. The shop carries kids apparel up to 24 months, as well as accessories, toys and gifts. ​

Have you heard

Copper Creek Cafe will reopen Monday at 12797 Indiana 23, in Granger, at the former Grill 23 and Between the Buns building on the corner of Princess Way. Copper Creek will be open from 7 a.m. to 3 p.m. seven days a week. … Spaghetti Joe's recently opened its doors at 26222 Edison Road in South Bend. The restaurant is open from 4 to 8 p.m. Thursday through Saturday, closed Sunday through Wednesday. ... And enjoy your Mother's Day.

Heidi Prescott’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact her at hprescott@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6070. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket. Hear her weekday reports at 6:52 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on The WSBT Morning News with JT at WSBT-AM (960) and WSBT-FM (96.1). The Market Basket Minute appears on the WSBT-TV First News at 4 on Thursdays.