Findings from a hearing between the district and teachers' union state the district didn't act 'in good faith' during contract negotiations

The results of arbitration between the Thompson School District and the Thompson Education Association came out Friday in favor of the teachers' union.

The two groups took part in a third-party arbitration hearing in Littleton July 25 after the teachers' union filed two grievances against the district.

The grievances asserted that the district did not negotiate in good faith during negotiations for a teachers' contract, known as a memorandum of understanding, and violated provisions of the agreement in effect, including through the Board of Education's refusal to ratify the contract after negotiations had completed between the district and teachers' union.

TEA representatives had asked the arbitrator to recommend the board be required to ratify the contract, but representatives from the district said the arbitrator did not have the authority to do so.

Arbitrator John A. Criswell, former Colorado Court of Appeals judge, said "While I have found that at least a majority of the members of the Board that voted not to ratify did so for improper reasons," he declined to require the board to ratify the contract because he considered it "inappropriate."

Criswell's recommendations were for the board to "remedy its contract violation" by taking a new vote on the second contract the TEA brought to the board that was voted down.

Advertisement

"In doing so, no member's vote should be based on a rejection of TEA's exclusive status or on any reason other than a dissatisfaction with one or more specific provisions of that proposal that had been the subject of prior negotiations," Criswell's findings stated.

That includes, the report continued, each member being fully informed about the provisions he or she objects to, and Criswell cited the pay for performance provision as an example, an issue that he wrote at least one board member had cited as one of the reasons to reject the contract.

"To insist upon a provision that the DISTRICT's own representative said was impossible to achieve during the time set for these negotiations would not be reflective of a good faith effort to reach some agreement," the report stated.

If the board doesn't approve the contract, Criswell stated that mediation — open to the public — should take place. If the two groups still can't reach an agreement for a contract, he wrote, then the mediator should announce recommendations for a settlement.

The Board of Education is required to discuss the findings in its first meeting following the recommendations and will have 30 days from that meeting to accept or reject the non-binding recommendations.

"Obviously, we'd love to have the board ratify (the contract) Wednesday night before kids come back (to school) on Friday morning, TEA President Andy Crisman said, adding that he understood the board had more time to make a decision.

Crisman said he was gratified to read the arbitrator's findings because "it was a lot of hard work in negotiations."

"We tried really hard to meet the needs of everyone's concerns ... so, I was very happy to see that the arbitrator respected that work," he said.

Crisman said he thinks the arbitrator's recommendations are fair — "It provides an opportunity for the board to act and to speak in good faith, and it provides a couple of opportunities for us ... to reach a resolution."

If the board rejects the arbitrator's recommendations, Crisman said the group will have to evaluate its options for legal remedies.

School district Superintendent Stan Scheer said district staff members have avoided conversations about negotiations with board members, so as not to violate the Colorado voter-approved Proposition 104, which requires discussions for negotiations to be open to the public.

He declined to make a statement about the findings, saying he respected the board members enough to let them have the opportunity to discuss the findings first and make a determination.

The board has set aside 30 minutes in its agenda at its 6 p.m. meeting Wednesday, Aug. 19, at 800 S. Taft Ave. to have a discussion about the arbitration hearing.

To read the full arbitrator's report, go to: http://www.coloradoea.org/docs/default-source/C4O---Center-for-Organizing/arbitrator's-report-thompson.pdf?sfvrsn=2

Saja Hindi: 970-669-5050 ext. 521, hindis@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/SajaHindiRH.