Associated Press

Private equity firm OpenGate Capital has agreed to sell the owner of TV Guide magazine, after a seven-year turnaround that helped rejuvenate a once ubiquitous magazine title.

The firm sold TVGM Holdings LLC, the owner of TV Guide magazine and its digital platform TVInsider.com, to specialist publisher NTVB Media LLC for an undisclosed sum, according to a news release.

The sale process attracted “a number” of interested strategic and financial buyers, said Reed Phillips, chief executive and managing partner of Desilva + Phillips LLC, the investment bank that served as an adviser on the deal.

Before TV Guide even hit the sale block, the company was garnering interested parties, said Robert Lezec, a partner at OpenGate.

“I think a lot of people were impressed with the turnaround executed by OpenGate and the management team,” said Mr. Phillips. “From the strategic buyers’ standpoint, it was a chance to acquire a stand-alone business and put it together with existing publications where they already had resources, making TV Guide even more efficient and [increasing] revenue opportunities.”

Mr. Phillips said this was particularly apt for the winning buyer, NTVB, a Troy, Mich., publisher of TV entertainment and listings magazines. “The financial investors were interested because of the strong brand name [of TV Guide],” he added.

The print industry has continued to struggle with declining advertising revenue. Much of the deal flow in the sector has been based around consolidation, which often allows for cost cuts.

Declining revenue has led to a smaller number of stand-alone players, said Mr. Phillips. “There are outliers, like The Economist, that got sold for an off-the-charts price, but more often it’s a consolidation deal,” he added.

New York-based TV Guide struggled for years before OpenGate purchased it. Once a publication seen on the coffee tables of many American homes, TV Guide in recent years faced declining print advertising, according to the OpenGate release announcing the sale. TV Guide saw its circulation drop to 3.3 million by 2007 from its 1975 peak of 19.7 million, according to a 2008 story in LBO Wire.

Macrovision Solutions Corp. paid $2.8 billion for Gemstar-TV Guide International Inc. in early 2008, which included the TV Guide publication and its namesake cable channel, TV Guide channel (later sold and rebranded as the Pop). Macrovision quickly decided to sell the TV Guide magazine division and OpenGate bought TV Guide magazine later that year for a payment of $1 and the assumption of $50 million in liabilities. As part of the deal, Macrovision also agreed to loan OpenGate $9.5 million at 3% interest.

“When we acquired the business in 2008, it was losing a lot of money and the previous owners weren’t putting a lot of faith in the future of it,” said OpenGate’s Mr. Lezec. “Literally, within the first year of OpenGate’s ownership, we took it from making a significant loss to being profitable, and repositioned it to be more relevant.”

The firm changed the magazine’s editorial content, helped revitalize the brand and its digital direction, and enacted a series of cost-cutting measures that included outsourcing both production and circulation management, and reducing head count, said Mr. Lezec.

OpenGate’s turnaround of TV Guide hit one bump early on in the firm’s ownership. Less than a year after the acquisition, TV Guide’s president and chief executive at the time, Scott Crystal, resigned, accusing OpenGate of draining the company’s cash flow, in part for charging fees for its consulting and advisory services, according to media reports at the time. OpenGate said at the time that Mr. Crystal’s accusations were “both inaccurate and unfortunate.”

As of spring 2015, TV Guide magazine registered a total audience of 12.4 million per issue, according to demographic statistics provided on the publication’s website. Its audience had a median age of nearly 49 years and was 58% female, according to TV Guide.

Last year, TV Guide changed its leadership, with Chief Operating Officer David J. Fishman appointed chief executive after Jack Kilger resigned from the post.

“We’re very positive about this deal. We had a great run with OpenGate and now have a longer vision with NTVB,” said Mr. Fishman.

There are many complimentary business areas between NTVB and TV Guide that will enable them to work together in “a collaborative way,” said Mr. Fishman. NTVB publishes other TV entertainment and listings magazines such as TV Weekly, Channel Guide Magazine and View! Magazine. “Our goal is to move TV ratings,” Mr. Fishman added.

However, Mr. Fishman said there weren’t any plans to further cut costs. “The [chief executive] of NTVB [Andrew DeAngelis] isn’t trying to do a private equity cost-cutting strategy,” said Mr. Fishman. “We’re not looking to cut our way to growth.”

OpenGate was founded in 2005 by former Platinum Equity executive Andrew Nikou. After a decade of investing its founders’ capital, OpenGate came to market earlier this year to raise its first institutional fund, with an offering amount of $300 million, according to a filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission.

Write to Lillian at Lillian.Rizzo@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @Lilliannnn