Club for Growth is targeting a pair of vulnerable Senate Democrats by highlighting their support of President Barack Obama's health care law.

The right-leaning free enterprise group unveiled new television ads Tuesday comparing Sens. Mark Pryor (D-Ark.) and Mark Begich (D-Alaska) to a parrot, repeating some of the administration's promises that fell short in the implementation of the law.

"Mark Pryor and Mark Begich voted for ObamaCare and then they parroted Obama’s false promise that if you liked your plan you could keep it," Club for Growth President Chris Chocola said in a statement.

"Instead of sending back a reliable vote for President Obama and his failed agenda to the Senate, voters in Arkansas and Alaska have a better choice," he added. "[Rep. Tom Cotton (R-Ark.) and [Anchorage Mayor] Dan Sullivan are pro-taxpayer fighters for economic freedom who will fight Obama and his reckless, job-killing agenda in Congress. Mark Pryor and Mark Begich won’t."

The ads, which are backed by a $300,000 buy, close by showing bird droppings splatter on a New York Times front page from the day the law was passed.

Watch one of the ads above.

UPDATE:

The Pryor campaign noted several problems with the Club for Growth spot. In an interview used in the ad, the Arkansas senator was actually referring to businesses when he said "are we going to be able to stick with our plan; the answer is yes," while the president's promise referred to individuals.

Furthermore, the campaign said, insurance providers in Arkansas could follow a recent Obama administration directive allowing people with sub-standard plans that don't meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act to stay on them as late as 2017.

Correction: A previous version of this article incorrectly identified the Republican running to unseat Begich. Dan Sullivan is a former state attorney general. The mayor of Anchorage, also named Dan Sullivan, is running for lieutenant governor.

Also on HuffPost: Senate Seats Up For Grabs In 2014 Senate Seats Up For Grabs In 2014

1 of 33 Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-Ala.) Status: Running for re-election Sen. Jeff Sessions (R-AL) speaks during the DC March for Jobs in Upper Senate Park near Capitol Hill, on July 15, 2013 in Washington, DC. (Photo by Drew Angerer/Getty Images) Share this slide:

Getty Images