NASHVILLE, Tenn. -- A Nashville restaurant turns into talking point about affordable health care on the House floor.

Congressman Diane Black says Noshville Deli's closing, due to health care costs, is an example of why congress should repeal Obamacare.

The U.S. House and Senate both just passed bills that would repeal part of the Affordable Care Act. Rep. Black says its needs to happen to save businesses.

"Mr. Speaker, the Nashville deli is a one-of-a-kind but sadly its story is not," said Rep. Black.

A place known for its sandwiches and fries is now making a point for Republicans.

"Financially, the business will take a loss," said Tom Loventhall, owner of Noshville.

"A music city institution, the Noshville Deli, announced this week that it would close its doors after 19 years because of the onerous mandates and high cost of this law," said Rep. Black.

In January, under the Affordable Care Act, businesses with 50 employees or more will have to provide health insurance to its workers. For the owner of Noshville, it meant coughing-up about $100,000 a year. He decided to close his Midtown location to avoid the costly mandate. A record shop, The Great Escape, tell us that it's not expanding past 45 workers get around the law.

"It is being repeated across the country, every single day," said Rep. Black.

A reconciliation bill is making its way through congress that could repeal the penalties businesses would face for not providing workers health insurance. The president promises to veto it.

"I think of a single mother with two kids, trying to raise two kids, and she is trying to do it with a $20,000 to $25,000 a year income," said Jeff Dempsey, an insurance agent with HealthTN. "The Affordable Care Act helps her provide health insurance for her and her children."

Advocates say the Affordable Care Act makes health insurance accessible to everyone. Rep. Black says what it does not do is create jobs.

"I would invite them to come to Noshville where they can get a good meal and a healthy dose of reality," said Rep. Black.

If businesses don't pay for workers health insurance starting in January, they will get fined $2,000 per employee.

The reconciliation bill needs to just get through the House before it's handed to the president.