Discussing health care The Arkansas Minority Health Commission held a health fair and Affordable Care Act community meeting on Saturday at the Forrest City Civic Center. There were several health care booths set up, presenters and In Person Assisters (IPAs) helping people sign up for health care. Casey Lewis, right, with the Arkansas Department of Health, speaks with Carreather Perry about the dangers of tobacco. Photo by Alan Smith.

COUNCIL TO CONSIDER ABOLISHING COMMISSION

The three remaining members of the Forrest City Water Utility Commission unanimously selected Calvin Murdock of Marianna as the new manager of the utility during a special called meeting Friday evening.

Commissioners met three times last week in the process to hire a new manager.

The meetings started Wednesday as chairman Jimmy King and commissioners Gloria Anthony and Michael Jeffers sorted through nine applications for the position. The group agreed to interview interim manager Edward Gregory, Murdock and Cedric Ali Bey of Wynne.

Commissioners interviewed Gregory and Murdock on Thursday. King stated after that meeting that Ali Bey notified the commission that he would not be able to attend the Thursday meeting due to illness. King said the commission would continue the process and hold another called meeting to vote on the manager.

After the Times-Herald was published on Friday, King notified the newspaper that a meeting to name the new manager would be held at 5:30 p.m., at the Forrest City Civic Center.

The meeting on Friday was attended by city council members Steve Hollowell, Danny Capps and Henry Peacock, along with Gregory and the commission’s attorney, Andre Valley. As soon as King called the meeting to order, the group went into executive session to discuss the candidates.

The session lasted for about a half-hour before King reopened the meeting.

"At this time, we've selected the candidate that will be the next general manager," King said. "That candidate will be Calvin Murdock. So, at this time we need to vote. I need a motion."

Jeffers made the motion, which was seconded by Anthony. All three commissioners voted to approve Murdock as the new manager.

King also requested permission to negotiate Murdock's salary should he accept the position.

"I would like the board to give me permission to negotiate with the candidate with the base salary of $65,000," King said.

Jeffers asked if the salary would be annually, and King said it would be.

Anthony made the motion, which was seconded by Jeffers, and the request was approved unanimously.

Gregory was named interim manager for the utility after Jim Beazley retired from that position in October.

As interim manager, Gregory has been working under a contract that would allow him to return to his previous position as water treatment supervisor should he not be selected as the utility’s permanent manager.

Having no other business, the meeting was adjourned.

The vote by the commission to hire Murdock as manager comes just days before the Forrest City City Council is scheduled to hear the third and final reading of an ordinance that would abolish the commission.

The ordinance was first presented by Hollowell in September but was tabled after the second reading in October. The matter is on the council's agenda for Tuesday night's regular meeting, which begins at 6 p.m., at city hall.