This article was initially published as a letter to subscribers of The Upshot’s newsletter. You can sign up for the email here to get this and all of the best of The Upshot.

It is “socialized medicine,” and it forces “all citizens, regardless of need, into a compulsory government program.” From this program, “it’s a short step to all the rest of socialism.”

If you know your health care history, you know the person who leveled these charges was Ronald Reagan, and you know that he leveled them against Medicare. His opposition to the program – which he predicted would force Americans “to spend our sunset years telling our children and our children’s children what it once was like in America when men were free” – helped turn him from an actor into a conservative star in the early 1960s.

I thought of Reagan and Medicare last week, after the instant political analysis of Supreme Court decision in King v. Burwell. Pundits, both conservative and liberal, quickly pronounced the 6-to-3 ruling that upheld a central part of President Obama’s health law to be a political gift not only to Mr. Obama but to Republicans, too.

“Phew,” one anonymous Republican told NBC’s Luke Russert. Rick Wilson, a party strategist, told The Washington Post that he was “relieved,” noting the decision would keep the Republicans in the 2016 elections from having to endure advertisements “where a weeping Hispanic woman looks at the camera and says ‘They took away my son’s health care. Now he’s dead.’ ”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

This political analysis isn’t wrong, as far as it goes. A ruling undoing parts of the health law could indeed have hurt Republicans in 2016. But the analysis is still a bit strange when you think about it.

Republicans, after all, have made undoing the law known as Obamacare their central domestic priority over the past five years. The House of Representatives has voted to repeal part or all of the program more than 50 times. Conservative groups have devoted thousands of hours and millions of dollars to the legal cases that the Supreme Court has now cast aside.

Yet now most experts believe that Obamacare is here to stay. Even if Republicans win back the White House in 2016, they are unlikely to have as good an opportunity to damage the law as the Supreme Court had. They would face the same problem that Mr. Wilson bluntly described. The Republicans can still win the electoral battle in 2016, but they appear to have lost the policy war over health care.

Photo

How, then, can the court’s ruling in favor of the health law – a ruling whose details were even more favorable to the law’s long-term standing than many court watchers expected – be good for Republicans?

The short answer is that it isn’t, not if you believe politics exists as a lever to affect government. The longer answer is that Republicans had already lost the war, well before the court ruled on Thursday.

They lost it in 2014, when the law began providing real benefits to millions of people – health insurance to a combination of middle-class, poor and sick Americans who could not have afforded it otherwise. Modern American history makes clear that once the social safety net expands in a major way, it’s almost impossible for anyone to reverse it.

Politicians and entire parties often oppose expansions before they happen, warning, as happened with Social Security, Medicare and the Affordable Care Act, that they would cause grave harm. In the 1930s, the Supreme Court blocked parts of the New Deal from taking effect. But when a program begins preventing elderly people from sliding into poverty or allowing cancer patients to receive treatment – when the beneficiaries morph from hypothetical to real – the politics are transformed.

Earlier this year, I asked historians for the closest analogy to a Supreme Court decision undoing a large part of the health law, and the best answer anyone had was the backlash to Reconstruction. Of course, that happened almost 150 years ago, and it could happen only because African-Americans were not yet considered full citizens. Since then, any large government program that improved millions of lives, once underway and functioning well, has endured.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Reagan, whose political instincts were generally fabulous, understood this point. In his speech (which the American Medical Association distributed as an LP in 1961), he gleefully quoted a proponent of Medicare as saying, “If we can only break through and get our foot inside the door, then we can expand the program after that.”

What Reagan got wrong, however, was the definition of socialism. Under socialism, the government controls every major sector of the economy. Under capitalism, most activity happens in private markets, and the government steps in to handle areas where the market struggles to earn a profit – be it defending the country, policing the streets, educating children or providing medical care to the sick and the elderly.

The best sign that government-guaranteed health insurance doesn’t equal socialism is that Reagan, a president committed to defeating socialism, changed his position on Medicare once it became law. As president, he not only didn’t try to repeal it; he vowed to protect it. Two decades later, another Republican president – George W. Bush – expanded it, just as Reagan predicted it would expand in 1961.

The reaction to last week’s Supreme Court decision was a sign that Obamacare has entered the very beginnings of its Medicare phase. The law will still come under attack, especially rhetorically. But it’s here to stay. We know that because some of its most virulent opponents just decided that a victory for Obamacare was actually a victory for them.