Haiti’s Tourism Minister Stephanie Balmir Villedrouin speaks during an interview with the Wall Street Journal. Keith Bedford for The Wall Street Journal

The Haitian government is seeking partners for a seemingly daunting task: building a world-class resort destination in one of the world’s poorest countries.

This nation of 10 million people has chosen a 16-mile stretch of largely unoccupied beachfront on the country’s southern coast, known as Côté de Fer, on which to build. Haiti’s Ministry of Tourism estimates it will need up to $350 million in private investment to develop the area, including infrastructure such as utilities, a sewer system and roads.

The plan calls for a new international airport, an 18-hole golf course and 4,000 new hotel rooms, which would be a 50% increase from the island’s current room count.

The government is aiming for the first phase of the plan, which includes four hotels and the airport with its own passport station, to open by 2017.

Côté de Fer would represent Haiti’s most ambitious hotel and real-estate project in 30 years. But the challenges the country faces in raising money show how hard it can be to lure investors to a natural tourism destination racked with poverty and crime.

Tourism minister Stephanie Villedrouin Balmir has been traveling the U.S. and Europe trying to line up investors as well as hotel operators to run the properties. Her pitch: a 15-year tax-free investment period and the chance to get in on the ground floor.

“We are telling them that this is an amazing opportunity to create a new destination in the Caribbean,” she says.

There has been some interest but few solid commitments. Grupo PuntaCana, a Dominican Republic-based airport operator, has agreed to build and manage the airport and to make an investment for an undisclosed amount, Ms. Villedrouin Balmir says.

More In Haiti Haiti Hopes For Help — But Not Charity

A spokeswoman for Grupo PuntaCana said the company is working with the Haitian government and “has invested in the planning, designs and studies necessary for the development of this new destination.”

The Inter-American Development Bank, an organization that supports development projects in Latin America and the Caribbean, has agreed to spend $36 million to upgrade waterfalls, caves and other points of nature in neighboring villages. Côté de Fer is located between the beach and a mountain range, apart from the rest of the island.

Rick Newton, founding partner of the travel-advisory firm Resort Capital Partners LLC, sees reason for skepticism that it can succeed. Besides raising the money, Haiti needs to convince airlines to add flights to Côté de Fer. It also has to train thousands of workers. Haiti would be years behind competing Caribbean destinations like Mexico and the Bahamas.

Read the full story at wsj.com.