Hoping to ease fears among legal residents whose family members are undocumented, Covered California officials on Wednesday partnered with several immigrant rights groups to assure those who qualify that applying for health coverage would not lead to deportations.

The assurances were made in a news conference in downtown Los Angeles where Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee was joined by members of Latino and Asian groups as well as officials with the U.S. Department of Homeland Security. They all said that information provided when applying for health coverage will not be used for immigration enforcement purposes.

“There is fear that the information provided will be used to deport the undocumented family members,” said Pedro Ribeiro, assistant director for Homeland Security. “This is absolutely not true. Let me repeat that, this is absolutely not true. “The information will not be shared with Immigration and Customs Enforcement. No American who is eligible should be afraid to apply for coverage because they have someone in the family who has mixed immigration status.”

Under the Affordable Care Act, any U.S. citizen or person who is lawfully present in California is eligible for insurance through Covered California, the state’s health plan exchange, even if they have family members in their household who are undocumented.

But among the 2 million remaining uninsured in California, the majority are Latinos. And more than half of those who qualify for health insurance plans or Medi-Cal through the state exchange say they are worried that getting coverage will draw attention to their families’ immigration status, according to a survey completed in July by the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Lee has said that the goal is to enroll a half-million new people through Covered California this period, but that goal comes with a set of new challenges, including breaking the culture of coping without health coverage.

“We want everyone to know that when you apply for health insurance through a health insurance marketplace like Covered California, all of your information is kept private and secure,” Lee said. “It will not be shared with or used by any immigration agency to enforce immigration laws. All information you submit is used strictly to determine your eligibility for health insurance programs available under the Affordable Care Act.”

Lee was joined by members of the Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund or MALDEF, the National Immigration Law Center, Asian Americans Advancing Justice — Los Angeles, the National Association of Latino Elected and Appointed Officials or NALEO Educational Fund, the Coalition for Humane Immigrant Rights of Los Angeles and the California Immigrant Policy Center.

Advertisement

The partnership builds on Covered California’s momentum to spread the word about enrollment, which began on Nov. 15 and continues through Feb. 15. On Tuesday, Covered California also announced a partnership with the California Medical Association and a dozen other physician, hospital and pharmacist groups to promote enrollment.

“Families need adequate health coverage, so no family should have to avoid seeking coverage because of understandable concerns about a political atmosphere that continues to demonize certain immigrants,” said Thomas Saenz, president and general counsel for MALDEF.

“We are thankful that Covered California and the Department of Homeland Security have made it crystal clear that immigration enforcement and health coverage should not and will not mix,” Saenz said.

Though Latinos are most often in the spotlight regarding issues of immigration, members from Asian communities also may hold back from applying for health care coverage, said Stewart Kwoh, president and executive director of <URL destination="http://www.advancingjustice-la.org/">Asian Americans Advancing Justice, Los Angeles.

</URL>“There are an estimated 1.3 million undocumented Asian-Americans and Pacific Islanders in the nation, and we hope that this guidance encourages members of our community to seek coverage without fear of getting a family member deported,” Kwoh said.

Arturo Vargas, executive director with NALEO’s Educational Fund, called the partnership with Covered California a high-stakes move and said his group would work to ensure that information shared by Latinos for the purpose of health coverage eligibility would be strictly confidential.

“With the highest rates of being uninsured, Latino immigrants who are eligible must take advantage of the opportunity to pursue health insurance coverage for themselves and their families,” Vargas said. “The health of Latinos will determine the future health of the state.”

Those who are undocumented in Los Angeles County have been enrolled in a $61 million program called My Health L.A. Through the program, people are assigned to one of 164 community clinics countywide that will become their medical home.

Earlier this week, Sen. Ricardo Lara, D-Bell Gardens, introduced SB 4 — the Health for All Act of 2015. It is the second time Lara introduced a bill that would expand access to health insurance coverage to all Californians regardless of immigration status.

“Access to health care is a human rights issue and until everyone is included, our work is unfinished,” Lara said in a statement. “I look forward to working with a broad coalition of immigrant, health care and legislative advocates to achieve the goal of health for all in the coming year.”