Just after the horrific slaughter of nine African-American churchgoers in Charleston, South Carolina, President Barack Obama openly doubted the latest shooting spree would change things in a nation awash in guns – and with lawmakers so controlled by National Rifle Association that the massacre of 20 suburban first-graders in a Connecticut elementary school more than two years ago couldn't get them to act.

Meaningful reform of gun laws, he told reporters just after the Charleston shooting, "is not going to happen in this Congress."

While likely true, Dan Gross, president of the Brady Campaign to Prevent Gun Violence, thinks the reform the president seeks is closer than any time since Adam Lanza burst into the Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, and opened fire that tragic December day. If you take the long view, he says, real change is unmistakably on the horizon – even if the bloodshed in Charleston makes it harder for Obama and others to see.

[OPINION: Getting Rid of the Confederate Flag Is the Easy Part]

"It's not a question of if or whether," Gross says. "It's a question of when."

That flies in the face of the prevailing narrative that the push for stricter firearms-access laws is a lost cause, at least for now.

While the NRA has maintained official silence on the Charleston shooting, it came out swinging weeks after the Newtown shooting, in the form of President Wayne LaPierre's unrepentant "good guy with a gun" speech, and it still remains a powerful political force. Practically every 2016 Republican presidential candidate – and at least one Democrat –supports so-called Second Amendment rights and a majority of the GOP-controlled Congress gets a thumbs-up from the gun lobby.

Meanwhile, public opinion, and pressure on lawmakers, seems to be in retreat. Just two years after clear outrage at the bloodshed in Connecticut, at least one poll shows a majority of respondents seem more interested in protecting the right to own a gun, hardly a surprise in a country where studies show there are 88 guns for every 100 people.

Yet Gross and other gun-control advocates say that, after decades of uphill fights against the NRA – arguably the wealthiest, most powerful political organization in America – their side has quickly reached more level ground in a much longer war. Grassroots support is surging through organization and fundraising, they say, politicians are heeding their money if not their message, and the shooting at Sandy Hook Elementary School in Newtown, Connecticut, was the catalyst.

"I don't think that 'resurrection' is the right term because I don't think anything has died. In fact, it's only grown in momentum since the terrible tragedy in Sandy Hook," Gross said. "There hasn't been this much momentum behind the reforms that we seek, which is around background checks, in decades."

There's no doubt that the NRA deserves its reputation as perhaps the most influential political organization in the country, with power over some Democrats as well as Republicans. Obama acknowledged as much in a statement the day after the Charleston shooting.

Appearing in the White House's James S. Brady Press Briefing room – named for President Ronald Reagan's press secretary, who was shot and critically wounded in an assassination attempt against the president – Obama predicted the nation would one day have to account for the blood on its hands from gun violence, even if that day wasn't yet at hand.

"At some point, we as a country will have to reckon with the fact that this type of mass violence does not happen in other advanced countries," he said. "It doesn't happen in other places with this kind of frequency. And it is in our power to do something about it. I say that recognizing the politics in this town foreclose a lot of those avenues right now."

The resignation, to most, seemed appropriate: six months after the Sandy Hook shooting, the Senate voted down a bipartisan bill sponsored by Sens. Pat Toomey, a Pennsylvania Republican, and Joe Manchin, a West Virginia Democrat, that some called a modest expansion of federally-mandated criminal background checks, one that would have closed a loophole for gun purchases online or at gun shows. Despite strong public opinion for tightening gun laws, a procedural move killed the bill by just six votes.

[READ: The NRA Should Send Obama a 'Thank You' Card]

Since then, the NRA has quietly opened a new front in the gun rights fight: state-level laws that allow the carrying of weapons openly or under cover without training, or even a government-issued permit. The so-called constitutional-carry laws are now on the books in six states, including Kansas, Wyoming, Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas and Vermont, and are being considered in several others.

In February, Texas Sen. John Cornyn introduced a bill that would treat concealed-weapons permits like drivers' licenses, allowing a permit from one state to be recognized in another. Cornyn told The Hill that the bill would "eliminate some of the 'gotcha moments,' where people inadvertently cross state lines" with guns they are legally allowed to carry in their home state.

Meanwhile the 15 leading potential Republican presidential contenders own 40 guns among them, according to the Washington Post – including South Carolina's Sen. Lindsey Graham, who owns military-grade assault rifles, and insists he isn't afraid to use them if the need arises. Yet Sen. Bernie Sanders, a Vermont socialist who's been pushing front-runner Hillary Clinton to the left for the Democratic presidential nomination, is on good terms with the NRA; he represents a state with a strong gun culture.

Gross, however, says he's bullish on reform, even though he was in the Senate gallery the day several moderate Democrats joined Republicans to kill the Toomey-Manchin bill.

Sitting with Sarah Brady – the wife of James Brady, his organization's namesake – Gross recalls a feeling of crushing defeat and sadness; months of intense lobbying on a lifetime crusade, it seemed, was gone in an instant that felt like a lifetime.

"Sarah looked at me and basically told me to buck up," Gross says. "She said two things: sometimes it takes a good loss – and what she meant is this is an opportunity to really demonstrate to the American public the extent to which our elected public leaders aren't doing right by us – and she also reminded me what it took: The Brady Bill [which mandated background checks] didn't pass that first time."

That's the cause for his optimism, Gross says: James Brady was shot in 1981, and it took Congress six votes over seven years before former President Bill Clinton signed it into law in 1993. His message to naysayers who doubt the Charleston shooting will have an impact is the same he heard from Sarah Brady: Buck up.

"This kind of change doesn't happen overnight and it doesn't happen in the aftermath of a tragedy, however terrible," Gross says. "I don't think we can give in to pessimism even in Congress. Anyone who says it can't be done is just arming Congress with an excuse to continue their current course of inaction, which costs lives every single day.

"We need to look at this in the context to what it took to pass the original Brady Law."

Ladd Everitt, communications director of the grassroots Coalition to Stop Gun Violence, concurs: he says there has been "an enormous amount of progress" in the gun-control movement since the Sandy Hook massacre. That includes PAC-sized organizations that have the financial resources to go toe-to-toe with the NRA, such as the Gabrielle Giffords-sponsored Americans for Responsible Solutions, and Everytown for Gun Safety, founded by billionaire former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg.

[OPINION: Yes, It's the Guns]

Like the NRA, those groups have millions of dollars at their disposal to support – or oppose –political candidates, depending on their position on handguns, Everitt says. That kind of money talks, and candidates who want to win are compelled to listen.

"I wouldn't argue we have totally loosened the [NRA's] grip," he says, "but we have made progress. The NRA is not going to fold their tent and go away. The NRA is an enormously powerful and influential organization. This is going to be a slog. We're not going to win the battle overnight."

It's equally as clear that the NRA isn't feeling the threat: with the exception of New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, all of the announced Republican presidential candidates have NRA legislative ratings of A-plus, the organization's highest rating, or A-minus – its second-highest rating. LaPierre delivered a fire-and-brimstone speech at the Conservative Political Action Conference in February, and 11 of the GOP candidates showed up at the NRA's national convention in April.

At the same time, a December 2014 Pew Research Center poll had bad news for the gun-control movement: for the first time, a majority of respondents favored gun rights over gun control, 52 percent to 49 percent.

The Brady Center's Gross wasn't impressed, he says the opposition has battled the NRA to a virtual draw at the state level, with expanded background checks on the books in 18 states, and "we're already on the ballot for a ballot initiative in Nevada." That push will continue, Gross says, "in as many states as it takes for Congress to wake up and get the message that this is something the people support."

There are signs it's already happening: Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid said last week he'd use his power to bring a gun-control bill to the floor, while Manchin and Toomey say they're going to count votes to determine if they've got enough support in the Senate for another try. And four months ago, West Virginia Gov. Earl Ray Tomblin – Manchin's gubernatorial successor – vetoed a constitutional-carry law in his state, calling it a threat to law enforcement.

Even Obama seems to have swept aside his public cynicism. He issued a fundraising email to supporters urging them to "join the fight" for gun control at the local level.

"People across the country are stepping up, and supporters and volunteers are working to prevent gun violence state by state and city by city – join the fight today," the email reads.