Kayla DeLaRosa won the 2014 Pepsi State Finals U15 category sanctioned by the United States Bowling Congress in Colorado Springs in April, earning her a trip to the Junior Gold Championships in Buffalo, N.Y. next month. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Kayla DeLaRosa won the 2014 Pepsi State Finals U15 category sanctioned by the United States Bowling Congress in Colorado Springs in April, earning her a trip to the Junior Gold Championships in Buffalo, N.Y. next month. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Bowling Fundraiser The DeLaRosas' trip to New York won't be a cheap one. The hotel alone will cost about $1,400. To save on costs, the family will drive to Buffalo, N.Y. rather than fly. To raise funds to help the family, Cañon City Lanes will host a nine-pin bowling tournament, and proceeds will go to the family's trip expenses. The cost to participate in the July 5 fundraiser is $15. — Brandon Hopper

A turkey in April earned a Cañon City girl a trip to New York in July.

Local bowler Kayla DeLaRosa, 14, won the 2014 Pepsi State Finals U15 category sanctioned by the United States Bowling Congress in Colorado Springs, earning her a trip to the Junior Gold Championships in Buffalo, N.Y. next month.

"It was nerve racking because last year I got second place (in a regional), and the girl that beat me last year got second this year," Kayla said.

Because the tournament doesn't display scores automatically above the lane like at bowling alleys, Kayla's mom, Kerri DeLaRosa, was manually keeping track of her daughter's total, as well as those of the other close competitors. Her main competition, Rebekkah Dettling, was on the next lane over and had already finished her final game as Kayla's was in the final few frames.

"(Kayla's) last game, she didn't start out good," Kerri DeLaRosa said. "I was thinking, 'Probably not going to happen.'"

Advertisement

That's when Kayla struck — literally. She recorded three strikes in a row — known in bowling as a turkey — in frame Nos. 7, 8 and 9. In the 10th frame, she got a nine-spare followed by another strike to close out her game with a 168.

It was good enough to edge runner-up Rebekkah Dettling by one pin. Kayla's six-game pinfall total was 926, and Rebekkah's was 925.

"I really wanted to win," Kayla said. "I lost to her last year so it'd be really cool to win this year."

Kayla will be the only Colorado girl in the U15 category at the national competition in New York. Other states have more qualifier tournaments so more girls get the chance to go to nationals. New York, for instance, has 24 girls who will compete, and there are 16 from Michigan.

"Bowling's more popular in other places. We're going to Buffalo, N.Y. and from what I understand, everyone bowls in Buffalo," Kerri DeLaRosa said.

The Junior Gold Championships is an annual national tournament for the top male and female youth bowlers in the country, according to bowl.com.

It's based in Buffalo, N.Y. and lasts from July 12-18. The first two days will be practice, then they'll have three days of competition where competitors will bowl five games a day.

Not long ago, five games for Kayla wouldn't have been a problem. But she's recently undergone surgery on both knees, and she's still trying to work her way back to full strength.

Following the initial 15 games, the field will be cut from 221 to roughly 32.

Kayla's goal is to make it in the top 50. She said that last year's representative from Colorado finished outside the top 150.

Kayla wouldn't even be in New York if she hadn't gotten the turkey.