Six months into the year and neither of the local hospitals have seen much of an indication that more Northwest Georgians have availed themselves of health insurance.

Rick Sheerin, vice president and chief financial officer at Floyd Medical Center, said FMC has provided approximately $15 million in unreimbursed care through the first half of 2014. That’s essentially unchanged from a year ago.

Sheerin said that since Gov. Nathan Deal opted not to expand Medicaid eligibility in Georgia, the hospital hasn’t seen the positive impact from the Affordable Care Act that hospitals in other states have seen.

“The other thing is, the penalties that are out there for folks not to join up through the exchanges are only $95, so really there is no incentive for folks to go out and sign up,” Sheerin said.

Redmond Regional Medical Center Chief Financial Officer Ken Metteauer said there’s been no significant change at Redmond regarding what he called “self-pay,” or uninsured, patients.

“When I look at the dollars that roll up in those buckets, I haven’t seen much of a decline (in unreimbursed care),” Metteauer said.

When Metteauer looks at the actual number of patient visits, he said Redmond has experienced a decline of about 50 self-pay and charity patients through the end of June as compared to the same six-month period a year ago.

He called that statistically insignificant, but added that the numbers do correlate to the number of patients who are using exchange plans.

In a blog for the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services on Aug. 8, deputy administrator Cindy Mann reported that over the last year, nationally, 10.3 million previously uninsured Americans now have some form of coverage.

Dr. Joseph Biuso, vice president and chief medical officer at FMC, believes the idea behind Obamacare is sound. He said the more people who have health insurance, the more people who can seek healthcare in traditional ways instead of through hospital emergency rooms.

“But we have not seen it medically, and we haven’t seen it financially change things in Georgia,” Biuso said.

One Obamacare impact Sheerin said he has seen is an increase in higher-deductible plans for people who have insurance through their employers, or perhaps bought policies on their own.

Big hit expected next year

Sheerin said the big hits for safety net hospitals like FMC are likely to come in 2016 and 2017. That’s when large cuts in Disproportionate Share payments will occur.

Medicare makes extra, Disproportionate Share, payments to hospitals that serve a high number of indigent and Medicaid patients.

“The monies that are used to make those payments to the hospitals are being drastically cut — because the expectation was the exchanges would be working pretty well and there would be Medicaid expansion all over,” Sheerin said. “Well, we’re not seeing that.”

Sheerin estimates that reduction to FMC will be in the neighborhood of $8 million to $9 million on an annual basis.

“We’ve got a couple of years to prepare for that,” he said. “If Congress continues to delay it, that would help us out.”

Biuso said it’s hard to recognize patients who are indigent or must come up with out-of-pocket payments for treatment at the hospital.

“It might surprise you who doesn’t have health insurance and doesn’t seek medical care in ways that keep you out of the emergency room,” he said. “There’s isn’t a stereotype person. We treat every person the same.”

Metteauer said Redmond does its best to track its self-pay or uninsured patients and said his best information is that many of them are chronically unemployed people.

As far as the exchanges go, Sheerin said he’s hearing that folks with more frequent medical problems are the ones signing up for policies, not the younger, healthier people.

“If you’re a healthy person and you’re not going to need health insurance or health care, why pay $3,000 to $5,000 for something when, if you don’t get it, the penalty is just $95,” he said.

The $95 figure is the lowest rate for an individual. The penalty for 2014 is capped at 1 percent of a household’s annual income. Under the ACA, the cap rises each year. In 2015 it will be 2 percent of income or $325 per person.