Facility gives 48,000 people access to recycling

A ribbion cutting ceremony was held Friday for Waste Management's new recycling facility in Sterling. Pictured from left are; Akron Mayor George Reese; Eric Heyboer, recycling grants administrator with the state of Colorado; Mac Leon, WM district manager; and Sterling Mayor Heather Brungardt. Funding for the facility came from Colorado's Recycling Resources Economic Opporunity Fund Grant Program. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

STERLING — — Northeastern Colorado has a new opportunity for recycling.

On Friday, America Recycles Day, Waste Management of Sterling hosted a grand opening ceremony for a new facility, located at 18211 Iris Dr., in Sterling, that will enable the company to offer curbside single stream, commercial single stream and drop-off recycling in northeast Colorado.

"Today is a big deal for us," said Mac Leon, district manager for WM.

This new facility is the result of the State of Colorado's Department of Public Health and Environment Resources Economic Opportunity Fund Grant Program. The grant partially funded the construction of a new building to process recyclables at the WM site in Sterling.

Because of the grant WM is "now able to offer recycling options to the area, that has had historical limited access to recycling, because Denver's so far away," Leon said.

The facility has the potential to give approximately 48,000 people in more than 17,500 households in the region access to recycling, with the potential to divert more than 3,750 tons of household recyclable material from the landfill per year.

Leon noted the new facility is part of WM's sustainable goals, which include increasing the volume of the recycled materials they process.

"So, this is a big step for us," he said.

He pointed out WM manages nearly 15 million tons of recyclables a year nationwide and, with the help of Single Stream Recycling, the company expects that to triple that by 2020.

Advertisement

With Single Stream Recycling, sorted items are compacted, bailed and put on pallets for use in making new products, such as plastics, bottles, paper, cardboard boxes and cans.

"Single Stream Recycling allows people the ease of the convenience recycling," Leon said. "With this facility in proximity to our Denver processing facility, we can now move their recycled materials in an economical matter."

He noted WM is proud to have served Colorado for over 30 years and they're proud to be a part of the community.

Sterling Mayor Heather Brungardt pushes the button to turn on the compact machine at a grand opening celebration Friday for Waste Management's new recycling facility in Sterling. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"We just don't serve the community, we are part of it," Leon said. "Waste Management recycling plant, our operations, our equipment and our employees — over 1,200 full and part-time personnel — are right here in Colorado."

Next Sterling Mayor Heather Brungardt congratulated the company on the new facility.

"Being here today is very exciting. Exciting for the city of Sterling, exciting for its residents, very exciting for Waste Management and very exciting for Mother Nature," she said.

She pointed out that "northeast Colorado is an area that hasn't had many easy recycling options," but WM is providing a solution.

Mac Leon, Waste Management district manager; Akron Mayor George Reese; and Eric Heyboer, recycling grants administrator with the state of Colorado, look over recycling brought in from Akron, ready to be compacted at WM's new recycling facility in Sterling. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

"By Waste Management offering free public recycling drop off to all the residents in the area, this facility will help all of northeast Colorado by making it easier to recycle. Not only will this facility bring more people to Sterling, to use its amenities, but it will also bring in new jobs as well and with those new jobs, it will create new business and with that new business it will help Sterling expand its workforce."

She noted Sterling is fortunate to have a business like WM, which does so much for the community.

"They have become a fixture here in our town, donating time and money to non-profits, donating services to the city and residents, helping out with the flood and simply choosing to be an employer in our community," Brungardt said. "It's businesses like this, with their forward thinking, that make Sterling a better city and help set us apart from other rural communities."

George Reese, the mayor of Akron, which has partnered with WM to offer recycling in their town, also spoke.

About 20 years ago, there was recycling in Akron at a central location, but that went away. Recently, the town sent out a survey to every trash customer they have, to gage their interest and see how much they would be willing to pay.

"This reply was quite favorable," Reese said.

So, the town went to curbside service, instead of central site, and then began working with WM and entered into a contract with the company.

"Akron really is proud to be part of this," Reese said.

The last speaker was Eric Heyboer, recycling grants administrator for the state of Colorado.

He explained the grant program has been around since 2007 and in the last legislative session the program was extended through 2026. Since 2007 they have awarded $7.1 million to about 66 projects, including other northeast Colorado projects in Julesburg, Haxtun and Holyoke.

Their revenue for the program comes from a tipping fee at each Colorado landfill.

"I really feel this will make recycling in the region a little bit easier and a little bit less expensive," Heyboer said. "Having a facility like this here, where you are able to consolidate and compact all of the materials collected in the region, allows for an economy of scale, that helps offset some of those transportation costs to Denver."

He noted WM is working diligently to form partnerships with other communities to setup a hub-and-spoke network in this region.

"By setting up these partnerships, it basically establishes a network of spokes that all of these various communities in the region can then funnel their recyclables here to this facility, which will serve as the hub," Heyboer said. "The materials can then be processed and stored here, until there's enough to send full truckloads off to market."

Items that will be able to be recycled at this new facility include newspapers, aluminum foil and cans, cardboard (collapsed boxes), office paper and envelopes, paper cardboard dairy and juice containers and plastic bottles and containers, Nos. 1-7. Plastic bags, construction materials, cassette tapes, spray paint, plastic or wax lined cups, organic waste, utensils, automotive waste batteries and shredded paper are not allowed.

WM also offers recycling by mail options for some hard-to recycle items like batteries, medical supplies, light bulbs and e-waste. For more information, visit thinkgreenfromhome.com.

To find out more about WM, go to wm.com.

Contact Journal-Advocate staff writer Callie Jones at 970-526-9286 or cjones@journal-advocate.com