Share This Story 516 Tweet Share Email

About 50 people packed into the small meeting room at the Dillon Town Hall on Feb. 2.

They came to take part in a "health care town hall," but over the course of the next two hours, what they actually took part in was a heated debate over one of the biggest issues facing lawmakers during the 2015 legislative session: whether to use federal dollars to expand health care coverage to an additional 70,000 low-income Montanans.

On one side of the debate was Zach Lahn, the man who managed Republican Sen. Steve Daines' 2012 congressional campaign and later served as his state director. Lahn is now the director of the Montana chapter of the Americans for Prosperity, the group that hosted Monday's meeting and two others like it across the state last week.

AFP is the Kansas-based conservative advocacy group that was founded by the billionaire Koch brothers. AFP spent more than $22 million in the last election cycle targeting House and Senate Democrats across the country who supported the Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

On the other side was Dillon Republican Rep. Jeff Welborn and members of the local medical community. Welborn's name was on postcard invitations sent to residents, on posters hung around town and in an ad printed in the Dillonite Daily, the local daily advertiser. The postcards and posters featured a photo of Welborn superimposed on an image of President Barack Obama and read in part: "THE FIGHT AGAINST OBAMACARE IS NOW: Tell Jeff Welborn to stand with us and vote NO on ObamaCare's Expansion in Montana."

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Americans for Prosperity holds a town hall meeting in Dillon to oppose Medicaid expansion. John S. Adams

Lahn organized the town hall events last week in Dillon, Roundup and Kalispell, the hometowns of three Republican lawmakers who refused to sign AFP pledge cards vowing to oppose any expansion Medicaid expansion plan, which AFP says is an expansion of Obamacare.

Welborn said he was approached by AFP lobbyist and former Republican state Sen. Joe Balyeat late last moth and asked to sign the pledge.

"I respectfully told him that I didn't think it was responsible to vow that I would oppose something by signing a pledge when I haven't even seen all of the proposals," Welborn said. "How can you make a conscious decision to promise your support for any bill, or your support against any bill, without first having that bill debated?"

Gov. Steve Bullock has proposed using $683 million in federal funds over the next biennium to provide health insurance to an additional 70,000 low-income Montanans. The federal government will pick up the full tab until 2016, and down the road the state would be on the hook for 10 percent of the total cost of the program.

Americans for Prosperity has made killing Bullock's Medicaid proposal its top priority in Montana, and last week it took aim at Republicans such as Welborn who refused to join its cause.

Presenting AFP's case against Medicaid expansion was Kristina Ribali, senior coalitions director at the Foundation for Government Accountability

There's talk of Republicans in the House and Senate working on a compromise bill that would expand health insurance coverage to low income Montanans, but would also include tort reform and other measures important to Republicans.

But AFP is opposed to any plan that accepts any federal dollars to extend health care coverage to what Lahn refers to as "a brand new entitlement class of able-bodied, childless adults."

"Before we start, I just want to be clear about … what this is and what this isn't," Lahn told the crowd gathered in Dillon. "What this is not is a crusade against any one legislator. This is a mission to educate voters on a policy that has serious implications for our state and our country, and to shine a light on what has become a serious rift in the Legislature today."

Welborn said though his name and image were used to promote the health care town hall, no one from AFP contacted him or anyone in the Dillon medical community to tell them about it.

A handful of people in the crowd got up and left when word came that Welborn would not be allowed to address the gathering. One member of the audience said she thought a town hall meeting was supposed to be an open discussion.

"Different definitions of town hall," Lahn replied.

The rift

The rift Lahn referred to in Dillon isn't between Republicans and Democrats, but between various factions within the GOP caucus.

It's a rift that had been widening, though mostly out of sight of the public, for more than a decade.

It came into clear view during the 2013 Legislature when a series of leaked emails among top GOP leaders revealed the Senate leadership's plans to take out certain members of their own GOP caucus in the 2014 primary election.

That intraparty rift carried over into legislative primary races in 2014, but it wasn't settled on the campaign trail. Many of the Republicans who bucked their tea party-leaning leaders in the 2013 Legislature are back this session, and they are emboldened by the fact that they fended off attacks from the hard right.

The rift played out in the first week of the session during a fight over proposed changes to the House rules that were designed to ensure the death of any attempt at Medicaid expansion.

A handful of Republicans sided with Democrats to block rules changes that would have given conservative Republican leaders the ability to kill virtually any bill that came to the floor. Under the change it would have taken a supermajority vote to stop that from happening.

House Speaker Austin Knudsen, R-Culbertson, eventually backed down from the rule change and the House adopted a compromise rule that will make it easier for each party to bring six priority bills to the House floor.

The town hall meetings AFP hosted around the state last week are the latest in the ongoing battle underway in the Republican Party in Montana and around the country. Lahn hinted at the rules fight Feb. 2.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Americans for Prosperity executive director Zach Lahn addresses a crowd at the Red Lion Inn in Kalispell during a Medicaid town hall meeting. Video Courtesy Tristan Scott, Flathead Beacon

"Part of the reason we are doing this is because some legislators are not acting like adults in the Capitol," Lahn said. "There are some that would like to be in leadership, but are not, and so they've chosen different alliances. And there are others who are trying to keep people out of being in leadership. We're seeing a lot of different alliances in different ways, which is why we see the disconnect between legislator and district."

Lahn insists AFP is advocating on issues and not engaged in campaign politics.

"We're not an election-based organization," Lahn said in an interview Thursday a few hours before a town hall event in Kalispell in Republican Rep. Frank Garner's district. "AFP Montana, since I've been here, we have not engaged in election-based work. We are an education-based organization."

Choteau Republican Rep. Christy Clark isn't buying it.

Clark said she signed AFP's pledge vowing to oppose Medicaid expansion under Obamacare, but AFP still called constituents in her district.

"I signed their stupid pledge and they're still on me," Clark said. "They are calling people in my district asking people to sign a petition that AFP is going to give to me imploring me not to vote for Obamacare. Let's be real, there is no bill with Obamacare on it."

Full-blown campaign

Though the election season is barely behind us, a new kind of campaign is well underway over Medicaid expansion.

A day after AFP's gathering in Dillon, Lt. Gov. Angela McLean was in town, ostensibly to take part in an education rally Tuesday evening.

But McLean arrived a few hours early to tour Barrett Hospital and HealthCare, a critical access hospital that employs 275 people in Beaverhead County and serves 12,000 people in southwestern Montana.

Barrett CEO Ken Westman said Barrett Hospital and HealthCare absorbed $2 million in uncompensated care last year, including more than $500,000 in charity care for people who didn't have health insurance.

All told, Montana hospitals absorb approximately $400 million each year in uncompensated care, which is why health care providers across the state are supportive of some sort of Medicaid expansion.

"I think the parties need to come together so we end up with a responsible plan," Westman said. "(AFP) certainly didn't offer up support or solutions."

Westman said if some form of Medicaid expansion were to pass, an estimated 700 more people in the Beaverhead County would be eligible for health coverage.

McLean reinforced that message and then blasted what she said were out-of-state interests looking to undercut Montana's health care system.

"Here's what I know about Montanans: They care about their fellow Montanans," McLean said. "They care that we have 70,000 working Montanans who don't have health insurance. The folks that I know are determined to do something about it and … are determined to convince folks on both sides of the aisle to do something about it."

McLean called AFP's arguments against Medicaid expansion "spin" by "folks from out of state." McLean pointed out 28 other states have already expanded Medicaid.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Lt. Gov. Angela McClean makes the pitch for Medicaid expansion at Barrett Hospital and HealthCare in Dillon, Mont. on Feb. 3, 2015. John S. Adams

"I know who was in town last night to have the conversation," McLean said. "Whatever spin they want to put on it, it's a bad spin, because Montanans right now are paying for citizens in other states to have it. Citizens of other states with Republican governors. That's a conversation that doesn't make any sense to me."

On Thursday, two days after dispatching his lieutenant governor to Dillon, Bullock visited Teton Medical Center in Choteau to pitch his Healthy Montana Plan.

Clark joined Bullock on the trip.

Teton Medical Center, one of Montana's 48 rural critical-access hospitals, has been in financial straits of late. Its board is in talks with Benefis Health System of Great Falls for the larger health system to purchase the rural hospital, which employs 75 people in the town of about 1,700.

Following a tour of the hospital with TMC CEO Louie King, Bullock met with community members to talk about his proposal, which he says will help struggling critical access hospitals in rural communities throughout the state.

"… The hospital that we're in is sort of completely representative of the hospitals all across our state that are going to be struggling to keep their doors open if we can't get the Legislature to do the right thing," Bullock said.

King said in addition to the 75 people employed by the hospital, other businesses in Choteau — including Choteau Activities, a group home for people with developmental disabilities, the county-owned long-term care facility and two assisted living facilities — rely on the hospital to stay open.

"The continued vitality of a small town is whether health care service is here," Bullock said. "Not only 75 employees here at the hospital, it's senior citizens homes and other services that they're providing in this community, dependent upon having an emergency room and a hospital. Without that, without the largest employer that the area has, the continued vibrancy of the community is really going to struggle."

Forty-two percent of patients who went to TMC last year did not have insurance, King said. That amounted to about $265,000 in uncompensated care.

That dollar amount would be lower if Medicaid expansion becomes a reality, King said, though he added "the future is you're going to have to be affiliated" with larger hospitals, even if Medicaid expansion does pass.

Clark told the group who met at the hospital to be wary of outside groups trying to influence the Medicaid debate.

"I think you've been called by Americans for Prosperity," Clark told the meeting at TMC. "Our failure of the last session — and you saw the postcards — was we could not find a solution."

Clark said as a Republican, she doesn't like increasing federal programs, but at the same time, Choteau needs a hospital.

"The Republicans I've traveled with, we're committed to finding a solution. Americans for Prosperity will tell you how I should vote, but I want you to tell me," she said.

For his part, Bullock said he believes Montanans know better than to be influenced by an out-of-state group like AFP.

"It rings pretty hollow," he said

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Americans for Prosperity holds a "Medicaid town hall" in Kalispell, MT. Rep. Frank Garner is not invited, but shows up and addresses the audience. Video Courtesy Tristan Scott, Flathead Beacon

Debate heating up

About 100 people attended the event at the Red Lion Inn in Kalispell.

Some of them received word about the gathering through the postcard mailers.

Garner, who made the eight-hour round trip from Helena to attend the meeting, took umbrage with the postcards and said the group never told him about the meeting, which he learned about from a reporter on the House floor at the Capitol.

"I support their right to have an opinion. I just didn't like how they did it," Garner said. "They didn't even extend the courtesy of telling me about the meeting. What does that say about their intentions?"

The former Kalispell police chief said he understands his constituents better than an out-of-state group like AFP because he ran a campaign based on listening to and understanding the wants and needs of his district, and he's made good on that promise in Helena.

Garner's mere presence had a chilling effect on the AFP presentation, which was frequently derailed by laughter, booing and shouting from audience members who overwhelmingly expressed support for Garner.

Following a hasty exchange with AFP State Director Zach Lahn minutes before Thursday's meeting commenced, Garner took the podium to defend his record before the crowd of mostly supporters, who cheered the lawmaker on.

"I promised the people here when I ran that I would listen to you and not out-of-town special interests," Garner said to raucous applause. "If every time they want me to sign a pledge card and I don't do it they are going to rent a room and have a meeting, then this is going to get real expensive. Cause I'm not signing the pledge card."

Garner is among a faction of Republican lawmakers that includes Welborn and Clark, who have refrained from taking a hardline against Medicaid expansion. These Republicans say they're open to considering some form of expansion, opening the possibility for a coalition of Democrats and moderate Republicans to approve it.

Garner said he sees problems with full Medicaid expansion, but that won't stop him from considering other alternatives, such as helping low-income people who can't afford a federal subsidy to purchase health insurance. Moreover, he wants to examine the plans at the Legislature before making a decision.

"Sure, I have problems with full expansion, but you can't know what a bill looks like and does until it's in front of you," he said. "I won't sign a pledge card for or against any issue. My vote is my pledge card. And it's permanent."