With the Supreme Court resolving the last of the Obamacare issues, America needs to turn to the real health care crisis facing this country: long-term care.

As a nation, we have no national policy or program to protect seniors against catastrophic nursing home expenses. We have failed to provide a system of community-based services to assist seniors not eligible for Medicaid to live independently for as long as possible.

And Congress continues to ignore the financial crisis facing children of aging parents as they strive to balance saving for their own retirement and putting their children through college while their parents' health care demands affect their ability to save.

Almost 10,000 Americans are turning 65 every day — more than doubling the number of retirees who will require long-term care by 2050 — and 70 percent of them will need some type of long-term care. That's one reason why today, more than 45 million Americans are caring for an elderly family member.

The Congressional Budget Office estimated in 2011 that the value of family and other informal caregiving services was $234 billion. And, women leaving jobs to be parental caregivers carries additional costs that cannot be ignored. They lose more than $64,000 in Social Security benefits, and when they leave the workforce to care for a parent, it could cost them more than $131,000 in addition to the lost wages (and, sometimes, pension contributions).

Sadly, Medicaid has become the de facto national long-term care program for seniors and disabled Americans when they qualify for the program. Long-term care services and supports represent approximately $158 billion, or roughly one-third of all Medicaid expenditures. The pressure on state Medicaid programs will continue to intensify as the population ages and no affordable public or private sector alternatives become available.

Perhaps the late Republican Sen. John Heinz from Pennsylvania said it best in a 1984 speech to the National Association for Home Care: "The national crisis we face in our national long-term care delivery system cannot be resolved by one legislator alone, it requires the full attention of the American people and the Congress."

Today, his words still echo in the halls of Congress, reminding the elected and those who aspire to hold elected office of their responsibility.

There is no better opportunity than now — some about 15 months from the next presidential election — to ask the Public Broadcasting Service to host a candidate forum on long-term care. Unlike what may have occurred in the past, candidates would have to present real solutions for a real problem. Each could be given 15 minutes to explain his or her specific plan to address and solve the nation's long-term care crisis. Americans are not looking for rhetoric; they are looking for solutions that make sense, are understandable and most important, honest.

Based on the demographic shift of our aging nation, long-term care is America's single largest health care crisis. It has and will continue to bankrupt middle-class families absent a national solution. The cost of ignoring America's long-term care catastrophe is not going to shrink just because elected officials have blinders on.

Jeffrey Lewis is president of the Institute for Healthcare Innovation and served as staff director for the late Sen. John Heinz.