Locals couldn't wait to get their boats on the water Saturday.

"It's the time of year when the season transitions from winter spring to coming up on summer and that brings a lot of activity," said Drew Nelson with the FWC.

The U.S. Coast Guard and the Florida Fish and Wildlife Conservation Commission co-hosted a boating safety event in honor of national safe boating week.

"Before going out plan it,make sure you have all your safety equipment, go through your check list, "said Officer Brian Hanson is with the U.S. Coast Guard.

Officer Hanson says many accidents can be prevented simply by having the right safety equipment on board.

"When going off shore make sure your flares are in date, also make sure they haven't been water logged or anything like that. Make sure you have proper life jackets for the people on board your vessel, make sure they're not torn or tattered," said Officer Hanson.

Those in the industry say boating has grown significantly in the area over the years, but more people on the water means more risk for accidents.

"It's a percentage game if you triple the amount of kayakers, and triple the amount of boaters, then you're probably gonna triple the amount of accidents without the proper education," said Brad Stephens, Owner of Sun Jammers.

And with more boaters, officials with the FWC have seen a spike in drinking and boating. Drew Nelson says in the majority of the accidents he investigates, alcohol plays a role.

"The atmosphere is fun, it's recreation, it's having a good time, part of that is the consumption of alcohol and you just need to be aware that it needs to be in moderation and you need to have a designated operator same as having a designated driver on the highway," said Nelson.

As boaters hit the water, Nelson wants them to have fun, but cautions them to remember their priority is safety.

Nelson encourages anyone involved in boating to take a boater educational course. He says with the right knowledge, most accidents can be prevented.