Clarke Rountree, chair and professor of communication arts at the University of Alabama in Huntsville, says this year's presidential election is Hillary Clinton's to lose.

"She is very intelligent and a skillful politician," Rountree said this week. "On the other hand, Trump's combative style and vagueness on policies have not hurt him yet, given his appeal as a change-agent in a time when many Americans desperately want Washington to take a new direction."

Rountree said the contrast between the two this fall will be "stark- old guard versus new, progressive versus moderate conservative and, historically, woman versus man."

Rountree also listed his "top five things at stake" in the election:

1. The world's view of America. Rountree said "the standing of the United States" is at stake. "Trump is not very respected" abroad, he said, while Clinton has been "a diplomatic fixture for years ... for better and worse."

2. The U.S. Supreme Court. Rountree said the court "is one appointment away from turning liberal for the first time since the Nixon Administration." A lot of precedents will fall if one to three justices are replaced, he said.

3. Trade policy. Trump "claims he will change trade policy significantly, gutting prior agreements and avoiding others," Rountree said. Clinton supports existing agreements "and would likely support some version of Obama's Trans-Pacific Partnership."

4. American alliances. Clinton supports NATO, Rountree says, and Trump "has serious misgivings about it." Trump "appears ready to pull back from this alliance," he said.

5. Health Care. Trump plans to revoke the Affordable Care Act (ACA/Obamacare), Rountree said, "but it's not clear what he would replace it with. Clinton would build on ACA and try to bring more people into the fold, while keeping the means for paying for it in place."

Rountree spoke after returning to UAH from sabbatical where he worked on books about the Supreme Court overruling itself and the Syrian refugee crisis.