Smart Benefits: With ACA Deadlines Looming, Prepare to File Now

The IRS forms are used to report information about offers of health coverage and enrollment in coverage for employees. Employers must file one or more Forms 1094-C and a Form 1095-C for each employee who was a full-time employee for any month of the calendar year. Employers who are required to file fewer than 250 information returns can submit paper filings; those with 250 or more must file electronically. The differences?

• Paper: To submit paper filings, employers will meet the requirement as long as the forms are properly addressed and mailed on or before the due date. The forms must be sent to the IRS in a flat mailing in conveniently sized packages. On each package, the employer must write their name, number the packages consecutively, and place Form 1094-C in package number one. The forms and packages must be sent by First-Class Mail to one of the addresses listed in IRS Pub. Instructions for Forms 1094-C and 1095-C, which are based on the employer’s location.

• Electronic: The electronic filing process, which utilizes the Affordable Care Act Information Returns (AIR) system, is more complex. Employers must first employers apply for a Transmitter Control Code (TCC) using the "ACA Application for TCC." Before actual filing, companies must complete communication testing to ensure it can properly submit the forms with the AIR system. Publication 5164, Test Package for Electronic Filers of Affordable Care Act Information Returns, provides general and program specific testing information. When submitting, a single, uncompressed XML-formatted file must be sent. Pub. 5165, Guide for Electronically Filing Affordable Care Act (ACA) Information Returns (AIR) for Software Developers and Transmitters, specifies the procedures for returns filed electronically through the AIR system.

And remember, employers who fail to file face penalties of $250 per return.

Related Slideshow: RI Business Rankings in US

Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.

Rob Calise is the Managing Director, Employee Benefits. of Cornerstone|Gencorp, where he helps clients control the costs of employee benefits by focusing on consumer driven strategies and on how to best utilize the tax savings tools the government provides. Rob serves as Chairman of the Board of United Benefit Advisors, and is a board member of the Blue Cross & Blue Shield of RI Broker Advisory Board, United HealthCare of New England Broker Advisory Board and Rhode Island Business Healthcare Advisors Council. He is also a member of the National Association of Health Underwriters (NAHU), American Health Insurance Association (AHIA) and the Employers Council on Flexible Compensation (ECFC), as well as various human resource associations. Rob is a graduate of Bryant University with a BS in Finance.