Property Executives Realty chases the leading edge

Owner and broker Jeremy Cudd in the reception area of Property Executives Realty’s new Second Street headquarters in Hudson. (Hudson Star-Observer photo by Chuck Nowlen)

The only realtor in the heart of downtown Hudson likes to stay ahead of the curve.

“We try to think outside the box and do it better than anyone else around,” says Jeremy Cudd, whose four-year-old Property Executives Realty moved to new headquarters at 411 Second St. Sept. 15.

Unfortunately, it’s still a bit too early to showcase what might be the company’s most visible marketing and customer-service innovation from a storefront standpoint.

A state-of-the art, large-screen/touch-screen kiosk will debut in Property Executives’ Second Street window in January that allows both inside customers and outside passers-by to search the company’s real-estate listings, schedule showings and even get pre-approved for a mortgage.

Cudd describes the kiosk this way: “It looks kind of like a big iPhone. … No other company has that. We’ll be taking window-front marketing to a new level.”

Becoming the only real-estate company in Hudson’s bustling downtown core –- at the former site of the home-interiors company, CocoBello Boutique -- was an innovation in itself, Cudd notes.

“We wanted to be downtown because we’re more than a local real estate company,” he says.” We also wanted to be part of that local hometown feeling downtown because it kind of reflects who we are.”

Property Executives Realty was previously located on Crest View Drive, but “we didn’t have a lot of exposure there, and we always want to remain top-line in the minds of our customers.”

“I love being here,” Cudd says of the new location. “It’s amazing how many people walk by our storefront every day.”

Yet another innovation for the 14-agent company, which also has offices in Somerset and River Falls: drone-generated aerial videos of listed properties, especially at the higher end.

“It’s worth it when you’re trying to sell a $1.4 million home,” Cudd explains. “You’ve got to give people the best marketing tools possible.”

@by:No franchise fees

@t:Property Executives Realty’s listings –- which are syndicated to more than 900 realty websites, including the top three, zillo.com, realtor.com and truila.com -- range from $100,000 properties to the million-and-up category.

The company also opened a full-service property-management company three years ago that includes free attorney collection services. The management company is often a boon to sellers who want to relocate while their properties are on the market, Cudd notes.

“No one else offers free attorney services for their clients,” he adds.

Property Executives is not a franchise of a larger company, which Cudd says gives the company more leeway to explore trailblazing initiatives.

“We dropped the franchise because it really opens up doors from a marketing standpoint and allows us to increase our marketing activities,” he explains, for example. “It allows us to decide how we want to market on our own, rather than as part of the parent company’s program.”

The franchise-free model has also helped the company attract some of the best, most experienced real-estate agents in the area.

They pay no monthly or franchise fees. Property Executives also provides its agents with free errors-and-omissions insurance, free sign allowances, free business cards and free cloud-based transaction management.

Agents’ commission split is 70/30 until a $12,500 cap is met, which is “about $10,000 cheaper” than the next-best local real estate company, Cudd adds.

“We offer our agents the best commission split in the business, which gives them the ability to spend more on marketing and results in better services for our clients,” he explains.

“I’ve wanted to create success for others, and I’m determined to be great for them. … We measure success, not by an accumulation of awards, but by the satisfaction of our clients. If they haven’t left with an amazing experience, we haven’t done our job.”

Here’s the Property Executives agent roster: Hesper Cordero, Joanne Gamache, Cudd, Gary Baillargeon, David Bracht, Sandra Weyer, Curt Jacobsen, Amy McCune, Brian Webb, Gregory Gamache, Denise Krogman, Scott Parfitt, Carol Evans and Peter Grabowski.

“I don’t want to take the spotlight because I really have a team approach,” says Cudd. “Really, I wouldn’t be here without our realtors. They’re the ones who make it all possible.”

Cudd, a River Falls native who lives in Hudson with his wife Dana and kids Jada, 12, Ryder, 8, and Liliana, 4, opened Property Executives Realty after six years as a top performer at another local agency.

There were no hard feelings after the move.

“I learned under some of the best in the business, but I wanted to take it to the next level,” Cudd says. “We’re all in a competitive business here, but we’re all friends. We all know that change is part of the business.”

For more information, stop in, check out the Property Executives Realty website, http://propertyexecutivesrealty.com, call (715) 381-8297 or email info@propertyexecutivesrealty.com.