William Dodds (Photo: Special to the Register/Kevin E. Schmidt)

As Iowa moves to privatize its Medicaid program, Medicaid customers and their families and advocates have expressed concerns that services, particularly for individuals with intellectual disabilities and serious mental illness, will be drastically curtailed and their quality of life will be adversely affected. They say the companies’ main concern is providing their stockholders with large profits, instead of caring for one of the state’s most vulnerable populations.

However, as president of one of Iowa’s largest private healthcare and human services providers that is almost entirely funded by Medicaid, I am cautiously optimistic about the transition. We believe the program is likely to greatly benefit customers, while achieving the worthwhile policy objective of slowing the growth of tax dollars required for the program. We believe the state has shown foresight in several areas that will lead to a successful program.

In the short term, the state has assured all current Iowa Medicaid facility, home and community-based services and habilitation service providers that they will be able to contract with the four managed care organizations if they choose, and those providers have also been assured that the rates for services will not decrease for at least two years. These two requirements help guarantee that these vulnerable populations will be able to keep their current service providers if they wish.

Second, Iowa has chosen a true managed competition approach that will allow customers to annually assess the services and provider choice offered by the MCOs. This allows customers to make informed choices as to which MCOs to use and helps to ensure that each MCO will place as much weight on access and customer satisfaction as they do the bottom line for fear of losing their market share. In turn, this will provide an incentive for the MCOs to promote the development of innovative services that aren’t available under current Medicaid rules.

Finally, looking at the long term, this program has the potential to transform Iowa’s Medicaid program. A mature program will likely develop sophisticated funding scenarios where, for the first time, the money can truly follow the members based on their needs and desires and provide innovative and, in some cases, customized services and supports. Also, a refined system of outcome measures is likely to be developed, allowing customers to make more informed choices about which MCOs and providers are most likely to meet their needs.

However, to make this transition successful, the program must have a clearly articulated set of values that focus on improving access to services, particularly lower cost preventative services that allow customers to participate in their community as fully as possible for as long as possible. Also, the sponsor of the program, in this case the state of Iowa, must provide continual leadership to ensure that the articulated values of the program are being used to make all major policy decisions.

We believe the state has made a good start in both these areas, but to be successful over the long run, the state and the public need to stay actively engaged in the implementation and management of the plan. We look forward to being an active part of this dialogue.

WILLIAM DODDS is president of Optimae LifeServices in Des Moines. Contact: wdodds@optimaelifeservices.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1RXievJ