The New York State Senate passed a series of legislation on Wednesday, which includes a measure that would reverse state regulations that reconstitute what a small business was, driving up healthcare costs.

A “small group employer,” which traditionally has been a business with 50 employees or under, was changed by the passage of the federal Affordable Care Act. Small businesses were reconstituted as those having 100 employees or fewer.

“The federal Affordable Care Act created various unintended consequences that both businesses and consumers continue to run up against,” Senate Insurance Committee Chairman James L. Seward said in a statement. “My legislation would help clear up one of those costly regulatory hurdles for mid-sized employers and help them continue to offer affordable health insurance benefits to their workers.”

Businesses that have 100 or fewer employees have experienced a substantial increase in health costs. They’ve experienced this rise in health costs through higher deductibles, co-pays and subscriber costs, according to the sponsors of the bill.

The measure would reverse New York’s “small business” definition back to what it previously was, which was between one and 50 employees.

The senate passed four other measures, including a legislation that would require state agencies to pay back small businesses within 15 days of a sent invoice. State agencies have a year to implement these changes.

The other measure is one that would establish a Task Force for the Review of the State Administrative Procedure Act (SAPA) to reduce state regulatory burdens on businesses. The task force would examine and evaluate SAPA and make recommendations for changes.

The two final measures establish a law that creates additional opportunities for small businesses, while the other gives a way for businesses to seek a delay in the proposed state agency payment measure if it negatively affects them.

The bills have been sent to the Assembly, with the exception of the state agency payment measure. That has been sent to the governor’s office.

“The passage of these bills sends a clear signal that my colleagues in the Senate recognize the need for serious regulatory reform for our state,” Senator Terrence Murphy said in a statement. “The burden placed on the business community by the layers of bureaucracy needs to significantly reduced if we are going to elevate New York to the prominence it once held as an economic juggernaut.”