A battle is brewing for the American worker.

On one side is Silicon Valley — companies such as Uber, Handy, and Airbnb, which are upending the way the economy runs — and on the other is a sort of vague group of labor advocates and workers who think these companies are unfairly depriving the people who do work for them of a safety net by refusing to call those people employees.

But a lot of discussions about this "on-demand economy" are leading in an entirely different direction. People on all sides of the political spectrum are starting to talk about a third class of worker: the dependent contractor, which would recognize the flexibility of workers but also build in some of the protections that full employees get.

And an overhaul like this would need to be taken on by Congress, according to US Sen. Mark Warner (D-Virginia). Warner, an early player in the mobile-phone business who has spent more time as a venture capitalist than as a politician, talked about these issues Thursday in an interview with Business Insider.

"I don't have a full-fledged proposal at this point, but the old 20th-century model doesn't work," he said. "That's yesterday's thinking — there are a whole series of people who don't fit neatly into those categories."

The problem, he said, is to figure out how to deal with this new sector of the economy, which is growing rapidly, but not "squash the innovation" going on in Silicon Valley. This is a thorny issue for politicians and regulators. On the one hand, you want to protect workers, but on the other, you don't want to over-regulate a fledgling industry before it has time to develop.

Warner thinks it is time, though, not least because people have started suing to get answers. This is where Congress needs to step in to clarify matters, he says. "These platforms that connect people, they don't want to have 50 different answers coming from 50 different litigations."

His ideas seems to center on public-private partnerships such as the Affordable Care Act's healthcare exchanges in which outside companies offer insurance for things including workers' compensation and disability insurance, and each worker is free to pick an option. He also likes the idea of an hour bank, in which a person qualifies for insurance based on how many hours he or she works each month, as recorded by a third party.

What about universal basic income? That idea — that every adult should be given a small amount of money so their basic needs are met and they can focus their working hours on what they really want to do — has proponents on both the libertarian right and the socialist left. Albert Wenger, a partner at the venture-capital firm Union Square Ventures, floated this idea as a solution in a blog post earlier this week.

Warner said he knew about this argument. "I don't think that's where our political system is moving the short-term," he said. "I'm not ruling that out, but that's not where I think this debate is going to start."