By Gretchen Reynolds

At age 93, Olga Kotelko — one of the most successful and acclaimed nonagenarian track and field athletes in history — traveled to the University of Illinois to let scientists study her brain.

Kotelko held world records and had won hundreds of gold medals in masters events. But she was of particular interest to scientists because she hadn’t begun serious athletic training until age 77. So scanning her brain could potentially show scientists what late-life exercise might do.

Kotelko died last year at 95, but the results of that summer brain scan were published in Neurocase.

Indeed, Kotelko’s brain looked quite different from those of other volunteers ages 90 and older who participated in the study. The white matter of her brain — cells that connect neurons and help transmit messages — showed fewer abnormalities than the brains of other people her age. And her hippocampus, a portion of the brain involved in memory, was larger than that of similar-age volunteers (although somewhat shrunken in comparison to the brains of volunteers decades younger).

Overall, her brain seemed younger than her age.

But because scientists didn’t have a scan showing Kotelko’s brain before she began training, it is impossible to know whether becoming an athlete late in life improved her brain’s health or whether her naturally healthy brain allowed her to become a stellar athlete.

That distinction matters. Before scientists can recommend exercise to forestall cognitive decline, they need to establish that it works.

So far, much of the evidence has been weak. A new experiment by the researchers who scanned Kotelko’s brain, however, bolsters the idea that exercise makes a difference.

In the study, published in PLOS One, Agnieszka Burzynska, now at Colorado State University in Fort Collins, and her colleagues at the Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology at the University of Illinois in Urbana, scanned the brains of men and women, 60 and 80, using a technique that tracks oxygen delivery to cells to determine brain activity. The researchers also measured their volunteers’ aerobic capacity and asked them to wear an activity monitor.

Notably, the most physically active older adult volunteers, according to their activity tracker data, had better oxygenation and healthier patterns of brain activity than the more sedentary volunteers — especially in parts of the brain, including the hippocampus, that are known to be involved in improved memory and cognition, and in connecting different brain areas to one another.

Burzynska points out that none of these volunteers were athletes, as Kotelko was. In fact, none formally exercised at all. But those who walked, gardened and simply moved more each day had brains that appeared to be in better shape than those of the other volunteers.