Jordan’s king said in an interview broadcast Sunday that President Obama is right not to call terror groups like the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) Islamic extremists.

ADVERTISEMENT

“I think he is right and I think this is something that has to be understood on a much larger platform, because they're looking for legitimacy that they don't have inside of Islam,” King Abdullah said on “CNN’s Fareed Zakaria GPS.”

“When we're asked in this debate, you know, are you a moderate or extremist -- what these people want is to be called extremist. I mean, they take that as a badge of honor,” Abdullah said.

“I think by making this comparison that they're extremist Muslims actually is working exactly what these people want,” he added, saying a manifesto released by ISIS’s leader “has nothing to do with the tenets of Islam, which is a religion of tolerance that reaches out to other people.”

Abdullah also said the west must be unified in its response to ISIS.

“This is a this World War by other means, this brings Muslims, Christians, other religions together in this generational fight that all of us have to be in this together. So it's not a Western fight,” he said. “This is a fight inside of Islam where everybody comes together against these outlaws."

Abdullah said ISIS is “trying to invent falsely a linkage” to a caliphate that has “no truth of bearing in our history."

He said the terror group is bringing in “deluded, young men and women that think that this is sort of an Islamic nation.”

Abdullah also said the “barbarity” of the way ISIS executed a Jordanian pilot “shocked the Muslim world.”

Abdullah said he has not watched the video, adding that many Jordanians “refused to see what I think is propaganda.”

He said, however, that attempts to intimidate Jordanians will backfire.

“If you look at our history, we're a country that's used to being outgunned and outnumbered and we've always punched way above our weight, and I think if anything, Daesh has now got a sort of -- a tiger by the tail,” he said, using another name for ISIS. “And it just motivated Jordanians to sort of rally around the flag and the gloves have come off.”