MILFORD, N.H. — New Hampshire and Iowa have two things in common: They stage early presidential contests and it’s awfully cold in the winter.

With everything else, including politics, the states are opposites.

New Hampshire, with its primary set for Feb. 9, rarely co-signs the results of the Iowa caucuses. And the makeup of the electorate is vastly different, with Iowa dominated by evangelicals and New Hampshire seasoned with independents who make up 40 percent of voters.

U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas is trying to beat the odds and pull out victories in both states. He hopes his brand of conservatism appeals to Republican voters everywhere.

On Sunday he started a five-day New Hampshire tour packed with 17 events in all 10 of the state’s counties.

“We’ve got to stand with the American people against the bipartisan corruption of Washington that is embodied by Hillary Clinton,” Cruz said during a rally at the Country Strong Saloon at the Pasta Loft in Milford, N.H. “If we stand together as ‘We the people,’ we will restore this last best hope for mankind, the shining city on the hill that is the United States of America.”

‘An outsider’s year’

Cruz gave his standard stump speech at the rally, telling the crowd that if elected president, he would repeal the Affordable Care Act, rip up the nuclear deal with Iran, build a wall to stop illegal immigration, abolish the Internal Revenue Service and “utterly and completely destroy ISIS.”

He also criticized President Barack Obama’s foreign policy as weak and ineffective.

“If I’m elected president, American sailors will never be on their knees to a foreign country,” he said.

New Hampshire, with its first-in-the nation primary, is critical to every major candidate in the race — and for different reasons.

Cruz hopes to roll into the Granite State after a strong showing in the Feb. 1 Iowa caucuses, where he leads in the polls. Following up a successful Iowa campaign with strength in the New Hampshire primary would set him up nicely for the rest of the nomination process, particularly when the contest heads to his strongholds in the South.

While a bad showing in New Hampshire wouldn’t hurt Cruz the way it would his opponents, it could put him behind his main rival, New York businessman Donald Trump.

Trump and Cruz are slugging it out in Iowa, where polls show a tight race. Cruz trails Trump in New Hampshire, a state where several contenders are pinning their hopes.

“He’s a fresh candidate and he’s not in with the Washington crowd,” said Sean Murphy, a 48-year-old software engineer from Milford whose family also likes Trump. “It’s an outsider’s year. He’ll do well if he stays with the message.”

‘It will be tight’

Michael Donovan, a businessman who also attended the Milford rally, said Cruz was a solid conservative who would bring down the budget deficit and create jobs.

But he said beating Trump in New Hampshire would be difficult for Cruz.

“It will be tight,” he said. “Maybe Cruz can finish a strong second.”

Political analysts say Cruz is positioned to make a strong push for New Hampshire voters.

“He only needs to make his case — ideally, face to face. And the case he’s made so far has been very effective in New Hampshire,” said Dartmouth College political scientist Russell Muirhead. “Most voters haven’t yet made up their minds, and when you combine people’s first- and second-choice candidates, Cruz has up to 35 percent support in New Hampshire. The only candidate with more support is Trump at 40 percent.”

There are other reasons Cruz is taking time off from Iowa to tour the lodges, diners and country stores of New Hampshire.

The primary is expected to winnow down the 11-candidate GOP field. Cruz doesn’t want a rival currently lagging in the polls — such as former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush or New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie — to get liftoff from a strong showing in New Hampshire.

“He’s keeping everybody honest,” said political consultant Craig Stevens, who lives in New Hampshire. “It’s a battle royal out there, and he wants to kick as many people as possible out of the long-term race. And if Trump falters in New Hampshire, Cruz would benefit.”

But Stevens says there’s a risk with trying to go all out in both New Hampshire and Iowa. New Hampshire voters are known for opting for a different candidate than Iowans. And the makeup of the electorate is different, with Iowa dominated by Christian conservatives.

“Sometimes when candidates try to go all-in in both states, they come up short in both,” Stevens said.



Fiscal conservatives

Though trailing, Cruz has reason for optimism in New Hampshire.

“Cruz’s favorability ratings have gone up as Republican voters here have come to know him better,” said Muirhead, the political scientist. “In fact, more people say they ‘could see’ themselves supporting Cruz, at 71 percent, than say that about Trump, Rubio, Carson, Christie and Bush.”

Still, Cruz is not as well known in New Hampshire as he is in Iowa. And his strong appeals to evangelicals aren’t as effective here.

“I grew up in New Hampshire, and I always thought of New Hampshire Republicans as more oriented to fiscal conservatism — small government, low taxes and balanced budgets — than social conservatism,” Muirhead said. “And indeed, likely voters in the New Hampshire Republican primary support same-sex marriage, unlike likely Republican caucusgoers in Iowa. But their convictions on the economy, job creation, taxes and spending — not to mention immigration and terrorism — align them with Republicans in the rest of the country.”

Some New Hampshire voters are suspicious of Cruz and the rest of the Republican field.



‘Volatile … race’

Bri Casey, a 31-year-old graphics designer from Bristol, was watching the NFL playoffs when the conversation at a Manchester bar turned to politics.

“I’m not voting for him or any of them,” Casey said. “I’m going to write in the name of my dog, Maizie. She has a better chance of getting stuff done.”

Corey Glaude, a 31-year-old Manchester resident who works at a refrigeration company, said he liked how Cruz stood up to Trump, including his controversial comments criticizing the real estate tycoon for having “New York values.”

“I like it that Cruz is not backing down,” Glaude said. “But I don’t know who I’m voting for. I’m an independent.”

Cruz’s bus tour could help his biggest area of need, which is getting to know more New Hampshire voters.

“The main impediment for Cruz is that fewer people have met him than have met other candidates,” Muirhead said. “He needs to show up, and to make his case in person. If he does, he certainly can do well. I think this is a volatile and competitive race. He might even win.”

Twitter: @gromerjeffers