Chief Justice of the Supreme Court John Roberts. (Photo: Associated Press )

Even the tired cliché about the pot calling the kettle black couldn’t adequately capture the irony when Iowa’s U.S. Sen. Chuck Grassley last week accused Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts of fueling partisanship around the judiciary. “Physician, heal thyself,” Grassley admonished Roberts in a speech Tuesday.

Picking a fight with the Republican-appointed chief justice marks a bizarre twist in the Senate Judiciary Committee chairman’s refusal to consider a nominee to fill an opening on the court while President Barack Obama is in office.

Grassley’s remarks were in reference to a speech the chief justice had given shortly before Justice Antonin Scalia's death. Roberts observed that the public wrongly believes that justices see themselves as Republicans or Democrats. Grassley shot back that perception is not because, as Roberts had contended, the confirmation process has been so politicized, but because, “the justices' decisions are often political and transgress their constitutional role.”

“In fact,” Grassley continued, “many of my constituents believe, with all due respect, that the chief justice is part of this problem. They believe that a number of his votes have reflected political considerations, not legal ones.”

Far be it from me to defend Roberts’ voting record on the court, which included the disastrous 2010 Citizens United decision allowing corporations to spend unlimited amounts to influence election outcomes in the name of free speech. Roberts also authored the dissenting opinion in the 2015 court ruling that upheld same-sex marriage rights. He even blasted his fellow justices over it at the time, declaring: "Today, five lawyers have ordered every state to change their definition of marriage. Just who do we think we are?"

Since his appointment by President George W. Bush in 2005, Roberts has also voted against the use of race-conscious admission policies to achieve school desegregation; against student free-speech rights when drug use is being advocated; to strike down an animal cruelty law; to require that colleges that receive any federal funding must allow military recruiters on campus, and to uphold the partial birth abortion ban. A liberal he's not.

“After four years on the Court,” wrote The New Yorker’s Jeffrey Toobin of Roberts in 2009, “Roberts’s record is not that of a humble moderate but, rather, that of a doctrinaire conservative.”

But not according to Grassley, for whom Roberts’ cardinal sin must have been voting to uphold Obama's Affordable Care Act. Grassley last week accused the court of drifting from the “constitutional text” and ruling on such hot button issues as “freedom of religion, abortion, affirmative action, gun control, free speech, and the death penalty,” based on individual policy preferences. And he blamed that primarily on justices appointed by Democrats.

Iowa Sen. Chuck Grassley, chairman of the Senate committee that oversees judicial nominations, has become the face of Republican opposition to the nomination of Merrick Garland to the nation’s highest court. (Photo: Charlie Neibergall/Associated Press)

Declaring that all the liberal justices were appointed by Democrats, and the conservative and swing justices by Republicans, Grassley said: “There are four justices who vote in a liberal way in effectively every case the public follows. There are two justices who stick to the constitutional text (emphasis mine) and who vote in a consistently conservative way. One justice votes mostly, but not always, in a conservative way, and one justice votes sometimes with the conservatives and sometimes with the liberals.”

It seems that for Grassley, only justices appointed by Republican presidents are capable of being impartial, because they “stick to the constitutional text.” But even then, some can’t be trusted because, like Roberts, they might drift from the conservative viewpoint in some cases. It’s no secret that some justices appointed by Republican presidents have shifted to the middle in their votes over time. Instead of being traitors to the conservative cause, as Grassley seems to see them, maybe they’ve had their eyes opened to a more contemporary-world perspective on social realities. After all, the Constitution was written at a time when many current circumstances were not even contemplated.

Declaring that “tens of millions of Americans believe, correctly, that too many of the justices are imposing their views and not interpreting the law,” Grassley called for a debate on the proper role of a Supreme Court justice, and “whether our current justices are adhering to their constitutional role.”

Senate Democratic Leader Harry Reid fired back at Grassley the following day for having, in Reid's words, the audacity to accuse Roberts of being part of the problem. “l say to the senior senator from Iowa, Justice Roberts isn’t the one who needs healing," he declared. By refusing to give a hearing to Obama’s appointee, Judge Merrick Garland, “purely because he was nominated by a Democratic president,” Nevada's Reid said, “Senator Grassley has sacrificed the historic independence of the judiciary to do the bidding of the Tea Party and the Koch Brothers.”

Grassley’s delay in confirming a ninth justice to the Supreme Court has prevented it from making precedent-setting rulings in tied cases. Reid said “with only himself to blame,” Grassley is “grasping for something, anything to get him off the hook.”

I’m tired of Iowa getting a bad name for Grassley's antics, and annoyed that he invokes his constituents to justify his intransigent stance. He denies being partisan but blasts a Republican-appointed justice for moving to the center. What could be a better illustration of partisanship — except maybe refusing to consider a Democratic president’s appointee?

So many of us, in Iowa and elsewhere, await the election, wondering how Grassley will get out of the corner he’s painted himself into if a Democrat wins.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1N1sG7q