It’s “show season” for the entrepreneurs who produce their own hunting and fishing lifestyle shows for cable TV — time to tour the outdoors expos, connect with fans and do the hard but necessary work of self-promotion.

Chris Brackett, producer and star of the Outdoor Channel’s “Fear No Evil,” is on the road with a high-energy approach to archery hunting that will rock the Monroeville Convention Center this month at the annual Allegheny Sport, Travel and Outdoor Show.

But on the way, Brackett’s unconventional views on chronic wasting disease put him at odds with scientists nationwide and the state Game Commission.

Last week, biologists working to contain the spread of CWD in Pennsylvania recommended expanding the existing ban on the use or possession of urine-based deer attractants within the state’s three Disease Management Zones. Though not contagious to humans, CWD is spread among most deer-like species through the exchange of bodily fluids, including urine. Unregulated bottled doe-in-estrus scents, it is believed, could spread the CWD prions.

During a recent interview about deer lures and concerns about CWD, Brackett challenged the need for a urine scent ban and the widely accepted belief that the disease is fatal.

“There has never been an animal die of CWD,” Brackett said. “Never, never, never.”

For accuracy, he was asked to repeat the claim and expand on it.

“I was fortunate enough to learn from a person who was one of the first people to discover CWD. I picked his brain for nine days,” said Brackett. “The fact is, what does with CWD do … they’re not dying from it. I think we’ve got a lot bigger problems than urine being spread.”

With no single universally accepted authority on chronic wasting disease, Brackett said, “people are just going to guess and guess.” Pressed for more information on his theory, Brackett suggested the disease is the result of human activity.

“If you trace back CWD and where it comes from, it’s from nuclear testing out West,” he said. “I’m not an expert, but if it walks like a duck and quacks like a duck … ”

Brackett’s “Fear No Evil” show airs on a cable channel received by nearly 40 million U.S. households and in more than 50 countries, according to an Outdoor Channel website.

Wayne Laroche, director of the Game Commission’s Bureau of Wildlife Management, said he agrees with Brackett that there’s a lot still to learn about chronic wasting disease. But one point, he said, is undeniable.

“Google CWD and go to any site,” he said. “Every one of them says the same thing: always fatal.”

Among scientists from leading universities and federal and state wildlife agencies, the lethality of chronic wasting disease is undisputed. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention refer to CWD as “a fatal wasting syndrome.” The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service calls it “a progressive, fatal, neurological disease,” and the U.S. Department of Agriculture, which oversees deer farms, describes a “progressive death.” In Brackett’s home state, the Illinois Department of Natural Resources reports that as of last summer a total of 538 deer were confirmed to have died from exposure to the “fatal neurological disease.”

Research continues. In 2015, the University of Texas Health Science Center found that when infectious single-protein prions bind to plants, they can be eaten and transferred orally. Despite hunters’ use of commercial deer attractants, studies on deer olfactory communication cast doubt on their effectiveness.

“When comparing rutting buck urine, human urine, estrous doe urine and ‘new car’ scent, there was no difference in visitation [of mock scrapes],” said Game Commission deer biologist Jeannine Fleegle. ”The conclusion was that deer were visiting out of curiosity and not out of sexual attraction.”

In a low but growing number of states, CWD control includes banning urine-based deer attractants It’s a growing concern for manufacturers of some hunting products.

“There is not a commercial test available to detect prions in urine. Removing them would be nearly impossible,” said Fleegle.

The Game Commission has confirmed CWD at deer farms in Adams and Jefferson counties, and in free-ranging wild deer in Blair and Bedford counties.

The Allegheny Sport, Travel and Outdoor Show runs Feb. 17-21 at Monroeville Convention Center. Details www.sportandtravel.com.