By Fritz Mayer

MONTICELLO, NY — Zephyr Teachout, the Democratic law professor who ran a surprisingly strong primary against Gov. Andrew Cuomo in 2014 and won convincingly in Sullivan County and many other upstate communities, was back in the county on February 15, meeting and listening to voters. She’s running for the seat in New York’s 19th Congressional District, which is currently held by Republican Chris Gibson, who has opted not to run for another term.

Teachout, who will likely face Will Yandik from Columbia County in a primary race, stopped by the Miss Monticello Diner in Monticello for an interview with The River Reporter.

The first topic was the Affordable Care Act, aka Obamacare, and what kind of healthcare system we should have. She said, “Certainly it’s something you hear about from everybody, healthcare costs and the mark-up. I was talking to a guy the other day who gets $5 dollar foot cream that gets marked up to $400. I think if we’re really going to fundamentally address costs, which is the key thing we have to address—people’s insurance premiums are too high—we have to directly take on Big Pharma, and make sure that the mergers in the insurance industry are not leading to higher rates, and I have a long history of standing up to monopoly power and big companies. I think the key here is understanding this isn’t a Republican-Democratic fight, but to get to where we need to be we need to reign in pharma and insurance companies.”

She next addressed the death of U.S. Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia and the appointment of his successor. She said, “It’s a really important moment. With an opening on this Supreme Court, we have a chance to have a new justice who would overturn Citizens United, overturn Buckley v. Valeo [decisions which lead to nearly unlimited corporate and super political action committee (PAC) spending in elections]… Citizens United was just a five-four vote and that’s led to this scourge of dark money, super PACS. I hope and I believe that public anger over what Citizens United has done to our democracy will make that a sort of central question in the appointment process. So people are going to talk about the process, but the key thing is who our next justice is going to be. And I am very hopeful that Obama will appoint somebody who understands why corporations shouldn’t have unlimited speech rights.”