GRAND RAPIDS, MI — He's been called "the most interesting" presidential contender in the crowded Republican field, one who "stands out" because of his experience and record.

But chances are, you don't know much about John Kasich, who is tied for 10th in national polls and is fighting for the last spot onstage next month at the first GOP debate.

The Ohio governor, who officially entered the 2016 race on Tuesday during a week dominated by coverage of fellow candidate Donald Trump, traveled across Michigan on Saturday, doing his best to capture the attention of voters here.

"The reason why I don't have high name ID is because I was just taking care of Ohio. I never thought I was going to do this," Kasich told a crowd at the Grand Rapids Brewing Co. in West Michigan.

"I mean, I didn't run down the middle of the field at an Ohio State-Michigan game with my shirt off. And I could have because I know that your team couldn't have tackled me," he said to loud laugher. "I love that rivalry by the way."

Kasich started his day at a GOP breakfast in Southfield, where he also filmed an interview with NBC's Chuck Todd that is expected to air Sunday on "Meet the Press," and he was scheduled to attend the Ottawa County Lincoln Day dinner on Saturday evening.

"The key for me is record, resume and me," the 63-year-old said. "Maybe it will work, maybe it won't, but I'm going to give them the record, and I'm going to give the resume and I'm going to give as much as I can of who I am. And have some fun."

That resume includes an 18-year run in Congress, where Kasich chaired the House Budget Committee and helped craft the 1997 balanced budget deal that led to a federal surplus, which hasn't happened since 2001.

"Under his leadership, we got to this place we said we were never going to get to," said former Congressman Pete Hoekstra, who joined Kasich onstage and praised him even as the candidate called the balanced budget a "team" effort. "This guy is the real deal. He is a good guy."

Kasich and Hoekstra, who chaired the House Intelligence Committee, also discussed their shared opposition to the nuclear deal with Iran that is backed by the Obama administration.

"It's the worst thing going," Kasich said. "First of all, they're going to get a nuclear weapon and we're going to give them a lot of cash to spread so much trouble." He predicted Congress will block the deal, the president will pull out his veto pen, and its fate will ultimately depend on Democratic support for an override vote.

"The question is, are we at a point of time in this country, where people of a political party can overcome their party identification to put the country first?" he said.

Kasich is considered one of the more moderate candidates in the 16-candidate GOP field. Like Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder, he's bucked the party trend by expanding Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, a law he says he'd still rather replace.

In his roughly 30 minute speech, Kasich described the importance of caring for those in need — "it doesn't mean a handout, it means a helping hand and personal responsibility" — but rejected the suggestion that means he is not conservative.

"I could care less about that, with the exception of this: The conservative movement, the Republican Party, needs to be a party of unity and listening to people," Kasich said.

"If we're going to be a party of no, and no ideas, and anger and name calling, forget about it. We're in the business of trying to make sure we are a 21st century party that can reach out to everybody across the board. That's what we've done in Ohio."

Kasich is heavily targeting Michigan in his bid for the GOP nomination, making it a stop on his official kick-off campaign tour, which has also featured visits to the early primary states of New Hampshire, Iowa and South Carolina.

"I expect to spend a considerable amount of time here," he told reporters after the event. "Look, it's a neighbor, so I'm comfortable here, and it's going to be so important in the nomination process."

He's hired longtime Michigan GOP consultant Jeff Timmer as his campaign builds its ground game here, and he already visited the state twice this year before making his run official.

"I think he's got to do well in the Midwest, especially the upper Midwest and the Great Lakes region," said U.S. Rep. Bill Huizenga, who explained that he hasn't endorsed any candidate yet this cycle but appreciates what Kasich brings to the table.

"He'll tell you what he's thinking whether you want to hear it or not," Huizenga told MLive after joining Kasich on a tour of the brewery. "He's obviously very confident, hard charging and is looking for solutions. He's not about fluff. He doesn't care about image and all that stuff. He's about results."

Cleveland.com: Why Ohio Gov. John Kasich ended his presidential campaign's kickoff tour in Michigan

Michigan's March 8 primary — and the state's relatively large delegate haul — has drawn heavy interest from a number of Republican presidential hopefuls.

At least half of the 16-candidate field will have visited Michigan by mid-September, when Scott Walker, Carly Fiorina, Ted Cruz and Jeb Bush will speak at the Mackinac Republican Leadership Conference.

Ben Carson launched his campaign in Detroit, Rand Paul toured the state this month and Trump is expected at a Genesee and Saginaw County dinner next month.

Susan Esser Hellton of Traverse City, who drove down state to see Kasich in West Michigan, plans to support him in the primary but is worried he won't make the cut for the first GOP debate, which will feature the top 10 candidates in national polls.

"When you've got the most qualified person to be hired, you ought to let him in the interview," she said. "...My only concern is that too much of the attention is being given to lesser qualified candidates in the Republican Party."

Jonathan Oosting is a Capitol reporter for MLive Media Group. Email him, find him on Facebook or follow him on Twitter.