Buy Photo Students walk across campus Wednesday at UW-Green Bay. (Photo: Evan Siegle/Press-Gazette Media/@PGevansiegle)Buy Photo

For a public institution, such as the University of Wisconsin-Green Bay, that milestone usually indicates that you’ve become a part of the fabric of a community.

It means that for many who live in Northeastern Wisconsin, Green Bay has always had a four-year public university.

On Wednesday, the university celebrated its 50th anniversary. Even though UW-Green Bay didn’t begin offering classes until 1968, on Sept. 2, 1965, then-Gov. Warren Knowles signed a bill authorizing a four-year university. Prior to that, Green Bay offered a two-year center with a growing enrollment.

That day 50 years ago capped an effort to build a campus here that proved to be fortuitous for not only the university and those who attended and worked there, but for the Green Bay community as well.

A four-year public university can have a positive impact on the surrounding community. Some examples include:

With its student body of about 7,000, it gives area high school students who want to go to college a nearby university. It also brings in students from outside the area, state, and nation, exposing students and people in the community a glimpse of the diversity they’ll find in the world.

It becomes a major employer, providing jobs to educators, professionals, hourly staff and students.

It also benefits the community economically in at least three ways: It brings in a population that spends money in the area, it supplies area businesses talented and trained workers, and it partners with experts and companies to provide opportunities and support.

For example, the state’s Small Business Development Center at UWGB supports small and mid-size companies that are looking to grow or just starting out.

It connects with the community, both young and older, through programs like Upward Bound and the Regional Center for Math and Science, which help get students from low-income and first-generation families; Camp Lloyd, a weeklong event for grieving children ages 7-14; continuing professional education programs; and the Environmental Management and Business Institute, to name just a few.

It also has forged ties with area educational institutions, like Northeast Wisconsin Technical College, St. Norbert College, and elementary and secondary schools.

It’s through these programs and initiatives that UWGB has become part of the the fabric of the community.

Some have said the university is overlooked – out of sight and out of mind given its location in the far northeastern corner of the city.

That hasn’t lessened its impact throughout the area. The students, faculty and staff are part of the Green Bay area, whether its patronizing area businesses or volunteering during Make A Difference Day. Plus, many of them tend to stay. More than 70 percent of UWGB grads stay within a 50-mile radius of Green Bay, according to a 2008 Press-Gazette story.

For this academic year, the university saw its student enrollment increase, continuing small, steady growth. That’s remarkable and says a lot about UWGB given the cutbacks in state funding over the last several years and the loss of talented faculty through buyouts.

Being part of the community is just as important for the university and its students, preventing them from becoming insulated from the world around them.

It’s a partnership between the university and the community that benefits both. Here’s to UW-Green Bay on its 50th birthday and here’s to hoping for 50 more.

Read or Share this story: http://gbpg.net/1UziVv4