CHICAGO — The quality of the health-care system in a community impacts the quality of workers attracted to that area.

“If people don’t have access to health care, that can cause more absenteeism, and it disrupts the flow of production,” said Scott Loveridge, professor at Michigan State University. “And if folks have to commute for basic checkups, that’s lost work time for the worker or lost vacation time.”

Poor health also may affect entrepreneurship.

“If I feel like my health is fragile, I might not start a business,” Loveridge said during a presentation at the Labor Issues Facing Agriculture and Rural Midwest meeting, sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago.

According to information provided by the National Rural Health Association, rural areas have 25 percent of the people, but only 10 percent of the physicians.

“That is clearly a substantial gap,” Loveridge said.

Additional statistics provided by the association:

* 40 percent of rural high school students use alcohol compared to 25 percent in urban areas.

* Cigarette smoking is 50 percent higher in rural areas among eighth-graders.

* Hypertension rates are 27 percent higher in rural areas.

“In the past 25 years, there have been 470 rural hospital closings,” Loveridge said. “That may be contributing to the higher death rates associated with death and serious injury accidents with rural areas having 33 percent of the motor vehicle accidents and 67 percent of the deaths.”

Law’s Effect

The Affordable Care Act, Loveridge said, is complicated.

“Farmers need to know the information,” he added.

Since the number of insured people is increasing, this could be positive for rural areas.

“Maybe some of those rural hospitals could come back through increased demand, with an aging population and new provisions available in the Affordable Care Act,” Loveridge noted.

Part of the reason there is a provider shortage in rural areas is due to lower salaries.

“The rural areas produce a lot of people that want to go to medical school and come back and practice in rural areas,” he explained. “But they are graduating from medical school with a huge debt load, and it is hard to make ends meet when you are serving your debt load with a small patient population.”

In addition, the doctor’s spouse may not be able to find an appropriate career in a rural area.

“We’ve seen a lot of effort over the last 20 years with ways to try to deal with this such as pressure on medical schools to do preferential admission to people who want to work in rural areas,” Loveridge said. “There have also been recruitment campaigns and efforts to set up the facility for a doctor. There have been cases where it has worked and where it hasn’t.”

Some of the doctor shortage has been addressed by doctors coming to the U.S. from other countries.

“India has been the biggest provider of physicians to help us address our national gap,” Loveridge reported. “Over the last two years, 2,800 providers have come to the U.S. The Philippines, Pakistan and Mexico are much smaller, but still important providers.”

Other Issues

Another set of issues involves mental health and substance abuse.

“This plays out a little differently in rural areas because we often work in a solitary fashion,” Loveridge said. “We’re doing outdoor work, so we’re not interacting with people on a regular basis.”

In addition, invisible homeless may lurk in rural areas.

“In downtown Chicago, we see people with signs,” Loveridge said. “But in rural America, they might be living in the woods, an abandoned house or couch surfing by living with relatives.”

Since homeless people in rural areas are not quite as visible it is harder to count them and bring them into systems that can help.

Another issue is rural areas tend to be conservative in regard to mental health. People are encouraged to be tough and deal with it, Loveridge said.

And, when rural residents do seek help, he added, their social networks tend to be destroyed.

Telemedicine may have some advantages for rural areas.

“It can potentially lower costs and residents can more easily tie into specialized providers,” Loveridge explained. “But broadband is a limiting factor in rural areas.”

Although telemedicine may provide access to a wider range of services to rural areas, there could be negative consequences to a community.

“You are replacing someone with a high wage with someone who has less training and a lower wage,” Loveridge said.

“My advice is to think holistically,” he said. “Put strategies in place that make sense for the community.”

Martha Blum can be reached at 815-223-2558, ext. 117, or marthablum@agrinews-pubs.com. Follow her on Twitter at: @AgNews_Blum.