Planned parenthood protest (flickrusersmirk)

Glass windows and a door at a Planned Parenthood facility in St. Louis, Missouri have been busted out in an apparent act of vandalism, St. Louis Public Radio reports.

The windows and doors were shattered with rocks in what appears to be a targeted attack on the women’s health facility on Saturday morning, Mary Kogut, head of Planned Parenthood of the St. Louis Region and Southwest Missouri, to the radio station.

“Someone came and literally busted all of our windows, throwing rocks at our windows, and it seems to be that it was specifically targeting Planned Parenthood, this act of violence and vandalism,” she said. “It’s a very unfortunately act of vandalism and violence against a health care provider.”

The vandalism caused “thousands of dollars” worth of damage, she said.

Kogut told SLPR that a suspect was in custody.

The vandalism is yet another act of violence at a Planned Parenthood facility, which provide an array of health care services for free to both women and women. Last month, three people were killed and nine wounded when Robert Lewis Dear opened fire at a Planned Parenthood in Colorado Springs.

At a court hearing this week, Dear blurted out that he was a “warrior for the babies” and admitted his guilt. When he was arrested last month, Dear hinted that he may have been influenced by increasingly extreme anti-abortion rhetoric when he said “no more baby parts.”

No one was injured in Saturday’s attack and the clinic was closed at the time.

“This year has been one that’s been filled with a lot of hateful and vile rhetoric, and I think that’s creating a violent opposition to Planned Parenthood and to health care providers, and it needs to stop,” Kogut told CBS St. Louis.

Just days after the deadly Colorado Springs shooting, Congressional Republicans voted to defund Planned Parenthood in their ongoing efforts to gut the Affordable Care Act — a move the president is expected to veto.

Dear’s attack came after Republican presidential nominee Carly Fiorina gave a graphic description of non-existent footage depicting a live fetus squirming while Planned Parenthood staffers dissected it. She was refering to heavily-edited and discredited videos released by anti-abortion propaganda group, Center for Medical Progress. The videos have given the GOP an opening to ramp up their battle against the women’s health care provider.