Norma Jean Fouche talks about the Fremont County Farmers Market on Saturday at The Abbey. ( Sarah Rose / Daily Record )

Norma Jean Fouche's booth at the new Fremont County Farmers Market. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

Family recipes that go back 100 years are used to bake the variety of breads offered at Mother's Memories, one of the booths at the new Fremont County Farmers Market.

"Instead of using cake mixes, I use the original lard and butter like the old-fashioned recipes," Market Manager Norma Jean Fouche said.

She makes 18 different types of jelly, as well.

"I pick all of my fruit," Fouche said. "I make the juice and then I make all of my jellies. Everything is Colorado-grown and homemade."

Fouche makes candy but won't bring it to the market during the summer months.

"I can't bring it in the summertime because it melts," she said. "For reunions and stuff, I make coconut balls, which are almost like Almond Joys, peanut butter balls, fudges, caramels, divinity."

She takes food orders.

"I do have a national registry license, and I do the Colorado Cottage Food Act," Fouche said "I do have several customers now that I deliver to twice a week."

She said she has been cooking since she was 6.

"I love to cook and bake," Fouche said. "It's a stress reliever. I enjoy the enjoyment of people who come back the next week and say, 'Boy, that was really good.'"

The farmers market, which features about 20 vendors, also offers pottery, furniture, glass-blown products, boot and leather repair, fresh eggs, produce, gifts and more.

The market is looking for more vendors to participate.

The market's first day was June 6.

Advertisement

"We've been real happy with what we have had," Fouche said. "We have a good turnout."

Carol Seal, assistant market manager, said she was previously a vendor for a different farmers market.

"We decided to start the Saturday market back up because we could do it, and a lot of others wanted to see it back, too," Seal said in a previous Daily Record article. "We have had several people say they are glad Saturday is opening back up because they can't go to Tuesday or Thursday markets because they are working."

For more information, call Fouche at (719) 371-5203 or Seal at (719) 371-2114.

The Fremont County Farmers Market is open from 8 a.m. to 1 p.m. every Saturday through Sept. 26 at the Abbey.

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com