Joanna Kennedy, founder of the Center for Happiness, Love and Pleasure, says she's inspired passion and confidence in thousands of clients in Boulder and beyond. On July 7, she'll try her luck on America's Got Talent. (Joanna Kennedy)

In the fall of 2001, Joanna Kennedy had what she calls a "eureka moment."

She was in her early 30s, divorced — with several failed courtships since the split — and climbing the corporate ladder in the Houston-area oil and gas industry.

"I realized I was the common denominator in those relationships," says Kennedy, now 47.

Since seeing the light, Kennedy has transformed into a renowned "passion and intimacy coach", specializing in helping men and women rediscover confidence in the bedroom.

Though she recently moved to Loveland, she's run the Center for Happiness, Love and Pleasure out of Boulder for nearly a decade.

"I love being a woman, I think men are phenomenal," she says. "It's extraordinary to see the magic that happens between the two when we let each other be who we are."

Along the way, she's developed something of an expertise on the delicate art of passionate kissing, which she'll show off on Tuesday's episode of "America's Got Talent." The show is produced by Simon Cowell of American Idol fame, and, like Idol, pits aspiring stars against harsh judges, with an affable host — Nick Cannon, in this case — playfully moderating.

"When they called and asked me to audition, I was like, 'OK, I'm not exactly a reality TV act,'" she says. "But my calling and my mission is to bring this work to those who want it and don't know it's available, like I was over a decade ago, when I was hungry but didn't know what I was hungry for."

Advertisement

Turns out she was hungry for a release of her authentic, feminine self. Now she works with people in the same position she once was.

"I work with a ton of men who say they've lost their mojo," Kennedy says. "And there's a walking erection, if you will, that comes from a confident man who knows who is he and what he stands for."

A well-done smooch doesn't hurt, either. Kennedy acknowledges that there is no right way, per se, to kiss, but she's also found countless clients who for years unknowingly misused their lips.

"We don't know what we don't know," she says. "Just as there are different ways to stroke and touch somebody's body, there are different ways to amplify the energy of the kiss. How do you use you tongue? How do you use your teeth? How do I use my breath?"

Cannon, who recently divorced singer Mariah Carey after six years of marriage, is about to get Kennedy's crash course in primetime.

She is contractually barred from revealing anything about the upcoming episode, but if her resume is any indication, Cannon, whom she describes as a skilled kisser, may owe her a thank-you.

"I've touched thousands in my career," Kennedy says. "Or, I should say, my words have touched thousands."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness