Hillary Clinton at a health care event in 1994.

LITTLE ROCK, Ark.—Notes from a summer 1994 meeting of Clinton administration officials reveal that some of the language and phrases they mulled for selling their universal health-care plan were similar to the words the Obama administration employed nearly two decades later.

Under the header “Elements of Reassurance,” a Clinton staffer wrote: “If you like Blue Cross, you can keep your Blue Cross.”

That line foreshadows a pledge made two decades later by President Barack Obama, both before and after his Affordable Care Act was signed into law: “If you like your health plan, you can keep your health plan” — which turned out not to be true. The fact-checking website Politifact gave the health-insurer claim the 2013 “lie of the year” award.

Clinton Library

Also scribbled in the notes were mentions of the administration’s support for the individual mandate, which requires Americans to buy insurance or pay a penalty if they don’t. “Only way to achieve [universal health care] is via mandates,” the Clinton staffer wrote. “Not because our idea; or because we’re stubborn but because it’s good for ordinary working people.” A page later, the staffer wrote: “We’re against doing this via taxes.”

In 2012, the Supreme Court ruled that the health-care law is constitutional because the individual mandate can be considered a tax. Mr. Obama has since maintained that it isn’t a tax, and his administration vehemently refuted that notion in the lead-up to the law’s passage.

Also written on the sheet is: “Freedom to choose doctor, plan.”

Documents outlining the administration’s media strategy for selling the health care bill in the summer of 1994 showed their primary targets were Congress and “Washington elite/media.” “Of secondary importance is touching a broader, national audience on choice and quality,” read one document detailing media appearances for the administration in the following week.

The Clinton health plan ultimately died in Congress in late 1994.

The documents were part of a trove of documents from the Clinton administration released by the William J. Clinton Library this week. Unlike past document releases, these were not posted online. The notes were part of a folder containing the documents of Noa Meyer, a speechwriter for then-first lady Hillary Clinton, but the author of the notes is not clearly identified.

Ms. Meyer’s records also contained notes from a 1995 meeting with Democratic pollster Celinda Lake that identified the president and first lady’s demographic strengths and weaknesses. Mr. Clinton was “very popular with women,” a staffer wrote. Mrs. Clinton, meanwhile, was popular with college-educated and older Americans, as well as those below the age of 30. Her point of weakness was among Americans aged 30-60 who had not graduated from college, the staffer wrote. The meeting focused on how to sell the administration’s initiatives, including universal health care, to the public.