The Obamacare tax on high-cost employer health plans is back in the news, thanks to MIT professor Jonathan Gruber's controversial comments that the provision would eventually upend all employer health plans. In the short term, though, very few companies are now expecting to drop their health plans the first year the tax kicks in, according to a new survey of employers.

Just a quick overview of what the Cadillac tax does: It’s a 40 percent excise tax on employer health plans on amounts above a certain threshold – it starts at $10,200 for an individual plan and $27,500 for a family plan. The tax won’t take effect until 2018, but firms are already starting to plan for it.

The tax is a big deal since it's a departure from one of the biggest tax breaks in the entire code: that the federal government does not tax the value of health insurance provided by employers to their workers. Gruber’s comments on the Cadillac tax stirred up controversy, in part, because he said it would eventually end the tax advantage, across the board, in 20 years. That’s not something that supporters of the ACA — himself included — were saying when the law was being drafted. They said the Cadillac tax would hit only the most expensive coverage, and that the tax would nudge employers to choose less expensive health plans and, in return, improve employee wages.

Economists generally agree that the preferred tax treatment for employer health plans is bad policy. But suggestions to end or limit this design are pretty unpopular, as Gruber's comments acknowledge.

A new survey suggests that in the short term, at least, the Cadillac tax won’t spur employers to drop coverage in a big way. Just about 3.5 percent of employers said they expect to stop offering coverage in the tax’s first year, according to a survey of more than 3,000 firms from the Employee Benefit Research Institute and the Society for Human Resource Management released on Wednesday. Another 30 percent of employers said they’re still unsure what effect the tax will have in 2018.

About 85 percent of firms in the survey said they don't expect their health plans would trigger the Cadillac tax in 2018, but firms that historically offer more generous coverage are more likely to anticipate hitting the tax in its first year. Businesses with at least 750 employees were twice as likely as smaller employers to say they expect to face the tax in 2018. Government employers, when compared to privately owned for-profit businesses, were more than twice as likely to expect to face the tax that year. It will also hit much more expensive preferred provider organizations much harder than any other type of plan.

The survey comes as the cost of employer health plans has been growing at a historically slow rate over the past few years. The cost of family coverage in 2014 grew just 3 percent, reaching $16,834 this year, according to the annual Kaiser Family Foundation/HRET survey. Employer-sponsored individual coverage grew just 2 percent, hitting $6,025 for the average plan.

How that rate changes over the next couple of years will affect how many plans will be subject to the Cadillac tax. For what it's worth, the Congressional Budget Office last year said the tax would bring in less revenue — $80 billion instead of $137 billion over the decade — because of lower health spending and changes in the employer-sponsored insurance market. So it indicates some employers will pay the tax and pass the cost onto workers.

With new attention on the tax and Republican control of Congress, there’ll likely be increasing pressure to blunt the tax’s impact. But it's still a big chunk of change to replace.