Bobby Brown and his wife Alicia Ethridge welcomed a baby girl over the weekend.

Ethridge, who wed the R&B star in 2012, was induced at Cedars Sinai hospital in Los Angeles on Saturday, TMZ reports.

It was a rare bit of good news for Brown, whose daughter with late ex-wife Whitney Houston, Bobbi Kristina, is entering her third week at an Atlanta-area hospice care center.

Baby girl: Bobby Brown and his wife Alicia Ethridge welcomed a baby girl on Saturday

Brown and Etheridge, who were married in 2012, have a 5-year-old son named Cassius.

Brown has a total of six children, including Bobbi Kristina with late ex-wife Whitney Houston.

Bobbi Kristina, 22, was recently moved to a hospice in Georgia, for what it is claimed will be her 'final days' and the tragedy is clearly taking its toll on her dad.

Brown, 46, took a break from caring for his daughter on last week to enjoy a lunch in Beverly Hills with pregnant Etheridge.

On July 7, Entertainment Tonight revealed they'd been offered an unlawfully taken image of Bobbi Kristina on her death bed for a price in excess of $100,000.

However, the news show declined the offer, deeming the photo 'unseemly'. Other outlets had a similar response.

Sad: Brown's 22-year-old daughter with late ex-wife Whitney Houston was recently moved to a hospice in Georgia, for what it is claimed will be her 'final days' and the tragedy is clearly taking its toll on her dad

Hve two children: Brown and Etheridge, who were married in 2012, have a 5-year-old son named Cassius

Brown performed at the Affordable Old School Concert series in Atlanta on Saturday, July 4, where the 46-year-old singer repeatedly apologized to the audience as he stumbled through the set and forgot lyrics and dance moves, TMZ reported.

In a video taken at the gig, the singer can be heard telling the crowd: 'I'm in a different zone.'

And in a recent interview with Fox News, a source close to the family said relatives have been 'beefing up' security and law enforcement over fears Bobbi Kristina's death is 'imminent'.

'She barely has any signs of life, hardly any vitals, the source told the news station. 'Even law enforcement have been called because the families have been told that death is now imminent.