During his first week in Congress, Dan Donovan was a reliable new member of the House Republican caucus. Donovan joined his colleagues in voting for high-profile bills to restrict the collection of telephone metadata, require congressional approval of a nuclear deal, and authorize the Defense Department budget.

But Donovan has already signaled that he will split with the more conservative wing, when the time comes.

“I might end up being in the minority of the majority,” Donovan said, in an interview during the campaign.

Last Tuesday, Donovan officially replaced Michael Grimm, who resigned the seat in January after pleading guilty to federal tax fraud, as New York City's lone Republican in Congress.

The job requires reconciling the needs of a moderate swing district, covering Staten Island and parts of Brooklyn, with the increasingly conservative demands of the Republican majority in the House.

Grimm won the seat as a Tea Party outsider in 2010, cultivating a brash ex-Marine persona, and loudly railing against President Obama and the Democratic incumbent.

Donovan, genial and mild-mannered, played down his party affiliation during the campaign.

“I never conducted business as a Republican D.A.,” he told Capital over lunch at Karl's Klipper, near the Staten Island ferry terminal.

That centrism has served him well on the island, where he moved up the ranks of the county party to run for district attorney, and twice won re-election by overwhelming margins, before declaring for the open congressional seat.

Despite concerns from the national party, Donovan's stewardship of the Eric Garner case—which ended without charges against a white police officer—did little to damage his standing on the island. A January poll, conducted by the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, scared away the Democrats' most credible challengers, and Donovan coasted to victory with 60 percent of the vote.

The challenge for Donovan now is to maintain that standing in the district, and resist being stained by an unpopular Republican majority that has drifted increasingly to the right.

DONOVAN WILL HAVE A MENTOR AND, PERHAPS, a model in the dean of the New York delegation.

Rep. Peter King introduced Donovan on the House floor after he was sworn in last Tuesday, calling him not only a "true public servant, universally respected," but also a "friend for many years." (King enjoyed a less friendly relationship with Grimm.) King and Donovan—sons of a cop and a longshoreman, respectively—both share an Irish background and working-class roots.

King has avoided serious challenges, from both parties, by positioning himself as an anti-Obama, fiscally conservative security hawk, who is also relatively pro-labor, mostly avoids divisive social issues, and occasionally encourages his party to compromise with Democrats.

Donovan, so far, seems to be following that script.

At his victory party earlier this month, Donovan told a roomful of 200 cheering Republicans that his win was "a message to President Obama, to Nancy Pelosi—and yes, even to Bill de Blasio—that their policies are wrong for our nation, they’re wrong for our city, and they’re they're wrong for the people of the 11th Congressional District."

Early in his campaign, Donovan suggested he supported some provisions of the Affordable Care Act, but grew more strident in his opposition in the closing week, telling WNYC's Brian Lehrer, "I think we need to repeal the whole thing."

For most of the campaign, Donovan offered himself as something less of a firebrand.

"When you read a report that [says] ‘the president’s opposition in Congress’—I didn’t realize we were supposed to be opponents,” Donovan told Capital.

“This isn’t a game we’re playing,” he said, later calling the unbending resistance of Washington Republicans to Obama “ridiculous."

(The ambivalence tracks with the district, where voters went for John McCain in 2008, but backed Obama in 2012. King's district also went for Obama in 2012.)

Donovan did his best to avoid social issues during the campaign, particularly abortion, which he opposes, after the issue plagued his 2010 run for attorney general.

Democrats are prepared to seize on the issue. After sitting out the campaign, the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee has made clear it will target Donovan in 2016, when the party expects to have Hillary Clinton leading the ballot.

On election night, the chairman of the DCCC, Ben Ray Luján, called Donovan a "seat warmer," and the group promptly attacked Donovan after one of his first votes was in favor of a Republican bill to impose a new ban on abortions after 20 weeks.

Donovan, for his part, has preferred to focus on less partisan issues like hurricane relief and national security.

Donovan repeatedly promised during his campaign to fight for federal funding for Hurricane Sandy victims, despite what he said was "an anti-New York sentiment in parts of our country.”

His two press releases as a congressman have touted, respectively, his vote for congressional oversight of an Iranian nuclear deal, and a congratulatory message to Obama and U.S. Special Forces for killing an Islamic State leader in Syria.

Donovan has yet to confront any of the intra-party differences that have divided the Republican conference in recent years. But he has already pledged to stand with King, who derides the "crazies" in his party and considers himself the keeper of its "common-sense wing."

At a meeting in Washington in February, Donovan urged party leaders to help his campaign by passing a bill to fund the Department of Homeland Security, over objections from some Republicans who wanted to provoke a standoff with the president over his executive order on immigration.

“There’s only 75 Republicans out of 246 that voted in favor of that,” Donovan said.

The House leadership should be happy to have Donovan, who has signaled that he will back Speaker John Boehner in his intra-party struggle with more conservative members.

Even before he was sworn in, Donovan said party leaders had been “helpful, supportive, generous,” and said "everybody is really welcoming."

Boehner may need his vote as the party stares down another potential increase in the debt ceiling, which conservative members have routinely refused to suport, despite the urging of Democrats and the broader business community.

Donovan said he doesn’t “advocate for increasing any spending,” but that he also is not “an advocate for shutting down the government.”

"People get Washington-ized a lot of times being down there for awhile, and forget that we’re called members of the House of Representatives because we’re meant to represent people," Donovan told Capital. "I don’t think there’s anyone that sends us down there to shut down government. Maybe to run it more efficiently but not to shut it down.”

Asked about joining King's crusade for a more sane party, Donovan said, “I think Pete’s been taking some blows. I think he just wants me to come down there to take some shots for him.”