“Justices are paying more attention to amicus briefs and regularly cite them and rely on them in their opinions,” Mr. Franze said.

The plaintiffs in the case, four Virginia residents, say the Affordable Care Act authorizes tax credits for low- and moderate-income people only in states that established their own insurance exchanges. Congress, they say, offered the subsidies as a way to induce states to set up exchanges.

But Virginia and 21 other states reject that argument. To succeed with such an inducement, they say, Congress would have needed to inform the states that the law included the enticement of subsidies only for those that built their own exchanges. It never did so.

“States selected among exchange options without clear notice that the choice could harm their citizens and disrupt their insurance markets,” the states said in their brief. Indeed, they said, states as diverse as Delaware, Illinois, New Hampshire and Virginia assumed that premium tax credits would be available to their citizens through the federal exchange. To deny those credits now, those states added, “would destroy state insurance markets and render the Affordable Care Act unworkable.”

A set of states dominated by Republicans — Alabama, Georgia, Nebraska, Oklahoma, South Carolina and West Virginia — argue just as vociferously that they were well aware of the inducement.

The arrangement, they said, “came as no surprise to the states” because Congress had pursued a similar approach in many social welfare programs, using money as an incentive for states to carry out federal policies.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The briefs address virtually every conceivable argument that has come up in King v. Burwell.

The chief lobby for the insurance industry, America’s Health Insurance Plans, described the subsidies as one of “three interconnected provisions” of the Affordable Care Act. The other provisions require most Americans to have insurance and prohibit insurers from denying coverage to sick people or charging them more.

If the Supreme Court eliminates the subsidies in states using the federal exchange, the group said, “it would leave consumers in those states with a more unstable market and far higher costs than if the Affordable Care Act had not been enacted.”

Without subsidies, the insurers said, “young and healthy individuals would opt out of the exchanges,” driving up premiums for the remaining consumers, including those who do not receive subsidies.

While most of the insurers’ brief is helpful to the Obama administration, they made one argument that may irk the White House: that consumers need the subsidies because other provisions of the Affordable Care Act, including benefit mandates and premium taxes, have raised the cost of insurance.

Another important brief supporting the administration was filed by one of the nation’s largest hospital chains, HCA, also known as the Hospital Corporation of America.

“The Affordable Care Act is functioning as intended,” HCA said, and the plaintiffs’ interpretation of the law would produce consequences “so absurd that Congress could not possibly have intended them.”

Citing its own experience, HCA said that after patients obtained insurance through the exchanges, they were less likely to use emergency rooms, more likely to receive proper care in outpatient clinics, and more likely to pay their share of hospital bills.

Prof. William N. Eskridge Jr. of Yale Law School, an expert on statutory interpretation, offered an argument calculated to appeal to conservatives like Justice Antonin Scalia who focus on the text of the law and scorn the use of legislative history as a guide to its meaning.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Even judges who exalt the text must not read one short phrase, “established by the state,” in a vacuum, Mr. Eskridge wrote in a brief joined by four other scholars.

“A statutory phrase that has one apparent meaning when read in isolation may have a different meaning when read in the context of the statute as a whole,” Mr. Eskridge said, noting that the law declared its purpose to be providing affordable coverage “for all Americans,” with the emphasis on “all.”

By contrast, Republican members of Congress, led by Senator John Cornyn of Texas, argue that the text of the health care law is “perfectly clear.” Congress, they say, deliberately chose to make subsidies available only for insurance bought through state exchanges.

In providing tax credits through the federal exchange, they say, the Obama administration has usurped the authority of Congress and tried to accomplish through an aggressive interpretation of the law “what it could not accomplish in the halls of Congress.”

Democrats who helped write the law, including Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, and Senator Harry Reid of Nevada, the Senate minority leader, told the court that they were much better qualified to explain its meaning.

“Congress never intended, or suggested to the states, that tax credits would only be available to individuals who purchased insurance on state-run exchanges,” the Democrats’ brief said.

The brief, filed also on behalf of more than 100 state legislators, added that state officials “never understood the tax credits to be limited to state-run exchanges.”

Thus, it concluded, the plaintiffs’ argument “makes no sense in light of the text, history and purpose of the statute.”