Job growth for small businesses increased in Chicago during December, but the pace of growth slowed from earlier last year and lagged many other metropolitan areas, an analysis of national payroll records shows.

By the end of December, Chicago had regained all the jobs it lost during the Great Recession, said economist James Diffley of IHS Global Insight. But for Chicago, as well as the rest of the nation, small-business job growth has been cooling since 2014, when hiring peaked as companies ramped up employment after recession cutbacks and business failures, he said.

Nationally, jobs declined in manufacturing, transportation, utilities and professional services in 2015, according to the Paychex payroll records Diffley analyzed from 350,000 small businesses nationally that employ no more than 50 workers.

Job growth has been increasing sharply in consumer services like hair salons and pet care — a result of increased discretionary spending by consumers, Diffley said. The jobs in those services have climbed about 3 percentage points from two years ago.

While that shows the economy has been recovering, many of the jobs are part time with relatively low pay, said Martin Mucci, chief executive of Paychex. Part-time jobs now total about 9 percent of total employment, compared to less than 6 percent three years ago.

"Small businesses are moving cautiously about adding employees due to new rules on overtime pay and the Affordable Care Act," in addition to uncertainty about the future, Mucci said. A shortage of qualified workers is also a factor, Diffley said.

The hottest metro area for small-business job growth was Dallas during December and all of 2015, where employment conditions improved 0.5 percent and 3.5 percent respectively. Chicago ranked 11th among 20 major metropolitan areas, with a decline in jobs growth of 0.8 percent during 2015. That was slower than areas in the east, north and central parts of the U.S., which had growth in jobs fall off 0.1 percent, according to the Paychex data.

For the year, Illinois job growth slowed 0.5 percent. The state ranks ninth, with Texas No. 1 despite job losses in the oil and gas industries.

gmarksjarvis@tribpub.com

Twitter @gailmarksjarvis