A artist’s rendering of a Bus Rapid Transit station. (Photo: Des Moines Area Regional Transit Authority)

Guess what?

There's another critical decision about to be made at Des Moines City Hall that will shape the character of the region for decades. If City Hall throws its full weight behind an effort to bring public transit into the 21st century, we'd have a terrific shot at getting a $20 million federal grant to develop the region's first Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) line.

Sweet. BRT sounds exactly like the next priority we should tackle now that food trucks are all the rage.

It's consistent with what Greater Des Moines says it wants to be when it grows up. Check out The Tomorrow Plan. Check out Capital Crossroads. Better public transit is perpetually called out as a strategy for creating a resilient regional economy.

And when you ask any person under 30 what Des Moines is missing, the top three responses are: Mountains, oceans, major league sports teams. Mountains? Forget it. Gray's Lake might flood again but it won't last, and even No. 3 is possible with population growth. But if we want the population to grow, we need the fourth item on this coveted list — and that's better public transportation.

Buy Photo Zachary Mannheimer (Photo: Zach Boyden-Holmes/Juice)

Numerous studies point out that young people are driving less (unless you're an Uber driver), not just nationally but here in Des Moines, and they would rather live in cities with strong public transit systems. DART is great, but it can only get us so far in its current form. We're not digging subways anytime soon, and light rail is too expensive. Other cities like Omaha and Kansas City had similar issues and they invested in BRT. Now we need BRT to take us to the next level.

So what is BRT? Picture this: Low-floored, train-like buses without steps to the door to allow for easy boarding; bus priority at intersections; enhanced, enclosed, well-lit shelters featuring digital signage with real-time schedule information; frequent service every 15 minutes.

The first line would be on DART Route 60, already among the most traveled bus lines in the city — for good reason. Starting downtown, it runs in a loop in both directions: Up Ingersoll Avenue, down 42nd St., then to University Avenue past Drake, and back downtown. The route includes one of the most dynamic retail and restaurant areas in the city, the Ingersoll Corridor, as well as the Roosevelt Cultural District, Drake University, DMACC, and Mercy Hospital.

Indeed, BRT is a significant economic development tool. Just like a freeway off-ramp, BRT routes are a signal to real estate developers that the corridors are a place to invest. According to a July 2012 U.S. Government Accountability Office report, "between $4 and $5 billion was invested near the [Cleveland] Healthline BRT project—associated with major hospitals and universities in the corridor."

So what's to hold us back? It's a matter of priorities, as is often the case with local politics. Thankfully, Councilwoman Christine Hensley is a supporter and a lead backer of the BRT project.

"The Greater Des Moines Area has come a long way in the public transit arena with the formation of the regional DART system," says Hensley. "The next logical step is the addition of BRT. There is no question the impact economically will be great."

There's not much discretionary transportation spending coming out of Washington, D.C., these days. The one program that does exist — "TIGER" (Transportation Investment Generating Economic Recovery) — holds BRT as the poster child for investments. Indeed, Omaha received a TIGER grant for such a project last year. Seriously. Omaha. Come on, we can't let Omaha be better than us.

So tell the council we want BRT. All they have to do is write a letter by the end of April. Here, I'll start: "Dear TIGER, please give us $20,000,000 for BRT. Love, Des Moines City Council." (OK, a little more heft probably, but you get the idea)

We need to create the type of city that caters to all demographics. BRT is economically and environmentally sound, and like food trucks, BRT pushes us further into becoming the city we have been working so hard to become — cool and efficient. While taking Uber cars everywhere sounds like what all the kids are doing, it's not the most economical or environmentally sound option. Des Moines is awesome, let's start acting like it. And riding like it.

STAND UP FOR TRANSPORTATION

Des Moines will recognize a national day to advocate for transportation Thursday, April 9, with these events:

OPEN STREET EVENT: Live music, street vendors. 11 a.m. to

1:30 p.m. on 12th Street between Grand Avenue and Locust Street, Des Moines.

PANEL DISCUSSION: U.S. Rep. David Young and others will speak. 11 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. at the Des Moines Central Public Library.

FOR MORE INFORMATION: See www.ridedart.com/ content/stand-transportation-day-thursday-april-9-2015

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1yeOQfd