Topics: Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, chutzpah, Editor's Picks, GOP, John Thune, Medicare, Obamacare, The Right, Politics News

After spending weeks subjecting the public to unfounded and widely debunked claims that Obamacare contains a hidden “bailout” for private insurers, Republicans have undertaken a complete reversal, and are attacking Democrats for cutting corporate welfare for insurance companies by too much.

Specifically, they’re attacking the Affordable Care Act’s reduction in overpayments to carriers who participate in Medicare Advantage, reflected in lower payment rates for program providers, which were officially announced late last week.

Unfortunately for Republicans, this line of attack on Obamacare hasn’t been as immediately effective as earlier ones, thanks to a few complicating factors. One is that it’s unclear whether or to what extent these lower rates will translate into benefit or coverage changes for actual seniors. Another is that they’ve spent the past several years talking up the urgent importance of slashing entitlement spending. But a third is that Republicans have voted for these same cuts many, many times since Obama’s been in office, have refused to remove the cuts from their own budgets even as they’ve attacked Democrats in multiple election cycles for raiding Medicare, and, broadly speaking, support the cuts on the merits.

This fundamental inconsistency is well known to reporters, and in many other circumstances that would militate toward nixing the Medicare attacks altogether. But Medicare attacks are unusually politically potent, so Republicans have decided it’s worth enduring accusations of hypocrisy if that’s what it takes to continue them.

That means they need answers for the press, though, and the only way for them to square their budgets and their Medicare attacks is through sheer bamboozlement. They think you don’t know how to read a budget, and are too stupid to figure it out.

When confronted, they retreat from pretending to oppose the cuts on the merits, to claiming the real problem is that Democrats used the savings from the cuts to fund Obamacare. But this is a non sequitur. A diversion. The attacks specifically express outrage on behalf of seniors who, Republicans claim, will lose doctors or get stuck with higher premiums specifically as a result of the ACA’s Medicare Advantage cuts.

Obama Admin Changes to MA, Prescription Drug Program Harmful to America’s Seniors, read GOP leadership letter: http://t.co/NHkgzbYwqp — Senator John Thune (@SenJohnThune) February 25, 2014

But remember, Republicans actually support the cuts. All of these supposedly horrible things would happen under their plan, too, regardless of how the savings are spent. So right away it’s clear that the attacks are straightforwardly deceitful.

But Republicans actually redouble the bamboozlement by then claiming their budget proposes using the savings to “strengthen Medicare,” while Democrats “double count” them — i.e. simultaneously claim to have improved Medicare’s finances, and used the savings to finance Obamacare. When you hear those words, remember that whoever spoke them thinks you can’t read and don’t understand fairly simple accounting.

Republicans would have you believe that they contemplate storing the savings from these cuts in a bank vault somewhere to draw upon in the years ahead for the sole purpose of financing future Medicare benefits, whereas Democrats waste the savings on Obummercare. But that’s not how Medicare finance works or how the federal budget works or how any particular budget proposal works.