A high-speed game of chicken between a motorcycle driver fleeing police and a concerned citizen in Chickasha, Oklahoma, ended with the concerned citizen in the Win column, KFOR (Oklahoma City) is reporting.

Floyd Briggs says that he had seen the fleeing motorcycle driver tear through residential streets at speeds up to 60 miles per hour before he decided he’d seen enough.

“I said ‘I gotta stop this guy before he hurts a little kid.’ I ain’t no football player either.”

KSTU (Salk Lake City) reports that Briggs then stood in the middle of the street and blocked the fleeing motorcycle driver’s path. It worked: pointing toward a neighbor’s house, Briggs explained what happened next.

“And he laid that bike over about here and slid all the way to that pickup. He got up, run around that fence right there and I just went after him.”

The beer-bellied, middle-aged man wasn’t able to give chase for long, however.

“I was running out of steam very quick. I’m not very aerodynamic.”

Fortunately, Chickasha police were there waiting for the fleeing motorcycle driver to run right into their arms.

It turns out the motorcycle driver, identified as Michael Coppedge, was fleeing for the most ridiculous of reasons: he didn’t have his driver’s license or insurance. Briggs didn’t find that a very compelling reason to flee and put innocent lives at risk.

“That’s not a serious thing right there … you get a ticket, slap on the hand, pay your fine, and go fix your problem.”

Coppedge was arrested and charged with eluding a police officer, and leaving the scene of an accident involving damage. Both are misdemeanors in Oklahoma, according to Kania Law Firm, and both faces penalties of up to a year in jail and fines of up to $500 for leaving the scene of an accident, and up to $1,000 for eluding.

Ever the gentleman, Floyd Briggs told a reporter that he wanted to make sure that his neighbors who witnessed his takedown heard his apology for the language he used during the incident.

“I did use some language that just isn’t how I talk … Some of the words I used, I was pretty worked up. I’m sorry for that.”

Neither the fleeing motorcycle driver nor the concerned citizen who stopped him were injured in the accident.

[Image courtesy of KFOR]