He’s the leader of the free world. She’s a celebrity responsible for pushing “conscious uncoupling” into the vernacular and turning “goop” into something less slimy. Together, President Barack Obama and actress Gwyneth Paltrow will be raising funds for the Democratic National Committee next week, marking the third time this year that the president is hitting up Hollywood and the entertainment elite’s coffers.

Gwyneth Paltrow is hosting a fundraiser for the DNC at her Los Angeles home. Courtesy of the Sunlight Foundation's Political Party Time blog

Obama generally has never paid a political price for his fundraising and cozy relationships with A-list actors. “I would say that Barack Obama, until recently, was an unusual case of someone who could get away with being seen with Hollywood celebrities,” says Timothy Stanley, author of “Citizen Hollywood: How the Collaboration between LA and DC Revolutionized American Politics.” But Stanley thinks that’s slowly becoming not the case. “I think it’s changing not because people hate Hollywood quite so much as they used to, but because they dislike the president more than they used to.”







It’s true that Obama’s disapproval ratings are high . And Stanley, also a columnist for The Telegraph, tells Whispers the change in perception regarding Obama and Hollywood occurred once the president began using celebrities, like comedian Zach Galifianakis, to promote Obamacare. “Some of them were really quite low-rent as well – they were really quite crap celebrities,” he says. “And I think that was the moment in which people started to snigger.”

The Sunlight Foundation’s Palmer Gibbs, who minds the watchdog’s Political Party Time blog, says there’s a political divide when it comes to the perception of gripping and grinning with movie stars. “Democrats love it,” she says. “It really shows that they are really in with the cool kids.”

Republicans? Not so much.

“Either political side will glom on to any of the details that are going to help them with their narrative and with their plot points,” Gibbs explains. One example she cites is Obama’s trip out West to raise funds at the home of “Scandal” creator Shonda Rhimes in July. “There were plenty of people who were saying, ‘He doesn’t have time to do X, Y, Z in terms of being the president and leading ... he can only party with his friends,’” Gibbs recalls.



However, Allan Lichtman, a distinguished professor of history at American University, contends the American public isn’t paying attention at all. “You have to hit the public over the head with a two-by-four to get them to really pay attention to something in politics,” he tells Whispers, adding that most Americans only tune in to political stories when something affects them personally. “They couldn’t care less about Richard Nixon shaking hands with Elvis Presley, Marilyn Monroe singing ‘Happy Birthday’ to JFK or, you know, Reagan meeting with Michael Jackson.”

American presidents were actually socializing with Hollywood way before JFK, starting with Republicans Calvin Coolidge and Herbert Hoover, Stanley explains. The film industry flipped to mostly Democratic during the administration of Franklin Delano Roosevelt, and FDR was politically hit for his relationship with studio heads​ in attacks that were veiled anti-semitism, Lichtman says, since many of those running Hollywood were Jewish.

Bill Clinton also hung out with Hollywood and paid a bit of a political price for it. “Bill Clinton got hurt by it because it made him look like he was fawning over them … that he was in love with liberal elites and he was hanging around beautiful people who were out of touch,” Stanley says.

Obama’s relationship with Tinseltown started much more slowly, says Stanley, who researched the evolution for his book. At first, Hollywood was part of Hillaryland, with stars throwing their support behind Obama's primary opponent, Hillary Clinton. ​Obama’s West Coast supporters, meanwhile, were fellow Harvard Law School alumni and personal friends. And once he started tapping into the Hollywood donor base, Stanley says, the president also made a faux pas.

“This was a complaint I constantly heard from people: 'He never said "thank you" for money,'" Stanley says. “Hollywood is California and it’s obsessed with etiquette, and you’ve got to say 'thank you.'"

The president re-engaged with the film industry ​in the run-up to the 2012 campaign. He won Hollywood over, in part, by coming out for gay marriage.

These relationships didn't necessarily irritate the public because Obama had such a lukewarm attitude about Hollywood to begin with, Stanley suggests. "So for two or three years Obama had this offhand relationship with them, and I think in the public’s mind there was this separation, an unusual separation between the Democrats and Hollywood, that took place in those three years," he says.

Additionally, Stanley argues, the Obama campaign geared some of its celebrity advertising just right. For instance, the ads in which “Sex and the City” star Sarah Jessica Parker and Vogue editor Anna Wintour invite supporters to join them in New York City for dinner: “The ad worked really well and raised a lot of money, and Obama’s people said, 'That wasn’t aimed at conservatives, that was aimed at single urban women and it worked out well for us,'” Stanley says. “So it was smart.” (Meanwhile, conservative pundit Glenn Beck blew a gasket.) That dinner, according to Whispers' calculations, raised about $2 million.

Gibbs says partisan criticism like Beck's​ is what tends to drive the narrative that the public isn't fond of cozy relationships between Hollywood and Washington. “A lot of it is media bloviating on the subject because there isn’t anything that is concrete, there aren’t any poll numbers,” she says.

As far as Whispers found, the last poll that connected Obama with Hollywood was taken before he was elected president. Rasmussen Reports asked 1,000 likely voters on Oct. 26, 2008, ​who had more support from Hollywood. Not surprisingly, 78 percent said Obama compared to 5 percent who named the GOP presidential nominee, Sen. John McCain of Arizona. Forty percent of respondents also said Hollywood endorsements made them less likely to vote for a particular candidate. Fundraising wasn’t even mentioned.