Prof. Uwe E. Reinhardt teaches health economics, comparative health systems, general microeconomics and financial management at Princeton.

In a story last week in the Journal of the American Medical Association, Reinhardt uses some high-level economic language, a few charts and graphs, but, basically, lays bare the American societal conundrum and moral dilemma of high-priced medicine.

The headline was: "Probing our Moral Values in Health Care: the Pricing of Specialty Drugs"

The link to the JAMA article is here.

"Imagine visualizing a health system through the eyes of an economist in the form of a supply curve, which shows the relationship between price of a product or service and the quantity of product that a seller can offer," Reinhardt begins. "In this example, the seller is the health system, a large agglomeration of highly skilled professionals supported by sophisticated technical equipment and institutions. The 'product' being offered to society is the benefit of interventions in terms of the quantity and quality of life it generates, measured in quality-adjusted life-years (QALYs)."

He explains that simple and sensible things such as immunizations and maternal health can add years of quality living and QALYs.

But other QALYs can "be obtained only at enormous incremental costs per QALY, such as additional months of life achieved with high-priced specialty drugs during terminal illness," Reinhardt writes.

The supply curve "confronts society with two vexing moral questions that physicians are not in a position to determine on their own. First, how much is society willing to pay for an additional QALY derived from a particular intervention? And second, should the maximum price to be paid per additional QALY be the same for everyone, or can it vary with the individual patient’s ability to pay for it?"

Reinhardt continues, "The answer to the second question reveals the distributional ethic to be imposed on the health care system: either rationing access to high-priced specialty drugs by income class of patients, or following a more egalitarian approach expressed through collective decision making."

Reinhardt points out two key elements that make the pricing question - and the overall healthcare economy - challenging to fix:

First, since most Americans have health insurance (more since the Affordable Care Act), they/we don't usually face the actual cost that drugmakers try to charge because that daunting figure is shifted to insurers, public or private. (As an aside, how many of you know the cost of the employer-based health insurance you might have?)

Second, plenty of Americans who complain about the price of medicine also want the the stock price of drug companies in their portfolio or 401(k) plan to rise. Sorry, but higher prices usually translate to higher profits. We tend to like capitalism when it makes us richer and dislike it when it costs us money. (We struggle aiming for moderation and compromise.)

"One should not question this pricing policy on moral grounds," Reinhardt writes. "After all, for-profit producers of new medical technology generally have been set up as practitioners of Anglo-Saxon capitalism, and the sole mandate for the company’s board of directors and the managers they hire is to maximize the wealth of the firm’s owners without breaking any of the laws.

"These enterprises will thus naturally seek by any legal means the maximum revenue for a new product. This usually includes the practice of profit-maximizing price discrimination, which means charging different prices to different customers for identical items with identical production costs. The investor-owned producers of new specialty drugs properly call this approach 'value pricing,' because it is based on their subjective estimate of the maximum value society imputes to the added QALYs these products can produce."

But he does offer a suggestion to specialty drug makers, who, like the aforementioned Americans, hate government regulation when it impedes them (those cumbersome FDA safety requirements) but love government regulation when it helps them (12-year patent protection, creating market monopolies and high prices).

He writes that "in pursuing their pricing strategy, specialty drug producers should not imagine themselves as free-enterprisers operating within the competitive markets of textbook fame. On the contrary, we can think of them as fragile little birds that the protective hand of government carefully shields from the harsh vagaries of truly free, competitive markets....When the government grants private investors the monopoly powers extended to the producers of specialty drugs, it has the right and the duty to monitor and possibly to regulate what these investors do with that privilege, including their pricing policies. The government has to be mindful of the social opportunity costs of high health care spending, which means beneficial activities such as education and infrastructure that are displaced by high spending on health care."

Reinhardt recognizes that investors need some return for risking their cash on a drug candidate that might not work out. But there are limits to everything. And for perspective, he suggests "contemplating how we compensate others who assume risk on society’s behalf, such as police officers, firefighters, or members of the armed forces. A good start in that regard might be perusing images of the horrific wounds in the first chapter of the US Surgeon General’s monograph on Combat Casualty Care, and contemplating the truly moderate premiums we pay young men and women in the armed forces for assuming those risks on society’s behalf."

A link to Surgeon General's publication on combat casulty care is here.

A link to Reinhardt's web page at the Woodrow Wilson School of Public and International Affairs is here.