The Environment Minister, Greg Hunt, says he's committed to saving the Great Barrier Reef. But the elephant in the room is climate change.

'Part of the problem, I think, is that the reef is so far from where most of us live it becomes almost theoretical.'

Australians do a nice line in black humour. When I told people I'd just returned from a coral cay on the Great Barrier Reef, a few applauded me for seeing it "while it's still there". Such grim fatalism, I suspect, masks a range of emotions – bewilderment, anger, grief – because the facts when it comes to our treatment of the reef are pretty hard to bear.

Since the 1980s, half its coral cover has gone. By 2050, "it will be really pretty ugly", says The Australian Coral Reef Society's president, Professor Peter Mumby. The federal government has approved a massive new coal port at Abbot Point, involving the dumping of three million cubic metres of dredged sediment in the reef marine park. And climate change poses the reef's greatest threat. Just last week, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority warned its outlook is poor and deteriorating.

Climate change poses the reef's greatest threat. Just last week, the Great Barrier Reef Marine Park Authority warned its outlook is poor and deteriorating.

The reef can be seen from space. To explore just a speck of it is to encounter sublime beauty and dazzling diversity. Schools of fish pass in waves, glittering like sequins on a dress. Fish in every shade of blue: teal, turquoise, neon, indigo. Fish with spots, stripes, speckles, ripples. Parrotfish. Angelfish. Sweetlips. Bright yellow trumpet fish.

Sea turtles stare, unblinking. Pipefish move like ribbons in wind. Rays and sharks glide past igloo-sized coral mounds. The reef's many species have a symbiotic relationship and we can learn from them. Scientists are studying the epaulette shark, a small, leopard-spotted creature that can live for hours without oxygen, to help people better survive strokes.

Advertisement

A Senate inquiry into the reef's management is due to report next week. But on Monday, the ABC's Four Corners revealed the authority had approved the dumping of Abbot Point dredge spoil against the advice of its senior scientists. The reef became a protected marine park in 1975 and a world heritage site in 1981. Yet as Kerry O'Brien glumly observed, for almost 50 years he has been reporting, reading or watching stories about its decline. How did we come to this?

Part of the problem, I think, is that the reef is so far from where most of us live it becomes almost theoretical – a vast, fabled place seen mostly on TV. And the threats – from crown-of-thorns starfish to agricultural run-off to coastal development – have been dauntingly complex.

It's 27 years since I first swam on the reef and I was awed then. But maybe my greatest folly in the time since was assuming governments would do their utmost to protect it.

The Gillard government stalled on the Abbot Point decision. Environment Minister Greg Hunt, who approved the dredge dump but says it's for "the last time", is "absolutely committed" to protecting the reef's health.

Hunt speaks with passion. But the elephant in the room here is climate change. Carbon emissions from burning fossil fuels warm waters and acidify oceans, killing coral. And this government is hell bent on flogging fossil fuels. As Prime Minister Tony Abbott reportedly told the Australian Industry Group this month: "Right now, we have massive reserves of coal, massive reserves of gas. Let's make the most of them."

In his speech to the AIG, in which he welcomed suggestions "for the next bonfire of red tape", Abbott said: "Since the election, Environment Minister Greg Hunt has been clearing the backlog of stalled project applications. All up he has made over 310 decisions ... resulting in approvals to projects worth over $800 billion."

What a strange way of commending the work of an environment minister. Is it any wonder those who care about the reef are exploring other ways of protecting it? There's now, for instance, a community campaign lobbying banks – both international and local – not to finance Abbot Point.

When I flew out of Gladstone, after visiting the reef, I picked up a copy of Shift Miner Magazine. I read that countries such as Germany and Portugal, which have voiced concern to UNESCO about the impact of port developments on the reef, were ill-informed "mouthpieces for environmental activists".

No scientist was quoted in the article. I'm not a scientist, but I reckon there's a realm beneath the sea as vital as the one above it.

Suzy Freeman-Greene is a senior writer at The Age.