PEORIA — For the second time in four years, a Peoria man was sentenced to spend the rest of his life in prison for the murder of his estranged wife.

Clarence Thomas, 47, showed little emotion Wednesday as he heard his fate. As the handcuffs were being tightened on his wrists, he calmly told Chief Peoria County Judge Steve Kouri that he wanted to appeal. In fact, considering the sentence, Thomas reacted almost like he expected the sentence and wasn’t too concerned about it.

Instead, Thomas told Kouri, as he has throughout his case, that he planned to appeal nearly every facet of the proceedings, going so far as to say, “I want the appellate court to know that if I forgot to mention something, I object to that as well.”

But Kouri flatly denied Thomas’ 18-page motion for a new trial and then, later in the hearing, handed down the life term.

“If ever there was a person who deserved a life sentence, it is you, Mr. Thomas,” the judge said.

Thomas was convicted a second time last November of stabbing his wife, Martha, 38 times on Jan. 20, 2010, while the two were in a car on Adams Street, just north of Downtown Peoria. Two small children, one 5 years old and one an infant, were in the back seat at the time.

Jurors found that Thomas acted in a “brutal and heinous matter indicative of wanton cruelty,” legalese that opened the door for a possible life sentence.

He initially was convicted and then sentenced in 2011. That was nullified when a trio of appellate judges found in May 2013 the judge should have allowed Thomas to act as his own attorney, even if that request came on the day of trial.

On the day his original trial was to begin, Thomas said he wanted to represent himself because he was upset with his public defender, who he said didn’t visit him enough or wasn’t willing to present the evidence he wanted. Thomas wanted to present evidence of an income tax conspiracy, which he believed would explain his actions that day.

During his second trial, angered by what he perceived to be bias against him by prosecutors and Kouri, he refused to participate in the first day of the trial and then declined to give an opening statement or testify in his own defense during the two-day trial.

Andy Kravetz can be reached at 686-3283 and akravetz@pjstar.com. Follow him on Twitter @andykravetz.