Buy Photo Map of Shoppes at Gardiner Park (Photo: The Courier-Journal)

After years of delays, plans for a shopping center adjacent to an Eastwood subdivision will finally move forward.

The Louisville Metro Planning Commission gave developing firm Blacketer Company the OK to build the Shoppes at Gardiner Park during a meeting May 15.

The original concept for the Gardiner Park subdivision, which was developed in the 1990s, included plans for a village-like design. The homes, located near the intersection of Shelbyville and Flat Rock roads, would be within walking distance to a commercial center, which would feature "English cottage" style storefronts.

Plans for the shopping center, were first approved by the Planning Commission in 2006, said zoning attorney Bill Bardenwerper, who represents Blacketer. Ohio-based gourmet grocery store Dorothy Lane Market signed a 24-month contract in 2007 to anchor the development, but the economy tanked shortly after, he said. In 2009, Dorothy Lane Market did not renew its contract, and Blacketer was forced to have a new set of plans approved by Planning and Design Services.

A 2007 rendering of the Shoppes at Gardiner Park depicted plans for a grocery store, a coffee shop and an office building. (Photo: Courtesy of Mark Bird of Power Creative)

Within the past year or so, developers introduced plans for a fueling station to move into the commercial center, a move that was hotly contested by some of the nearby residents who feared it would bring increased traffic and disrupt the village-like atmosphere.

MORE |Changing shopping center plans concern Eastwood neighbors

Within the past couple of months the developers have put "intense effort" into revising plans to please all parties, Bardenwerper said. The fueling station has been moved away from the main entrance on Shelbyville Road to the far west side of the development, he said, and the proposed layout of the center has changed completely.

The developers have also redesigned storefronts to adhere to the "English cottage" style initially promised, and more sidewalks were added to the plans to encourage more pedestrian traffic.

Now that plans have been approved, plans for Eastwood Market and Cafe's storefront, which have been on hold while the proposed shopping center was reviewed by the Planning Commission, can move forward.

MORE |Read The Courier-Journal's story about Eastwood Market and Cafe

Reporter Kirsten Clark can be reached at (502) 582-4144 or on Twitter by following @kirstenlmclark.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1k6w8bo