David Plazas (Photo: File) Story Highlights Lawmakers are proposing to make the Holy Bible the state's official book.

State and U.S. constitutions prohibit favoring one religion over an other.

Even though the state Attorney General has opined that making the Holy Bible Tennessee's state book would be unconstitutional, House legislators on Wednesday went forward with the resolution any way. The Senate is expected to vote on the bill as early as Thursday.

The Tennessee Constitution is far stricter than the federal constitution on prohibiting government endorsement of religion:

From Article I, Section 3:

"... that no human authority can, in any case whatever, control or

interfere with the rights of conscience; and that no preference shall ever be given, by law, to any religious establishment or mode of worship."

In addition, Gov. Bill Haslam has called it "disrespectful" to make the Bible the official book of Tennessee.

If the Senate passes the bill, Haslam should veto it, even if it might be overriden by legislators.

The legal challenges that are sure to come will show what a waste of time and money this effort was.

ORIGINAL EDITORIAL FROM FEB. 15, 2015 BELOW

Tennessee lawmakers have filed unconstitutional, divisive and misguided bills that would make the Holy Bible the official state book.

Both Tennessee and United States' constitutions expressly respect the rights of individuals to worship freely, but also prohibit the state from favoring one religion over another.

This protects all of us, whether we choose to belong to a religious congregation or not.

We can live peacefully in society without religious tests and choose which religious institutions to attend and which scriptures to honor.

Making a religious text the state's official tome isn't like the innocuous act of choosing a state beverage (milk), fruit (tomato) or rock (limestone). This sends a message of exclusion and divisiveness in a state that is becoming more and more diverse.

The bills filed by Rep. Jerry Sexton, R-Crossville, and Sen. Steve Southerland, R-Morristown, in addition to abridging Tennesseans' constitutional rights are unnecessary and tell non-Christians that they are unwelcome in the Volunteer State.

The co-sponsors include Rep. Jeremy Durham, R-Franklin; Rep. Terri Lynn Weaver, R-Lancaster; and Rep. David Byrd, R-Waynesboro.

Muslims feel threatened

Religious minorities already feel under attack by past legislation such as that involving the prohibition of Sharia law, which while on its face targeted radical Islamists, had the practical effect of demonizing all practicing Muslims.

During the course of the last few years, the community of Muslims and foreigners has grown significantly in Tennessee.

The Nashville metropolitan area has the highest population of Kurds (13,000) of any other in the country and significant numbers of Somalis, Egyptians and other immigrants or refugees from countries where Islam is the dominant religion. The foreign-born population, at 11.9 percent, is among the highest in the nation.

That has caused some confrontations between long-time residents and new Americans, who often came to this area as immigrants or refugees. Take for example the recent controversy of opponents trying to block the building of a mosque in Murfreesboro.

Some Christians may feel threatened by these newcomers because they don't share the same religious beliefs as they do.

However, many came here for the same reasons America's forefathers did: for freedom.

What the Constitution says

Consider the words in our state and nation's constitutions:

Tennessee Constitution, Article I

Section 3. That all men have a natural and indefeasible right to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their own conscience; that no man can of right be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of worship, or to maintain any minister against his consent; that no human authority can, in any case whatever, control or interfere with the rights of conscience; and that no preference shall ever be given, by law, to any religious establishment or mode of worship.

Section 4. That no political or religious test, other than an oath to support the Constitution of the United States and of this state, shall ever be required as a qualification to any office or public trust under this state.

U.S. Constitution

First Amendment:

Congress shall make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for a redress of grievances.

Sexton and Southerland's bills stand antithetical to these documents.

Let's be clear that to oppose them is not anti-Christian in the least bit.

Respecting the right of Christians to worship freely is paramount to living up to the freedoms we enjoy, and Christians shouldn't feel they have to apologize for their beliefs.

However, neither should Muslims, Jews, Hindus, Buddhists, nor atheists.

Remind our lawmakers that their job isn't to favor one religion over another and that they have a responsibility to protect the rights of those who share their beliefs and those who don't.

Passing this legislation would do the opposite.

ABOUT THE BILL

HB 0615/SB 1108

State Government - As introduced, designates the Holy Bible as the official state book. - Amends TCA Title 4, Chapter 1.

House Sponsor: Rep. Jerry Sexton, R-Crossville

Contact information: Phone: 615-741-2534, Email: rep.jerry.sexton@capitol.tn.gov

Senate Sponsor: Sen. Steve Southerland, R-Morristown

Contact information: Phone: 615-741-3851, Email: sen.steve.southerland@capitol.tn.gov

SEND YOUR LETTERS

Do you believe the Holy Bible should be the official book of Tennessee? Send your letters of 250 words or less to letters@tennessean.com. Include your full name, address and phone number. Only your name, city and zip code will be published with your letter.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1EdsqJl