By Gretchen Reynolds, New York Times News Service

If there is a holy grail of weight loss, it would be a program that allows someone to shed fat rapidly while hanging onto muscle.

A new study describes a workout and diet regimen that accomplishes those goals remarkably well. But it may not be so easy.

For most of us, losing weight and keeping it off is difficult. If you consume fewer calories than your body requires for daily operations, it turns to internal sources of fuel. Those sources consist of body fat and lean tissue, meaning muscle. When someone on a diet drops a pound of body mass (a measure that does not include water), much of that pound consists of fat. But about a third or more can be muscle.

The problem with losing muscle is that, unlike fat tissue, muscle burns calories. Having less muscle means a lower resting metabolic rate, so you burn fewer calories throughout the day.

Researchers have long been looking for weight-loss programs that produce hefty amounts of fat loss but diminish any decline in muscle. To scientists at McMaster University in Ontario, Canada, that goal seemed to demand a high dose of protein and also plenty of exercise.

For the study, in The American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, the McMaster researchers rounded up 40 overweight young men, who began a diet in which their daily calories were cut by about 40 percent.

For half of them, this consisted of about 15 percent protein, 35 percent fat and 50 percent carbohydrates. The other 20 volunteers began a diet that mimicked that of the first group, except that theirs swapped the protein and fat ratios, so that 35 percent of their calories came from protein and 15 percent from fat. Their protein intake was about three times the recommended dietary allowance for most people.

Six days a week, they completed a strenuous full-body weight training circuit, high-intensity intervals, or a series of explosive jumps and other exercises known as plyometric training. By the end of four weeks, “those guys were done,” said Stuart Phillips, who holds a research chair in skeletal muscle health at McMaster and oversaw the study. “All they could talk about was food.”

The men in both groups weighed about 11 or 12 pounds less, on average. But the men on the high-protein regimen had actually gained muscle during the month, as much as 3 pounds of it. So in these men, almost all of the 11 or 12 pounds they had lost overall had been fat.

These results strongly suggest that extra protein is advisable during weight loss, Phillips said, to avoid stripping yourself of muscle. But exercise is also key.

Of course, this type of extreme calorie cutting combined with intense exercise “is not a sustainable program in the long term,” Phillips said. “It’s more a kind of boot camp,” he said, manageable in the short term by people who are very committed and generally very healthy.