BOSTON - Massachusetts Health Connector call and walk-in centers will extend the hours they are open as the final deadline of open enrollment looms on Monday.

The state's health insurance exchange has been able to handle significant amounts of online traffic. But before previous deadlines, customers experienced long wait time for assistance by phone, if they had trouble.

Maydad Cohen, a special assistant to Gov. Charlie Baker overseeing the Connector, said he anticipates that there will be another spike in interest and potentially long wait times. But he expects that there will be fewer problems than in the past. Connector officials extended the deadline for people to apply for health insurance that begins March 1 from Feb. 15 to Feb. 23 due to the recent snowstorms.

"We do expect to see spikes over the next three days, but this extension caused by weather helped to level out some of the issues and concerns," Cohen said.

On Friday, the average wait time for Connector call center representatives was 18 minutes. Wait times have spiked to 30 or 35 minutes at peak times, which are generally between 10 a.m. and 1 p.m., Cohen said.

The Health Connector call center, which customers can reach at 877-MA-ENROLL, will have representatives available from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday, and from 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. on Monday.

A Boston walk-in center at 133 Portland St. will have additional staff available on Saturday from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. and on Monday from 9 a.m. to 7 p.m.

As of Thursday, 108,000 people had enrolled in and paid for health insurance, either subsidized or unsubsidized, through the Connector website. Of those, just under 40,000 people purchased unsubsidized plans and the rest received a state or federal subsidy. Another 260,000 used the system to be determined eligible for, and automatically enrolled in, MassHealth, the state's Medicaid.

Last year, when the state rolled out a new exchange to conform with the Affordable Care Act, it was a technological disaster and unable to enroll people in health insurance. This year, the state website has largely worked, despite some glitches.

The state still has not analyzed the data it is receiving through the open enrollment process. In particular, it does not know how many people put on temporary MassHealth coverage last year due to the website failure were actually eligible for it. Preliminary data show that of those who were on temporary MassHealth last year then reapplied for coverage this year, around 95,000 remained on MassHealth, 24,000 qualified for other state or federally subsidized plans, and 6,000 did not qualify for a subsidy. If people were enrolled in MassHealth without being eligible for it, that could affect the amount of federal reimbursement that the state gets.