EDITOR'S NOTE: Alkermes is the pharmaceutical company that manufactures anti-addiction drug Vivitrol and which is participating in a program with Orange County Jail and Orange County's mental health department to treat inmates with addiction. The name of the company was incorrect in the original story.







GOSHEN — The scenario is too common: Someone with a severe mental illness, who hasn’t gotten the psychiatric care he or she needs, is charged with a minor offense and winds up in jail.

There are now more people with mental illness – an estimated 356,000 nationally – in jails or prisons than in state-run psychiatric hospitals, according to the Treatment Advocacy Center, a non-profit that seeks to remove barriers to treatment for people with severe illness.

About a third of inmates at jails in Orange, Ulster and Sullivan counties have a mental health diagnosis, and about a third of those have been diagnosed with a severe mental illness. Nationally, an estimated 20 percent of jail inmates have a severe illness, according to TAC’s 2014 estimates. That’s in line with Department of Justice estimates.

“If you have somebody decompensating on the streets, it’s going to be worse once you get them into a correctional facility,” said Major Donald Bader, assistant administrator at Orange County Jail.

“Over the years, we’ve seen such tragic stories,” said Thomas Bolzan, deputy commissioner of mental health for Orange County. “So many people now are getting their best mental health treatment in jail.”

On one recent day, Orange County Jail mental health clinic Director Nichole Kaye said the clinicians had about 140 open cases — inmates receiving some kind of care — out of just over 500 inmates in the jail. Many of them have mood disorders. Some have had adjustment issues coming into the jail. Some have severe mental illness, diagnoses including schizophrenia, schizoaffective disorder or bipolar disorder. Some have both a mental illness and a substance abuse issue, a common occurrence.

Inside Orange County Jail, this has led to close cooperation between the jail staff, from top administrators to the correction officers, and mental health staff at the inhouse county-run clinic.

“Our mental health operation is seven days a week, and we have a significant number of psychiatrists and nurse practitioners to prescribe,” Bolzan said. “A lot of county jails see a doctor maybe once or twice a month.”

Imprisoned minds

Ulster County Jail Superintendent Jim Hanstein said that back in the day, police would take mentally ill people directly to Benedictine Hospital in Kingston for psychiatric assessment. For Sullivan County Undersheriff Eric Chaboty, it was Middletown Psychiatric Hospital. As the number of psychiatric inpatient beds has fallen, more and more people are going to the county jails because police have to do something.

“It’s overwhelming, frankly,” Hanstein said. “You see people come in here. They’re just so tragically, so completely out of it. They shouldn’t be here.”

Orange County Jail’s mental health clinic operates seven days per week, and there’s always a psychiatrist on-call for emergencies, Bolzan said. “A lot of county jails see a doctor maybe once or twice a month.”

Sullivan County Jail has a psychiatrist under contract through the county Department of Community Services, who comes to the jail a couple of times per week, and a social worker, Chaboty said. On an average day, about 50 of the jail’s average-day census of 160 to 170 inmates are taking a prescribed psychotropic medication.

Hanstein said Ulster contracts with Mid Hudson Psychiatric Associates, through jail medical provider Corrections Medical Services, for four board-certified psychiatrists who rotate through to cover five days per week. Ulster also has an in-patient hospital treatment agreement for inmates with Benedictine Hospital in Kingston. The jail has three registered nurses on staff, all of whom are trained in crisis management and suicide prevention.

All of the jails have a psychiatrist oncall 24 hours per day for emergencies.

Orange County’s strategy is a close alliance between the jail and county mental health services, with a goal of getting people who are ill into treatment and out of the criminal justice system. The operation, with its interplay between agencies, dovetails with evolving practices in New York and nationally to find ways to divert people who are ill out of the justice system and into treatment.

“We’re way out in front of the curve,” Bader said. “You have to give inmates programs.”

Intake

In New York, jail intake staff must screen every inmate for suicide risk as he or she is processed into the jail. The state Commission on Corrections has a recommended screening questionnaire that asks about life situation, alcohol or drug use and psychiatric and social history. There’s a specific set of questions to address symptoms of depression and check-offs for behavioral cues such as paranoia, sadness or hopelessness.

If certain items are checked off, Bolzan said, the inmate is automatically flagged for observation and assessment.

Inmates who appear at risk for suicide may be assigned a one-on-one watch, or for 15-minute checks.

The Orange County Jail clinic is working on transitioning to a new screening questionnaire that should be more accurate at reading suicide risk, Bolzan said. Clinic staff and corrections staff will be trained to use it.

“It’salso OMH (state Office of Mental Health) approved, and also helps provide appropriate levels of treatment,” Kaye said.

Any inmate who’s already taking psychiatric medications of any kind is automatically referred to the mental health clinic, and sees someone within 24 hours, Kaye said. Inmates can also drop a mental health self-referral slip in the request box in their housing unit.

Treatment

The Orange County Sheriff’s Office has spent the past decade working to improve jail mental health care. The county’s Office of Mental Health has a full-fledged mental health clinic in the jail, staffed with county employees and doctors. The clinic workers diagnose and treat, and help inmates with discharge planning, to link them with doctors and medications and other programs once they’re back on the outside. There is supportive counseling, as well as groups for substance abuse awareness and stress management.

“We’re more and more seeing it as an opportunity to make a difference,” said Darcie Miller, Orange County’s commissioner of social services and acting mental health commissioner. “It’s county operated and county tax funded, but well worth it.”

The jail has six clinicians in all, Kaye said. Clinicians meet with inmates on the medical unit, or in the unit where the inmate is in house. They see a lot of mood disorders, personality disorders and adjustment issues, she said. And there are the severe cases: inmates with bipolar disorder, schizophrenia or schizoaffective disorder, illnesses that require medications. Some of these inmates also have substance abuse issues.

The jail and mental health staff have daily shift meetings to discuss concerns and solve any potential problems, Bolzan said. There are weekly meetings with administrative staff — started by Col. Kenneth Decker, the jail administrator — to discuss new ideas and inmate issues.

Besides the psychiatric and psychological side of mental health care, the jail also offers other therapies to help inmates learn to deal with frustration. One of the big programs is dialectical behavioral therapy, which essentially helps inmates understand their own emotions, develop empathy for others and work on coping skills. DBT is a therapy that has proven useful and helpful for people with depression, certain personality disorders, or other issues that can lead to conflict, according to the National Alliance on Mental Illness.

The program is completely optional, said Beverly Moskowitz, Orange County Jail’s offender services counselor, who runs DBT. Corrections staff will refer inmates who are having a hard time coping with jail.

Even inmates who start out doubting that they can change have succeeded in the program, Moskowitz said.

“They’reveryengaged,”she said. “We’ve seen really good results with it.”

The jail has also partnered with Alkermes Pharmaceuticals to supply Vivitrol, a time-release, long-acting naltrexone injection that negates the craving for opiates to help break the cycle of addiction. The program, which started in June, is voluntary.

Serious illness: special issues

The push for better access to treatment gained traction in recent years in the wake of tragedies such as the Aurora, Colo., movie theater shootings, the killings at Sandy Hook Elementary School, and a succession of others, all involving killers with histories of untreated or under-treated mental illness.

While those high-profile tragedies draw headlines, the jails are dealing with people who’ve been charged with far more banal offenses, but are just as ill. Inmates with severe illness often end up at the jail after they’ve been off medication, Kaye said.

“The longer they stay here without medication, the more they deteriorate,” she said. “We don’t have the ability to treat without their consent.”

Hospitals can medicate over a patient’s objection. Jails cannot.

In those cases, the jail has to seek psychiatric commitment under state Mental Hygiene Law. The process is time-consuming.

“When we have to send them out, it disrupts their life,” Moskowitz said.

Kaye said the jail and clinic hope to build a relationship with local hospitals so they can send inmates to be treated and stabilized on medication, at which point they can come back to the jail.

Discharge planning

Every inmate gets out of jail at some point.

Orange County developed the Staying Out program for those who have served their sentences. Again, this puts Orange ahead of the curve in terms of follow-up after release.

Ulster County also does discharge planning, in cooperation with mental health services where appropriate, Hanstein said. A full-time planner meets with inmates to assess their needs.

In Sullivan County, poor inmates are referred to Community Services for their social services needs and for Affordable Care Act insurance sign-ups, and they get referrals if they need medical appointments. They also get a five-day supply of medications.

The program starts inside, with an eight-week curriculum, and connects the inmate to a case manager who will guide them: going to Social Services, getting signed up for Medicaid if eligible, getting them into housing, taking them to job interviews, making sure medical and psychiatric treatment is followed. The forensic support team follows inmates’ progress for up to a year after release, to help them stay on track. A case manager takes over when they leave jail, to lend support.

“We always make sure they have an appointment, a follow- up clinical appointment and make sure they get their medications,” Kaye said. “It’s really about stopping recidivism and helping them stay out.”