Rock the Vote: Like leather seat warmers, cup holders or a driver’s-side armrest, it seems that Hillary Clinton’s state-of-the-art Imperial Death Star 2016 presidential campaign has a must-have feature: a turn signal that only blinks left. In the last eight weeks, she’s supported a minimum-wage hike, dumped on Wall Street titans, supported Black Lives Matter and courted African-American women. Now, she’s supporting universal voting registration, granting instant suffrage to all citizens on their 18th birthday, minimal identification necessary. Clinton, who announced the proposal in a speech in Texas on Thursday, went light on the details, including how it would actually happen if, as president, she miraculously got it past Republican vote-fraud hawks in Congress. Politically, though, it’s a nice three-cushion bank shot to pocket Obama coalition voters: To youngs, it’s hassle-free, instant access to the ballot box; to liberals, it’s muscular pushback against the recent wave of Republican-sponsored voter ID laws; and to African-Americans – the vote she’s arguably got to fight hardest to turn out – it’s a tacit fence-mending gesture that puts the at-times bitter 2008 campaign further into her past.

Call Me, Reince: The epic 2008 race between President Barack Obama and Clinton aside, black voters have arguably been the Democrats’ most reliable constituency, practically before LBJ’s signature was dry on the Voting Rights Act of 1965. The marriage has been on the rocks through the years, but come election season Democratic candidates show up with some roses and maybe chocolates, and black voters grumble and renew their vows anyway at the polls. The Republicans have made half-hearted attempts to break things up, but black voters have generally decided to stay together for the sake of the children, or something like that. Now, a black minister who preaches in one of South Side Chicago’s toughest neighborhoods – the place where the first black president cut his political teeth – is giving the GOP some come-hither looks, inviting them to the ‘hood for some dinner and maybe a movie. “African-Americans have been loyal to the Democratic Party,” Pastor Corey Brooks tells The Daily Beast. “But there is a group of African-Americans that feel like the Democratic Party has not been loyal to us.” So far, though, Rand Paul’s been the only taker.