Buy Photo James Comer (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The 2016 elections have revealed that Americans are tired of politics as usual. Overwhelming majorities of voters from both parties believe that money has too much influence in our political system and that elections spending by outside groups should be both limited and fully transparent. So it is not surprising that anti-establishment candidates like Sen. Bernie Sanders and businessman Donald Trump, who have thus far shunned support from super PACs and other deep-pocketed outside groups, have experienced so much success on the campaign trail.

But for all the focus on the presidential race, the problem of unlimited dark money in politics is perhaps most acute when it comes to congressional races. The Republican primary election for Kentucky’s 1st Congressional District is a case in point. So far, this race has attracted over $140,000 in outside spending; that’s more than in all but 23 of the 435 other House races.

The vast majority of this $140,000 has come from the United States Chamber of Commerce. Now the U.S. Chamber is nothing like your hometown chamber of commerce. It receives the lion’s share of its money from a small number of very large corporations and it has spent more than $1.2 billion since 1998 lobbying for these large corporations and more than $125 million since 2008 on elections apparently trying to elect congressmen and senators who will do the bidding of Big Business. This makes it by far the largest lobbyist in the country and one of the largest outside election spending groups. What’s more, the money the Chamber spends on elections is 100 percent secret. You’ll see its ad for James Comer all over TV, but you won’t know which corporate interests are actually paying for it. How does that make you feel? Like an uninvited guest in your own democracy?

We’ll never know who’s really paying for all these ads in Kentucky, but there is convincing evidence even most business people don’t support the Chamber’s ad binge.

While the Chamber claims to be representing the views of American businesses of all sizes and industries, a recent poll of business leaders taken by GOP pollster Frank Luntz for the Association of State Chambers of Commerce reveals that a majority of business leaders actually support many progressive policy goals opposed by the U.S. Chamber, including raising the minimum wage, paid sick leave and predictive scheduling for employees. And contrary to what the Chamber would have you believe, replacing the Affordable Care Act (the ACA; also known as Obamacare) was not as high on business leaders’ list of priorities as was simply keeping healthcare costs low for families. So if business leaders themselves hold nuanced views about policy and indeed support many progressive policy proposals, why then does the Chamber run ads attacking Obamacare, such as the one for Comer currently running in Kentucky?

Rather than representing all American businesses as it claims, it would appear that the Chamber actually represents the narrow interests of a few industries. Its unwavering opposition to the ACA does not reflect a business consensus to this effect; rather it reflects the priorities of the health insurance industry, which reportedly has given the Chamber more than $86 million to oppose the ACA. Similarly, its opposition to an increase in the minimum wage may reflect the opposition of the fast food and retail industries, both of which employ millions of low-wage workers. Of course, the Chamber’s opposition to legislative and regulatory efforts to fight climate change may be explained by the influence of the fossil fuel industry.

Lost in the Chamber’s flood of partisan political spending on behalf of its Big Business allies are the more nuanced views of the majority of business executives. Likewise, the Chamber also ignores the priorities of small business, green energy, sustainable business and a whole host of other sectors. But most importantly, the Chamber ignores the priorities of individual voters like you. It doubly disrespects you by concealing who is really trying to buy your election, and by trying to buy your election in the first place. For or against coal, for or against the ACA, the time has come for voters to say no to the role of Big Money in politics.

If the Chamber can’t even faithfully represent the interests of business executives, how can it, and other groups like it, pretend to represent your interests? The Chamber may pretend to be defending the “Kentucky way of life,” but don’t be fooled, it’s really defending the Washington lobbyist way of life.



Daniel Dudis is director of Public Citizen’s U.S. Chamber Watch, a watchdog project that promotes transparency in politics.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1TgJZRH