As President Barack Obama begins his seventh year in office, how will history judge him?

Slightly less than half the public approves of his performance in office thus far. Supporters look at the improved economy as evidence of success. The Affordable Care Act has insured many Americans. Our dependence on foreign oil has been reduced.

Critics point to the doubling of the national debt.

The left and right have criticized government surveillance activities.

The Trans-Pacific Partnership Free Trade Agreement the president is negotiating threatens U.S. sovereignty by granting more power to global corporations. It remains to be seen whether the ACA will adversely affect the cost and quality of health care.

Most of the top-ranked presidents such as Lincoln and FDR handled crises well. Others transformed the country through their leadership and by moral persuasion.

Theodore Roosevelt and Woodrow Wilson are examples.

The Truman and Eisenhower administrations’ rankings have improved steadily as their actions have largely stood the test of time.

Many Americans hoped that the first president with non-European ancestry would transform and unite the country, but his results have not matched his oratory.

The bitter partisanship in Washington has gotten worse, and the administration has developed few working relationships on Capitol Hill. After getting the ACA passed, Obama has had few legislative successes.

Voters have given Republicans majorities not seen since the 1920s.

While not the abject failure such as Fillmore, Pierce or Harding, the Obama administration has fallen short of expectations.

Both John Adams and his son John Quincy Adams had long distinguished careers. Their intellect and integrity were indisputable. Yet their administrations were largely forgettable due to the partisanship of their enemies.

Ulysses S. Grant was a respected war hero and earnestly sought to help the newly freed slaves. He took on the Ku Klux Klan and supported civil rights. He tried to treat the Indians as fairly as possible. Unfortunately, many in his cabinet were corrupt and tainted by scandals. His administration was unable to prevent the slaughter of Indians in the Great Plains. The violence against blacks in the South often overwhelmed the administration.

William Howard Taft had a reputation for fairness and honesty as a judge. He was Teddy Roosevelt’s most trusted adviser, and served competently as governor of the Philippines and later as secretary of war. Yet TR’s hand-picked successor lacked the outgoing personality of his former boss and was unable to cultivate the press the way TR had. In 1912, Taft finished third to Democrat Woodrow Wilson, and his old boss, who ran as a Progressive.

Herbert Hoover used his management skills to feed a starving Europe during and after World War I. He served as commerce secretary during the Harding and Coolidge administrations. In 1929, the Great Depression overwhelmed his own presidency. While he was not the “do-nothing” president his critics say, Hoover lacked the personality to assure Americans that he cared about their plight and suffered a resounding defeat in 1932.

Advertisement

More recently, Jimmy Carter’s humility and honesty were a breath of fresh air after the Watergate and CIA scandals. Other than the Camp David Accords, the administration had few successes and suffered a resounding defeat in 1980.

This administration inherited two wars, continued transformation of the American economy and a deeply divided country. Perhaps when the consequences of his decisions are better known, his stature may improve.

Harry Truman had a 28 percent approval rating when he left office. We won’t know for years whether Obama deserves to be elevated from the middle of the pack.

Michael Hartnett of Greenbrae is a former member of the Marin Republican Party Central Committee.