A soil amendment is any material added to a soil to improve its physical properties, such as water retention, permeability, water infiltration, drainage, aeration and structure. The goal is to provide a better environment for roots.

To do its work, an amendment must be thoroughly mixed into the soil (6-8 inches). If it is merely buried, its effectiveness is reduced, and it will interfere with water and air movement and root growth.

Amending a soil is not the same thing as mulching, although many types of mulch are used as amendments. A mulch is left on the soil surface. Its purpose is to reduce evaporation and runoff, inhibit weed growth, and create an attractive appearance. Mulches also moderate soil temperature. Organic mulches may be incorporated into the soil as amendments after they have decomposed to the point that they no longer serve their purpose.

There are two broad categories of soil amendments: organic and inorganic. Organic amendments come from something that was alive. Inorganic amendments, on the other hand, are either mined or man-made. Organic amendments include sphagnum peat, wood chips, grass clippings, straw, compost, manure, biosolids, sawdust and wood ash. Inorganic amendments include vermiculite, perlite, tire chunks, pea gravel and sand.

Not all of the above are recommended by Colorado State University. These are merely examples. Wood ash, an organic amendment, is high in both pH and salt. It can magnify common Colorado soil problems and should not be used as a soil amendment. Don't add sand to clay soil — this creates a soil structure similar to concrete.

Advertisement

Organic amendments increase soil organic matter content and offer many benefits. Over time, organic matter improves soil aeration, water infiltration, and both water-and nutrient-holding capacity. Many organic amendments contain plant nutrients and act as organic fertilizers. Organic matter also is an important energy source for bacteria, fungi and earthworms that live in the soil.

There are at least four factors to consider in selecting a soil amendment:

• How long the amendment will last in the soil,

• Soil texture,

• Soil salinity and plant sensitivities to salts,

• Salt content and pH of the amendment.

The amendment you choose depends on your goals.

Are you trying to improve soil physical properties quickly? Choose an amendment that decomposes rapidly.

Do you want a long-lasting improvement to your soil? Choose an amendment that decomposes slowly.

Do you want a quick improvement that lasts a long time? Choose a combination of amendments.

Three cubic yards covers 1,000 square feet approximately 1 inch deep.

Cultivate the soil amendment into the top 6-8 inches of soil. On compacted/clayey soils, anything less may result in a shallow rooting depth predisposing plants to reduced growth, low vigor, and low stress tolerance. Rate should be adjusted if incorporation depth is different.

Plant-based compost are derived solely from plant materials (leaves, grass clippings, wood chips, and other yard wastes). Use this application rate for other soil amendments know to be low in salt.

Use this application rate for any soil amendment with manure or biosolids, unless the salt content is actually known, by soil test, to be low. Excessive salts are common in many commercially available bagged and bulk products. Use with caution.

For soil amendments with high salts, this routine application rate may be too high. Use with caution.

Soil Salinity and Plant Sensitivity to Salts

Always beware of salts in soil amendments. High salt content and high pH are common problems in Colorado soils. Therefore, avoid amendments that are high in salts or that have a high pH. Amendments frequently high in salts or pH include wood ash, Colorado mountain peat and manures, and manure-based compost, biosolids, and biosolid-based compost.

Growing plants that are sensitive to salts

Raspberry, strawberry, bean, carrot, onion, Kentucky bluegrass, maple, pine, viburnum and many other landscape plants are salt sensitive. In such cases, choose sphagnum peat and compost made from purely plant sources these are low in salts and are good choices for amending Colorado soils.