Happier times: CWA staff director Maura Clare, left, walks in the first row of the procession kicking off the 2014 conference. Clare does not usually take part in the procession, but CWA director Jim Palmer, center, asked her to accompany him in his last one. Also in the front row are keynote speaker Kathleen Sebelius, chatting with Palmer; CU Chancellor Phil DiStefano and conference chair Jane Butcher. Behind Clare are John Griffin, then Palmer's heir apparent and now the director, and Piper Jackson-Sevy, a Clare deputy who resigned Friday because of a "a culture of fear and secrecy" that has accompanied Griffin's ascension to the top role. Currently on leave, Clare is the sole remaining staff member from Palmer's tenure. ( Mark Leffingwell / BOULDER DAILY CAMERA )

It is with a mixture of sadness and pride that we say goodbye to the Conference on World Affairs as we have known it, the splendid free-form tribute to freedom of thought and expression that survived for an astonishing 67 years before finally being pounded into submission by the pedestrian forces of bureaucracy and budgetary provincialism.

The powers that be at the University of Colorado will insist it goes on as before. Do not believe them. The soul of the conference, the collaboration of staff, students and community volunteers for whom it was a passion play, has left the building. Two of three staff members who predated the university's ham-handed takeover and 28 of 37 community volunteers in leadership roles have resigned since the 67th iteration last month. All told, 41 community volunteers representing 659 years of CWA experience — an average of 17 years apiece — have submitted their resignations.

The university will try to minimize the loss of institutional memory and conviction. Don't buy it. This is the CWA's central nervous system walking out the door. The final shoe will drop when John Griffin, the new director, forces out staff director Maura Clare, the heart of the CWA since the turn of the century.

The university has apparently chosen to turn a blind eye to the allegation that Griffin disclosed to people outside the personnel process his disparagement of Clare, in violation of university protocol on confidentiality. Rules really matter at CU, except when they don't.

Why? The usual reasons. Money and politics. The university was unhappy with us for characterizing the $300,000 it spends each year on the conference as two one-hundredths of one percent of 2014-15 academic year revenues of $1.35 billion. We should count only the general fund, it said. So we stand corrected. The allocation to the CWA represents just under five one-hundredths of one percent of the $642 million general fund.

For that, the university got a conference that inspired the students who fell in love with it into lifelong commitments. Orientation for moderators and producers this year was led by CU senior Annika Erickson-Pearson, who told us the conference was the most rewarding part of her CU experience. No matter. The top priority now is "new funding streams." Given university President Bruce Benson's background, we would not be surprised to hear that the Colorado Oil & Gas Association is the new lead sponsor and the university's general fund contribution is no longer required.

Chancellor Phil DiStefano had a chance here to do something brave, to honor the wealth of input he received from community participants young and old, veterans of decades with the conference and recent, giddy recruits who thought they had found their calling. But DiStefano has not survived and thrived for 41 years as a CU academic and bureaucrat by being brave.

The community volunteers liked to think of the CWA as a partnership between community and university, between town and gown. In slamming his gavel down with a missive published in yesterday's Camera, DiStefano made it clear this was an illusion. In the end, the community volunteers had nothing to say about the outcome. The university coup is complete.

No doubt it will continue to bill the event as the CWA to take advantage of the legacy and deny what it has done. We are confident this new conference will be every bit as brave as those who commandeered it.

—Dave Krieger, for the editorial board. Email kriegerd@dailycamera.com. Twitter @DaveKrieger