By of the

Rogers Behavioral Health System plans to open an outpatient program in the Minneapolis area this spring, continuing an ambitious expansion begun in the past two years.

The behavioral health system, based in Oconomowoc, has opened outpatient programs in Tampa, the Chicago area and Nashville. It also set up an outpatient program in Appleton and opened a new hospital in Brown Deer this year.

"There's no question there is a need out there," said Stacy McGauvran-Hruby, its director of marketing.

Rogers Behavioral Health System, an affiliate of Rogers Memorial Hospital in Oconomowoc, is best-known for treating patients with obsessive-compulsive disorder and related anxiety disorders and patients with eating disorders.

Behavioral health systems throughout the country are expanding, driven in part by Affordable Care Act's requiring health plans to cover behavioral health care the same as medical and surgical care. Health plans previously provided more limited coverage, such as a set number of outpatient visits and higher co-payments, for behavioral health.

In October, Aurora Health Care announced plans to spend $35 million to expand and renovate the Aurora Psychiatric Hospital Campus, which provides care to 20,000 to 25,000 patients a year, in Wauwatosa.

Rogers' planned outpatient program in Eden Prairie, a Minneapolis suburb, will focus on OCD and related anxiety disorders, eating disorders, post-traumatic stress disorder as well as depression and other mood disorders.

The OCD and anxiety programs will provide care to children and adolescents as well as adults.

The program will offer partial hospitalization, which typically consists of four to six hours of therapy a day, five days a week, and intensive outpatient, which typically consists of three to four hours of therapy a day, three days a week.

"There continues to be a growing demand for mental health services," James Ledbetter, vice president of regional partial hospital operations for Rogers, said in a statement. "We believe we offer an expertise and commitment to specialized services that can help fill needs in each of the markets we've entered."

Finding psychiatrists, psychologists and other therapists is a challenge.

"But, so far, we've been able to do it in each of the markets we're in," McGauvran-Hruby said.

Rogers' operations in Wisconsin also include its hospital in West Allis and outpatient programs in Kenosha and Madison.

Separately, Rogers recently opened a new outpatient center at 1205 Corporate Center Drive in Oconomowoc, moving the programs from its main campus about two miles away.