2 shares Share on Facebook Share on Twitter Share on Google+ Share on LinkedIn Pin to Pinterest Share on StumbleUpon +

Is Marco Rubio the greatest challenge to Hillary Clinton in her Presidential endeavors of 2016? A latest report in this regard from the election race is the news to follow. The young Florida Senator who decided not to run for his re-election to the senate, has been getting some real admirers going by the charm he oozes while campaigning. And he is definitely coming across as a challenge to Clinton.

Standing far behind in the Republican list – with Donald Trump and Ben Carson being in the lead, Rubio is being said to be the real front runner.

People, who have been around and watched US elections for very long, are of the opinion that the young, clear spoken and good communicator Rubio has been quietly but steadily gaining ground in his run-up for elections.

Meanwhile, there has been a lot of attention on Hillary after the Thursday hearing on the Benghazi Attacks where she testified in front of the House committee investigating the attacks. Hillary has been open about her take on various issues that would relate to her future role, if she manages to be the first Woman President of USA. Whether Marco Rubio comes across as a challenge to Clinton will be a matter to watch for.

Like us on Facebook

Take a look at her health care plan that she came up with towards the end of September this year.

Also Read: US Health Care System Needs Renovation

She plans to put a tab on the fluctuations in pricing of drugs. Suddenly an age old medication meant to treat a life-threatening infection cannot jump from $13.75 to $750 a tablet, she says.

Downplaying the Republican efforts to shelve the Affordable Care Act, she says that she would retain it in favour of the 16 million people who will benefit from the same.

Very open about her dissatisfaction with President Obama’s Health Care Act, Clinton intends to bring about changes and make it more beneficial for people. She refuses to call the Act as a failure. “My attitude is, look, we’ve got some good things done, let’s preserve what works and fix what doesn’t,” she said.

She came up with the outline of her prescription drug plan that includes and provides guidelines on the percentage of revenue to be spent on research and development by the pharmaceutical companies. Also, she intends to put a cap on the price of drugs that are used to treat many chronic conditions.

Besides, she intends to allocate funds for providing more generic versions of drugs in the market.

Her plan also includes reining in on the non-pharmaceutical expenses meant to be borne by the patients.

It must be remembered that Hillary Clinton has always kept health care among her top priority issues and is well respected by her fraternity for that.

Others Read: Hepatitis C Cure Sends Shockwave across US Health Care System

Photo Source: Wikimedia.org