Topics: Editor's Picks, Evangelical Christianity, Sex, Virginity, Life News

To write about contemporary evangelicals, especially if one is no longer an evangelical and is not writing for an evangelical audience, can quickly turn into target practice. I spent whole decades taking aim, though usually just during parties in San Francisco, where an evangelical past makes you a little bit exotic. At least that’s what I hoped. But even if you’re not taking aim yourself, you can inadvertently line up the easy shot for those inclined. Nuance, in discussing extremists, is rare. And much of this is the fault of evangelicals themselves, with what is too often an all-or-nothing approach to, say, the literal interpretation of the Bible, narrowly defined moral absolutes, a deep-seated anti-intellectual prejudice. And then there are the many public examples of evangelical Christianity’s disgraced ambassadors.

Sex scandals are particularly powerful, in part because of the strength of the whole wedlock injunction and the desperate measures taken to prevent extramarital fornication from about the age of 12 on. In my town of about 3,000, largely if not exclusively evangelical, prayer was our first line of defense against the call of the body. And as a 12-year-old, once you figured out that something felt good “down there” you didn’t have to go through a church seminar to know it was probably against God’s will. To be saved for marriage, is the way my mother put it when, clueless, I inquired. I wised up enough on the spot not to push her for clarification. (What, exactly, should be saved? Touching oneself? Orgasm? Not that I had the word orgasm. Quickening seemed to be the closest thing the Bible offered.) I never talked to my dad about it. He’d been a minister, like my grandfather and great-grandfather, but one day he was at home with us, and then the next day — or so it had seemed to me when I was 6 years old — he had a new home in the next town, a new job, a new girlfriend, and a new baby on the way. Clearly, sex carried with it many dangers.

And with sex, it wasn’t just actions you had to guard against, it was thoughts, too. So you prayed not to have thoughts. But who knew which thoughts were dangerous until the feeling announced itself again? It was a mystery. And praying not to have a thought is like trying not to think about an elephant. So there were other methods of discouragement besides prayer, like public confessions. On testimony nights at church, or during revivals, or at camp meetings, the preacher would preach at you for hours, convincing you that God could see into your heart and that if you would just lay your burden down you’d feel so much relief. And we were 12 and 13, 15 and 16. Our bodies were going nuts. We felt guilty about it, of course we did. And God could see! Horrifyingly, we confessed, sometimes at the altar to one other person, sometimes in front of large groups. This was humiliating enough in itself to take care of lustful thinking for at least 24 hours. Even listening to the confessions — thankfully as far as I ever got — was excruciating.