Buy Photo Louis W. Cataldo, seen in this 2013 file photo, pleaded guilty Friday to trying to murder the manager of his Brielle eatery, the Sand Bar. (Photo: THOMAS P. COSTELLO/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER)Buy Photo

Just as attorneys were to begin picking jurors to preside over his trial, a restaurateur who is a former Essex County sheriff's officer admitted to trying to murder the manager of his Brielle eatery.

Louis Cataldo, 64, of the Bay Point Harbor condominium complex in Point Pleasant, pleaded guilty Thursday before Superior Court Judge Francis J. Vernoia to the attempted murder of Nicole Griffin, who worked for him as manager of his restaurant, the Sand Bar in Brielle.

Authorities said Cataldo shot Griffin, then 35, in the restaurant's parking lot about 1 a.m. on June 18, 2013, after they had closed the eatery and were walking to their cars.

Cataldo later barricaded himself in his Point Pleasant condominium, where he engaged in an eight-hour standoff with police that ended about 2 p.m. that day, after he fired a shot at SWAT team officers who managed to dodge the bullet as they moved in to arrest him, authorities said.

Cataldo also pleaded guilty to possession of a weapon for an unlawful purpose and resisting arrest.

Assistant Monmouth County Prosecutor Matthew Bogner will ask Vernoia to sentence Cataldo to 12 years in prison. He will be required to serve 85 percent of his term before he can be considered for release on parole, under the state's No Early Release Act.

Additional charges of aggravated assault and unlawful possession of a weapon will dismissed as part of the plea bargain, according to court records.

Cataldo was slated to go to trial the week of June 8, and attorneys were expecting to begin picking jurors for the trial when Cataldo decided to pleaded guilty.

Griffin survived the shooting, but still suffers from the injuries she suffered, according to a lawsuit filed on her behalf against Cataldo and the Sand Bar. Cataldo purchased the restaurant about eight months prior to the shooting.

Authorities said the two walked to the restaurant's parking lot after closing time and, when Griffin entered her car, Cataldo told her to wait there. Then, he went to his vehicle, retrieved a handgun, returned to Griffin's car and fired several shots at her, authorities said.

Police responded to 911 calls and found Good Samaritans tending to Griffin, who suffered a gunshot wound to her back for which she underwent surgery at Jersey Shore University Medical Center, Neptune. She remained hospitalized there for six days.

Griffin's lawsuit alleges that Cataldo had been drinking heavily in the restaurant before he shot her.

Cataldo worked as an Essex County sheriff's officer from 1972 until he resigned in 1989. At the time of his resignation, he was a detective in the sheriff's narcotics division.

Cataldo remains incarcerated in the Monmouth County Jail, with bail set at $2.5 million. His sentencing is scheduled for July 17.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HB3U54