The separation of older Americans from their life savings seems to be a cruel game almost anyone can play these days.

While we know it's happening more and more, the size of the problem has been notoriously hard to quantify.

That's because when elders do realize they've been had, most of them are too ashamed to talk about it or too reluctant to prosecute someone they know and — amazingly — still happen to love. Instead they tend to blame themselves, for signing documents without reading them or falling for a scam too good to be true.

So it's enlightening to have a new "population-based prevalence study" that focused on financial exploitation among more than 4,000 people 60 and older — who were not cognitively impaired — living in New York state. In this first large-scale survey, 2.7 percent reported having been financially exploited in the past year, and 4.7 percent said it had happened in their lifetimes.

The study, a collaboration between Weill Cornell Medical College, Lifespan of Greater Rochester and the New York City Department of the Aging, was published in the Journal of General Internal Medicine.

I would imagine the prevalence of elder fraud in Florida is even higher. But if you take that conservative 2.7 percent as a guide, it would mean that that close to 120,000 Floridians who are 60-plus have been conned out of their money in the last year. And those are the ones not suffering from dementia.

It's interesting that this attempt to quantify an outrage has come from the medical community. Doctors and other health care providers were the first targets of a 2010 initiative to create awareness of elder financial fraud by the Investor Protection Trust, a nonprofit arm of the securities industry that combats investment scams.

When the money people are alarmed about elders' nest eggs, you know it's not just scare stories.

So far the trust has trained about 7,800 medical professionals in 32 states in how to ask their patients about financial abuse, and report problems. Now they're launching a similar program aimed at lawyers, in collaboration with the American Bar Association.

Attorneys who specialize in elder law — and there are a number of good ones here in Southwest Florida — are trained to see financial exploitation, said Charles Sabatino, director of the ABA's Commission on Law and Aging. But the problem is so pervasive — and new investment instruments so complex and sophisticated — that more attorneys could be assisting in a swindle without realizing it.

"Once considered an insular problem, this is now a reality that permeates a broad spectrum of legal practices," Sabatino said in a conference call to announce the push to educate lawyers. "Over time it has become clear that this is a critical issue for everyone, not just specialists. Most lawyers aren't trained to spot it or respond to it, and may even be unwillingly complicit in enabling exploitation."

For example, he said, a client could ask for help executing a Power of Attorney document for an elder relative to sign. If the attorney simply provides the form and instructions, without asking how it will be used, he or she could miss the signals of an intention to defraud.

Don Blandin, CEO of the Investor Protection Trust, said his organization's survey of 658 practicing attorneys found that 90 percent of them were willing to attend training sessions on elder exploitation. The effort will begin as a pilot program in at least three states.

The four years of training for health care providers has been a success, said Dr. Robert Roush, director of the Texas Consortium Geriatric Education Center of the Huffington Center on Aging at Baylor College of Medicine. Now, he said, physicians are asking their patients — especially those with signs of cognitive impairment — if anyone has urged them to change their wills or sign any documents lately.

"These are questions that doctors had never asked before with their patients," Roush said. "But it's something that has to be broached — gingerly, I might add."