A Canadian island is urging Americans to make it their new home should Republican presidential front-runner Donald Trump Donald TrumpAustralian opposition leader: Trump's views are "barking mad" Rubio signals support for Trump Trump to release veterans fundraising totals on Memorial Day MORE win the White House in November.

“Hi Americans!” a statement on a tourism website for Cape Breton Island, Nova Scotia, reads. "Donald Trump may become the next president of your country. If that happens, and you decide to get the hell out of there, might I suggest moving to Cape Breton Island?"

ADVERTISEMENT

The statement adds: "Don’t wait until Election Day to find somewhere else to live!

“Start now – that way, on Election Day, you just hop on a bus to start your new life in Cape Breton, where women can get abortions, Muslim people can roam freely and the only ‘walls’ are holding up the roofs of our extremely affordable houses.”

The website then explained its rationale for seeking potential American residents disgusted by the prospect of a Trump administration.

“We are an island about the same size as the Hawaiian Big Island on the east coast of Canada,” its statement reads. "We always rank high on travel magazine lists of beautiful islands, but we are experiencing a bit of a population problem at the moment.

“We need people [and] we need you! This is not a joke! See for yourself – you belong here on Cape Breton Island, where healthcare is free, you know your neighbors and they look out for you and nobody has a hand gun.”

Cape Breton Island also details some of its unique features as a North Atlantic tourist destination.

“In Cape Breton, we value diversity,” its tourism site reads. "Here, you can hear a number of other languages, like French and Mi’kmaq, even Gaelic! But everybody speaks English, too, just like you.

“Yes, this is Canada, but Cape Breton isn’t frozen all year round! Our summers are delightful with highs in the 80-degree range. Winters here are very similar to the Northeast USA."