Jennings and Marcus: Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's Medical Center: Contributing to the Local Economy

Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's Medical Center are cornerstones of the greater Bridgeport community -- caring for all who come through our doors 24 hours a day, regardless of their ability to pay. The benefits of our hospitals extend well beyond our walls, as we strive to improve the health of our community and serve as an economic engine. In fact, the two hospitals have a tremendous impact on the financial health of our local community and our state.

In total, Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's Medical Center had a direct economic impact on our community during the past year of more than $1.5 billion. Examples include:

The two hospitals provide 4,400 full-time jobs. Employment of community residents is an important economic stimulus, creating and supporting jobs throughout the local and state economies.

Salaries earned by Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's Medical Center employees and spent on groceries, clothing, mortgage payments, rent and other essential items generate approximately $468 million in annual economic activity.

The hospitals spend $304 million on goods and services. Funds spent to buy goods and services flow from the hospitals to businesses and then ripple through the economy generating a total of approximately $327 million.

During the last three years, Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's have invested nearly $200 million in construction projects. Bridgeport Hospital completely modernized its Connecticut Burn Center, extensively renovated its main lobby and created the new Grant Street Plaza neighborhood park outside its main entrance. St. Vincent's just completed a major building project that included its Elizabeth Pfriem SWIM Center for Cancer Care, Emergency Department expansion and lobby renovation. Both hospitals also are engaged in developing several ambulatory services. These projects not only improve the safety, functionality and appearance of the patient care environment, they also generate local jobs and revenue in the community, and most importantly, provide additional access points of care for residents throughout the region.

Generations of families have come to rely on Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's. In addition to our caregiving roles, both hospitals are an important part of our local economy and the area's economic development strategies.

Recent government actions, though, including the passage of the Affordable Care Act and deep cuts in funding for underserved patients, have placed increasing financial pressures on Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's and other not-for-profit hospitals in Connecticut. Recent proposals to tax hospitals would significantly increase these pressures -- perhaps to the point where some programs and services would need to be curtailed or eliminated altogether.

Our two hospitals have already taken a number of steps to be able to continue providing safe, high-quality patient care in a more efficient manner. We are committed to continuously improving patient outcomes and enhancing the patient experience -- doing what is right for our patients -- and at the same time, lowering costs.

Financial stability is essential for us to achieve an operating margin that lets us reinvest in our patient care programs, technology and facilities maintenance and improvements. In addition, we require the resources to continue to attract highly-skilled doctors, nurses and other professionals to our hospitals and offer competitive wages and benefits to all our employees.

For more than a century, our two hospitals have been blessed with tremendous support from residents in the communities we serve. We appreciate that you understand the important role the hospitals play -- in supporting the local economy, and in providing critical healthcare services to patients, whether they are among the 165,000 a year who visit our Emergency Departments, the 60,000 a year who rely on our primary care clinics or the more than 3,000 women a year who give birth at our hospitals.

Please let your state legislators and members of Congress know that you and your family need the services that Bridgeport Hospital and St. Vincent's Medical Center provide to the communities we serve. Please urge your elected officials to work in partnership with our hospitals when considering hospital funding to preserve safe, high-quality healthcare services for their constituents. Enough is enough. No more cuts in the next biennial budget. We - and the residents in the communities we serve - have sacrificed enough.

Together we will ensure that our hospitals provide the safe, quality, compassionate care you have come to depend on. We are privileged to serve you and grateful for your support.

William M. Jennings

and Dr. Stuart G. Marcus

Jennings is president and CEO of Bridgeport hospital and executive vice president, Yale New Haven Health System. Marcus is president and CEO, St. Vincent's Health Services, Ministry Market Leader, Ascension Health.