Three people were hospitalized after their car crashed into a business in northeast Wichita.

Emergency crews were called around 1:50 a.m. Sunday to a building collapse at the Mattress Firm at 2191 North Rock Road, at the 21st Street intersection. When officers arrived on scene, they found that a car had crashed into the build and was partially inside the business.

Sgt. Paul Kimble said the car was traveling eastbound on 21st Street at a high rate of speed before crashing into the Mattress Firm.

One man was able to get out of the vehicle with the help of others nearby. He suffered minor injuries.

Two other men were trapped inside the car. The Wichita Fire Department used "heavy-duty equipment" to support the car and extract the remaining two victims, Sgt. Kimble said.

"The car is actually partially in the building, so it's lifted up," Kimble said. "They supported it just in case it fell when they were trying to get the victims out of the vehicle."

Of the two men who were trapped in the car, one suffered critical injuries. The other was not seriously hurt.

Wichita Police released additional information at the daily media briefing. They say all the occupants in the car were men. The driver was 23 years old and the two passengers were 20 and 21 years old.

There's no word yet on whether alcohol or drugs played a factor in the crash.

There is extensive damage to the building, Kimble said. But the structure is sound.

Emergency crews have rescued people pinned in a vehicle at 21st and Rock. Investigators say speed is likely a factor in the crash, leaving two men with critical injuries and one man with serious injuries.

Sedgwick County dispatchers tell the incident happened before 2 a.m.. Three people were pinned in a vehicle, but one managed to escape with the help of others nearby. Firefighters were able to rescue two other victims inside the vehicle. The victims are believed to be in their mid-20's.

As of 2:45 a.m., the Wichita Fire Department confirmed on Twitter that "All patients have now been extricated from the vehicle accident at E 21st and N Rock Rd."

KAKE News is working to gather details on this developing story. We'll bring you the very latest on Good Morning Kansas at 8 a.m.

All patients have now been extricated from the vehicle accident at E 21st and N Rock Rd. — WichitaFireDept (@WichitaFireDept) November 1, 2015