The implementation of the Affordable Care Act has clogged the system for nearly all types of health insurance in New Jersey, causing frustration and delays for consumers, agents and policyholders say.

Lingering backlogs have left thousands in limbo, unsure of whether they’re covered and unable to reach anyone to find out. Some people who completed applications late last year — before the deadline for coverage to begin on Jan. 1 — are still waiting for insurance cards.

And so are those who have signed up for N.J. FamilyCare, the state’s newly expanded Medicaid program, and private policyholders.

The paperwork chaos has real-world consequences, said insurance agent Susan Goodman, director of group benefits for New Agency Partners in Parsippany.

Her clients report pharmacies don’t know how much to charge for prescriptions, hospitals are asking for credit cards upon arrival and pre-certifications for special services can’t be obtained.

“It’s truly, truly a disaster,” she said. “I’ve been doing this for 30 years and I’ve never seen anything like it.”

David Vasquez, a 49-year-old diabetic, has been paying hundreds of dollars for his medicine and hopes to be reimbursed, but he’s putting off seeing a doctor until he receives his insurance card.

“I’ve been postponing that because if I walk in with a card, it’s 20 bucks, but if I walk in without a card, it’s $300,” said Vasquez, who lives in New York but is insured through his South Hackensack employer. “I’m hoping they get their collective act together in the next few weeks, because it’s torture.”

Tens of thousands of New Jersey residents have successfully obtained insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare. The state Medicaid program has added more than 82,000 residents to its rolls and the insurance companies have issued insurance cards, though they won’t say how many.

But thousands of others are still waiting — waiting for an insurance card, and waiting on hold and on the computer for answers.

“We have maintained increased staffing levels and operating hours to help us quickly resolve claims, authorization, billing and enrollment questions that have accompanied what is an unprecedented transition for the industry and health insurance consumers,” said Tom Vincz, a spokesman for Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield. “We are working closely with state and federal regulators, members, brokers and community organizations to implement health care reform and make the ACA work.”

Meanwhile, what should have been routine renewals of private policies — those having nothing to do with Obamacare — have been delayed as well.

“I am still trying to get bills straightened out for January 1 renewals,” said agent David Oscar, a Fairfield-based agent who manages 120 policy renewals a month.

“The insurance carriers were clearly not prepared,” said Oscar, who is also the spokesman for the New Jersey Association of Health Underwriters. “I can’t blame them fully because I don’t think they got all the guidance they required.”

Carriers didn’t set their rates until the end of November, and didn’t get final approval from the state until December, which compressed the time left to process renewals, he said.

“There was no way on God’s green earth they could’ve gotten it done by December,” he said.

Aetna spokeswoman Susan Millerick said its backlog was due to unexpected growth in its small business category. “As a result, we had to redeploy resources to address a surge in the last few months,” she said. That included moving employees to the Northeast to help get new customers enrolled.

Consumers who feel they can’t wait can contact the state Department of Banking and Insurance.

“If they can’t get their insurance card and can’t get treated, they should call us,” said Marshall McKnight, department spokesman. The complaint hotline is (800) 446-7467 or online.



The Record contributed to this report.