Music

Group of friends: The Bloods with Victoria "Sweetie" Zamora, left, Dirk Jonker and Marihuzka Cornelius.

With a day job working as publicist for Remote Control records, and a gig hosting FBI Radio's Friday drivetime show, Victoria "Sweetie" Zamora has been party to countless promotional conversations, but rarely the subject. "I'm used to organising interviews or doing interviews, not being interviewed," Zamora says.

Having seen the music biz from the inside, she's wary of the buzz around her own outfit, Bloods, an ultra-melodic garage-rock trio in which she plays bass and sings.

"I've seen how fickle buzz can be, seen too many people make really great records that just flop," says the 26-year-old. "I can't just be a naïve 20-year-old who thinks because we've put out this indie record (Work It Out), the deals are going to roll in, and soon we're going to be touring around the States. Working in the music industry, I've seen too much to ever be optimistic."

Zamora was born in Hong Kong to a Bolivian father and a Filipino-American mother, and spent the first year of her life in Beijing, only for her family to be evacuated to Jakarta due to the Tiananmen Square protests. At three, she and her mother landed in Sydney's Edgecliff area, and by five, Zamora was being taken to ACO shows, and learning the violin. "Classic Asian Mother: overprotective, and loved to put the pressure on," she recounts. "As a kid there are always those moments where you don't want to practise any more, you don't want to go to another orchestra rehearsal, you don't want to do another AMEB exam. Now, as an adult, I feel so lucky that I'm a classically trained violinist, and that my mother really pushed me."

Advertisement

Growing up "oblivious to pop music", Zamora fell into the epic-rock six-piece Lions At Your Door, at 20, due to her friendship with future Bloods leader Marihuzka Cornelius. When that band "inevitably fell apart" in 2011, Zamora, Cornelius, and guitarist Dirk Jonker founded Bloods, with each picking up a new instrument: bass, guitar, and drums, respectively. "None of us really knew what we were doing," Zamora recalls. "We'd bash out these little songs - literally three or four chords for two minutes - and have a fun time."

In the years since, they've all "actually learnt to play our instruments well," honing their sound through endless shows in Sydney and a run of fuzzed, furious singles. But the initial spirit of Bloods' birth persists on Work It Out. "We just wanted to put out a fun record," Zamora says. "If it wasn't fun, it wouldn't make sense. To me, Bloods is this really great time I get to have with two of my best friends. And, luckily, people at our shows seem like they're having fun as well."

Bloods play the Curtain Bandroom on Saturday, November 29.