A flash flood warnings for the Fourmile Canyon burn scar in Boulder County and other areas around the region were issued Sunday by the National Weather Service in Boulder.

A half inch of rain fell in the High Park burn area west of Fort Collins in three hours Sunday morning early afternoon.

As the rain continued to pound the region, the weather service issued the flash flood watch until 4:30 p.m. for the Front Range foothills and adjacent plains.

Flash flood warnings were in place in all or portions of the following counties: Adams, Arapahoe, Boulder, Broomfield and Denver.

All of northeast Colorado remains under a flood warning.

Flooding can be expected in several areas, including western Aurora, Centennial, Commerce City, Brighton, Greenwood Village, Denver International Airport and Buckley Air Force Base, according to the weather service.

The flood watch is in place in areas already hard-hit by the storms that have flooded parts of the state with more rain than normally falls in a year.

By the end of Sunday total rainfall amounts could increase by between 1 and 4 inches, according to the weather service.

“The heaviest amounts will be in the foothills and mountain areas,” said Bob Kleyla, a meteorologist for the service in Boulder.

Rain continues to fall in scattered spots across Northern Colorado, with an average of 0.01 to 0.02 inch of per hour expected to fall through the afternoon.

Byron Louis, program manager for the weather service in Boulder, said the storm is expected to move south by Sunday evening.

While a lot of rivers in the flood area are receding, Louis said flooding is still possible.

“A lot of (rivers) in the area are coming down,” Louis said. “But again, with the rain we’re seeing today, flooding is not impossible, with the already saturated grounds, it won’t’ take much for flooding to occur.”

In Longmont, Mountain View Fire and Rescue reported the St. Vrain River was rising at 7 inches every 15 minutes Sunday morning.

Many of the gauges used to measure river flows have been damaged by the flooding and so Louis was unable to confirm reports the St. Vrain river is rapidly rising.

The North Fork Big Thompson River at Drake has receded to a height of 9.4 feet, down from the record 10.55 feet Thursday night.

Boulder Creek has dropped to 2.7 feet, down from 7.78 feet Thursday evening. However, at about 11 a.m., the weather service showed the river slightly rising.

Weather service meteorologist Dave Tomalak said there will be a slight chance of afternoon showers in the mountains on Monday and Tuesday but expects the storm will completely clear the area by Tuesday.

“There might be a very slight chance of showers over the metro area later this week but it does look like today will be the worst of it,” Tomalak said. “Today will be the last really big push of this widespread precipitation.”

Rain is expected to continue through the day, with accumulations of 2-inches in some areas throughout the foothills and high country, but relief is in sight, according to the weather service.

tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee