Topics: Barack Obama, Fox News, Media Matters, Nikki Haley, Obama Derangement Sydrome, Politics News

This article originally appeared on Media Matters

It didn’t take long for conservative commentators to start hurling childish insults at their television sets last night during President Obama’s State of the Union address. As he mapped out his vision for America, he was called a “crapweasel president,” a “shameless snake” and a “bad man” giving a “stupid shit” speech.

Viewers disagreed, of course, and gave Obama’s address sky-high marks last night.

If you follow these regular vile eruptions you can’t be surprised. Over the years during Obama’s annual, thoughtful national address, his feral critics have excitedly denounced him in real time as an “arrogant,” “flippant” “jerk.” He was “fake,” “thin-skinned,” “cocky and snide”; “patronizing,” “demagogic,” “unpresidential,” and really, really “arrogant.” And he often gave a “stupid,” “Castro-like,” “evil speech.”

By all indications Obama’s final year in office is going to feature a never-ending geyser from the far-right press, where every move and utterance from the president is met with overwrought name-calling and desperate cries of help. His critics have bronzed and memorialized the art of indignation. (And also berated the president’s wife, endlessly.)

It must be exhausting.

It’s only the second week of January and already, aside from the State of the Union outburst, we witnessed the weird and childish media attacks on the president after he teared up in public while remembering child victims of gun violence. (“Check that podium for like a raw onion … It’s not really believable.”)

Just four weeks ago two Fox News talkers were suspended, one for calling the president of the United States a “pussy” on national television, the other for claiming, on the same day, that Obama just didn’t “give a shit” about combating terrorism.

It’s classic Obama Derangement Syndrome: the inability of adults to rationally deal with the actions of the Democratic president. Remember the collective 2014 meltdown when Obama appeared on comedian Zach Galifianakis’ comedy show? (It was “dreadful” and “gross.”) When he ordered “spicy mustard” on his hamburger? (“What kind of man orders a cheeseburger without ketchup but Dijon mustard?”) Or when feverish critics blamed Obama for golfing when an earthquake hit the East Coast of America?

And note we’re not talking about anonymous online commenters, or a group chat of College Republicans. We’re talking about people who are supposed to be leading lights within the conservative movement. But it turns out they’re immune to intellectual pursuits when it comes to Obama.

The amazing part is very little of this batty behavior seems to disqualify the participants in the eyes of the elite Beltway media. There seems to be few baseless allegations or insults that critics can hurl at Obama (or Hillary Clinton) these days that’s deemed out of bounds, which of course only fuels the spoiled-rotten behavior.