By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

Family members of developmentally disabled Ohioans are warning against state efforts to shrink Medicaid-funded residential facilities.

Medicaid pays for more than 5,000 Ohioans who live in Intermediate Care Facilities where they have around-the-clock nursing care but are, according to nonprofit Disability Rights Ohio, “needlessly segregated.”

Disability Advocacy Alliance, a grassroots group formed in January, sees DRO’s focus on “community integration” as a threat to ICF residents — many of whom cannot walk or speak, cannot eat without assistance and cannot control their bodily functions.

Last July, DRO threatened a lawsuit should the state fail to “transition a substantial number of individuals from segregated residential, employment, and day services,” prompting Gov. John Kasich to target ICFs for downsizing in his latest budget.

Disability Advocacy Alliance supporter Tamie Hopp thinks attempts to shrink ICFs are misguided.

“The Kasich Administration’s budget proposal would have resulted in thousands of individuals with profound intellectual and developmental disabilities and significant needs being forced from their ICF homes,” Hopp said in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

As government affairs director at national developmental disabilities advocacy group VOR, Hopp helps Disability Advocacy Alliance and groups in other states navigate Medicaid policy changes.

Kasich’s 2016-17 budget would build on existing state benchmarks limiting the size of ICFs, which typically save money by serving a large number of residents with a dedicated nursing staff at a single location.

Pressure on Ohio’s ICFs has come from DRO and the Republican governor and from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, too. About two-thirds of the Medicaid benefits for ICF residents come from federal taxpayers.

“Tragedies are predictable when individuals with significant needs are displaced from specialized care and separated from trained caregivers and instead placed in small, unlicensed settings with staff not trained to accommodate their needs,” Hopp warned.

“An analogous situation would be removing a patient from the ICU and attempting to serve that individual in his/her living room,” she said. “Serving ICU patients in scattered locations is either cost prohibitive to do safely, or dangerous.”

Hopp pointed to studies from Georgia and Virginia showing sharply increased mortality rates when developmentally disabled residents were moved from ICFs to “community-based care.”

Relocating ICF residents wouldn’t just hurt those individuals, Hopp said — it could also increase medical wait times for other disabled Ohioans as former ICF residents “moved to the head of the line” for care.

The Supreme Court’s 1999 Olmstead vs. L.C. decision “settled any dispute that undue segregation of a person with a disability is discrimination” forbidden under federal law, DRO Executive Director Michael Kirkman told Ohio Watchdog.

“DRO’s request to the state is that it create a system in Ohio that allows individuals real choice, not the false choice that currently exits,” Kirkman said in an emailed statement.

“Thousands of individuals in ICF institutions and day habilitation are on wait lists to move to the community; thousands may want to move to the community but would not receive adequate services under the current system to ensure their health and safety,” he continued.

When it comes to giving Medicaid recipients more options, there is some agreement between DRO and Disability Advocacy Alliance.

But in Ohio and elsewhere, critics fear the push for deinstitutionalization and an end to “segregated” services veers toward a one-size-fits-all approach by limiting access to ICFs.

“Community homes are needed for people who can handle and desire to live in the community, while large and small ICFs are necessary for those requiring higher levels of care,” Hopp said.

“This is what is envisioned in the U.S. Supreme Court’s Olmstead decision,” she added. “This needs to be achieved through policies which do not pit the disabled population against each other.”

The Ohio General Assembly removed budget language targeting ICFs, but has not finalized the 2016-17 state budget. Kasich’s Office of Health Transformation did not respond to a request for comment.