Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn. (Photo: Wade Payne / AP)

U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander is sponsoring bipartisan legislation in companion to a House bill to change a formula that is used in determining how much hospitals get in reimbursement from Medicare.

The bill establishes a 0.874 as the national floor for the average wage index, or AWI, which is used as a multiplier for determining what Medicare reimburses hospitals. The legislation, called the Fair Medicare Hospital Payments Act of 2016, is the Senate version of a bill sponsored by U.S. Rep. Diane Black, R-Tenn.

Raising the floor on the AWI would help rural and urban hospitals as they face planned reductions in Medicare payments in the coming years under tenets of the Affordable Care Act, which was designed to offset the decreased payments with expanded Medicaid payments.

“This bill will protect Tennessee hospitals, and others around the country, from shrinking Medicare reimbursements that make it harder for them to recruit skilled doctors and nurses, make payroll, pay bills and care for patients," Alexander said in a statement.

The AWI takes into account market trends, such as labor and benefit costs. The highest AWI in the country for fiscal year 2016 is Santa Cruz, Calif., which has a $72.27 average hourly wage and 1.723 AWI.

The higher an AWI, the higher the Medicare payment.

Alexander called the formula "flawed."

Tennessee is divided into 10 districts, eight of which fall below the proposal. The Memphis core based statistical area, a federal geography, has the highest AWI in the state at 0.8923. Three districts — Bristol, Knoxville and Morristown — have the lowest at 0.7327.

Across Tennessee, the lowest average hourly wage is $28.86 in Johnson City, where the AWI is 0.7397; Chattanooga has the highest average hourly wage at $35.99, with a 0.8625 AWI.

The Tennessee Hospital Association backs the legislation to create a floor because it is of "critical importance" to state hospitals.

The legislation "would bring about much-needed change to the AWI and would level the playing field for all states," said Craig Becker, president and CEO of the hospital association.

Since 2000, nine of Tennessee's districts have seen reductions in AWI.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 and on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1SximmY