Posted: Dec. 16, 2013 8:47 am Updated: Dec. 30, 2013 9:15 am

By DOUG WILSON

Herald-Whig Senior Writer

Don Hess and his wife, Pauline, were among those Americans who had insurance coverage they liked.When the couple got a cancellation notice on their private insurance policy and saw how high the insurance exchange plan would be, Hess wrote President Barack Obama a letter saying that the Affordable Care Act ... isn’t affordable. He wanted to know what happened to the president’s promise that anyone who likes their insurance policy can keep it.“I’m not going to question the guy’s intent with the law, but it has turned into such a quagmire that any astute person would have said ‘this is going south on us’ and held up on this thing,” Hess said.There are 15 million Americans covered by individual insurance plans, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation. Many of those plans don’t meet the requirements set out by the health care reform law and insurance companies sent out cancellation notices to policyholders in recent months.A study by Families USA, a nonprofit group that supports health reform, found that 1.6 million Americans who are at risk of losing their individual policies also are not eligible for subsidies on policies offered through the health care exchanges.Hess was in that group.He retired from John Wood Community College in Quincy this year and qualified for health coverage through the university retirement system for about $300 per month. Coverage for his wife, who does not yet qualify for Medicare, would have been prohibitively expensive. So they bought her a policy through Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois.“It was only $188 per month and we thought it was pretty good. It had a $3,000 deductible and an 80-20 copay,” Hess said.Then several months ago, they got a cancellation notice because Pauline’s plan did not meet all the requirements of the health care reform law, often known as Obamacare.“The cheapest plan under the Affordable Care Act was $430 a month, with a $6,000 deductible and a 60-40 copay. If we went for an equivalent policy with what she had, it would be a ‘gold policy’ that cost nearly $900 a month,” Hess said. “The cheapest plan was much worse coverage that was going to cost more ... and if she had major surgery and had to pay 40 percent, we’d be wiped out.”The couple didn’t qualify for any government subsidies because of retirement income and consulting fees that Don Hess receives.For a while, the couple looked at their other alternatives.Pauline Hess was born in Australia, so she could earn an exemption from the health care law if she renounced the U.S. citizenship she has embraced since childhood. As unattractive as that option was, it sounded better than ending their 40-year marriage in divorce so that she would have no income and would qualify for a top quality insurance policy free of charge.“Eventually we got a reprieve. We get to keep her insurance policy for another year. Then it will start all over again,” Don Hess said.Jeff Kennedy, owner of Kennedy Wealth Group of Quincy, also got an insurance cancellation notice and then got confirmation that he could keep the policy at a higher rate for the next year.“Prices have gone up, but I feel relieved that I can still get the policy,” Kennedy said.A former fighter pilot, Kennedy had throat cancer this year. The insurance policy he owned met his needs. He used a health savings account to cover some of the expenses of treatment.Kennedy, 47, works with insurance through his business and has tracked the dramatic increase in insurance rates since the health care law was passed.“Since the Affordable Care Act (was enacted) my rates have gone up more than 200 percent,” Kennedy said.Although Kennedy was not willing to put his private information on the troubled healthcare.gov website, he was able to confirm the costs of a policy he considered buying before Blue Cross Blue Shield gave him the one-year renewal.“I would go from the $5,200 deductible with an HSA-type plan to a $12,700 deductible. And the cost would go from $515 per month to about $980,” Kennedy said.“Coverage was going down by almost two and a half times and the cost was nearly double.”One driver of health insurance costs is the ACA’s requirement that all policies must cover a broad array of treatments that clients will no longer be able to forego. Kennedy said he does not need or want maternity coverage, but the health care law requires it on all policies so that everyone bears the costs.“I’m not happy with this law or what it’s doing to my family and millions of other families,” Kennedy said.He also is concerned that the costs of providing subsidies or full health coverage for everyone in the United States will cause Congress to cover the costs thought higher taxes. As a financial services worker, Kennedy fears that 401(k) plans or other retirement accounts might be in the cross hairs.Hess and Kennedy both say Obama’s reversal, allowing them to keep insurance plans one more year, delays but does not solve their problems.“All they did was kick the can down the road,” Kennedy said.Sticker shock also awaits individuals who are buying insurance for the first time through the new insurance marketplace. With the Dec. 23 deadline looming for anyone who wants health insurance by Jan. 1, people may hurry to choose plans with cheap monthly payments. But they may be surprised, especially if they’ve never had coverage before, to find they’re still on the hook for thousands of dollars in out-of-pocket “deductibles,” a standard part of most insurance policies.Many will find they must pay costs up to $6,350 — on top of their monthly premiums — before their insurance pays anything for actual medical care. If they have a family, they may have to pay nearly $13,000 in an out-of-pocket “deductible” before insurance starts paying.If you don’t know about deductibles, you’re not alone. Only 14 percent of American adults with insurance understand deductibles and other key concepts of insurance plans, according to a study published this year in the Journal of Health Economics.If people with insurance don’t understand it, it’s likely that uninsured Americans’ grasp is even fuzzier. If they make poor decisions when shopping for insurance for the first time, they may be surprised that the law’s promise of affordable care, for them, is still out of reach.People can shop for insurance plans by tiers — bronze, silver, gold and platinum — based on what portion of medical costs are covered. Bronze plans are expected to be popular because they tend to have lower monthly premiums.In Illinois, the health plans available will have deductibles ranging from $3,150 to $6,350, according to an analysis conducted for The Associated Press by Chicago-based Stonegate Advisors, an independent health care consulting company.“People need to look in the mirror and think about what they value most,” said Michael Wolf, director of the health literacy and learning program at Northwestern University’s Feinberg School of Medicine in Chicago. Some will choose peace of mind and not having to worry about big medical bills, he said. Others will want to keep their monthly costs low.