The campaign in the Fourth Congressional District should be a civil debate and not "finger pointing" or "mudslinging," said a Democrat who filed Friday to oppose incumbent Republican U.S. Rep. Vicky Hartzler.

Nate Irvin of Versailles, a 2012 graduate of the University of Central Missouri, became the second Democratic candidate to file to run against Hartzler. The first, Jim White of Pleasant Hill, who filed Wednesday, said just hours after entering the race that he would withdraw to support Irvin.

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Or, use your facebook account: facebook Need an account? Create one now.

Irvin, 25, worked on U.S. Sen. Claire McCaskill's successful 2012 re-election campaign and in Iowa on a referendum campaign since graduating with a degree in political science. Asked to name an issue that showed Hartzler did not deserve another term, Irvin said he was not going to run an attack campaign.

"I don't want to get into a dog fight right out of the gate," he said.

Hartzler, who is seeking her third term, gained statewide notice in 2004 as a leader of the campaign to ban same-sex marriage. During her time in Washington, she has voted numerous times to repeal the Affordable Care Act and supported forcing the government shutdown in August over the health care law.

Irvin said he supports allowing same-sex couples to wed and would seek ways to make the Affordable Care Act better.

"I am going to tell you I am 100 percent, unequivocally for same-sex marriage and equal rights for all Americans," Irvin said.

Hartzler won her seat in 2010 by defeating longtime incumbent U.S. Rep. Ike Skelton. She kept the seat in 2012 after redistricting added Boone and other Central Missouri counties north of the Missouri River to the district. Her 2012 opponent, Cass County Prosecuting Attorney Teresa Hensley, raised substantial money early in the race but was unable to build any momentum with her effort.

Hartzler, R-Harrisonville, won her second term in 2012 with 60 percent of the vote, carrying 23 of 24 counties in the district. She lost only in Boone County.

Hartzler began the year with $437,554 in her campaign account. As of yesterday, Irvin had not created a committee to accept donations to his campaign. "As far as how much money we will need, that is very difficult to say," Irvin said. "Our main focus will be talking directly to people."

Irvin said he wanted to be a voice of moderation, which he said is rare in polarized Washington. "What makes me different and in my opinion makes me better as to what we need in this country at this point in time is my moderation," he said.

Filing closes Tuesday for federal, state and county offices. Two Libertarians, Randall Langkraehr of Warrensburg and Herschel Young of Harrisonville, will face off in the primary.

Irvin will find Boone County Democrats eager to help if he is more than just a name on the ballot, said Homer Page, the party's county chairman. The top priorities for the party will be defeating state Rep. Caleb Rowden in the 44th House District and defeating Hartzler, Page said.

"We need a really vigorous, credible campaign that can go out and raise issues and bring to the voters the weaknesses, the failures of Vicky Hartzler as a representative for Fourth District," he said.