Will Ferrell as Ron Burgundy in “Anchorman 2.” Paramount

Super fans who can’t wait to reunite with Ron Burgundy will get the chance to see him two days earlier than expected.

Paramount Pictures is offering the first-ever nationwide “Superticket” in the U.S. on “Anchorman 2: The Legend Continues,” giving moviegoers the chance to pay extra and see the Will Ferrell sequel before its wide release on Dec. 20.

Supertickets often offer more than just early screenings, and the Viacom studio said pricing and further details will be available when the tickets go on sale Nov. 26. The Superticket will be honored at AMC Theatres and available for purchase on Comcast’s Fandango.com.

The original “Anchorman: The Legend of Ron Burgundy” opened in 2004 and grossed a healthy $85.3 million before enjoying a long shelf life thanks to catchphrases and characters that have become some of Mr. Ferrell’s most popular trademarks. The sequel follows Burgundy, a San Diego news anchor lacking self-awareness, as he and his team try their hand at a 24-hour news channel.

The announcement marks a significant step in Hollywood’s experimentation with premium-priced tickets that include special perks like early screenings or digital downloads. Paramount is the only Hollywood studio to have experimented with such offerings domestically, charging $50 over the summer at five U.S. theaters for a “Mega Ticket” to “World War Z.”

Mega Ticket buyers got to see the Brad Pitt zombie movie two days before its national release and received a digital download when it hit home video. The package also included a poster, small popcorn and branded 3-D glasses. In its limited offering, the program was a success: four of the five theaters that opened for Mega Ticket showings to “World War Z” were at capacity, and a fifth was filled to 80%. Executives at Time Warner’s Warner Bros. have said the studio plans to offer a bundled ticket promotion on a movie at the end of this year or in early 2014.

Until now, nationwide rollouts of bundled theatrical tickets appeared only in Canada as part of a program that the country’s main exhibitor, Cineplex Inc., has done on three films this year. Supertickets at Cineplex tie theatrical tickets to subsequent digital downloads, allowing studios to consolidate marketing budgets and commit moviegoers to owning a home video option before they leave the theater. For a Superticket tied to the summer release “The Smurfs 2,” Cineplex tied an in-theater ticket with a download of the original film in the franchise from Sony Corp.’s Sony Pictures Animation.