Topics: Netflix, the daily dot, Valentines Day, Social News, Technology News, Media News, Business News, Life News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

Valentine’s Day is only a little more than week away, and whether you’re planning an elaborate date with your long-term lover or a solo night celebrating single life, you’re likely to end your evening curled up with Netflix. The streaming service certainly has plenty of romantic viewing options, but have you ever considered what your viewing tastes and Netflix habits say about your love life?

More from The Daily Dot: “How feminists across the globe came together to thwart a men’s rights activist”

Netflix has just released a new study detailing how couples use the site and how tastes can be a reflection of relationship happiness, Complex reports. The company conducted their research by asking users how their viewing habits have impacted their relationships, and the results are likely to ring true for many streaming enthusiasts.

The study found that 25 percent of users are more attracted to potential partners if they like their taste in television. If your profile indicates your love of Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt, The Office, House of Cards, or Breaking Bad, you’ll have particularly good luck attracting interested dates on Netflix.

More from The Daily Dot: “Inside the Facebook group for people addicted to QVC”

Clearly, many have already figured out this strategy—58 percent of users admitted to adding shows and movies to their profiles specifically to appear more attractive to other eligible singles.

And once you’ve landed your dream bingeing buddy? Prepare to engage in some serious discussions. Sixty-five percent of couples who watch Netflix negotiate which shows they’re going to watch together, while 35 percent compromise with trade-offs. As for sharing those coveted account passwords? Fifty-one percent of users see that step as a sign of serious commitment. But some users (17 percent) want a ring on it before sharing their coveted password.