Martin Van Buren (Photo: stocksnapper, Getty Images/iStockphoto) Story Highlights "Little magician" was overshadowed by Andrew Jackson, but he was important in American politics.

It is fitting as we experience a truly compelling presidential campaign to remember the man we can thank for helping create this political madness: Martin Van Buren.

While not a name that leaps to mind at the time of year when we commemorate the birthdays of George Washington and Abraham Lincoln, Van Buren continues to influence the nation in significant ways.

Born in New York in 1782, Van Buren held a number of important positions — U.S. senator, New York governor, secretary of state and vice president under Andrew Jackson — prior to becoming president in 1837.

His administration suffered from a severe economic depression, which is one of the reasons that Americans tend to forget him. Following the powerful personality of Old Hickory in office also makes it easy to overlook Van Buren.

But Van Buren was called the Little Magician for a reason. He was a masterful political strategist.

He was the one who looked at the United States in the mid-1820s and envisioned a nation with a competitive two-party political system, one that substituted, as he told Richmond, Va., newspaper editor Thomas Ritchie, “party principle for personal preference.”

During a time when sectionalism threatened to tear apart the country, he wanted voters to have to choose whether they would allow that threat to continue by favoring their region or if they would embrace “the fairly expressed will of the party” as a way to maintain national unity.

Cumberland University Professor Mark Cheathem (Photo: Submitted)

The solution, in his mind, was to force voters to pick a political party and allow the parties to constrain the emotions and violence that otherwise might destroy the United States. Of course, for Van Buren, the only party that mattered was the Democratic party. It was the party that captured the true essence of what the Founding Fathers intended.

Looking at the current Republican and Democratic presidential campaigns, we can question the wisdom of Van Buren’s vision as it has developed.

Were he alive today, with social media and 24/7 news cycles, even he might wonder if he charted the correct political course for the nation.

Or, maybe he would see that it is working just as he intended.

Instead of revolutions, coups d’etat, or putsches, our presidential candidates fight it out verbally in debate venues, town halls and public meetings across the United States.

It is an imperfect system, but its longevity suggests that maybe the Little Magician was right.

Mark R. Cheathem, Ph.D., is professor of history and project director/co-editor of the new Papers of Martin Van Buren project located at Cumberland University.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1TiVppM