Topics: 2016 GOP primary, 2016 Republican primary, Affordable Care Act, Conservatives, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, healthcare, Healthcare Reform, Obamacare, Republicans, Ted Cruz, Elections News, News, Politics News

New York Magazine’s Ed Kilgore wrote a smart piece over the weekend pointing out that the quality Republicans fear most in Donald Trump is his willingness to cut deals. Trump’s alleged deal-making acumen is among his chief selling points on the campaign trail – we’re all getting suckered on trade deals with Mexico and nuclear deals with Iran, but President Trump will come in, renegotiate everything, and extract every concession while giving up nothing in return. The famously gregarious Trump will also get along with everyone, even Vladimir Putin. There’s going to be so much bonhomie, you won’t believe it.

This prospect terrifies the GOP, Kilgore notes, because they don’t want a dealmaker in the Oval Office. They want someone who will administer cleansing fire to the Obama administration’s legacy. They want a president who will reflexively sign every experiment in trickle-down public policy that Paul Ryan can dream up. But Trump’s campaign keeps talking about “bipartisan” solutions and the candidate himself keeps deviating from accepted conservative orthodoxy on critical issue areas – recall that he’s the only Republican candidate who says he supports some form of government-assisted healthcare for the sick and the poor. Trump’s politics are difficult to scrutinize, but he has little grounding in conservative thought and zero loyalty to the Republican establishment, which makes it likely that he’d be open to straying from Republican orthodoxy.

Another interesting scenario to contemplate is how the Republicans might fare under the presidency of Trump’s only viable Republican challenger: Ted Cruz. When it comes to cutting deals and making compromises, the Texas senator is Trump’s opposite. Cruz will make no deals, he will accept no compromises, and he will make no effort to ingratiate himself to powerbrokers. This philosophy of his applies equally to both Democrats and Republicans – Cruz has spent healthy chunks of his time in the Senate blasting GOP leaders for being cowards who refuse to stand up for conservative principles. If he maintains this hardline stance as president, things could get a bit tricky for the GOP on domestic policy.