One-fifth of all U.S. children live in food-insecure households

A pledge, on the part of U.S. President Barack Obama to eradicate childhood hunger in the United States by 2015, has fallen noticeably short. "Needless to say, the nation is not close to eliminating childhood hunger in this - the target - year," Food Research and Action Center researchers in the report "A Plan of Action to End Hunger in America," said this week.

LOS ANGELES, CA (CALIFORNIA NETWORK) - According to the Department of Agriculture, approximately one-fifth of all U.S. children live in food-insecure households. Food security is defined as "access to enough food for an active, healthy life for all household members." However, as of last year, 15.4 percent of Americans live in food-insecure households, which is a total of more than 48 million people.



Bad timing, the center argues, is the chief reason for the program's failed goals. The number of food insecure persons spiked in the immediate aftermath of the 2008 financial collapse. These percentages were only relieved modestly, with a peak of 16.6 percent in 2009.





The federal government, in order to meet these goals hastily enacted an emergency expansion of SNAP, or Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, or "food stamps." However, food stamp disbursements began to decline again in 2013 when the White House rerouted SNAP funding into a federal school lunch program. An automatic $5 billion cut to SNAP benefits labeled the "hunger cliff" by food assistance charities, was the result.



FRAC's plan recommends renewed investment in SNAP benefits along with child nutrition programs.



Again, not long after the $5 billion food stamp cut, Obama signed into law an agricultural omnibus bill that sought to cut an additional $8.7 billion from the program. In response, several governors took action to prevent the cuts from taking effect in their states.



Prominent Republican legislators have suggested fundamentally restructuring the SNAP program that would result in fewer benefits. Republicans Paul Ryan, a former vice presidential candidate and Senator Lindsey Graham, a candidate in the 2016 Republican primary for president, both touted this approach.



[media id="12303]

Massachusetts Democrat, Representative Jim McGovern, as well as a leading opponent of food stamp cuts in the House, says, "Americans will be listening closely to find out which candidates are ready to give struggling families a hand up by tackling poverty, hunger, and many of the other challenges we face."



A McGovern aide said the congressional representative "has spoken with senior Clinton campaign officials to discuss the need to address hunger and those conversations were positive."

---

The California Network is the Next Wave in delivery of information and entertainment on pop culture, social trends, lifestyle, entertainment, news, politics and economics. We are hyper-focused on one audience, YOU, the connected generation. JOIN US AS WE REDEFINE AND REVOLUTIONIZE THE EVER-CHANGING MEDIA LANDSCAPE.