Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share The national weather forecast for Thursday, May 19th calls for more wet weather in the South, light showers in New England and in the Pacific Northwest. Meanwhile, the Midwest will see some pleasant, but cooler, weather.

UnitedHealthcare will stop selling its Oxford health insurance plans on New Jersey's individual Obamacare exchange, the company said Wednesday, as part of a strategy to leave markets where it is losing money. (Photo: Creatas Images, Getty Images)

LIVE COVERAGE: Donald Trump holds New Jersey rally

With the New Jersey primaries around the corner, Donald Trump is scheduled to appear with Gov. Chris Christie at a rally in Lawrence Township today.

Trump's companies have history of tax troubles

While Donald J. Trump refuses to release his federal tax returns, saying his tax rate is “none of your business,” a USA TODAY analysis found Trump’s businesses have been involved in at least 100 lawsuits and other disputes related to unpaid taxes or how much tax his businesses owe.

France: EgyptAir flight crashed over Mediterranean Sea

French President Francois Hollande confirmed Thursday that an EgyptAir flight from Paris to Cairo carrying 66 passengers and crew crashed over the Mediterranean Sea, although he said it was too early to determine the cause of the accident.

UnitedHealthcare dumps NJ Obamacare plan

UnitedHealthcare will stop selling its Oxford health insurance plans on New Jersey's individual Obamacare exchange, the company said Wednesday, as part of a strategy to leave states where it is losing money.

Shore Reg'l will hire interim business chief

The Shore Regional High School Board of Education will seek an interim business administrator to run the school's financial affairs following the abrupt resignation of Dennis Kotch.

Jersey Shore tourism; nobody's in charge

The Jersey Shore Convention & Visitors Bureau has no funding, no executive director and no website, leaving the promotion of the Shore's tourism industry to Monmouth and Ocean counties – and individual towns and businesses.

Lakewood rejects 'monster' building downtown

In the end, a developer’s plans to elevate part of the downtown shopping district never got off the ground. The proposal called for demolishing an existing row of storefronts and second-floor apartments at First Street and Clifton Avenue and replacing the building with a five-story, retail and office complex.

WATCH: Trump flags keep flying; charges dropped

Joseph Hornick will be able to fly his Trump political flags at his West Long Branch home without retribution, after the borough municipal prosecutor on Wednesday dismissed a summons alleging he violated a borough ordinance.

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1TpdiBp