Affordable Care Act: Passed by Congress in 2010, the Affordable Care Act required the vast majority of Americans to get health insurance, and it established state and federal marketplaces where consumers could buy coverage. In Arizona, more than a half-million people secured health insurance during the federal law’s first two years, either from the federal marketplace or the state’s expanded Medicaid program. The act also barred health insurers from denying coverage to the sick and required them to justify rate hikes of more than 10 percent. The health-care law remains a hot topic of debate in both Congress and in the Arizona Legislature, and has faced numerous court challenges. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic) Story Highlights Arizona spent the lowest amount in the nation in a recent study period for Medicaid long-term care costs.

Yet Medicaid budget pressures will mount for Arizona and other states as populations age, according to Moody's.

Arizona has done a good job of curtailing Medicaid long-term care costs, according to a study. But pressures will mount, with Arizona's 65-and-up population rising at the fastest rate in the nation.

Arizona faces steep potential budget pressures in providing care for people over 65, yet so far the state's government has met the challenge.

That's the upshot of a new analysis by Moody's Investors Services that indicates Arizona has controlled Medicaid spending on long-term care for the 65-and-up population. Compared with national long-term care spending increases averaging 6.5 percent a year from 1999 to 2009, the period of the study, Arizona was one of six states that held its spending rate below 4 percent, Moody's said.

Arizona's average spending increase of 2.3 percent a year over that period was third lowest of the 50 states, and Arizona spent substantially less on Medicaid long-term care per capita than any other state — about $19 per person here compared with a national median of $335.

MORE: Arizona lawmakers enjoy prime health-care benefits

States generally control long-term care expenses by offering less-costly alternatives to traditional nursing homes such as home- and community-based care, Moody's said.

Still, states including Arizona will face pressure to increase spending on Medicaid long-term care as the population ages. In fact, Arizona is expected to have the highest growth rate in its 65-and-older population, which is projected to surge 65 percent by 2024, compared with 34 percent for the nation overall.

Moody's predicts seven state governments will be especially challenged by Medicaid long-term care costs — Alaska, Delaware, Maine, Minnesota, New Hampshire, North Carolina and Oregon.

Controlling these costs isn't easy to achieve, Moody's said, noting that changes by states in Medicaid services require federal government approval while local politics can make it hard to cut spending.

"The electoral power of a growing elderly population and the political influence of long-term care providers are hurdles to reform," Moody's said.

Long-term care represents about 28 percent of overall Medicaid spending, Moody's said.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1Suv06z