Bob Hanna, previously suspended in sex-harassment case, retires

A University of Colorado philosophy professor previously found in violation of the school's sexual harassment policy retired over winter break, the latest departure from a department still reeling from the release of a scathing report describing a climate that was unfriendly to women.

Tenured professor Bob Hanna, 57, retired Dec. 31 after more than two decades on the Boulder campus.

Multiple sources with knowledge of the situation confirmed to the Daily Camera that Hanna was investigated twice by CU's Office of Discrimination and Harassment in recent years. He was suspended without pay for a semester in 2013 for sexual harassment and unprofessional conduct, sources said.

The sources spoke to the Camera on condition of anonymity out of fear of retaliation.

Hanna made frequent unwanted romantic advances, often in the form of emails, toward women in the philosophy field, including faculty and students in the department at CU, sources confirmed.

Approached at his house in south Boulder, Hanna declined to comment.

"I'm not saying anything," he said.

Salary and performance ratings provided by CU show that Hanna received an "A" grade for his performance for several straight years until 2012-2013, when he was given a "D" grade.

Hanna's annual salary rate was $106,923 this year, according to CU spokesman Ryan Huff.

Advertisement

Huff told the Camera that Hanna was suspended without pay during the fall of 2013, but would not elaborate.

"I cannot discuss the reasons for the suspension, as it relates to personnel actions," Huff said.

Hanna originally came to CU as an assistant professor in 1989, according to his curriculum vitae. He left in 1995, but returned in 1999. He was promoted to full professor in 2005.

Patrick O'Rourke, chief legal officer for the CU system, said Hanna did not receive a settlement or any other payout in connection with his retirement.

Though the independent report released in January 2014 summarizing sexual harassment, bullying and other unprofessional behavior did not name faculty members or students, it describes specific problems in the department.

Email, for example, was pointed out as a "nexus for incivility and disrespect."

"Both students and faculty need better training or information regarding appropriate email etiquette," according to the report, which was authored by members of the American Philosophical Association Committee on the Status of Women Site Visit Program.

Hanna's views

In an essay published online at Academia.edu in October titled "Sexual McCarthyism, Polyamory and the First Amendment," Hanna wrote about CU's Office of Discrimination and Harassment, which investigates incidents involving employees.

Hanna emailed a link to the essay to philosophy faculty and graduate students, and encouraged them to share it "as widely as you like." The paper has since been removed from Academia.edu.

"Even being accused of wanting to have an intimate, romantic relationship with another academic person ... is subject to investigation by the ODH and punishment by the university, including being fired, suspended or otherwise disciplined, and also informally or formally blacklisted," he wrote.

Hanna went on to write that the sexual harassment "label" at CU is applied to everything from "originally welcomed but ex-post-facto-unwanted expressions of romantic affection over e-mail, and funny or not-so-very-funny jokes that someone took the wrong way, to rape."

He added that if a sexual harassment complaint "doesn't stick," professors can still be charged with unprofessional conduct. Hanna also wrote that a complainant "always gets the benefit of all the doubts" during a CU investigation, and that people use sexual harassment complaints as "effective weapons for silencing and terrorizing other academic people."

"I know this first-hand, because it has happened in my own department several times in recent years," Hanna wrote.

Department in crisis

Hanna's departure comes on the heels of several other recent cases involving philosophy faculty.

Brad Monton, an associate philosophy professor accused of violating the school's amorous relationship policy, reached an agreement with CU in November. He'll get paid for the rest of the current academic year without having to work, and will receive a $120,000 settlement in exchange for his resignation.

The university moved to fire David Barnett last summer after he was accused of retaliating against a female philosophy graduate student who reported being sexually assaulted by another student.

Barnett denies the accusations, is battling to keep his job and has demanded $2 million from CU for defamation and other claims.

A report that could help determine Barnett's future is due in early January, according to university officials.

Also this year, CU banished philosophy professor Dan Kaufman from campus for more than two months. He was reinstated after being evaluated by a violence expert, and is also seeking $2 million from the campus.

Those four professors — Hanna, Monton, Barnett and Kaufman — have drawn much of the attention since the release one year ago of the independent report describing problems in the department.

Some have criticized the CU administration for releasing the report and for taking action against men in the department.

Others, including women in the department, wrote in a Daily Camera letter to the editor that they are grateful to the university for taking "strong and decisive action to investigate wrongdoing" and "for committing significant resources to punish those found in violation of university regulations."

After a yearlong hiatus, the university decided in October to reopen graduate admissions in philosophy, despite perceived reputational harm to the department.

The recent departures and pending case against Barnett, coupled with an expected new class of graduate students next fall, has given hope for a fresh start to many professors, who have at times feared the collapse of the department.

"Although the process has been and continues to be painful, we believe that the outcome will be positive," the female members of the department wrote in the letter to the editor.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta