ASSOCIATED PRESS

So, that happened. This week, let's talk about you. What kind of stuff do you like to read on this site, and how do we provide it when Congress takes off a day early to avoid a snow storm? Senior Politics Editor Paige Lavender explains.

Listen to this week's "So, That Happened" below:



* * *

Some highlights from this week:

“We have an audience that loves to read about politics affecting actual human beings, and not just hearing about goings-on from the Hill. Whenever we have 'real-people stories,' we feature those pretty heavily.” -- Paige Lavender

Meanwhile, the Supreme Court took up a challenge to Obamacare. If you like your health insurance, will you get to keep it? We talked to health care reporter Jeff Young about how nine people in robes could become the Affordable Care Act's final death panel.

“John Roberts had a chance to kill this thing three years ago. He chose not to, and went to great lengths to do so and made a lot of people very upset. So why do it now in such a weird way over such an arcane dispute?” -- Jeff Young

Finally, you might have heard that Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker (R) doesn't know whether President Barack Obama is a Christian, but did you know Walker kicked labor unions right in the collective bargaining unit this week? Labor reporter Dave Jamieson tells us all about it.

“Here’s the thing. Walker has called private sector unions his partner in economic development. A lot of people thought he didn’t want this, and the reason is that he’s already famous for breaking unions.” -- Dave Jamieson

* * *

"So, That Happened" is available on iTunes. We've been working to create an eclectic and informative panel show that's constantly evolving, a show that's as in touch with the top stories of the week as it is with important stories that go underreported. We'll be here on a weekly basis, bringing you the goods.

Never miss an episode: Subscribe to "So, That Happened" on iTunes, and if you like what you hear, please leave a review. We also encourage you to check out other HuffPost Podcasts: HuffPost Comedy's "Too Long; Didn't Listen," the HuffPost Weird News Podcast, HuffPost Politics' "Drinking and Talking," HuffPost Live's "Fine Print" and HuffPost Entertainment's Podcast.

This podcast was edited by Ibrahim Balkhy and engineered by Brad Shannon, with assistance from Christine Conetta and Adriana Usero.

Have a story you'd like to hear discussed on "So, That Happened"? Email us at your convenience!

Also on HuffPost: Scott Walker Pointing Fingers Scott Walker Pointing Fingers

1 of 10 Scott Walker FILE - In this Jan. 3, 2011, file photo Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker speaks at an inauguration ceremony at the state Capitol in Madison, Wis. More than a year after the standoff over union rights that rocked Wisconsin and the nation for weeks, the Republican Governor will face Milwaukee's Democratic Mayor Tom Barrett in Tuesday's recall election. (AP Photo/Morry Gash, File) Share this slide:

AP