Photo

WASHINGTON — Speaker Paul D. Ryan said on Sunday that, through compromise, Republicans had advanced key priorities since he took office just a month and a half ago and readied themselves to reopen contentious fights over the Affordable Care Act and funding for Planned Parenthood when Congress returns early next year.

Sounding optimistic after the passage of a $1.8 trillion spending and tax cut package on Friday, Mr. Ryan acknowledged that divided government means that Republicans were not in a position to achieve all their goals, but had succeeded in bringing relief to American taxpayers and business owners.

“We fought for as much as we could get,” Mr. Ryan said in an interview aired on the NBC News program “Meet the Press.” “We advanced our priorities and principles. Not every single one of them, but many of them. And then we’re going to pick up next year and pick up where we left off and keep going for more.”

President Obama quickly signed the spending and tax measure into law before he and both Houses departed Washington for the year-end holiday recess.

Mr. Ryan praised several measures in the omnibus spending package, including the end to a 40-year ban on crude oil exports, cuts in funding for the Environmental Protection Agency and billions of dollars in tax breaks. He also praised his colleagues for passing a multiyear highway funding bill and another to replace No Child Left Behind, a 2002 law that had given the federal government a greater role in primary and secondary education.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And while congressional Democrats and the White House claimed victory last week for stalling Republican legislative efforts to cut funding for Planned Parenthood and dismantle the Affordable Care Act, Mr. Ryan said those issues will be atop the Republican Party’s agenda when the House returns from recess in January.

Echoing comments he made Thursday, Mr. Ryan also said he would make a priority of restoring a “more orderly appropriations” process in 2016.

Mr. Ryan said he would meet over a meal with Mr. Obama early next year to try to “find common ground without compromising principles.” He singled out criminal justice reform as a potential area in which the two leaders could act.

At several points, Mr. Ryan reasserted his pledge to lead the Republican majority with a more optimistic tone and an eye toward presenting clear policy alternatives to Democrats heading into an election year. He said he expected Republicans competing for the party’s presidential nomination to eventually do the same.

When asked, Mr. Ryan would not say whether he intended to remain in the speaker’s office after the election should Republicans retain a majority in the House.

“I just haven’t been thinking about it,” he said. “I stepped into the breach, stepped up when I had a duty and an obligation to do so. I’m excited about the potential. I’m excited about the opportunity.”

The Senate majority leader, Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, echoed Mr. Ryan’s year-end optimism in his own television appearance Sunday morning, lauding what he called an “extraordinarily accomplished first year for the new Senate majority” even amid the realities of divided government.

“The Senate is back to work,” Mr. McConnell said on CNN’s “State of the Union.” “We are voting again. We’re passing budgets again.”

Increased domestic spending advocated by Democrats and included in the package was necessary given Republicans desire to increase spending on defense, Mr. McConnell said, deflecting criticism from deficit-conscious conservatives.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Nobody’s a dictator here,” he said. “We can’t do things with one party only in the time of divided government.”