Topics: Affirmative Action, Antonin Scalia, Clarence Thomas, constitution, Editor's Picks, joan biskupic, John Roberts, Justice, Latino, Sonia Sotomayor, Stephen Breyer, Supreme Court, News, Politics News

Keeping in mind that most of us are still a bit fuzzy on the whole three branches of government thing, it shouldn’t be a surprise to find that Justice Sonia Sotomayor, despite being the first Latina member in the high court’s history, remains something of a mystery to most Americans. The fact that the Supreme Court is infamously tight-lipped and secretive — so much so that we often only find out the real story behind historic cases decades after they’ve occurred — certainly doesn’t help.

But while many Americans may still not have much of a feel for Justice Sotomayor, journalist and author Joan Biskupic’s new biography, “Breaking In: The Rise of Sonia Sotomayor and the Politics of Justice,” makes a persuasive case that the Court’s first Latina is already having great influence over the legal questions that, whether they know it or not, influence all Americans’ lives. And she’s doing it, in part, by shaking up one of the most staid and conservative institutions in the world.

Earlier this week, Salon called up Biskupic to discuss Sotomayor’s growing influence as well as how her life story reflects that of Latinos in America more generally. Our conversation is below, and has been edited for clarity and length.

First off, what made you want to write about Justice Sotomayor? You’ve written about other Supreme Court Justices before, of course; but was there anything about her, specifically, that intrigued you? Or was it more about her historic role as the first Latina Justice in the history of the Court?

I was more interested in the connection between her rise and her life and her career and the parallel rise of Latinos in America. I didn’t want to do a straight biography because she’s so new to the Court; in that way, this differs from my books on Justice O’Connor and Justice Scalia.

Here she was, born in 1954, the year of Brown v. Board of Education — but also the year of Hernandez v. Texas, when the Supreme Court for the first time said that Hispanics could be a protected class of people, just like African-Americans — and then she enters Princeton in ’72, the year of the secretary of labor’s instruction to universities and colleges to increase their minority representation. In 1978, the year of Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, she’s finishing up at Yale Law and being asked whether she got into both Princeton and Yale just because she was Puerto Rican … So pivotal points in her own life [alinged with] pivotal points in the trajectory of Latinos in America.

But then I realized how much she had been an agent for herself from her earliest days of getting on the bench. Democratic Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan had been the one who brought her to the attention of then-President George H.W. Bush, and she had been very actively following that nomination process in the early ’90s, then had been very active in helping to win a floor vote for her elevation to the Second Circuit Court of Appeals in 1998. I liked tracking her as a political figure as well as a person who represented this ethnic milestone [in the history of the Court].

As she’s presented in the book, she’s a pretty complicated and interesting person, someone who could be both ambitious and strategic on the one hand while showing vulnerability and humanity on the other. How did she balance those aspects of her personality during her rise? Did she kind of keep her head down the whole time or was she more aggressive than that?

That’s a great phrase — “keep her head down” — because I use that to characterize her early childhood life. She did keep her head down. She was a dutiful daughter going through Catholic school for elementary and high school. But she learned to work the channels [of power].

She didn’t disrupt situations as a young person or even in college; I compare her to students at Stanford who walked out when they didn’t like the graduation speaker (who happened to be Daniel Patrick Moynihan). She worked through channels, she wrote letters, she understood the system. So what she did is she learned how to be very assertive on her own behalf and very assertive on behalf of other Latinas and minorities who she was with in school or the workplace.

And it was a careful balance. She came along at a time when, fortunately for her, the nation was readier for more of a Hispanic presence, and she took advantage of that. She stands up and boldly says, “I was the perfect affirmative-action baby” — quite in contrast to Clarence Thomas, her colleague on the Supreme Court who feels that affirmative-action has stigmatized many people.

In terms of how she dealt with people, she’s a generation behind justices Ginsberg and O’Connor, and she didn’t have to be as cautious with the way she presented herself [as they did]. First, she’s a woman from the Bronx; she’s got more Scalia in her than she might want to acknowledge. She’s used to mixing things up … The Court is a very tradition-bound environment where most justices come from different backgrounds than the one Justice Sotomayor came from. They came from backgrounds of privilege; and I think she’s probably the first justice from a housing project.