Jason Stein meets with Bonnie Beach, the woman he helped save with CPR on a sidewalk in Madison in May. This happier meeting was at Panera Bread in Madison earlier this month. Credit: Photo courtesy of Bonnie Beach

Bonnie Beach has seen the scary statistics on surviving cardiac arrest and knows how lucky she is to be alive.

Her own heart attack not only failed to take her from us, it has led to a budding friendship with the two strangers who rushed to her side when she collapsed on the street in Madison in May.

One of those men, I'm proud to say, is a colleague of mine at the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Capitol reporter Jason Stein. He did CPR on Bonnie as a second passer-by, Jefren Olsen, called 911 and relayed instructions to Jason from a dispatcher on the phone.

"Don't stop. Keep going," the surprisingly calm Dane County dispatcher said. And Jason did just that, performing chest compressions until paramedics arrived.

"After a few seconds of Jason starting, you could tell she was coming back. So it was pretty dramatic," Jefren said.

Jason checked on Bonnie's progress in the weeks that followed. On July 3 they met in person, at Panera Bread in Madison, for the first time since that spring day on the sidewalk.

"He came up and he had a bouquet of flowers, and I just lost it," said Bonnie, who is 64. "There he was giving me a hug and telling me everything was going to be OK. It's like we knew each other forever."

Bonnie and Jefren also have been in touch and are hoping to meet in person. I wouldn't recommend a heart attack as a way to make new friends, but it's working that way for her.

Jason, 38, prefers writing the news to being the subject of an article himself.

"I would stress," he said, "how Bonnie could have only been saved by a whole chain of people — from Jefren and me, to the dispatcher, cops, EMTs and especially the surgeons, who apparently performed a near miracle on the operating table."

Doctors were putting in a stent when Bonnie's heart suddenly ruptured. She lost much of her blood and nearly died.

She has been told her heart will never function at full capacity again, but there was no brain damage.

She spent two weeks in the hospital and five more weeks in a rehab unit before she ever made it home to her Madison condo. Now she straps on a defibrillator vest every day in case this happens again. Her hope is to return to work.

Bonnie, who is single but has stepchildren and a grandson, said she had a smaller heart attack a few days before the sidewalk scene. She woke up with a sore esophagus and throat along with some pain in her arms. She thought maybe it was acid reflux, and kept going about her day.

The morning of May 6, she parked her car and was walking along W. Main St. to her job at the downtown Rotary Club of Madison. Suddenly, she felt lightheaded.

"I just knew I was going down. The last thing I remember was calling out and saying, 'Someone please help me! I think I'm having a heart attack!'"

That's where Jason picks up the story. He was riding his bicycle toward the Capitol. In a twist of fate, he was running later than usual because of a task at home.

Jason heard a woman cry out.

"I hopped off my bike and came toward her to tell her not to worry, I'd help. But as she tried to sit down on a low window ledge, she began to just slump unconscious to the sidewalk. I got there just in time to grab her and keep her head from smacking the pavement," he said.

Now it was Jason calling for help. Jefren, 53, who was biking to his job as a public defender, saw the commotion, stopped and called 911. At one point, he set down the phone and helped Jason roll Bonnie on her back.

"It sounds melodramatic," Jason said, "and I didn't really know, but I felt like someone's grandmother was dying beside me on the sidewalk. I was very conscious of the fact that someone's loved one might slip away if I couldn't do something. I had taken CPR a few years back, so I knew that I didn't need to do mouth-to-mouth, just chest compressions. But I hesitated a second. 'Why the hell didn't I retake CPR?' I was thinking. And 'We've got to get this woman to a hospital.'"

Police and paramedics arrived quickly and took over the lifesaving efforts, a tremendous relief to Jason and Jefren. Bonnie's color had improved and she was breathing again. Half in a daze, Jason resumed his ride to work.

He called police to find out if Bonnie had survived. Madison police have nominated both men for a citizen recognition award.

"I guess if I'm going to show up in a Madison police incident report, this is a best-case scenario," Jason joked.

Bonnie hopes her story will inspire people to learn CPR and to know more about heart disease, America's No.1 killer. Men are more likely to have crushing chest pain during a heart attack; women's symptoms are more subtle — nausea, fatigue, dizziness, sweating, and pain in the right arm, neck and jaw.

More than anything, Bonnie is grateful to Jason, Jefren and everyone who saved her life on a sunny Tuesday morning.

Jason holds a special place, appropriately, in her heart.

"He wants to stay in touch," and so does she, Bonnie said. "He said, 'If you ever need anything heavy moved, give me a call.' It's like we adopted each other. I could be his mom, for sure."

Call Jim Stingl at (414) 224-2017 or email at jstingl@jrn.com