Sen. Ted Cruz (Photo: U.S. Senate Photographic Studio-Frank Fey, U.S. Senate Photographic Studio-Frank Fey)

Name:

Rafael Edward "Ted" Cruz

Birth date:

Dec. 22, 1970

Education:

Bachelor's degree, public policy, 1992, Princeton University.

Law degree, 1995, Harvard Law School.

Family:

Wife: Heidi, managing director at Goldman Sachs.

Two children: Caroline and Catherine.

Current home: Houston, Texas.

Websites:

Tedcruz.org

Cruz.Senate.gov

Twitter.com/Tedcruz

Twitter.com/SenTedCruz

Facebook.com/SenatorTedCruz

Facebook.com/tedcruzpage

Elective office:

U.S. senator representing Texas, 2013-present: He won the open Senate seat vacated by retiring Republican Kay Bailey Hutchison after beating the favored candidate, Texas Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, in a GOP primary runoff election. His victory has been called the biggest upset of the 2012 election cycle.

Other career highlights:

Was a law clerk for then-U.S. Supreme Court Chief Justice William Rehnquist.

Was the first Latino solicitor general of Texas.

During his time as solicitor general and in private practice, he authored 80 U.S. Supreme Court briefs and argued nine oral arguments before the High Court.

Worked at the Federal Trade Commission and U.S. Department of Justice during the George W. Bush administration.

Was a policy adviser to Bush's 2000 presidential campaign.

Key Iowa allies:

Bryan English, long-serving conservative activist in Iowa. Serving as state director of Cruz campaign.

Jeff Roe, Missouri-based political consultant; worked on Mike Huckabee's 2008 campaign. Serving as campaign manager.

Matt Schultz, former Iowa Secretary of State and current Madison County attorney. Serving as campaign chair.

Steve Deace, talk radio host

Known for:

His sharp conservatism, his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, his intelligence and his rhetorical skills as a lawyer who has argued many cases in front of the nation's highest courts.

Spoke from the Senate floor for 21 hours in September 2013 in a move that had no procedural effect but brought national attention to his opposition to the Affordable Care Act, the health care law also known as Obamacare.

Cruz and his hard-line opposition to the Affordable Care Act were also at the center of the political stalemate that led to a two-week government shutdown in late 2013. When the government reopened, Democrats and Republicans alike blamed Cruz for the shutdown, although many agreed he was not politically damaged by the incident.

Cruz was the first candidate from either party to jump into the 2016 presidential race. Cruz formally announced his candidacy on March 23, 2015.

Top issues:

Repealing Obamacare: Cruz has made "repealing every word of Obamacare" a cornerstone of his stump speeches and campaign. Barring a full repeal of the health care law, Cruz has said states should be given the choice whether to opt into the system.

Tax reform: Cruz has called for abolishing the Internal Revenue Service and installing a flat tax. He has said the tax system should be simple enough that Americans can fill out their taxes on a postcard.

Religious liberty: Cruz has said a radicalized left is attacking freedom of religion in the U.S. and has generally criticized members of his own party for backing down from supporting religious rights. He has also disparaged the Supreme Court decision that permits same-sex marriage across the United States.

Things you might not know:

Cruz's father, Rafael Cruz, is an immigrant from Cuba who fled the 1959 revolution there and is now an evangelical pastor who often appears as a speaker at social conservative political events.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IIy1bK