Sen. Brian Kelsey is pitching a pair of bills aimed at reforming Tennessee health care infrastructure in the wake of Insure Tennessee defeat.

Buy Photo State Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, is proposing a pair of bills that would reform health care in the state in accordance with “conservative” ideals. Kelsey voted against Gov. Bill Haslam’s Insure Tennessee health care coverage plan on Feb. 4. (Photo: Steven S. Harman / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights One bill would allow Tennesseans to buy insurance plans in other states

Kelsey proposes to replace TennCare with 'personal health savings accounts'

Kelsey remains opposed to a Tennessee-run health insurance exchange

Cross-border plan raises initial questions over quality control

Sen. Brian Kelsey, R-Germantown, is proposing two bills to reform the state's health care infrastructure in the wake of Insure Tennessee's defeat.

Under one bill, Kelsey is proposing to allow Tennesseans to buy insurance plans that are for sale on insurance exchanges in other states. The open border approach — which would require agreements between states, according to the bill — would widen the breadth of plans from which Tennesseans could choose, Kelsey said.

Kelsey, who also is sponsoring a bill that would prevent Tennessee from establishing its own exchange, wants to see Tennesseans have access to the most affordable health care regardless of where the insurance plan is offered — and regardless of whether Tennesseans send money out of state to buy the plans.

"I'm concerned about getting Tennesseans the most affordable plan for their budget. That's more important to me than protecting insurance companies' bottom line," Kelsey said.

A cross-border approach raises a bevy of questions and concerns, health care industry professionals say. "We are evaluating the proposed legislation," said a spokesman for the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance, which licenses health insurance companies in the state. Insurance companies are governed state by state — there is no federal agency that regulates insurance — so an insurance company could offer a plan from out of state and that may not necessarily meet Tennessee standards.

"It's a whole different ballgame in terms of regulatory oversight. You're depending on a foreign commissioner to provide oversight," said Richard Cowart, chairman of law firm Baker Donelson's health and public policy department.

Another concern that comes up with out-of-state plans is access to medical networks. "Typically everybody stays within their own states," said Keith Dennen of law firm Dickinson Wright, emphasizing that network access becomes a question.

Insurance companies with plans for sale in other states that opened to Tennessee residents would have to make sure Tennessee-based doctors were in their network, Kelsey said. He wants to see Tennesseans have broader access to choices but remains opposed to creating a state-run exchange if the King vs. Burwell case at the U.S. Supreme Court finds that tax credits are not available on the federal health insurance exchange.

The increased number of plans will make plans more affordable even if credits on the federal exchange are no longer available, he said. "My goal is to address the health care problem in Tennessee and America by going the opposite way of Obamacare," Kelsey said. "That's why I'm advocating both strategies at the same time: to attack Obamacare in the U.S. Supreme Court and to offer conservative reform to health care."

Kelsey's proposal is akin to legislation that U.S. Rep. Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn., is sponsoring that would allow interstate insurance exchanges.

The other bill would establish personal health savings accounts in lieu of Medicaid. The plan would credit federal money into participants' accounts that would be used for treatment. Kelsey said this would replace the traditional Medicaid and TennCare programs.

The proposal would not be effective upon passing the General Assembly. It would require an amendment to the TennCare waiver, said a spokeswoman for TennCare.

Kelsey wrote in an open letter to Tennessee's congressional delegates in Washington, D.C., that he wants them to pass laws bolstering state governance of health care and push for approval of block grants for Medicaid funding as antidotes to problems that hospitals and providers suffer under the Affordable Care Act.

Kelsey has heard in the days after the Insure Tennessee defeat from "many hospitals" that are concerned that costs associated with uninsured patients will cause them to close. "This was a problem caused by Washington, so I am requesting that Washington fix the problem," Kelsey wrote.

Both pieces of state legislation are reprisals. The cross-state option was proposed in 2010, while the personal health savings account bill was on the table in 2006. "I plan to repropose now that we have a Republican majority in the Senate and the House," Kelsey told The Tennessean.

Kelsey was one of seven senators on the special session Senate Health and Welfare committee to vote against Insure Tennessee.

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 and on Twitter at @hollyfletcher.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1DVl1hz