Two good prospects for spring: Gai Waterhouse. Photo: Ryan Osland

Gai Waterhouse has returned from Europe hoping she has found the next Fiorente in Royal Ascot placegetter Cafe Society or French buy Pornichet, which will give her a first runner in the US in Saturday's inaugural Belmont Derby Invitational.

The pair came out of the Goffs sale before Royal Ascot but Pornichet, which ran third in the Poule D’Essai des Poulains (or French 2000 Guineas) over 1600 metres at his last start at Longchamp, was a private buy after not reaching his reserve at the sale.

Pornichet, which is a winner on an all-weather track, is believed to have cost €500,000 ($724,000) and Segenhoe and Mount Hallowell studs took an interest in the colt with a view to having a Melbourne Cup runner. The Belmont Derby, which is worth $US1.25 million ($1.32m) and run over 2000m on turf, could give a quick return on the investment and give an indication to his potential

"It is exciting to have a runner in America and he is a lovely horse," Waterhouse said. "I have someone with him and he is going well but we are learning about him. He is a three-year-old that has a very similar rating to Fiorente at the same age, he is 113 and Fiorente 114.

Advertisement

"He will go over have the run in Belmont Derby and then return to Europe and quarantine to be back here for the spring."

Waterhouse identified Cafe Society and Pornichet as possible Melbourne Cup types to follow in the hoofprints of Fiorente from last year. Cafe Society ran into third in the Wolferton Handicap at Royal Ascot and will have another start in Europe before entering quarantine to arrive in Melbourne with the spring.

The European buys will take up some of the spare Tulloch Lodge boxes that have been vacated by stakes performers Law, Whittington and Bull Point, which have moved to the care of Chris Waller in recent times.

"One door closes, another opens," Waterhouse said. "When Denise [Martin's Star Thoroughbreds] moved over to Chris' stable there was always going to be a couple of owners that wanted to go with her. That's what happened [with Law and Whittington].

"A controlling interest of Bull Point was sold to the Inghams and they have their horses trained by Chris, so he moved. It happens in racing and we move on."

Waterhouse's focus is starting to shift to the spring after a wonderful finish to the season, which has netted her seven group 1 wins, six this year.

She had her first Melbourne Cup winner out of her Flemington stable, which has produced 20 winners for the season. It will be closed for the next month for the winter but spring horses will start arriving in August.

Her late-season group 1 winners will provide the base of her team for the spring. Sydney Cup winner The Offer is the early favourite for the Melbourne Cup, while Brisbane group 1 winners Almalad and Cosmic Endeavour will return after short breaks to build on promising careers.

Waterhouse had her first winner for syndicator Round Table last Wednesday when Mr Boomsday strolled home at Canterbury and he is to be set for the Victoria Derby, while Saturday's Rosehill winner Pajaro has a big future, she says.

"I as delighted with the win on Wednesday because Bruce Slade has put so much into Round Table," she said. "He is just good for racing with his enthusiasm and is bringing new people in the sport.

"Mr Boomsday has gone for a short spell but he will be back in the spring because he is a Victoria Derby sort of horse with a lot of potential. Pajaro is a former New Zealander that is going to get better, like a lot of the horses we buy from over there, and I think he has good future as well."