Courtesy of CNN

The 2016 Presidential Election is over a year away, but we may have already found the winner — of the Most Outrageous Candidate ever! Donald Trump announced his campaign with a speech that I know I will never forget. Here are 5 of the most unbelievable things I think Donald said.

Donald Trump, I applaud you. It takes a certain skill to make a Presidential announcement truly memorable. While the 69-year old business icon doesn’t have the years of political experience as the rest of the Republicans running for the 2016 nomination, he certainly has a leg-up on the art of the sound byte. During his speech, The Don said some really unbelievable, head-scratching quotes. Here are the 5 most Outrageous things Donald Trump said during his Presidential Announcement.

Donald’s 2016 Presidential Campaign Announcement speech at Trump Tower in New York City was so full of unforgettable quotes that it was hard to whittle down the list to just five. There were certainly some gems. Whether you agree with his politics or opinions or not, we can agree that Donald certainly made some interesting, it not completely outrageous, comments.

1. “‘Number one – I am a nice person. I give a lot of money away, to charities and other things. I think I’m a very nice person.”

Donald was addressing how a reporter told him, “Mr. Trump, you’re not a nice person,” and wondered how he could get people to vote for him. Thankfully, all it takes is a good charitable donation to get people to like you, according to Donald Trump.

2. “We have a disaster called ‘The Big Lie:’ Obamacare….Deductibles are through the roof. You have to get hit by a tractor — literally, a tractor — to use it!”

So, in according to Donald, in order to use a medical insurance plan from the Affordable Care Act (aka ‘Obamacare’), you need to own a John Deere first. Good to know!

3. “I will build a great, great wall on our southern border and I will make Mexico pay for that wall.”

Securing the southern border between the United States and Mexico is one thing, but making another country foot the bill for our security is another. Look, I know Donald is a good negotiator, but I don’t think he’s going to talk Mexico into paying for everything.

4. “Obamacare kicks in in 2016. Obama’s going to be out playing golf. He might even be on one of my courses, I would invite him, I actually would say. I have the best courses in the world, so I would say — you know what, if he wants to — I have one right next to the White House, right on the Potomac. If he’d like to play, that’s fine. In fact, I’d love him to leave early and play.”

For a moment, it seemed like Donald was running for the President of the Professional Golfers’ Association of America.

5. “I’m really rich.”

Just in case anyone forgot.

Bonus: While this isn’t something Donald said, I think it’s hilarious that he came out on the stage to “Rockin’ In The Free World,” by Neil Young. The song was written as a critique of then-Republican President George H. W. Bush. Also, Neil Young is a confirmed liberal who probably wouldn’t vote for Donald Trump or like him using his music.

What do you think of Donald’s quotes, HollywoodLifers? Did he earn your vote with his announcement?

— Jason Brow

JavaScript is required to load the comments.