What we're working on at the Courier News, Home News Tribune and MyCentralJersey.com April 9 and through the weekend. STAFF VIDEO BY JENNA INTERSIMONE

Officials at a New Jersey high school say they’re upset over a photo on social media showing students playing a “Jews vs. Nazis” drinking game. (Photo: ~File)

PRINCETON - Police are investigating a photo posted on social media that showed students from a New Jersey high school playing a “Jews vs. Nazis” drinking game.

The photo was shared on Snapchat, where one Princeton High School student captured it and wrote about it on her blog. It shows students playing a version of beer pong dubbed “Holocaust Pong” or “Alcoholocaust.” Students can be seen pouring beer into two sets of cups that were arranged in the forms of a Star of David and a swastika.

The 17-year-old student who blogged about the photo, Jamaica Ponder, told NJ.com the students were her classmates.

“They are athletes and student leaders,” Ponder said. “They’re prominent individuals that everybody knows, captains of sports teams.”

The Princeton Police Department said Friday morning that they’ve started an investigation into the circumstances surrounding the photo, NJ.com reported.

Lt. John Bucchere said that possession of alcohol by minors on private property is not a crime.

“However, if there is evidence that someone bought alcohol for minors or provided a place specifically for them to consume it, that is illegal,” Bucchere said.

Princeton Superintendent Steve Cochrane said he’s deeply upset that students engaged in a drinking game with “clearly anti-Semitic” overtones.

“An incident such as this one, forces us to take a hard look at our efforts in educating our children in the values that may be most important to their success in life,” Cochrane said.

He said the district is talking to the students and their families about the photo.

Copyright 2016 The Associated Press. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1S1kTW5