By Bill Poovey

bpoovey@scbiznews.com

Published Oct. 22, 2013

A new Greenville business selling online and telephone access to doctors who can write prescriptions has started signing up customers.

EDocHome is the first of its kind based in Greenville, and South Carolina medical regulators, scrambling to protect traditional patient-doctor relationships, said they are closely watching.

For a $20 registration fee and $25-$30 monthly membership payments, eDocHome members in South Carolina and the 47 other states in the continental U.S. get quick access to consultations with doctors via live, two-way video or by telephone. The $30 service also includes discounts for vision and dental care, lab testing, hearing aids, and diabetic and medical supplies.

Founding partners Linda Cowart and Chris Cole started the venture in September after discovering how it works. Both said they decided the around-the-clock access to a doctor would have been helpful in their own experiences caring for family members. Cowart, who is CFO and executive vice president of finance at Trehel Corp., said she and Cole both had ill mothers.

“We came across the product and said ‘I wish we had these,’” she said.

Cole, a former real estate manager, said he “stumbled upon telehealth and decided this would solve so many problems.” He said the business has had hundreds of calls since opening and typically is getting more than 40 emails daily. Cole said memberships include members’ families. A growing number of businesses are using telehealth partly to help reduce absenteeism, Cole said.

The co-owners said members are linked to participating doctors licensed in the same state and there is no additional cost to the member for the online or telephone consultations. Medical records from the consultations can be forwarded to a member’s primary care doctor, at the member’s request. The service does not involve insurance or third-party payers.

“We are not replacing the primary care physician,” Cole said.

“Patients use online care typically to communicate with a doctor about conditions such as respiratory and sinus infections, flu, sore throats, allergies, rashes, insect bites, as well as wellness and nutrition advice,” an eDocHome statement said.

Cowart and Cole declined to discuss their investments in the business that offers its services through a Texas company called New Benefits. Cowart and Cole said they do not know of any eDocHome competitors in the Greenville area and consider the East Coast to be wide open.

Dr. Louis Costa, president of the S.C. Board of Medical Examiners, said telehealth services are raising questions. He said in South Carolina they “have got to have a physician where they can pass along the information required during their interaction” to the primary care doctor. “What the board is afraid of is fragmentation of care,” he said.

Cowart and Cole said their doctors offer members that option.

Costa also said there can be obvious business advantages to such telehealth ventures, when “you get 1,000 calls a week and didn’t have to have a storefront.”

Costa said the state monitors all prescriptions, including any written by doctors in such telehealth services. He said state lawmakers are considering legislation that addresses the growing telehealth sector, and Congress may get involved.

“The argument by the General Assembly has been y’all need to improve access,” Costa said.

The board in November approved a guidance statement for doctors that says “prescribing drugs to individuals the licensee has never personally examined based solely on answers to a set of questions is unprofessional,” but that has since been relaxed. Costa said after looking at the eDocHome website that its prescribing online and by telephone by licensed doctors is not considered unprofessional.

“A bona fide physician-patient relationship requires an in-person evaluation, and outcomes have proven when there is a physical contact there is a much more appropriate diagnosis,” Costa said.

The board has issued cease-and-desist orders in two prior instances involving other businesses with doctors working in telemedicine scenarios that did not meet all requirements.

Dr. Bruce Snyder of Greenville, president of the S.C. Medical Association, said he also is concerned that patients are interacting with a physician they don’t know.

Snyder said people can go through “online gamesmanship” to get medications.

“That worries me a great deal. I really don’t understand why if someone has a primary care physician they could not contact them,” he said.

“Every physician who treats a patient is obligated by the Board of Medical Examiners to have adequately assessed that patient,” Snyder said. “People who prescribe medication would be at risk of providing care without adequately having examined and interviewed the patient.”

Cole predicts telehealth services like eDocHome are “going to be common. You bank online. You get a college degree online. It’s just a natural fit to have health care online for the masses.” He said the Affordable Care Act is going to add up to 25 million “new people” waiting to see a doctor in the future.

“In Greenville we have a four-day wait time” to see a doctor, Cole said. “Now we’re looking at Greenville having an eight-day wait just because of more people (receiving care).”