62 PT Cruisers cross, park on Royal Gorge Bridge

As part of the Colorado PT Cruiser Club's 'Cruise the Rockies,' 62 PT Cruisers crossed and stopped on the Royal Gorge Bridge on Saturday morning. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

A woman stands on her toes to look over the rail at the Royal Gorge Bridge on Saturday. As part of the Colorado PT Cruiser Club's 'Cruise the Rockies,' 62 PT Cruisers crossed and stopped on the Royal Gorge Bridge on Saturday morning. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Anne Weekley doesn't love PT Cruisers. Strange, given that she's the treasurer of the Colorado PT Cruisers car club.

But there's certainly a reason she's hung around so long.

"Just seeing the people. We're old friends," the Cañon City woman said. "Even though you only see them once a year, they throw their arms around you and hug you. I'm not in love with the car, I'll be honest. I never grew up with a car, my parents or anyone, so I don't have the car mystique, but I have never met such nice people in my whole life."

On Saturday, 62 PT Cruisers (and three non-Cruisers with the group) crossed the Royal Gorge Bridge, then turned around and parked in the middle for about 20 minutes for photo opportunities.

Many members got out of their cars to talk with friends, others peeked over the edges of the bridge's railing, and some refused to get out of the car in fear of whatever they thought might happen.

They had a photographer and a helicopter to fly a few circles around the bridge to snap some photos.

The crew included cars and people from Colorado, Minnesota, Washington, Texas, Florida, Kentucky and other states, said Weekley, who helped organize the annual "Cruise the Rockies" event since she's from Cañon City.

"We want to show Colorado off to everybody," she said. "... We just cruise the Rockies because we want to show it. We're not a car club — we're cruising, we like to drive. We don't like to sit in the parking lot."

Advertisement

The Colorado PT Cruiser Club members stayed at America's Best Value Inn & Suites (some since Wednesday) and parked in the lot for locals to enjoy their cars.

This was the second time in the club's 14-year history of driving the Rockies that they've driven over the Royal Gorge Bridge. The first time was in 2009.

The group gathers monthly at different places in Colorado to have lunch and hang out. During the second week of every August, they gather for their bigger event. Next year, the club will gather in Frisco. They've been to places, such as Montrose, Gunnison, Estes Park and Longmont during the 14 years.

"Most people, this is their 10th, 11th visit," Weekley said. "They come from all over. They're our friends."

Weekley said there are no membership dues, and the group has had as many as 150 cars in it at once. Anyone can join the club, whether they have a PT Cruiser or not.

"We're a fun group," she siad. "We want everybody to join us."

For more information, visit coloradoptcruiserclub.org, email jno266@bresnan.net or call 276-6979.