So far, neither Portman’s opponent, former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland, nor Toomey’s rival, Katie McGinty, are running ads to highlight their advocacy on opioid issues, but it’s still early in the election cycle. | Getty Vulnerable GOP Senate incumbents talk up their record fighting opioid abuse

The opioid epidemic is playing a starring role in tight Senate races in Ohio, New Hampshire and Pennsylvania — communities hard-hit by addiction, where Republican incumbents are fighting to retain their seats in an anti-establishment year.

With the control of the Senate at stake, the opioid battle has morphed into a large enough political issue that the Karl Rove-backed group, One Nation, weighed in by spending $1.12 million in March on an ad touting New Hampshire Sen. Kelly Ayotte’s role in passing bipartisan Senate legislation, known as the Comprehensive Addiction and Recovery Act. She’s in a tight contest with Gov. Maggie Hassan, who has her own record on opioid legislation to run on.

Story Continued Below

In Ohio, Sen. Rob Portman’s campaign recently put together three web ads that play up his long-time record in tackling abuse. The ads, one of which depicts a grieving family, address both opioids and heroin. And, just last week over congressional recess, Pennsylvania Sen. Pat Toomey visited the Lehigh Valley Hospital in his home state to talk about how hospitals can help fight the deadly painkiller crisis.

“Sen. Toomey is using opioids as a way to talk about solutions and to demonstrate that Republicans care,” says Terry Madonna, a political science professor and director of the Franklin & Marshall College Poll. “This is a community-based issue that Senate candidates will have to talk about. It’s not some removed policy idea dealing with the Federal Reserve.”

So far, neither Portman’s opponent, former Ohio Gov. Ted Strickland, nor Toomey’s rival, Katie McGinty, are running ads to highlight their advocacy on opioid issues, but it’s still early in the election cycle. A DSCC national spokesman did not want to comment on its paid media strategy. Ads or no ads, Democrats aren’t letting the Republicans off easy. They say the legislation Republicans have backed in Congress doesn’t devote any new money to fighting the twin scourges of opioid and heroin addiction.

Vulnerable Republican senators are talking at length about opioid abuse because it has struck their home states in such swift and lethal fashion. In just one year from 2013 to 2014, opioid-related deaths in New Hampshire jumped by a stunning 73.5 percent, according to the most recent CDC data. In Ohio, overdoses rose by 18 percent over that same time period and in Pennsylvania, by roughly 13 percent.

“Candidates have been forced to respond,” says Andrew Smith, director of the University of New Hampshire Survey Center.

Republican senators address the crisis in a way that they hope portrays them as empathetic, and able to tackle bipartisan legislation in a year in which Democrats bash them for failing to pass spending bills — including emergency funds for the spreading Zika virus — or stonewalling President Barack Obama’s Supreme Court nomination.

The Republican-controlled Senate passed the opioid-related CARA legislation in March by a vote of 94-1. A related package of bills is expected to go to the House floor later this week.

But Democrats are trying to use the opioid issue to their political advantage by casting it as the latest example of Republicans supporting a broad idea without putting any new money on the table.

“Sen. Ayotte wanted to tout her work on the CARA legislation but a couple of weeks earlier, she talked about repealing Obamacare. Medicaid expansion in New Hampshire has allowed lots of people to access substance abuse treatment,” says Lauren Passalacqua, national press secretary of the DSCC.

New Hampshire offers a good test of how the opioid abuse will factor into down-ballot races this cycle.

It first emerged as a major political issue during the presidential primary, when candidates from both parties fielded questions about the death toll at New Hampshire town halls.

Then, in March, Rove’s group One Nation aired the ads playing up Ayotte’s role in shepherding the CARA legislation through the Senate. “We’re at risk of losing a whole generation,” Ayotte says toward the end of the commercials, following a montage that shows teenagers; people in treatment; and police officers, all of whom have much at stake in the epidemic.

Meanwhile, Hassan has criticized Ayotte for politicizing the opioid issue and for failing to support Obamacare and its Medicaid expansion, which gives low income people access to substance abuse treatment.

Since then, the number of New Hampshire voters worried about drug abuse has only risen. In mid-April, the WMUR Granite State Poll showed that 44 percent of New Hampshire voters called drug abuse the most single important problem facing the state. That polled way ahead of jobs and the economy, at just 18 percent.

Both candidates have been eager to show off their bipartisan bona fides in tackling the issue.

For Ayotte, this has meant emphasizing her role in helping to pass the Senate CARA bill. Hassan’s camp points to her work in fast-tracking two opioid-related bills that passed just two weeks into the 2016 legislative session; for reauthorizing Medicaid expansion; and joining with other governors across the country to demand more action from the federal government on drug abuse.

“It’s not an issue that either Hassan or Ayotte will be able to get their hands around completely,” Smith of the University of New Hampshire says.

The latest poll from the non-partisan Kaiser Family Foundation shows that most Americans fault both the federal and state governments for not doing enough to help people addicted to prescription drugs, or heroin. Forty-four percent of those surveyed by Kaiser said they personally knew someone addicted to prescription painkillers.

That’s all the more reason for Senate candidates to work it into their campaigns in the coming months, especially in the hard-hit states. “At a time when a lot of issues are very polarized and only appeal to half of the electorate, public health crises offer the opportunities to unite a broader swathe of people behind a solution or cause,” says Brad Todd, a Republican ad maker who runs the firm OnMessage Inc. “You’re going to see people who are doing something about it, talking about it.”

Authors: