Re:”Oil and gas folks protest too much,” June 28 Steve Lipsher column.

It’s difficult to know where to start with this column attacking Coloradans for Responsible Energy Development. In addition to regurgitating tired myths disseminated by extreme groups bent on eradicating all fossil fuels, it blatantly ignores proven scientific facts.

Ironically, however, ignorance is why CRED was formed and has continued to engage in a multi-year education effort. Although fracking has been around since 1947, many Coloradans admit they don’t understand the process.

CRED’s mission is simple: Provide Coloradans the facts about fracking so they can make up their own mind.

The writer tries to characterize Colorado as the unregulated Wild West of fracking. Fortunately, that is another myth.

Colorado’s stringent regulations have been called a model for the nation. Through collaborative efforts by environmentalists, regulators and the energy industry, Colorado was the first state in the country to pass groundbreaking methane regulations, require water sampling both before and after drilling and publicly disclose all chemicals — and their concentrations — in fracking fluid.

That information is available to anyone on FracFocus.org.

As to allegati0ns that water, land and air are being polluted and oil spills are rampant, the facts again prove otherwise.

Not only is Colorado cutting carbon dioxide emissions, the state also has the most comprehensive leak detection and repair program for oil and natural gas production in the country.

Colorado is also producing more energy with less land disturbance, which is better for the environment.

Thanks to advancements in fracking technology and horizontal drilling, wells sites are 30 percent smaller today but produce 60 times more energy. And while oil production in Colorado is up, total oil spills are down.

This is true even as the legislature lowered the threshold for reporting spills.

The Environmental Protection Agency recently published a landmark report finding that fracking has had no “widespread, systemic impacts” on the country’s drinking water.

In Colorado, the EPA has never found an instance of hydraulic fracturing contaminating groundwater.

Technology is making drilling for oil and natural gas more efficient and safer than ever before. That fact ought to be celebrated, not twisted and distorted in order to scare Coloradans.

Karen Crummy is communications adviser for Coloradans for Responsible Energy Development.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.