After only two weeks of inpatient treatment for anger management, singer Chris Brown checked out of rehab. Eva Rinaldi, CC BY SA

Singer Chris Brown was spotted out this week, just two weeks after announcing that he would be receiving inpatient treatment at a rehabilitation facility to “gain focus and insight into his past and recent behavior.” His representatives say that he will now continue the same treatment on an outpatient basis.

"Chris is continuing his rehab program as an outpatient and is also completing his community service in the Los Angeles area," Brown's representative told E! News in a statement. "He appreciates all of your encouragement and support."

Brown, 24, initially went into rehab following an incident in Washington, D.C. in which he was accused of physically assaulting a fan who asked to take a photo with him. According to Rolling Stone, Brown was charged with misdemeanor assault for that incident. If convicted, he could face a $1,000 fine and six months in prison. The singer will go before the judge to decide on the charge next week.

Brown was reportedly taken to a Malibu, Calif. rehabilitation facility on Oct. 29 after the Los Angeles County Probation Department — which has been following Brown since his 2009 felony assault on singer Rihanna — began investigating whether the incident in D.C. violated his probation. If his probation is revoked, he faces four years in prison.

Initial reports did not limit the amount of time Brown would be in a rehabilitation facility. He allegedly went into treatment to deal with his anger management problems which, according to Palm Partners Recovery Center, could be linked to anxiety and depression. While two weeks may seem short, it may have been as much time as the singer could take for inpatient treatment considering his other legal obligations.

"He's a good kid, but he keeps messing up," a source told E! News shortly before he entered treatment. "He needs help. He keeps self-medicating with weed and alcohol and that's when he always gets in trouble."

Hopefully the two weeks away did give Brown the “healthier vantage point” he was seeking. He is set to face numerous legal challenges in the coming weeks.