Is it 2016 yet? The future has already arrived in Iowa, which will play host to seven potential Republican presidential candidates over the course of 11 days this week and next. They will do what candidates do to butter up voters in Iowa: hobnob with donors, lend their clout at campaign rallies, gorge on delicious fried concoctions at the State Fair and attend the Family Leadership Summit in Ames, an annual cattle call for GOP hopefuls.

Their destination is not surprising considering Iowa is where it will all begin in early 2016 when a still-to-be-determined slate of aspirants vie to be crowned victor of the venerable Iowa Caucuses. And for five of those trying to spur their chances this week, their hope is the party chooses to “fall in love” rather than “fall in line” in 2016. And there’s a high probability that will be the case.

Story Continued Below

It’s going to be a fascinating primary season, because the Republican nomination is completely up for grabs. For the fifth time since Herbert Hoover first carried the banner in 1928, but only the second time since Richard Nixon’s first try in 1960, Republicans could nominate a candidate for president who is neither currently in the office or been a prior candidate for the job. In 11 of the last 14 elections, Republicans have picked a previous loser or nominated the incumbent—with admittedly mixed results.

But a truly wide open field, like the one that led to George W. Bush’s victory in 2000, could give the Grand Old Party a grand new opportunity to highlight a changing of the guard on the national level by nominating a first-time candidate such as Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie, Florida Sen. Marco Rubio, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush or Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, to name just a few. (Of this group, only Rubio and Paul are going to Iowa this week.)

Of course, the allure of another shot at the White House might be too much to stop someone like former Sen. Rick Santorum or Texas Gov. Rick Perry from jumping into the race. Both Ricks have signaled that they are at least thinking about it. Santorum’s tour for his latest book, Blue Collar Conservatives, made stops in reliable battleground states like Ohio. Likewise, Perry said another presidential campaign was “an option” when he announced that he would not run for a fourth term as governor. More recently, he made the case to Meet the Press moderator David Gregory that America is a country of “second chances.”

Typically, a second chance like the one Perry might seek would be welcome because Republicans have long preferred rewarding previous also-rans with their own ticket to the general election in the weird, monarchy-like coronation we call the Republican Party primary process. But maybe not this time: In a Quinnipiac poll taken at the end of June, both Santorum and Perry were relegated to single digit support status. The potential candidates with double-digit support – Paul, Bush, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee and Christie – included only one past candidate.

Perhaps guiding the decision for the likes of Santorum, Perry and even Huckabee, is that the second or third shot at the nomination was the charm for the most recent party nominees. Mitt Romney, John McCain, Bob Dole, George H.W. Bush, Ronald Reagan and on down the line all the way to Calvin Coolidge in 1924 proved the political adage about Republicans “falling in line” to be correct.

Democrats, on the other hand, as the saying goes, fall in love. They have been most successful when selecting first-time candidates as their standard bearer. Barack Obama was little known until his star turn a decade ago at the 2004 Democratic National Convention that nominated then Sen. John Kerry, a first-time candidate. Arkansas Gov. Bill Clinton propelled himself from an asterisk in polls to the nomination in 1992 and won the presidency. Neither Jimmy Carter nor John F. Kennedy had run for president before capturing the nomination and finally the Oval Office. (Hillary Clinton, should she run, would probably confound this pattern.)

First-time candidates can find the national campaign to be tiring, with the constant back-and-forth bickering and incessant digging into one’s past by an over-anxious media with ever shrinking deadline windows. Those who have taken a spin around the block before, though, have a little more psychological freedom. They already lost once, so what’s the worst that could happen?

Good news for Rick Santorum, right? In theory, with a run already on his resume, Santorum and his oft-mocked sweater-vest should be gliding their way to the 2016 Republican presidential nomination. Having finished second to Romney in the 2012 contest, he’s kinda/sorta technically next in line. And Perry, who stumbled but still stands, learned a number of lessons from his failed effort of two years ago that could result in a smoother ride this time around.

Sadly for them, and for any other previous presidential aspirants, recent polls show Republicans are more likely to “fall in love” than “fall in line” in the battle to pick the 2016 torch bearer. But it’s not just the polls—talk to Republican voters, and you get the sense they are ready to move on from begrudging support based on a previous loss, and yearn for the kind of genuine excitement that surrounded Obama in 2008 – just with a candidate with more experience. If Republicans can, in fact, “fall in love,” that could prove to be a good thing for the party moving forward.