Q Why do we allow Saratoga -- one town of 30,000 people -- to have such influence on the decision to upgrade Highway 85 to four lanes? There are no easy solutions to the horrific traffic problems caused by the jobs-housing imbalance, but widening 85 is one thing we could do. Those of us who drive from South County on 101 will soon suffer a normal delay from the metering lights at the ramps in our communities, and then suffer another 10-minute backup from the moronic metering lights at the beginning of 85 and 101 in South San Jose. An alternative would be to turn the 85-101 meters off and set the cycle for the metering lights in Saratoga at 10 minutes per car.

Tom Scott

Morgan Hill

Bicyclists enjoy the virgin pavement of Highway 85 several weeks before its opening. (Mercury News)

A Tom isn't the only 85 commuter upset.

Q When I leave work from San Jose, I avoid I-280 and end up taking surface streets just so I don't need to take 85 south to reach Almaden Expressway. Are there plans to provide an extra lane on 85? We definitely need it. Traffic is simply ridiculous.

Agape Eleftheriadis

San Jose

A Boy, are these complaints a blast from the past. Sunday marks the 20th anniversary of the opening of 85 from South San Jose to Cupertino, a magical day that provided drivers with a vital alternative for getting from the southern part of Santa Clara County to the Peninsula. But some issues fought so hard over in 1994 remain. Highway 85 was limited to three lanes partly because of the politics of the time, and now West Valley cities oppose adding a second carpool lane from 87 to I-280. Whether that happens remains to be seen, but one big change is coming to 85.

Advertisement

Q The biggest aggravation is the number of cars that enter at Fremont Avenue to north 85. When will the metering lights be turned on? They would solve a lot of problems.

Brian Matsumoto

A By the end of the year, though these projects often are delayed.

Q It was brought up during the express lanes project to add a second carpool lane to the southern section of 85 by using up the wide median barrier. The objections raised were that the extra space was reserved for mass transit. Fine, but what will happen to that mass transit line when it reaches the narrow part of 85 into Mountain View? Has anyone considered the possibility of widening it?

Joe Lin

A No. The current carpool lane on the old stretch of 85 will be turned into a toll lane.

Q In regards to Tom Keeble's comments about the grooves on 85, the first time I rode my motorcycle on it I thought I had a flat tire. Some motorcycle front tires have a groove in the middle and that gets into the grooves on the road, and it's a scary feeling. I resolved the problem by buying a front tire that does not have that center groove but has angled grooves. If Tom goes down to a bike shop and checks out tread patterns, he will see what I mean.

E. K.

Los Altos

A That tip was echoed by several motorcyclists. The grooves on 85 were added in an effort to lower freeway noise.

Look for Gary Richards at Facebook.com/mr.roadshow, follow him at Twitter.com/mrroadshow or contact him at mrroadshow@mercurynews.com or 408-920-5335.