Jay Brown (Photo: Special to the Register)

I took my Hippocratic oath in the summer of 1988 at the University of Iowa. Since then, I’ve learned a lot about caring for the poor, first in the inner city of Chicago, later on an Indian reservation in Arizona. For the past 21 years I’ve been a doctor in Ames. I travel regularly to Marshalltown, Iowa Falls, Eldora and Boone. For almost two decades I was the medical director of a free clinic in Ames.

I am angry at Gov. Terry Branstad’s recent announcement to “privatize” Medicaid. This was an announcement, not a proposal, much like his closing of mental health hospitals. The privatization of Medicaid has significant repercussions for me as a doctor, and significant repercussions — negative ones — for my patients.

Indigent populations pose special challenges for us doctors. Generally this is a sicker population compared with other patient groups for many reasons. Poor people have worse nutrition, more stress and have more exposure to pollution and lead paint. They often make less healthy choices; they may be less compliant with medical decisions and miss appointments — often because of irregular work schedules and poor access to transportation.

I’m a big believer in personal responsibility. However, most of the poor people I serve seem to be making an earnest effort in caring for their children. And Iowans can agree that these children are blameless for their economic status. Having compromised health can have far reaching repercussions. A child can’t concentrate in math class if she was up all night coughing due to poorly controlled asthma.

My poorest patients’ care is paid for by Medicaid and controlled by the state of Iowa. Committees of doctors, pharmacists and nurses oversee the tax dollars. While I’m not always lockstep with all their decisions, I’ve never doubted their motives. Most health care workers are doing this for reasons unrelated to their reimbursement. I doubt it pays well. But generally it feels like a system overseen by earnest professionals.

I deal with health insurance companies in the private sector on a daily basis. Their efforts at cost containment vary, but in broad strokes, the two chief mechanisms for lowering costs are 1) to shift the costs onto patients and 2) to create time-consuming burdens on doctors and their staff by requiring us to get “prior authorizations.” I recognize that some barriers are needed to prevent unnecessary care. But it is a clumsy system. My staff and I can spend 40 minutes on the phone trying to persuade some “reviewer” that I know what’s needed for my patient.

It’s a tricky balance. If there are no constraints, providers may suggest unneeded services. But if the insurance company constricts us too much, patients don’t get needed care. Some insurance companies are worse than others. For employer-based health insurance, if the insurance companies are too aggressive, employers take their insurance purchase elsewhere. No such checks and balances will exist if the whole Medicaid program is handed off — as Governor Branstad intends — to profit-minded, private sector companies to provide needed care for poor kids. These companies will have ample incentive to curtail care because the same people who get to authorize the care given to poor people are allowed to keep the money that is left over. The less a private insurance company spends on patients, the more lucrative it is for the company. And that's before any malfeasance.

I envision myself spending more time on the phone with some under-informed and anonymous insurance company reviewer to justify the procedures or medicine needed for a child I’ve spent my whole life learning to care for. Governor Branstad’s autocratic decision to privatize Medicaid is good for insurance companies but terrible both for medical professionals and the poor in Iowa. I think we Iowans care more about the well-being of our children than this plan suggests.

Jay Brown is a doctor in Ames. Contact: 515-239-4482

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1XM19Go