Thursday night’s Fox News-sponsored prime-time debate among the top Republican candidates for president cries out for some ground rules.

So here they are, all 25 of them:

1. Each candidate will be allowed to compare himself to Ronald Reagan no more than twice.

2. The candidates from Florida will be allowed to carry concealed firearms on stage in order to stand their ground during the debate.

3. The first commercial break will be after 10 minutes, or after Donald Trump uses the word “loser” five times, whichever comes first.

4. While not speaking, candidates will be allowed to drape themselves in the American flags on stage.

5. The Fox News moderators Chris Wallace, Megyn Kelly, and Bret Baier will insist that candidates adhere to their speaking time limits. Candidates wishing for an extra 30 seconds may do so by saying the password “Benghazi.”

6. A coin toss will determine which candidate gets to make the first vacuous attack on Planned Parenthood.

7. Candidates must advise their supporters in the audience to behave. If not, they will be asked to leave or sit in the Trump section.

8. If the air conditioning isn’t working properly, Mike Huckabee has agreed not to compare the arena to the ovens during the Holocaust.

9. Candidates who mention President George W. Bush will experience audio problems with their microphones.

10. There will be a five-minute intermission in the middle of the debate in order to give the candidates time to accept donations from the Koch brothers and for Donald Trump to reload his hair.

11. Each candidate will be provided a pen, a notebook, and a sheet of talking points about Hillary Clinton’s e-mail.

12. Jeb Bush and Marco Rubio will be allowed to speak Spanish while distancing themselves from supporting a pathway to citizenship for the 11 million undocumented Hispanic immigrants working and living in America.

13. A Domino’s employee will be allowed on stage to make a delivery to Chris Christie’s podium during the second half of the debate.

14. Ted Cruz will not be permitted to shut down the debate by reciting Dr. Seuss for 90 minutes.

15. If candidates say they would “repeal and replace” Obamacare, the moderators have agreed not to ask those candidates to explain what they would “replace” Obamacare with.

16. If Rule No. 15 is violated, any candidate may shout out “Let us pray!,” which would invoke 30 seconds of silence, followed by an ad block featuring Glenn Beck hawking speculative gold coins to novice investors and Fred Thompson pitching reverse mortgages to desperate retirees.

17. Marco Rubio will be allowed an extra bottle of water at his podium.

18. During questions about mass shootings, candidates will be permitted to read their answers from the courtesy cue cards provided by the NRA.

19. No questions about “science” will be allowed.

20. If any candidate mentions that Scott Walker didn’t graduate college, he will be permitted to wear Rick Perry’s bookish eyeglasses for the remainder of the debate.

21. Candidates are required to highlight the plight of one of the following three classes of people: (1) Homophobic bakers of wedding cakes; (2) Billionaire hedge fund managers who need relief from capital gains taxes; (3) Confederate history buffs.

22. Candidates will be required to feign outrage over the recent discovery that U.S. Supreme Court justices aren’t elected.

23. Any candidate who works in the words “mom jeans” while talking about President Obama will be allowed an extra 30 seconds to say how he would launch a nuclear attack on Iran on his first day in office.

24. Donald Trump may not threaten to sue the other candidates until they have left the building.

25. Fox News Chairman Roger Ailes will notify candidates who won the debate 15 minutes before it begins.