Asthma

Children in California increasingly are flocking to emergency rooms for treatment of asthma, despite millions of dollars spent on programs to control the disease.

However, Yolo County may be one of the few exceptions. It’s seeing some of the lowest hospital admission rate for asthma in the region.

Allergist and Asthma Specialist at Woodland Care Center Dr. Rajan Merchant has seen an increase in the number of children being diagnosed with asthma in the last few years but no change in the number of children being diagnosed with acute issues.

The number of pediatric asthma cases is 3,969 and the number of adult cases is 13,760, among the county’s population of 204,590.

Dr. Merchant said the increase could be due to an increase in families with healthcare.

Seasonal allergies make this a busy time at Woodland Healthcare, he said, but the facility still has some of the lowest rates of admission for asthma in the county.

“Even though the region for Sacramento matches the state average, (Yolo County is) definitely at a lower rate countywide compared to the other areas,” he said.

There are a number of recognizable symptoms and triggers for asthma, such as coughing, wheezing, and shortness of breath.

While seasonal allergies remain the No. 1 trigger, air pollution and exercise can also increase symptoms.

To control symptoms, Dr. Merchant recommends limiting exposure to those elements which cause problems, hand washing to help prevent transmission of respiratory diseases and using an inhaler to open airways in the lungs.

When it comes to medication, doctors focus on the severity of the illness to make decisions on treatment.

According to Dr. Merchant, inhalers and Singulair allergy pills are the most common ways of controlling symptoms.

Woodland Care Center has also partnered with Propeller Health to implement a new technology available for those working to manage asthma that involves attaching a sensor attached to the inhaler which measures date, time and the location to provide information on what might be causing asthmatic problems.

“That helps us to look at overall adherence with medication treatments,” Dr. Merchant said.

Advertisement

It also helps them monitor changes in symptom status.

Sensors can be paired to mobile technology and web-based data to monitor community patterns and air quality and patients and their doctors can access the data online confidentially.

The system is also smart enough to send out messages to alert problems so doctors can try to make them feel better before they reach the point of hospitalization or ER visits.

And while local asthma problems may be relatively few, statewide the rates of ER visits for asthma symptoms rose by about 18 percent for California children ages 5 to 17 and by 6 percent for children under 5 between 2005 and 2012, according to a Kaiser Health News analysis of the latest available rates by county.

At the national level, asthma-related emergency room visit rates have declined in recent years, according to federal health data through 2010, the latest available.

Loretta Worthington, coordinator of the Asthma Coalition of Los Angeles County and a staff analyst at the county’s department of public health, said she’s been surprised at some doctors’ lack of knowledge about controlling the disease.

“There’s a lot of training that still needs to be done,” Worthington said.

The good news is fewer kids in California are actually being admitted into hospitals. Overnight-or-longer stays are declining statewide and nationally. That’s due largely to better medicines and more aggressive treatment in the ER, asthma specialists say.

The rising rates don’t seem to reflect an actual increase in the respiratory disease — about 15 percent of California children have been diagnosed with asthma, a number that has remained fairly steady since 2001.

Younger children visit the ER at higher rates because they are more likely to have undiagnosed asthma and because their lung function is more difficult to measure, complicating the task of finding the right combination of medicines, Kelsey Lamb said.

Across California, local and regional asthma programs aim to educate families and doctors to help keep kids out of the hospital.

Though often effective, these programs are expensive and can’t serve enough children to make a real difference statewide, said John Capitman, a Cal State Fresno public health professor and executive director of the Central Valley Health Policy Institute. And health outreach workers have found it difficult to get reimbursed by insurers, including Medi-Cal, for proven strategies including home visits to minimize risks, Capitman said.

Because the emergency visit data don’t extend beyond 2012, it remains unclear how expanded coverage offered since last year under the Affordable Care Act and California’s Medicaid program will affect emergency room visits.

Los Angeles Daily News also contributed to this report.