Bernard Faro, consul general deputy of France, welcomed benefactors and sponsors of the French Alliance Ball to a pre-event cocktail party April 16

Bernard Faro, consul general deputy of France, and Robin Ray, president of the Friends of Jacobus Vanderveer House Board of Trustees, of Bedminster. (Photo: Courtesy of RCB Communications) Story Highlights The French Alliance Ball, commemorating the original held in Bedminster in 1779, will be held May 16

Tickets are $500 each; tables of 10, $5,000; junior patron tickets (25 years old and under), $300

The French Alliance Ball, commemorating the original held in the Bedminster countryside in 1779, will be held May 16 at Trump National Golf Club.

Bertrand Lortholary, the consul general of France and honorary gala chairman, will arrive by horse-drawn carriage. He will be accompanied by honored guest and Far Hills resident Col. Jack Jacobs, Medal of Honor recipient and military analyst for NBC/MSNBC News. The black-tie event will include cocktails and hors d’oeuvres, live and silent auctions, dinner and dancing, costumed re-enactors, cannon fire and fireworks.

Individual patron tickets are $500 each, patron tables of 10 are $5,000, and junior patron tickets (25 years old and under) are $300. For ticket information, visit www.jvanderveerhouse.org. For sponsorship details and questions, contact French Alliance Ball Event Producer Nancy Schechter, president Hemisphere Productions Events, at 908-580-0051 or njevents@aol.com.

On April 16, Bernard Faro, consul general deputy of France, welcomed benefactors and sponsors of the French Alliance Ball to a pre-event cocktail party at the Consulate of France on 5th Avenue, overlooking Central Park, in New York City. The event was sponsored by Nancy Schechter, member of the Board of Trustees of the Friends of the Jacobus Vanderveer House.

Faro praised guests for their support of the long-standing alliance between France and the United States through events such as the French Alliance Ball, benefitting the Jacobus Vanderveer House & Museum.

Robin Ray, president of the Friends of the Jacobus Vanderveer House, thanked supporters for their ongoing efforts to preserve a national historic treasure. She also outlined the Friends’ vision to build a kitchen garden, historic walkways, 18th-century-style outbuildings, and a barn with proceeds from a capital campaign launched by the French Alliance Ball.

About Jacobus Vanderveer House

The Jacobus Vanderveer House served as headquarters for Gen. Henry Knox during the winter of 1778-79 and is the only known building still standing that was associated with the Pluckemin Artillery Cantonment, believed to be the first installation in America to train officers in engineering and artillery. The Jacobus Vanderveer House interprets Dutch colonial life in America as well as the stay by Knox and his family during the 1778-79 encampment. A National and New Jersey Historic Site, the Jacobus Vanderveer House is a true landmark that offers a vivid look into the history of our country and the lives of those who made it.

The Jacobus Vanderveer House is at 3055 River Road. The entrance to the house is via River Road Park. For directions and more information about the Jacobus Vanderveer House, visit www.jvanderveerhouse.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1zdmum2