Allegations of delays in care and manipulation of waiting lists at veterans' hospitals across the country have spurred an investigation into the Department of Veterans Affairs and calls for the resignation of Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki. Reports that 40 veterans died from preventable conditions at a VA hospital in Phoenix, Arizona, because they had to wait too long for treatment have raised questions about similar conditions at the 152 VA medical centers across the country.

President Barack Obama is professed to be “madder than hell” about the mistreatment of veterans, an issue he campaigned on during his first run for president. First lady Michelle Obama and Jill Biden, wife of Vice President Joe Biden, have also made considerable efforts on behalf of veterans. White House Spokesman Jay Carney said the White House has confidence in Shinseki and the administration is not currently seeking his resignation. “On the broader issue of accountability, we are of the view that the kinds of allegations that we have seen need to be investigated rigorously … The investigation needs to continue and needs to be completed, and then we can assess what the facts are,” Carney said. “And once we know all the facts, it is absolutely appropriate that accountable individuals ought to be held to account.”

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Ron Christie of the Daily Beast said Obama should be worried by the bipartisan outcry in response to the allegations of mismanagement at the VA. He notes that House Veterans Affairs Committee Chairman Jeff Miller, R-Fla., sent Obama a letter a year ago asking the president to act in response to the lack of accountability in the VA health care system. “For a president who seems to have endless amounts of time to talk about the miseries of those living on the minimum wage, Obama’s seeming indifference to the severity of the problems faced by our returning veterans seeking care at VA facilities is shocking,” Christie wrote.

But Obama isn’t to blame, wrote Matt Lewis of the Daily Caller, because the VA has long experienced a backlog of veteran claims. “The truth is, this has more to do with problems endemic to very large bureaucracies — where (due to union contracts) it’s virtually impossible to fire anyone — than to recent mismanagement," he wrote. “It’s high time for Congress to radically rethink how we should be taking care of our veterans, and to radically restructure the V.A.,” Lewis continued. “With so many facets of big government to manage, things must go dramatically wrong in any given area before our leaders have either the inclination or the political capital necessary to take dramatic steps (such as are now obviously needed).”

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Republicans are likely to try investing some of that political captital by making the VA scandal an election issue, and by drawing comparisons with Obamacare, wrote Noah Rothman of Mediaite. “In a heated election year, and with the added pressure associated with the [Affordable Care Act], Democrats can be forced to go on record opposing much of the excessive bureaucracy, which medical professionals in the VA system are blaming for poor care,” Rothman wrote. “Not only should Republicans make the VA’s problems a campaign issue, they should ignore the disingenuous scolds who will emerge from the woodwork to chide Republicans for daring to criticize the intolerable conditions America’s vets face.”

The Democratic love of big government hasn’t been enough to fix the problems at the VA that have been around for decades, wrote Jonah Goldberg at National Review's The Corner. “Maybe it’s a mess because such messes come with the territory when you put bureaucrats in charge,” he wrote. “Criminality, as alleged, may not be inevitable (though I’m not so sure). But rationing, incompetence, bloat, waste, rent-seeking and a sort of legal corruption certainly are.”