As was expected going into the season, Erik Johnson and Francois Beauchemin have been the Avalanche’s top defensive pairing through the first 22 games, logging major minutes.

Less noticed during the Avalanche’s 8-13-1 start is the fact that the second pairing of Tyson Barrie, who could be a restricted free agent July 1, and Nick Holden also has been mostly constant at even strength. Last season, Barrie most often played with Nate Guenin, and Holden usually was with Brad Stuart.

Given that he’s counted on to contribute offensively and counter the risks of having an undersized D-man on the ice so much, the 5-foot-10, 190-pound Barrie’s goal total so far (1) is underachievement. He had 13 and 12 goals the past two seasons. Yet he and Holden have remained paired through thick and thin, other than when Barrie was serving a three-game NHL suspension for an early-season hit on Anaheim’s Simon Despres.

The Avalanche’s offseason plan to play Barrie with young Nikita Zadorov, acquired from Buffalo in the Ryan O’Reilly trade, was quickly scuttled, and Zadorov now is with the AHL’s San Antonio Rampage.

“I like the pairing,” Patrick Roy said of Barrie and Holden. “They’re both capable of breaking out on their own; they’re both mobile. Nick is capable of playing steady defense for us, which is good for Tyson as well, and he’s having some good reads. If Tyson goes on the rush, (Holden) is capable of playing the odd-man rush. I just feel right now it’s a good fit for both of them.”

Going into the Avalanche’s Saturday home game against Winnipeg, Barrie has that single goal — at Pittsburgh on Nov. 19 — and 13 assists, is minus-4 and is averaging 23 minutes.

Holden has no goals and eight assists, is even, and plays 20 minutes a night. He also is capable of more on offense, because he had 10 goals in only 54 games for Colorado two seasons ago. But partnering with the offensive-minded Barrie comes with encouragement to dial back a bit.

“Nick’s a real smart guy, and he plays a simple game,” Barrie said. “I think that works well for me because I always know where he’s going to be and he communicates really well. I think he does a pretty good job of being in the right place, of being in a support position for me, because I like to go a little bit. It can get me in trouble, so he’s a good, reliable valve for me.”

Holden said, “I knew what kind of player Tyson was. He uses his partner a lot, and he’s so explosive that you regroup when he’s going to start jumping, so you have an extra option in a neutral-zone breakout. Or in the D-zone, you know he’s going to jump and he gives you another option. It’s funny, but you both talk more and then you can talk less because I know what he might do when he’s going back on the puck.

“I don’t think I’ve really had to change my game. My game’s always pretty much been move the puck up to our boards and let them go. … I know he likes to pop in more than most guys, so you just have to take a double look.”

They essentially have been Avalanche teammates for three seasons now.

“We had a friendship before this year, but it definitely grows in little ways when you play together,” Holden said. “You’re talking more, you’re talking away from hockey a little bit more. You start to make little bets. I bet him who would score first and then he scored in that game in Pittsburgh.”

Holden smiled and admitted, “I owe him supper.”

Footnote. The Avalanche didn’t practice on Thanksgiving, so Roy wasn’t called upon to expand on or temper his postgame criticism of goalie Semyon Varlamov following the 5-3 loss to Ottawa on Wednesday. “He needs to be better,” Roy said after the game. “Period.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com