Renate Justin lived in German during the Nazi regime and escaped to the United States with her family

Holocaust Remembrance Events Dr. Renate Justin - This Time, Not Too Little Too Late: 5:30 p.m. Tuesday, April 14, Rialto Theater Center, 228 E. Fourth St., with performances by members of the Fort Collins Symphony Orchestra, poetry readings and a presentation by Dr. Renate Justin. Free, but tickets required, available at the Loveland Museum/Gallery. Remembrance: Paintings by Andrew Jay Svedlow: Exhibit open April 11-July 12, opening reception 6-8 p.m. Friday, April 10, free exhibit at the Loveland Museum/Gallery, 503 N. Lincoln Ave. Book Discussion Group with Jenna Blum's "Those Who Save Us:" 1-4 p.m. Sunday, April 12, includes a free copy of the book. Artist Gallery Talk with Andrew Jay Svedlow: 5:30-7 p.m. Thursday June 4, free. Generations, Survivor Stories: a Mizel Museum Community Narratives Project, 4-7 p.m. Thursday April 12 and 4-7 p.m. Thursday, May 7. Watch a collection of 11 video narratives that reflect the multi-faceted nature of the Jewish people and illustrate the vastness of the Holocaust experienced in Eastern and Western Europe, Siberia and Greece. Each narrative is five minutes and will run continuously in the Loveland Museum/Gallery lobby. The films are on loan from the Mizel Museum. More info: Contact the Loveland Museum/Gallery at 962-2410 or visit www.lovelandmuseumgallery.org. Advertisement

Dr. Renate Justin of Fort Collins and her family were some of the lucky ones.

Justin lived in Germany during the time of the Holocaust when Jews were persecuted and sent to concentration camps. She and her family managed to escape to the United States.

Justin will speak about her experiences at 5:30 p.m. Tuesday at the Rialto Theater Center at a commemoration event of the 70th anniversary of the end of the Holocaust.

Justin was born to a Jewish family in Germany.

"Before Hitler, we were just part of the community," she said. "We lived in a small village and we were the only Jewish children in that village. Then, when Hitler came, we were not allowed to go to school anymore."

Justin was 12 years old in 1936 when she was sent to school in Holland to escape the Nazi regime. Her sister was sent to Italy.

She said as a little girl she had a very supportive family, which helped as things in Germany escalated. Jews had already been denied the right to go to school. Many people were being sent to concentration camps.

The boarding school was run by the American Friends Service Committee, a Quaker non-governmental organizational that still performs service worldwide.

"The school was for political and religious refugees. (Students) came from all over Europe," Justin said.

She said that at the time, Jewish parents were allowed to send their children away but were not allowed to leave themselves.

Her father was also sent to a concentration camp but was released later. She isn't sure why, but a few Jews were released from the camp and her father got out of Germany with the help of an underground Dutch network. Her mother also escaped the country in "a complicated way," she said. Her family congregated in Holland and escaped on the last boat that was allowed to leave for the United States.

"It was a boat that was supposed to be just for cargo but because they could make a lot of money with refugees, it was stuffed full of people," Justin said. "It was really scary crossing because of all the mines in the English channel."

She remembers that just before they left, another boat exploded, which killed many of her classmates.

She speaks at schools and other organizations about her experience, and said she hopes people learn from what she went through, even just by thinking about that history.

Sometimes children from classes write her to thank her for speaking to them. She said she received one letter from a child who said her speech made him think about the issue of bullying, and that he might be doing that himself without thinking about it.

"That was very satisfying (to have that impact)," she said. "I think it is easy for us to fall into traps of prejudice and act on it."

She has lived in Fort Collins now for 26 years and has spoken at Colorado State University about the Holocaust before.

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.