Organizations can now present a religious objection to the Department of Health and Human services, in order to deny employees birth control.

The Obama's administration announced Friday that the 2010 Affordable Care Act had been modified so religious groups can dodge the obligation inscribed in the bill to provide free birth control for female employees – as they associate birth control with a form of abortion.

From now on, organizations can present a religious objection to the Department of Health and Human services, instead of alerting the insurer. The administration will then transmit it to the insurer, so that it can provide alternative forms of birth control coverage.

However, the modification has not proved good enough for religious groups like the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which has been at the forefront in the legal fight against so-called “Obamacare” and its contraception mandate.

“Especially after the Supreme Court’s recent King v Burwell decision allowed the government to expand its healthcare exchanges, there is no reason at all the government needs religious employers to help it distribute these products,” Becket Fund legal counsel Adèle Auxier Keim said in a statement.

RELATED: Obama’s Good Republican Week

The government's move follows the U.S. Supreme Court's decision in June 2014 to grant the request of a Christian-owned company (Burwell v Hobby Lobby), that “closely held” corporations had the same religious protections as individuals, and were therefore not required to follow the contraception mandate.

The court's ruling, however, did not specify if the government had to modify the law, while public interest groups like American United for Seperation of Church and State warned that modifying the law will probably not calm down religious groups.

“Although I hope I’m proven wrong, I fear that the religious right and its allies, the Catholic bishops, won’t stop until they have denied access to safe and affordable birth control to as many women as possible,” said the group’s executive director, reverend Barry W. Lynn in a statement.