Buy Photo Flint resident Robert Jackson, 54, shows of some marks left on his arm that he believes are the result of drinking contaminated Flint tap water at Flint Fire Station 3 in Flint, on Thursday, Jan. 21, 2016. (Photo: Romain Blanquart Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

WASHINGTON — Two Michigan members of Congress are asking the Obama administration to extend the open enrollment period for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act for residents of Flint because of the drinking water crisis there.

In a letter Friday to Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell, U.S. Sen. Gary Peters and U.S. Rep. Dan Kildee, D-Flint Township, said “a special enrollment period would provide more time for Flint residents to enroll in quality health plans that are vital to their future health.”

Federal agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services have been responding to the crisis in Flint, where drinking water has been found to have high levels of lead and researchers have found both an increased number of children with high lead levels in their blood and a rising number of cases of Legionnaires' disease, which may be related.



In a statement released by Peters’ and Kildee’s offices they said that quality health care is “one factor that can help mitigate some of the adverse physical, cognitive and behavioral effects of lead exposure, particularly for young children who are most vulnerable.”

Experts say that lead poisoning, especially in children, can have lifetime impacts, affecting IQ and potentially leading to learning disabilities, speech and language problems and an increased risk for behavioral issues. In adults, it can be a contributing factor in increased blood pressure and hypertension, kidney problems and reproductive issues in men and women, the EPA says.

The deadline for enrollment under the ACA for coverage in 2016 is Jan. 31. According to the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit organization focusing on health issues, the Flint area was one of the lowest areas for eligible recipients on the state insurance marketplace signing up in Michigan in 2015, at 37%.

Peters and Kildee also asked DHHS to “commit additional resources to assist Flint families to secure health care coverage” before the Jan. 31 deadline.

“The health implications of this catastrophe are severe and its impact is irreversible, but signing Flint residents up for quality health care insurance will improve their long-term health outcomes,” they said.

Peters, Kildee and U.S. Sen. Debbie Stabenow, also D-Mich., also sent a letter to Gov. Rick Snyder on Friday urging him to request a disaster declaration from the Small Business Administration which, if granted, could free up low-interest loans for businesses, homeowners and others impacted by the crisis.

Snyder already lost a bid for a presidential disaster declaration in Flint because the statute limits those to natural disasters, fires and explosions. But the Michigan members of Congress said he could still receive a physical or economic disaster declaration from the Small Business Administration.

Contact Todd Spangler: 703-854-8947 or tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter at @tsspangler.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1VeybyF