Best option: Anthony Drmic in action in Idaho. Photo: Getty Images

A year from now, basketballer Anthony Drmic could be anywhere.

This week he is at the Australian Boomers training camp in Perth and later this year he will begin his senior (final) year at Boise State University in Idaho.

But once his college career is finished, Drmic is expected to have options in the NBA or Europe, where he is in the process of getting a Croatian passport, enabling him to play as a local.

The 22-year-old former Dandenong Ranger player said it would all come down to how well he performs in the next year, but considering he is a 198-centimetre guard with a great three-point shot, no one is ruling out the possibility he could follow Matt Dellavedova or Patty Mills and make the NBA.

Advertisement

“You always look a little bit forward but it all comes down to what kind of senior year I have,” Drmic said.

"I’m really putting everything I can into preparing for that and seeing what I can do. Everything is on the table for me, it really depends on how I play next season.

“I want to see how far I can take it and whatever opportunities come up be it NBA, Europe or NBL, then I will go from there.”

At the Boomers camp, Drmic will play under the watchful eye of coach Andrej Lemanis as the Boomers prepare for their annual four-game Sino Series against China.

It’s the second time Drmic has been called into the series, which usually includes “second-string” Boomers from the NBL and US colleges as well as available European players.

Drmic is at long odds to make the Boomers for the FIBA basketball world cup in Spain this year but hopes to work his way into the group in future.

“The Boomers are my number one priority on this trip home and I want to see how far I can take it,” Drmic said.

Anthony is not the only Drmic in Australian basketball. His older brother Frank starred with South East Melbourne Magic, Victoria Titans, Sydney Kings and South Dragons in the late 1990s and early 2000s.

Frank played three seasons in Europe and won a gold medal with Australia at the under-23 world championships in Melbourne in 1997

There is 14 years between the two brothers but they share a close bond.

Frank spoke to The Sunday Age on the condition the article was "all about Anthony” but the story wouldn’t be complete without letting people know about the older Drmic. Now 36, he works at Baron Forge in Brooklyn in the western suburbs as a supervisor and is the father of four girls.

For big brother, seeing Anthony on the verge of professional basketball brings a feeling of “extreme pride”.

“It’s come full circle,” Frank said. “I now realise what my family went through with my career, you don’t realise how much it affects the family. I haven’t been to Boise to see him but it’s easy to follow him over the internet and on games shown on ESPN here. I used to get him T-shirts and shoes, now he is looking after his big brother.”

When Frank was starring in the NBL, he knew then his baby brother would follow in his footsteps.

“He was always going to play basketball – I still remember him running around as a little kid at my games so I’ll take some credit for his love of basketball – he makes us all really proud,” Frank said.

Anthony agreed, although his memories of those years are not exclusively of his big brother. Frank was part of Ian Stacker’s Australian under-23 side at Melbourne Park in 1997.

“I remember it, Aaron Trahair hitting a game-winner in one of those matches – they were all great,” Anthony said.

The two brothers are very different players. Frank was a tall, burly, versatile guard who played in the NBL from his teenage years, and could use is strength to play in the low post.

He described Anthony as “a little sleeker”, a scorer with an enviable three-point shot - which big brother would have loved to have. Anthony led Boise State in scoring last season, even when a stress fracture in his foot and a twisted ankle cut a chunk out of his season.

Anthony is proud that he retains his Australian accent despite three years in Boise, where retired NBL star John Rillie is an assistant coach. “It’s literally because [fellow Australians] Igor Hadziomerovic and Nick Duncan and John are with me,” Anthony said. “We are keeping a little bit of Australia in Boise.”

In the years ahead Drmic will keep his family name in basketball.