IRS is unprepared to deal with flood of questions.

Health care tax forms 8962, 1095-A, and 8965. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster, AP)

Much of the attention regarding the Affordable Care Act (ACA) is focused on Americans signing up for health insurance, the cost and services covered. Largely lost in this dialogue is the fact that the ACA is the most significant change to the tax code in 20 years. It has made filing a tax return more complex for the more than 147 million individual tax filers — insured and uninsured alike.

This will be a steep learning curve for many Americans as they prepare their tax returns over the next couple of months. The Internal Revenue Service (IRS), which will play a starring role in the implementation of the ACA this year, has already forecast that they will receive upwards of six million additional calls from taxpayers seeking help, largely because of ACA tax code changes. They also estimate they will only be able to answer about half of these calls, with wait times of more than half an hour.

This leaves a potentially large number of taxpayers in the lurch, especially those who fall into two key ACA categories and are therefore most likely to feel the biggest impact at tax time: Those who received government financial assistance to purchase insurance through the federal or state marketplaces, and those who were uninsured in all or part of 2014. For many of these people, the tax refund is one of the biggest financial moments of their year, making it even more imperative that they understand the tax implications of the ACA.

Like this column? Get more in your e-mail inbox



So who will this affect and how? An H&R Block survey of consumers found that 66% were unaware that taking the credit could impact the amount of their tax refund. This research also showed that nearly one in four taxpayers were not confident when estimating their income, a key factor in determining the amount of their credit. Now imagine how this may affect a family. Say they estimated their household income was going to be $38,000 for 2014. Their resulting tax credit would have been about $2,800. However, if their actual 2014 income was $50,000 — maybe because the spouse got a job — they would only be eligible for a $1,500 tax credit. That means they would have to pay back $1,300 — which the IRS will take back through a reduced tax refund. A bitter pill for sure, but the opposite is also true. If their household income was lower than predicted, they may get a larger refund.

For those who were uninsured in all or part of 2014, much attention has been given to the $95 penalty. Few realize that the penalty may be as much as 1% of their modified gross adjusted income and rises to 2% in 2016 and 2.5% in 2017. While the government has been clear that it will apply the higher of the two penalties, this myth still persists.

If these changes weren't confusing enough, there are also more than 30 penalty exemptions people can apply for through the IRS and Department Health and Human Services — which are all intertwined in the claims process.

The ACA is complex: From tax credits based on estimated and actual income, to potential penalties, to applying for an exemption, it will be a steep learning curve for many. And with increasingly limited resources at the IRS to help taxpayers, I believe the private sector has a duty and obligation to bridge the gap. Each taxpayer return is unique and there is no one-size-fits-all solution, but this year, more than ever, we must ensure that taxpayers get all the help they need to understand how the ACA will affect their tax return.

For millions of Americans, the Affordable Care Act is no longer some distant conversation. It's real. It's here. And it's going to affect them at tax time.

Bill Cobb is the president of H&R Block which is hosting a free consumer education day on Jan. 8 at its 10,000 offices nationwide to help consumers understand how the ACA may affect their tax return.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the Opinion front page or sign up for the daily Opinion e-mail newsletter.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BzZY4Q