Ola Farhad and her daughters pose for a selfie during the annual International Day Luncheon Friday at Park Vista Elementary. See a photo gallery of the event at dailyworld.com and also Facebook. (Photo: Freddie Herpin, Daily World) Story Highlights Students from Cambodia, China, Germany, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Mali, Mexico, Pakistan, Palestine and Vietnam attend Park Vista.

So do Creoles, Cajuns and Native Americans.

Parents, teachers and aides carried tray after tray of food into the Park Vista Elementary School cafeteria.

But Friday’s meal wasn’t an ordinary lunch.

The spread included Pakistani kebabs, Salvadoran pupusas, Vietnamese rice cakes, Mexican tamales and Palestinian hummus, all homemade.

Even for those who didn’t know how to pronounce the dishes, they all translated into delicious.

For Park Vista principal Ulysse Joubert, that was the point of the school’s second annual International Day.

“In a school you have to learn, but it’s not just the things you learn in books,” he told about 300 students, parents and staff before the feast.

“We want to celebrate the backgrounds of all the children we have here,” Joubert said. “Some parents said, ‘What we want is to be the same as everybody else and not point out the differences.’”

The principal continued, “My answer to that is: too late.”

The school’s 630-plus students represent more than a dozen nationalities. While some are relatively recent arrivals to the area, their presence reinforces a longstanding Louisiana way of life, Joubert said.

For example, crawfish routinely shows up on Chinese restaurant menus here, he said, adding, “we take a little bit of every culture and we make it one.”

Parents at the luncheon said they and their children feel that unity inside out.

“I wish every school in St. Landry Parish were like Park Vista, where people from different countries are being accepted,” said Shaid Swati, the parent of four children at the school.

With his brothers, Swati operates gas stations and convenience stores. The Pakistan native, now a U.S. citizen, also volunteers at the school.

Lucia DeLeon put in lots of time before the event making pork tamales and guacamole from scratch.

“This is the second year I’ve enjoyed this day,” said the mother born in Guadalajara, Mexico, who arrived in the U.S. eight years ago with her husband, who runs a construction company.

“When I came here, I didn’t speak any English. I can tell you that around the town, people looked at our kids funny when they spoke Spanish,” she said. DeLeon emphasized that she feels as strongly about her three children maintaining their native language as others in St. Landry Parish feel about keeping French alive.

That’s one reason she gets excited about International Day — which, as it turns out, happens at a school with a French-language immersion program.

“Latinos are being pointed to as ‘lazy illegals,’” said DeLeon, who wore a tiered skirt in the red, white and green of the Mexican flag. “This is a good way to show others that we are good and hardworking.”

Like her, Ola Farhad is rearing her children in two languages. To represent Palestine where many people speak Arabic, she displayed the baklava, hummus and pita bread she brought with examples of Islamic calligraphy and mosaic work.

Farhad also wore a black-and-white headscarf and dressed some of her daughters in richly embroidered velvet gowns.”My kids love to be noticed,” she said. “This makes the kids proud of their country” — a country most nations, and soon Pope Francis, recognize as sovereign even as Israel, the United States, Canada and Mexico do not.

Her daughter Jennat, a second grader, said that to her the day “means different countries.

“They express that they aren’t that different. They are the same as you.”

Joubert said it takes constant work to reinforce that idea.

The principal likes to remind people that “the world is bigger than St. Landry Parish. Everything south of Texas is not Mexico. Everything Asian is not Vietnamese.”

Gesturing toward two girls in the cafeteria who twirled in Mexican folk dresses, he said, “Two boys teased them today.

“I jumped on them like a duck on a junebug and said, ‘Hold up. Suppose someone made fun of you?’”

Joubert paused.

“That’s why we still need this.”

The World in a School

Park Vista Elementary enrolls students from Cambodia, China, El Salvador, Germany, Ireland, Ivory Coast, Mali, Mexico, Pakistan, Palestine and Vietnam. Along with Cajuns, Creoles and Native Americans.

Read or Share this story: http://www.theadvertiser.com/story/news/local/education/2015/05/16/variety-stop-lunch-table/27446125/