“You can never get a cup of tea large enough or a book long enough to suit me.” — Author C.S. Lewis.

Bossard Library will pair the love of reading with the enjoyment of a cup of tea during a special afternoon Winter Queen’s Tea, featuring honored guest Megan Wise, the reigning Miss Ohio USA.

Hosting this community tea provides the Library with the perfect opportunity to celebrate the joy of reading as well as the accomplishments of one of our own, Gallia County’s Megan Wise, who will share her journey to the crown. As Wise notes, “Being a first-grade teacher, I am extremely passionate about inspiring children to read. I believe that the most precious gift you can give a child is to share the love of reading.”

As a librarian, it is so encouraging to know that our reigning Miss Ohio USA has such a passion for reading and lifelong learning. Her enthusiasm for literacy has made and will continue to make an impact on all those with whom she comes in contact, as she represents the great State of Ohio. As Megan recently stated, “I believe that for those who love books, anything is within their reach.”

As a reminder, the shelves of your local library are filled with books on all subjects, including those related to the subjects surrounding this unique library program. Perhaps you are interested in hosting your own tea and want to brush up on proper etiquette or read more about pageantry. If so, you will find books on these subjects available for your perusal at the Library. As we begin a new year, you may be interested in books related to perseverance and the attainment of reaching your goals (such as those goals reached by our current Miss Ohio USA). Our friendly Library staff is always available to assist you in finding the right book selections on these or other topics of interest.

In addition to providing books for readers, the Library is committed to offering a wide variety of programs for all ages, such as the upcoming Winter Queen’s Tea. Those attending this special event, open to all ages, will experience a traditional afternoon tea — complete with refreshments, as well as a short reading on the history of tea and proper tea etiquette. Miss Ohio USA will share two winter stories before providing photo opportunities for those in attendance. I invite those in our quaint community to attend this special winteresque tea at Bossard Library, where we agree that the secret to a well-balanced life is a cup of tea in one hand and a good book in the other.

(Sources: teaspot.com; goodreads.com)

http://mydailysentinel.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/web1_DSaunders.jpg Miss Ohio USA Megan Wise is from Gallipolis. http://mydailysentinel.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/01/web1_IMG_0963.jpg Miss Ohio USA Megan Wise is from Gallipolis. Courtesy photo

From the Bookshelf

Debbie Saunders For the Times-Sentinel

Debbie Saunders is director of Bossard Memorial Library in Gallipolis.

Debbie Saunders is director of Bossard Memorial Library in Gallipolis.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus