By Hannah Poturalski

Staff Writer

Four regional hospitals are among 17 in Ohio to have 30-day readmission rates higher than their national peers.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services since 2008 has been tracking and publishing hospital readmission rates for Medicare patients experiencing heart attack, heart failure and pneumonia. The federal agency last December expanded its tracking to include readmissions for all diagnoses.

Locally, West Chester Hospital, Mercy Health - Fairfield Hospital, Mercy Health - Anderson Hospital and University of Cincinnati Medical Center had readmission rates worse than the national average, for patients returning within a month for unplanned reasons, from July 2011 through June 2012, according to CMS data.

Those 30-day readmission rates are directly tied to reduced Medicare payments for hospitals having excessive rates, according to the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program established in late 2012 by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. More than 2,200 hospitals in the U.S. are facing penalties for excessive readmissions.

Penalties are taken out of the hospital’s total reimbursements, and range from 0.23 percent at Atrium Medical Center in Middletown; 0.39 percent at Mercy Fairfield Hospital; 0.38 percent at West Chester Hospital; 0.21 percent at Fort Hamilton Hospital; and 0.37 percent at McCullough-Hyde Memorial Hospital in Oxford, according to Kaiser Health News and CMS data.

“There are initiatives absolutely everywhere you turn to help hospitals reduce readmission rates,” said Sheri Vogel, project manager for care transitions at Greater Cincinnati Health Council. “Since the advent of CMS fines, there has been a great incentive for hospitals to look inside to reduce those readmissions. It’s certainly a financial impetus but it’s about improving care, improving health and lowering cost.”

Efforts are underway locally and across the nation to reduce readmission rates.

Five hospitals in Greater Cincinnati are part of the Community-based Care Transitions Program, a national effort by CMS to reduce readmissions while improving care transitions from hospitals, Vogel said.

Through a partnership with the Council on Aging of Southwestern Ohio, Mercy Fairfield Hospital, University of Cincinnati Medical Center, Christ Hospital, Mercy Jewish Hospital and Clinton Memorial Hospital have been provided 15 care transition coaches to work with patients after being discharged, said Kim Clark, manager of elderly services at Council on Aging.

Cincinnati was one of the first seven programs to develop in the U.S. in March 2012, Clark said. There are now more than 100 programs.

Clark said the 30-day intervention program uses five pillars to reduce readmission rates: understanding medication instructions; following up with a physician within seven days; filling out a personal health record; knowing the red flags of your disease process; and connecting the patient with community resources such as transportation and Meals on Wheels.

“Our goal is to engage and coach (the patient) to take full responsibility for their own care,” Vogel said.

Vogel said another initiative at the health council to reduce readmission is through the efforts of an 18-member hospital group dubbed the Accountable Care Transformation (ACT) Leadership. Vogel said the group was able to reduce chronic heart failure readmissions at the 18 hospitals by 5.3 percent from February 2012 to March 2013.

West Chester Hospital is one of those 18 member hospitals participating in ACT, said Jamie Hunter, director of quality management at the hospital. She said a hospital’s inability to force a patient to comply with discharge instructions is “one of the criticisms CMS is getting because some things are not within our control.”

“When first discharged, patients are scared and more apt to follow instructions; the further out they can become non-compliant,” Hunter said.

Hunter said two years ago West Chester Hospital formed a multidisciplinary readmission performance improvement team to quell rising readmission rates. A group of nurses, physical therapists and dietitians follow up with patients between 48 and 72 hours of discharge to make sure they understood discharge and medication instructions and have made follow-up appointments with their physicians.

The follow-up calls also include educational elements on worsening signs and symptoms the patient should be aware of for their particular disease, said Barbara Bertke, coordinator in the quality management department at West Chester Hospital.

“When nurses discharge (a patient) they use a teach-back method,” Bertke said. “They ask the patient to repeat it back and it’s a much more effective method to make sure the patient understands what they’ve been taught.”

Dr. Tammy Lundstrom, chief medical officer for Premier Health, which operates Atrium Medical Center, said the network has implemented similar efforts to keep readmission rates low, including the teach-back method, identifying patients at-risk for readmission upon admission to the hospital, and giving patients the opportunity to fill prescriptions before they leave.

Lundstrom said the Premier network has recorded a 12 percent drop in readmissions in the last two years.

“It is important to work across the continuum of care to identify necessary community resources that can help patients remain in the home setting,” Lundstrom said in an email. “We also partner with home health agencies and long term care facilities to continue dialogue and physician-to-physician communication in order to enhance and improve patient care transitions.”