by John Gibson

When President Obama held the required Turkey Pardon ceremony at the White House just before Thanksgiving, he was accompanied by his two daughters Sasha and Malia.

It was hard to not notice that they looked they’d been ordered to attend. They looked bored.

At the time I thought “Par for the course”. They’re teenagers. Being dragged along for a parental event bores all teenagers, not just First Daughters. I figured most people who have or have had a teenager would feel sympathy for the parents going through this period in a young person’s life. You may oppose everything about Obama’s policies and tactics, but if you’ve had a teenager in the house you certainly would recognize what Barack and Michelle are up against, and you’d likely feel simpatico. I know I did.

As for criticizing the two girls, it didn’t enter my mind. Why should they be any different than virtually every other American teenager? It’s what kids this age do. No biggie. Happens millions of times a day everywhere in this country. I suppose every other country as well.

Well… I was wrong.

One person did decide to take a whack at the First Daughters, criticizing their attitude, their dress, and telling them to straighten up. Her name is Elizabeth Lauten, and until her critical Facebook post, she was a staffer for a Republican member of Congress from Tennessee. Notice I said “was”. Within a very short period of time she had to resign under a tsunami of criticism.

Elizabeth Lauton should have known better. She was out of line, for several reasons.

First, taking a stick to Presidential children is verboten. We in the media know that, and the rule is generally, even sometimes scrupulously, observed. But even if there weren’t rule, it’s just lowdown to subject children to the criticism we are otherwise entitled to aim at public figures. So Lauton was wrong. Period.

But more than that, she was a staffer working for a Republican. Flashing red lights should have gone off in her head even thinking of making a peep about Obama kids. She should have known the vultures were perched on the power lines waiting for someone to volunteer to be dead meat. Elizabeth Lauton stepped up.

Should she have resigned? Sure. She embarrassed her boss. That’s reason enough no matter what the particular issue. Was criticizing the President’s kids enough to warrant a resignation? Again, considering her position on Capitol Hill, yes.

But if you look at the media reaction, you might notice some serious condemnation and investigative work on Ms. Lauton. Even some assertions of out and out racism. The Washington Post put its foreign affairs correspondent on Lauton to discover what she’d ever written about anything involving foreign countries that could be held up for criticism, and hit paydirt, emphasis on dirt, when he found she had been arrested for shoplifting when she was seventeen. How dare a teenage crook jump on teens whose only offense was public sullenness>

Maybe some people deserve being thrown under the bus. The question is whether the media bus is justified running back and forth over the corpse, and whether that kind of gusto is simply a matter of partisan overkill.

Recall, please, as Howard Kurtz pointed out, these same people had to be dragged kicking and screaming to even notice Jonathan Gruber’s repeated and public expressions of scorn of the “stupid” American public when he helped in the Democrat project to hoodwink the country on Obamacare.

Verdict: Lauton guilty as charged. Further, media guilty of breaking into the jail and lynching the accused.