PRIETO’s moment of truth -- AC default ‘virtual certainty’ -- SHERIDAN lawsuit bombshell

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmannj)

Good Thursday morning! It’s not just Cinco de Mayo. It’s the moment of truth for Speaker Prieto, who has scheduled his Atlantic City bill for a vote today. But it’s a less momentous day for Atlantic City, which remains in a bad situation regardless of whether Prieto’s bill passes or fails.

Story Continued Below

QUOTE OF THE DAY: "I look forward to Thursday’s voting session.” — Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto http://politi.co/1rwbIo8

POLLS OF THE DAY: Just 15 percent of New Jersey Republicans think Gov. Christie would help Trump’s presidential ticket as a running mate http://politi.co/1rwb0HC and Hillary Clinton leads Bernie Sanders 2-1 in New Jersey http://politi.co/1rwb1eH

NEWS

PLEASE NOT ANOTHER A 3-4 HOUR CAUCUS MEETING — “Statewide stakes in vote over Atlantic City,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “It may be the most tense moment in New Jersey politics since the fight over pension and health care benefits in 2011. The Assembly meets Thursday with the aim of voting on Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto’s Atlantic City rescue bill (A3614), a counter to state takeover legislation backed by Senate President Stephen Sweeney and Gov. Chris Christie. Christie has publicly challenged whether Prieto has the 41 votes to pass his bill, and even some allies concede the outcome looks less assured than when Prieto scheduled the session late last week. ‘I have publicly said I support the speaker’s position,’ said Democratic Assemblyman John Wisniewski. ‘That being said, it’s unclear to me at this point whether there are enough votes to sustain the speaker’s position, and if there are not, we then need to look at what a reasonable compromise between the two positions are.’” http://politi.co/1NkeJls

RATING AGENCY LIMBO: HOW LOW CAN AC GO? — “S&P: Atlantic City default ‘appears to be a virtual certainty,’” by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins: “A Wall Street credit ratings agency has again downgraded Atlantic City, saying default or restructuring “appears to be a virtual certainty” for the seaside resort “even under the most optimistic circumstances.” S&P Global Ratings has moved the municipal bond rating from “CCC-“ to “CC,” and it gives it a negative outlook. Puerto Rico had been given the same rating before it started defaulting this week on $422 million in debt.” http://politi.co/1NkeLcV

DUH OF THE DAY — “Sweeney won’t post Prieto’s Atlantic City bill if it passes” http://politi.co/1NkeIOh

WHO GETS TO BE STALIN? — “Would-be Yalta Conference on Atlantic City Crumbles” http://bit.ly/26UV0iv

—Sweeney details ‘private’ Atlantic City offer, but Prieto says none was made” http://politi.co/1NkeFCf

—“Bramnick calls on legislative leaders to meet before AC vote” http://politi.co/26UTrkM

—“As Atlantic City goes broke, pols bicker over aid plans” http://bit.ly/1rwaDwu

— “And Then There Were 79: Kennedy Won’t be at Thursday’s Session” http://bit.ly/26UTdKp

ATLANTIS CITY — “Atlantic City Gambles on Rising Seas,” by National Geographic’s Michael Edison Hayden: “Sea level rise, caused by a confluence of melting polar ice caps and warmer temperatures expanding the ocean, could devastate Atlantic City in what its residents describe as a kind of “slow death,” one that takes the form of sporadic super storms and routine nuisance flooding, crumbling infrastructure, and endemic poverty. Only a few portraits of how rising seas will endanger American cities have entered the public consciousness. The most vivid example has been Miami. But Atlantic City—with its severe financial problems and low-lying shoreline—may prove to be another highly vulnerable place.” http://bit.ly/1SYIXcR (headline via The Press of Atlantic City’s Christian Hetrick: http://bit.ly/1SYIZRT)

THE SHERIDANS — “Detective in Cooper Hospital CEO slaying case: Investigator threw evidence in garbage,” by NJ 101.5’s Sergio Bichao: “A veteran detective involved in investigating the deaths of a prominent hospital executive and his wife now says the Somerset County Prosecutor’s Office botched the probe by mishandling and destroying evidence. The explosive allegations threaten to cast new doubt on the office’s conclusion that the 2014 case was a murder-suicide …. For the first time, however, skeptics of the investigation are bolstered by someone from the Prosecutor’s Office. ‘It was common knowledge among detectives assigned to the Forensic Unit that the Sheridan evidence was improperly collected, improperly preserved and subsequently destroyed,’ according to the text of a whistleblower lawsuit filed last month by Somerset County Prosecutor’s Office Detective Jeffrey Scozzafava.” http://bit.ly/1rwaNUK

RIGHT IN TIME FOR THE BRIDGEGATE TRIAL — “Donald Trump is the presumptive GOP nominee. Here are 5 people who could be his VP,” by The Washington Post’s Chris Cillizza: “1. Chris Christie: ‘I think Chris Christie is fantastic,’ Trump said Tuesday night as the New Jersey governor (and his wife) stood just behind him onstage. No one has risked more with his support for Trump than Christie, who has been roundly mocked and dismissed by the GOP establishment for the decision. Personality-wise, Christie and Trump seem to be an obvious match. And Trump has said before that he would want a politician as his running mate. From a geographic/ideological standpoint, Christie doesn't add a ton to the Trump ticket. But who knows if Trump even cares?” http://wapo.st/1SYJI5G

THIS ONE’S FOR THE CAMPAIGN MEMORABILIA FREEGANS — Steve Lonegan, Ted Cruz’s New Jersey campaign chairman, just threw out a ton of Cruz campaign buttons and stickers. I don’t know his trash pick-up schedule though. Via @Brian4NY http://bit.ly/1SYLfbM

R.I.P. — “Passaic County prosecutor’s detective killed himself in home, authorities say,” by The Record’s Stephanie Dazio: “Before a Passaic County prosecutor’s detective shot and killed himself in his home on Tuesday, many police officers and a SWAT team had amassed outside his home to try to talk him out of it, jolting neighbors and leaving them wondering what prompted the large response. Detective Sergio Mella, who had served in the prosecutor’s office since 2007, was found dead inside the Grandview Avenue house after 6 p.m, Prosecutor Camelia Valdes said in a statement on Wednesday morning. He had shot himself with his service weapon, the statement said..” http://bit.ly/1SYJCLa

LIARS LIARS BUTTS ON FIRE — “Are N.J. smokers lying when they apply for Obamacare?” by NJ Advance Media’s Kathleen O’Brien: “While 16 percent of New Jersey residents said in a federal health survey that they smoke, only 6 percent of the Obamacare applicants from here indicated they smoke. That mirrors the nationwide figure, according to Kaiser, which found that 17 percent of Americans smoke while only 7 percent of Obamacare applicants admitted to smoking. ‘Given how low these numbers are, it's hard to believe there is not some misrepresentation or lying going on,’ said Cameron Kaplan, assistant professor of health economics at the University of Tennessee, in the Kaiser analysis.” http://bit.ly/1Nk2RQh

THANK YOU JERSEY CITY — “N.J. home construction jumps to 10-year high,” by The Record’s Kathleen Lynn: “Home construction in New Jersey is running 20 percent ahead of last year's pace, powered by the multifamily sector's recovery from the worst housing downturn in decades. New Jersey builders got permits for 6,448 housing units in the first quarter of this year, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. That was the strongest performance since the first quarter of 2006, when the housing market was booming. Last year, home builders started more than 31,000 units in the state, the highest number since 2006. ‘The multifamily activity is predominantly Manhattan-centric,’ said Patrick O'Keefe, an economist with CohnReznick, an accounting firm with offices in Roseland. Home construction in South Jersey, he added, ‘is not robust at all.’” http://bit.ly/1Nk2MML

THE MARKET — "Speculators, cash sales crowd out home buyers in some NJ towns,” by NJ Spotlight’s Joe Tyrrell: “Just off Route 9 in Forked River, blocks of newly rehabilitated and elevated homes are interrupted by the occasional lot overgrown by weeds on which might sit a damaged or vacant home or a foundation naked since superstorm Sandy. Similar circumstances are visible on Passaic St. in Trenton, scarcely four blocks from the State Capitol, although the initial cause is different. There, the mix of homes includes some newly renovated, well-maintained, deteriorating or boarded-up, and a vacant lot. The city has been busy working on foreclosures. To real-estate analysts and academics, the circumstances reflect New Jersey's slow recovery from the big storm and the Great Recession. That has created problems for long-term residents, but buying opportunities for property investors, the experts said. The combination feeds into changing real-estate dynamics in much of the state, they said. One thing both towns have in common is the number of speculators purchasing properties in all-cash sales. This is worrisome given that speculators often use the properties to build rental housing or simply sit on.” http://bit.ly/1rwaVUl

LOCAL TIES — “Fulop-linked super PAC raised $360k in 2016, has some Jersey City ties,” by The Hudson County VIew’s John Heinis: “In the super PAC’s first Federal Election Commission filing for 2016, made on April 15th – which covers the dates January 1, 2016 through March 31, 2016 – the entity reports raising a total of $359,600. A handful of Coalition for Progress donors this time around have ties to local government agencies in Jersey City. Fairview Insurance Agency Associates, Inc., of Verona, gave a donation of $10,000 to the cause on March 18th, 2016. Back in 2013, Fairview insurance came under fire when agency Director Ryan Graham got involved with the board via email as a vote for a Princeton insurance firm was imminent, via The Jersey Journal.” http://bit.ly/1QSmppE

ISN’T THAT PRIETO’S TTF PLAN? — “Extreme pogo competition comes to Jersey City Saturday,” by The Jersey Journal’s Alisha Morales-Lizardo: “Don't look down Saturday at Riverview Park in Jersey City. You'll be sure to miss something. The park will be full of pogo riders looking to get maximum air in a relatively new sport that is catching fire with the "X Games" generation -- Xpogo. The Pogopalooza 2016 Tour event will feature athletes ‘pogoing’ nearly 7 feet in the air, contorting their bodies in all ways while holding on to their pogo sticks.” http://bit.ly/1Nk2IMZ

REMEMBER LANCE BEFORE HE WENT TO WASHINGTON? — “Lance endorses Trump for President,” by PolitickerNJ’s Max Pizarro: “‘I have always supported the Republican nominee for President of the United States dating back to my first vote for Richard M. Nixon in 1972,’ Lance said in a statement. ‘While no one would confuse my personality with his, Donald Trump will have my enthusiastic support for President against Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders.’” http://bit.ly/1QSmCsZ

WE GOT RID OF COMMON CORE BY CHANGING THE NAME — “State revises Common Core, renames N.J. academic standards,” by POLITICO’s Linh Tat: “Nearly a year after Gov. Chris Christie ordered a review of the Common Core standards …, the state Board of Education on Wednesday approved amendments to them and also put a new label on all of New Jersey’s education standards. The renaming of the New Jersey Core Curriculum Content Standards — under which the Common Core standards for English and math fell — as the ‘New Jersey Student Learning Standards’ has largely been viewed as a political move. Christie called for a review of the standards last May, during which time he said Common Core was ‘simply not working.’ The comment marked a departure from his previous support of those standards, and its timing — just weeks before the Republican governor officially announced he was running for president — left many speculating he wanted to distance the state from Common Core … [which] critics often equate … with federal overreach.” http://politi.co/1SZuRI6

SCHOOL BATHROOMS — “No Statewide Policy on Transgender School Bathroom Use,” by NJTV’s Erin Delmore: “The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals — which covers the area south of New Jersey — ruled a students’ gender identity is covered by the Constitution’s Equal Protection Clause and by Title IX. The U.S. Department of Education made that clear two years ago. But what exactly school districts need to do to be in compliance with the law? That’s up to the state. And New Jersey has no statewide guidance. Around half of the districts have adopted some version of a policy, or are in the process. The rest are working with a piecemeal — and often inconsistent — interpretation of the law.” http://bit.ly/1rwb8qk

OF COURSE HE’S FROM NEW JERSEY — “Too slow! Howell native trolls Cruz at Indiana campaign stop,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Mike Davis: “Wearing a red, white and blue flannel, one man stood out among the mob of supporters looking for an autograph or a selfie: With an iPhone in his left hand, 21-year-old Kevin Nichols reached in with his right for a handshake. ‘Senator Cruz, can I at least shake your hand,’ Nichols screamed over the crowd. Cruz gave him a sideways glance and immediately stuck his hand out. Before he could reach Nichols, the Howell native pulled his hand back and ran it through his hair. ‘Too slow, Joe!,’ he yelled … Video of Nichols's encounter – some would just call it a stunt – went viral on both his own Facebook page, political blogs and was aired on ‘The Daily Show with Trevor Noah.’” http://on.app.com/1QSmcCR

THEY SHOULD’VE GONE TO TRUMP UNIVERSITY — “Students facing deportation decry feds' fake college sting,” by NJ Advance Media’s Tim Darragh: “In April, prosecutors took the cover off their ruse of more than two years, announcing that 21 individuals had been charged with conspiracy to commit visa fraud, conspiracy to harbor aliens for profit and other charges. Meanwhile, immigration officials moved to revoke the visas of 1,076 individuals who had paid thousands of dollars each to recruiters or directly to the university to enroll. But not all of those who signed up for the school, mostly Indian and Chinese aliens, say they were here to ‘study"’under false pretenses. Indeed, some say it was the federal government, and not brokers or recruiters, who victimized them. ‘We were misunderstood, misled and hurt in the UNNJ process and subsequent federal sting operation,’ some students wrote in an online post.” http://bit.ly/1Nk2RzQ

OPEN FOR BUSINESS — “N.J. environmental agency has cut back on policing polluters, group says,” by The Record’s James O’Neill: “the state’s environmental protection agency has vastly cut back its policing of industrial and other polluters in recent years, raising the likelihood that companies will be less compliant with environmental laws, according to a report issued Wednesday by an environmental group. The number of site inspections made by the state Department of Environmental Protection fell from more than 60,000 in the 2011 fiscal year to fewer than 12,000 in 2014, a drop of 80 percent, according to the New Jersey Sierra Club, which used data posted on the DEP website and records it received through an open records request. The environmental group’s report also indicates that the number of enforcement actions by the DEP dropped by 56 percent between 2011 and 2014, to 8,107.” http://bit.ly/26V46Mq

THANKS OBAMA — “‘A furor on campus’ ahead of Obama’s visit to Rutgers,” by POLITICO’s Conor Skelding: “Rutgers University president Robert Barchi said Wednesday there has been a “furor on campus” as the university prepares for President Obama, who will deliver the commencement address May 15. ‘We literally found out about this two weeks ago, and my first invitation was in October of 2013. So, it does create a significant furor on campus about what you have to do,’ Barchi said during an Assembly budget hearing in Trenton. ‘There are a lot of things that have to get done.’ Rutgers announced the president's visit on April 14, a week after its board approved Bill Moyers, the award-winning broadcast journalist, as speaker. ‘It’s going to generate a major expense for the university...,’ Barchi said. ‘...I doubt that they’re going to reimburse Rutgers very much for the expenses.’ http://politi.co/1OeFHpj

—“Rutgers rescinds tickets for premium seating for Obama commencement speech” http://bit.ly/1Nk2EN4

*IF JC IS STILL ABOVE WATER — “Whole Foods opening Jersey City location in 2020,” by The Jersey Journal’s Terrence T. McDonald: “Whole Foods is coming to Jersey City. The health food store announced this afternoon that it will open a market near the Grove Street PATH station in 2020. Plans are for a 45,000-square-foot Whole Foods market on the site of Metropolis Towers, at Columbus Drive and Marin Boulevard. That's more than twice the size of the Whole Foods in Montclair, one of Whole Foods' 15 New Jersey locations.” http://bit.ly/26V3M05

THE DAILY FOAL — “Jon Stewart's farm sanctuary gets OK,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Karen Yi: “Tracey are one step closer to bringing a farm sanctuary to Colts Neck. The Monmouth County Agriculture Development Board approved the farm's concept Tuesday night, which includes an educational center for students and sustainable-vegetable production.” http://on.app.com/1Nk2Dca

NO ANSWERS — “Her son died in police custody, but this mother can't get any answers,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s Michael Boren: “Phillip White, 32, was pronounced dead at the South Jersey hospital after a scuffle four miles away with Vineland police, who had responded to a 911 call about a man screaming on a residential street that morning, March 31, 2015. A bystander's recording of part of the encounter showed an officer kneeling over White, who lay in the street. Authorities said White reached for an officer's holstered weapon, and in the video, another officer released a dog onto White. White's family saw his body five days later, on Easter. Officers told Pamela White he had had a heart attack. A death certificate from the medical examiner suggested he had been on PCP. Pamela White expected more findings to come out. Then a month passed. Then several more. Now, more than a year has gone by with almost no answers from authorities.’ http://bit.ly/1rwawBl

THE BLOOM IS OFF THE FIELD — “Officials: Bloomfield 'racial profiling' report is 'flawed'” by NJ Advance Media’s Laura Herzog: “A controversial report that officials said has become a ‘blemish’ on the town of Bloomfield was discussed and largely criticized by the mayor, police director, residents, and other officials on Tuesday evening. The recently released study — which was supposed to be representative of a larger national issue, was conducted by student researchers from the Seton Hall University School of Law Center for Policy and Research — called attention to an allegedly ‘persistent and disproportionate representation of African Americans and Latinos in the courtroom’ as compared to Bloomfield's demographics. No officials at Tuesday's meeting outright denied the possibility of racial profiling in Bloomfield, but they emphasized that the study had many ‘flaws.’” http://bit.ly/1Nk2BRl

A BIG EFFEN DEAL — “Local store drops 50 Cent over autism mockery,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Devin Loring: “Rapper 50 Cent was supposed to make an appearance at a local liquor store here — until the owners canceled the event after the rapper posted a video in which he mocked an autistic airport employee. Early Wednesday morning, the Stephens family, which owns Gerard’s Wine and Spirits in Point Pleasant, canceled a bottle-signing event that 50 Cent was supposed to attend on May 13. 50 Cent is a spokesperson for the Effen vodka brand.” http://on.app.com/1rwbpcY

MORE NEWS

—“Clinton plans fifth New Jersey fundraiser this month” http://politi.co/1OeFfYa

—“New Jersey and Bernie: Perfect together Sunday and Monday” http://bit.ly/26V3yWS

—"For NJ's Latino community, strong economic success and lingering struggles” http://bit.ly/1rwaBou

—“The Auditor's Politicomix: The eye roll…” http://bit.ly/1Nk2Hsc

— “Hospital Error Reports Have ‘Absolute Privilege,’ Court Rules” http://bit.ly/26V3Blx

—“Janitors who were fired over union ties to receive up to $1 million in back pay” http://bit.ly/1TnP9s1

—“Uber can continue to pick up at airport terminal, Elizabeth mayor says” http://bit.ly/1TnPfjh

—“Employee health coverage sparks criticism at Bergen County budget hearings” http://bit.ly/1rwaHfN

—“Elevated lead found in water in six of seven Bergenfield public schools” http://bit.ly/1rwaE3G

—“MVC will keep state inspection stations open” http://bit.ly/1TnPquS

—“Lead in water at Parsippany school 100 times over federal limit” http://bit.ly/1rwba1v

—“Trenton mayor, police call on community to help stem gun crime” http://bit.ly/1rwbcGF

-Want to make an impact? POLITICO New Jersey has a variety of multi-platform solutions available to reach and activate the most influential people in the Garden State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Share your message with our influential readers to increase awareness and drive action. Contact Chris Falls to find out how: cfalls@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

NOW AVAILABLE: HARD TO ACCESS CAMPAIGN DETAILS - POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium solution for policy professionals offers Campaign Pro. Get breaking news and analysis about this season’s unconventional presidential race, as well as developments about this year’s most competitive House, Senate and gubernatorial races. You’ll also have access to the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard, giving you all of the facts about specific races in one, convenient place. The dashboard provides campaign details such as: current consultant rosters, the latest polling numbers and race summaries written by Pro’s Campaign Pro reporters. Beyond the 2016 cycle, you’ll continue to receive coverage that provides you with a behind-the-curtain look at potential races, including insight about candidate/consulting firm partnerships forming behind the scenes, and about all fundraising efforts. Request your Campaign Pro demo today.