Sexual assault victims often stay silent about the crime because people are quick to blame them. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Editor's note: Daily Herald Media has partnered with the Marathon County Sexual Assault Intervention Team to bring you this weekly series during April. This is the first of four reports.

WAUSAU - It is estimated one-half to two-thirds of sex-related crimes never get reported, which makes their true prevalence difficult to estimate.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is working on national sampling to determine a more accurate picture, as relying on reported incidents does not capture the reality. The reasons sex crimes are so under-reported are many. We work with hundreds of victims a year who have never reported their assault to the authorities. When asked why, a common response is “no one would believe me.”

Indeed, we see this play out in cases that have been reported when the investigation begins, or during trial. Not only are victims frequently not believed, but also we seem to have a hard time believing that someone would commit such heinous acts. For example, a juror in a sexual assault case commented that she “just couldn’t believe such a nice young man would do such a thing." Or the young man who was approached by an officer investigating a report of sexual assault and when questioned said, “Yeah, she was drunk and said ‘no, get off’ but she didn’t mean it. I can’t believe she would say I raped her.”

Buy Photo Jane Graham Jennings (Photo: USA TODAY NETWORK-Wisconsin)

What is also a common factor is that victims of sexual assault are often blamed for what was done to them. Victims of sexual assault continue to be questioned about their behavior; we tend to view victims as somehow contributing to the assault instead of looking at offenders for what they are — predators of sexual violence.

We live in a culture that shames victims and supports comments like, “Women who get drunk and go to the fraternity are idiots looking to get raped,” or, when the systemic problem of rape of women in the military came to light, we heard comments like “When you put men and women together, what did you think was going to happen?”

How about not rape? That is what we think should happen.

Stopping rape is really quite simple: Don’t rape anyone. That’s it. That’s the answer. Tell people to stop raping.

Instead, we tell women to take self-defense classes, to never leave their drinks unattended, to go out in groups, to not drink, to not walk at night, to park their car close to lights, and the list goes on. Women who follow all of these rules still get raped. And they still get blamed for the rape, and we create one more rule that women must follow to keep themselves safe.

Every time we make a new rule for women to protect themselves from rape, we create another reason a woman won’t report. Every time we question the behavior of a victim, we create another excuse a rapist will use to cast blame elsewhere. Every time we allow the focus on behavior to zoom in on the victim, we allow the behavior of rapists to go unchanged.

For more information on sexual violence and how to support victims, contact The Women’s Community at 715-842-5663 or www.womenscommunity.org

Jane E. Graham Jennings is the executive director of The Women’s Community.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1S0vGzZ