Dealing with lice in the hair of our children is never fun, but new mutant versions of lice — known as super lice — have many Americans even more skeeved out than before.

These super lice are resistant to over-the-counter treatments, leaving many parents scratching their heads (seriously) about what to do next in the event their kids come home from school with the dreaded lice letter.

Twenty-five states are seeing super lice right now, a report from Southern Illinois University found. They aren’t necessarily any bigger or any smarter, but they’ve found a way to resist the comb-through drugstore treatments that many of us had to undergo when we were kids.

"There is nothing really 'super' about them, of course. They're simply lice that are more resistant than previous generations to permethrin, the active ingredient in many lice treatment products," Justin Talley, an entomologist at Oklahoma State University, said in a statement.

"They have been able to change their biochemistry. It’s a nuisance," said Jennifer Schindler, director of franchise relations for Lice Lifters, which runs 13 anti-lice franchises around the country.

"There’s a reason lice have been around since the beginning of man," Schindler added. "It’s a very frustrating, annoying time for parents."

Amber Pittman of Winder, Georgia, has a 7-year-old son in the first grade. She has talked to him about not sharing brushes and hats in school, she said, but she’s been stressing about it after reading about super lice in the media. Her son has not had lice, but Pittman says the thought of it "terrifies me."

"Boys share things all the time," Pittman told LifeZette. "If he were to come home with lice I would immediately consult a pediatrician because of the new resistant forms. If over-the-counter meds are proving useless, I am ill-equipped to do much more."

Treatment Options

Schindler's company, in addition to its franchises, offers a natural lice solution that can be purchased online. More companies are cropping up like hers. Treatments typically range from $150 to $200, with online products running anywhere from $20 to $75 to combat the little buggers. Family-sized lice kits are available.

Not all treatments are covered, however, by health insurance. Schindler said the Affordable Care Act has made it questionable as to whether or not treatments will be covered.

Related Content HealthZette Selfie Lice New ways to share, new issues with treatment

The Center for Lice Control offers a comparable $50 do-it-yourself kit along with KaPOW! Products that parents can use at home. The online resource also offers mobile lice services: Professionals come into the home to treat lice, which costs $150 per person.

"It’s completely non-toxic, but it’s 100 percent effective to defeat live lice — it kills in seconds," Ed Steinberg, president of the center told LifeZette. Three separate treatments must be administered, he said, to ensure lice are destroyed at different phases of their life cycle.

In addition to the dimethicone-based (less toxic) treatments, AirAllé blows heated air into the scalp and hair shaft to dehydrate the lice. The process is followed up with a dimethicone oil rinse to kill any lice that hatched and survived the treatment.

Ivermectin, sold under the brand names Stromectol or Sklice, is another option that still seems to work. However, that treatment can run about $300 if not covered by insurance, Steinberg said.

So Long, Lice

Steinberg noted that parents need to take an active role in preventing lice — then there won’t be lice hysteria — or super lice hysteria. And while many are calling on schools to have stricter lice policies, public health officials warn that lice is a community issue, not necessarily a school issue.

"It’s the parents’ responsibility, not the school, number one," said Steinberg, adding that one over-the-counter treatment is never effective. The best way to prevent lice is to invest in a metal comb and check the child’s head weekly for nits, which are empty eggs where lice have hatched.

"You want to own this process," he said. "If you use that regularly, you won’t have a lice problem."