The cafeteria was quiet in Washington Township's Orchard Valley Middle School Friday morning as the seventh-graders listened as Air Force Technical Sergeant Brian Williams told his story.

Williams is from the 87th Security Forces Squadron out of Joint Base McGuire-Dix where he works as a military working dog trainer. He trains handlers with their dogs, whether it be drug- or explosives-detecting dogs.

The Arizona native was approached to be the guest speaker when seventh- and eighth-grade history teacher Chris Jameczko requested to have a speaker.

"We've been doing this for about five to six years now," Jameczko said. "We've had great luck having speakers come in, and this year we had a speaker with an unbelievable story to tell."

Williams spoke to the students about the importance of Memorial Day, as well as his story of how he lost his left leg in Afghanistan.

Williams was in his sixth deployment on April 25, 2012, in Afghanistan when he was inside a building with his German shepherd Carly searching for improvised explosive devices (IEDs).

"(Carly) searched all the rooms. I was asked to have him search a room upstairs, so I sent him up and he doesn't come out," Williams said. "I don't know what's he doing, he could be doing anything."

He alerted the men that he was going upstairs because Carly hasn't notified if he found anything, and he needed to check.

"So I'm walking up the steps, and everything turned brown," Williams said. "I remember hovering for a long period of time, like everything was frozen, and then I landed."

He said when he landed he was conscious and he remembered everything after that point.

"I was laying on the ground and past my knee was missing. I tried to crawl a little bit. I couldn't move."

Williams spent time in the hospital, where he saw his family, and his girlfriend, Emily. She helped him get through rehabilitation and he's thankful she was there the whole time. They are getting married this weekend.

But while he recovered, all he could wonder about was if Carly was OK.

"He was still up there, he never came out, so I had no idea what was going on," Williams recalled, his eyes welling with tears as he shared his story.

After three weeks in the hospital, Carly was brought to Williams.

"He wasn't harmed. I went through rehab, looking to get better, and the Air Force decided to give me Carly, so now Carly is my dog all the time, a regular house dog," Williams said, getting emotional about the memory.

Williams said he doesn't regret joining the military and knew the possibility of what could happen to him on a mission.

"I knew when I was walking with my dog that day I knew the possibility of what could happen," he said.

Kelly Evans, a seventh-grade reading teacher, said she was in awe of Williams and his story.

"We often talk about character to our students and they were able to see a strong personality with great character," Evans said.

She said the students read information about Williams before he came in so they could be prepared with questions.

"They were very excited to meet him. He's strong and determined and it's great the kids get to see that kind of person."

Williams said he's the same person he was before the accident, and that his life now is the new normal.

"I was doing what I was trained to do," he said. "Obviously there was something upstairs. I was doing what I was supposed to do but I got hurt. It's what I signed up to do."

He began his story by telling the students what Memorial Day means by saying, "Memorial Day is more somber. It's to remember the fallen members of the military in all the wars, all the way back to the Civil War."

He also told the students to be grateful for what they have and to be grateful for those who have sacrificed their lives. He told them he owes it to the fallen soldiers to continue living life.

"Those who are not here, I owe it to them to do what I'm doing now. I am still working, still serving. I owe it to them. If they were still here they'd want to continue to work and serve," Williams said.

----

Contact staff writer Kristina Pritchett at 856-686-3655 or kpritchett@southjerseymedia.com