There is only one question worth asking about the sudden alliance between a vulgar talking yam and Princess Dumbass of the Northwoods. It is not a question you need to be born a cynic to ask, although that assuredly helps.

What did it cost him?

I mean, honestly, are we supposed to believe that this was a simple meeting of the minds? (A hard pull anyway, since they're at least one short.) This is a guy who is said to have paid for people to stand and cheer at his announcement being endorsed by a woman who hasn't done anything except for the check in seven years? And the Trump campaign is the gravy train of all gravy trains right now, a self-financed sinecure for the otherwise unemployable that looks like it could keep on rolling all the way to the Republican National Convention and beyond. Why wouldn't she climb aboard? All she had to do was sell out Ted Cruz, for whom she campaigned when he first ran for the Senate, and John McCain, whose heroism Trump already has denigrated. And she gets to take out her vengeance on all those Republicans who were unable to keep her from failing in 2008. What the hell. It beats working for a living. However, let us be fair. Let us explain this marvelous turn of events in her own words.

Advertisement - Continue Reading Below

(And, not for nothing, but the extended Palin clan can't seem to stay out of trouble with the law. Nice timing, Track.)

Are you ready to make America great again? We all have a part in this. We all have a responsibility. Looking around at all of you, you hard-working Iowa families. You farm families, and teachers, and teamsters, and cops, and cooks. You rockin' rollers. And holy rollers! All of you who work so hard. You full-time moms. You with the hands that rock the cradle. You all make the world go round, and now our cause is one.

Most Popular

And, furthermore…

Thank a vet, and know that the United States military deserves a commander-in-chief that our country passionately, and will never apologize for this country. A new commander-in-chief who will never leave our men behind. A new commander-in-chief, one who will never lie to the families of the fallen. I'm in it, because just last week, we're watching our sailors suffer and be humiliated on a world stage at the hands of Iranian captors in violation of international law, because a weak-kneed, capitulator-in-chief has decided America will lead from behind. And he, who would negotiate deals, kind of with the skills of a community organizer maybe organizing a neighborhood tea, well, he deciding that, "No, America would apologize as part of the deal," as the enemy sends a message to the rest of the world that they capture and we kowtow, and we apologize, and then, we bend over and say, "Thank you, enemy."

Moreover...

Well, and then, funny, ha ha, not funny, but now, what they're doing is wailing, "well, Trump and his, uh, uh, uh, Trumpeters, they're not conservative enough." Oh my goodness gracious. What the heck would the establishment know about conservatism? Tell me, is this conservative? GOP majorities handing over a blank check to fund Obamacare and Planned Parenthood and illegal immigration that competes for your jobs, and turning safety nets into hammocks, and all these new Democrat voters that are going to be coming on over border as we keep the borders open, and bequeathing our children millions in new debt, and refusing to fight back for our solvency, and our sovereignty, even though that's why we elected them and sent them as a majority to DC.

In conclusion…

When we're talking about no more Reaganesque power that comes from strength. Power through strength. Well, then, we're talking about our very existence, so no, we're not going to chill. In fact it's time to drill, baby, drill down, and hold these folks accountable. And we need to stop the self-sabotage and elect new, and independent, a candidate who represents that and represents America first, finally. Pro-Constitution, common-sense solutions, that he brings to the table.

I accept with some sadness that political oratory is something of a lost art. I didn't think the same could be said for syntax. I was wrong.