Ankeny, Iowa — John Kasich is holding a town hall in Iowa, and he says the phrase that is supposed to be the death knell for a Republican presidential candidate in 2016: “I’ve been in politics a long, long time.”

He says it because he believes that being president is about more than talk, but about experience and accomplishments.

“I like to talk about what I have done,” Kasich says, “because I think that if I show you I’ve done it a couple of times before and now I tell you I can do it again, I hope that the record of the past would convince you.”

He certainly has a record. Kasich has held office for a total of 27 years. He spent four years in the Ohio State Senate, 18 years in the U.S. House, and he has been governor of Ohio since 2011.

Kasich calls himself a strong conservative, but also stresses that practicality is what you get with him. He’s not a bomb-thrower and talks with the matter-of-fact tone of someone who saw every kind of political problem imaginable when he was chairman of the House Budget Committee for six years.

“I try as best as I can to, when I see a problem, I look at it and I go fix it,” he said. While fielding 20 questions in his hourlong town hall, Kasich’s answers are peppered with phrases such as, “I don’t know, I’d have to check that out,” “I’ll check it out, I’ll go out and look again,” “My mind is open, I just say show it to me,” and “I’m open to a discussion, but we also need to be realistic.”

Kasich has plans to balance the federal budget in less than 10 years, saying that when he was in Washington, “We did balance the budget, we cut taxes, and when I left we had a $5 trillion projected surplus.” He says that since he took over as governor of Ohio the economy has boomed and that he will apply those same tactics nationally: “It’s common sense regulations, it’s tax cuts to spur economic growth, and it’s restraining government spending.”

Kasich laments that his ideas to stabilize Social Security in 1998 weren’t adopted — likening it to a patient going getting a bad diagnosis and, “You come back 10 years later and you say to the doctor, ‘well, what can you do for me?’ ” He says his Social Security fix will probably have to involve upper-income Americans receiving less in benefits. “So if somebody says they can just come and fix it and nobody has to make any sacrifices, they’re not being honest.”

When asked about climate change, the practical governor showed no interest in fighting over science (“I think humans do affect climate change, but the degree to which is still not certain”), but instead says we need to be promoting renewable energy sources such as wind and solar and working toward “achievable” energy-efficiency goals and standards that won’t cause job loss.

“We should have been doing these things a long time ago,” he says. He favors a middle ground on the issue. “I think the environment is important. But I’m not in favor or worshiping it, I’m just in favor of taking care of it and improving it.”

When asked about national security issues, Kasich says that he doesn’t like the U.S. getting involved in civil wars, but with ISIS, America is facing an enemy not interested in territory per se, but in destroying Western culture.

“They are intent on destroying our very way of life,” he says. So, “We need to take them out. And at the same time I believe we need to communicate our values worldwide.” He believes that America isn’t at war with Islam. “It’s just an infinitesimal number that have hijacked that religion.”

Kasich also says there are other aspects of national security to think about, such as fighting global poverty. He notes that he worked with the singer Bono on those issues and there is more America can do.

“We talk a lot about war. It’s also important that we show the heart of America,” he said. “If we have a bomber flying over an African village, I want someone there saying, ‘Yeah, they may be flying that bomber, but they also vaccinated my children.’ ”

Every Republican Iowa campaign town hall features a question the Affordable Care Act, with the usual response by the candidate being that he or she would repeal it, and Kasich’s answer was no different.

However, a follow up question — in which a man said that due to a chronic illness he had never been able to get health insurance until Obamacare — elicited an answer one would not hear from most of the other GOP presidential hopefuls. For Kasich, who as governor accepted Obamacare funding to expand Medicaid in Ohio, there is a moral element to the health care issue.

He told the questioner that as president he would push to bring resources to every state to cover the working poor. Then he paused, looked down at the ground, and got angry.

“Are you kidding me? It could be any of us, right? No. You have a pre-existing condition, you gotta’ get insurance,” he said. “That’s not our country!”

He expanded Medicaid in Ohio, he said, “so we could have the money that is necessary for the working poor, the mentally ill, for the drug addicted. I mean, you don’t turn your back on those kinds of things. Because that’s not the way I was raised. We just don’t behave that way. We stick together. It’s important that we do.”

In the traditional view of American politics, Kasich’s experience and gubernatorial accomplishments in the vital swing state of Ohio should be recipe for success as a presidential candidate, but so far at least, not this year.

When I asked him if he ever would have expected the circus-like atmosphere that has permeated the race this time around, he feigned ignorance. So I rephrased the question: “I mean Trump!” The governor of Ohio sighed, and said, “I’m not caught up in it. We’ll see. We have a long time to go.”

John Kasich is playing the long game. He’s banking on his party reverting to a long tradition of picking a political veteran as its nominee.