On the first day of its Kickstarter campaign, Denver-based Notion raised what it asked for: a cool $50,000. But $50,000 doesn’t go very far in building a smarthome hub, sensors and a mobile app to control almost everything in a house.

Notion wasn’t in it for the money, said co-founder Brett Jurgens.

“It may sound altruistic, but it’s true. We had funding going into it and a lot of support,” said Jurgens, whose company was part of the prestigious Techstars program. “We would rather have the feedback now so we can use it to make the product.”

Kickstarter, once considered a jackpot for tech startups, has turned into just another tool for entrepreneurs and businesses. While the popular crowdfunding site continues to have huge highlights (August’s $13.3 million Coolest Cooler) and low lights (potato salad, anyone?), the site has changed for businesses, whether intentional or not.

“Instead of looking at Kickstarter or Indiegogo as a vehicle to raise money, what’s happening is they are using it as a place for selling products and getting a better perspective of the market size,” said Ray Burrasca, a director at Wisdom Peaks Capital who organizes the Colorado Crowdfunding Meetup.

He’s noticed many companies use Kickstarter solely as a test ground. If they fail, they tweak the project based on feedback and return and crowdfund successfully.

“It’s really only the spectacular businesses that get lots of money,” Burrasca said. “Ordinary, run-of-the mill businesses have a hard time getting funding, but even ordinary businesses can get a good idea of the size of the market for their product, and sometimes these companies do Kickstarter just for that alone.”

While there are more crowdfunding sites than a few years ago, companies return to Kickstarter due to its sheer size.

A year ago, the company said 5 million people backed a project since its inception in 2009. Today, it’s 7.2 million. The number of projects have also grown — to date, Kickstarter has hosted 177,494 projects, up 53.3 percent from last October.

But success rates for projects are declining. In 2011, Kickstarter reported that 46 percent of projects succeeded. Last year, it dropped to 43.8 percent. Today, it’s 40.6 percent.

Companies that use Kickstarter as a marketing or pre-sales tool still need to work to get attention.

Nikki Braziel, co-founder of Octa, remembers when Octa’s Monkey Kit, a hands-free iPad stand, launched on Kickstarter two years ago. She counted 92 other technology projects. It raised $103,621 from more than 1,000 people.

But this summer, Octa’s TabletTail was among 300 technology projects. It succeeded but raised much less — $43,961 from 358 people. (Incidentally, there were 862 live projects in Kickstarter’s technology category on Thursday.)

“I feel like we got lucky with our Monkey kit because it seemed to be a golden era for Kickstarter,” she said. “There are 7 million users but its user base is growing vertically, while projects are growing exponentially.”

Octa had to work harder to attract investors, she said. In its first campaign, 80 percent of its backers found the project from within Kickstarter. The second? Only 40 percent.

“It’s not if you build it they will come anymore,” she said. Octa has no plans for a third Kickstarter.

“I don’t know what else we could have done to generate more visibility for the project,” she said. “It’s still a phenomenal avenue that didn’t exist five years ago. But for a company like ours, which is in the late-startup phase, some traditional grassroots marketing might actually serve us better.”

Jeff Popp and Casey Lorenzen returned to Kickstarter this summer after a successful project two years ago for its MHM bags. But in June, the Denver startup Co.Alition, which touted $375-and-up tech bags with built-in power and digital storage, ditched its floundering campaign when it realized it wasn’t going to reach its goal of $80,000.

They tweaked the campaign and Co.Alition returned a month later, this time asking for $15,000.

“What we asked for on Kickstarter the second time was honestly not enough,” Popp said. “We actually needed $80,000.”

The second attempt raised $51,000. Additionally, attention from the original campaign resulted in $20,000 in pre-orders made on the company’s site. They plan to raise the rest on Fundable.com.

While the goal was money, Popp added, “the three things anyone running a Kickstarter is looking for are marketing, getting pre-sales and getting research on the product.”

That’s why Notion launched its Kickstarter last month. It already had raised at least $167,000, according to documents filed with the U.S. Securities & Exchange Commission. And with lots of development completed, plus a prototype nearly ready for manufacturing, Jurgens said the time was right.

Notion raised $281,655 or five times more than it asked for. Not only is it getting feedback from 1,338 supporters during final development, those people paidNotion an average of $210.

“We have a 1,300-person beta-test crew, a group of people vested in getting the best product possible,” Jurgens said. “If you want to build a product and you’ve done some work, what’s wrong with trying to get people interested in paying ahead of time and offering feedback into something they want to buy?”

Tamara Chuang: 303-954-1209, tchuang@denverpost.com or twitter.com/Gadgetress