Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Clinton released her first campaign video defending the Affordable Care Act (ACA) on Monday.

"We've got to defend the Affordable Care Act," says the Democratic frontrunner in the video, which was recorded during a campaign event in New Hampshire.

The video marks Clinton's first advertisement addressing health care in the 2016 election. It also comes just days after the Supreme Court handed the law a major victory in King v. Burwell.

The video also featured a high school student named Meghan Richardson, who suffers from a chronic lung condition called cystic fibrosis. Before the ACA, insurance companies made it difficult for people with such conditions to receive health insurance.

"No child, no adult, should go without quality, affordable health care," said the former first lady, adding that she has been working to expand access to health care for over 20 years. "My pledge, as it has been for 25 years, is I will do anything I can to make that promise," Clinton says in front of a small crowd of supporters, including Meghan.

Last week, Clinton called on the nation to take a stance against gun violence following the horrific massacre at a historic African-American church in Charleston, South Carolina Wednesday night.

The mass shooting took place on June 17, when a white man, identified as 21-year-old Dylann Roof, opened fire at the Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church while the church members were praying. Altogether nine people were killed, including the church's pastor, state Sen. Clementa Pinckney, 41. Three people survived.

On Thursday, the former secretary of state made her first public remarks on the tragedy, challenging lawmakers to take new actions to curb gun violence.

"How many people do we need to see cut down before we act?" she asked while speaking at a summit of elected and appointed Latino officials in Las Vegas, according to Time.

"So as we mourn and as our hearts break a little more, and as we send this message of solidarity that we will not forsake those who have been victimized by gun violence, this time we have to find answers together," Clinton said.

Watch Clinton's health care ad below.