Buy Photo Howell Township is considering selling the property that houses the school board's central offices. (Photo: Bob Bielk/Asbury Park Press)Buy Photo

Howell Township is considering selling the property that houses the school district's central offices, which if sold could force the school board to move, township officials said.

The 9,300-square-foot building on an acre of land at 200 Squankum Yellowbrook Road is owned by the town, but is being leased to the Howell Board of Education, records show.

New Jersey American Water has expressed interest in the buying the property, but the town council is still discussing whether to sell it, Howell Mayor William Gotto said.

The company owns two adjacent properties at the same address, including a water treatment plant that's going to be expanded, New Jersey American Water Spokesman Richard Barnes said.

The town is still early in its negotiations, Gotto said. Meeting minutes show the town council has been discussing the sale in executive session since April, but those minutes won't be available to the public until a sale is complete or if the town decides not to sell.

"The goal of the (town council) is to reduce expenses and tax burdens to our residents," Gotto said. "Property that we have no interest in anymore can be sold to public or private entities and to be turned into something to be put on the tax roll."

The property is assessed at $986,000, records show. The adjacent 12 acres owned by New Jersey American Water are assessed at about $3.3 million together.

Gotto said he's not sure if the property could be sold directly to New Jersey American Water, or if it would have to be auctioned publicly.

Howell Superintendent Joseph Isola said he knows that the town is considering the sale, but said he doesn't know the depth and the details of the conversations between the town at the water company.

"I don't want to leave this building," Isola said. "It's an administrative building. It fits us well. (The town) knows that."

The school district and the town have a 15-year lease that ends in April 2016, but the tenant has the option to renew the lease five times for five-year periods each. The district paid $10,000 annually in rent from 2001 to 2011, and now the district pays $1 a year.

The school district maintains, insures and pays the utilities on the building, according to the lease. Isola said the district also paid for major renovations before they occupied the building in 2001.

"There's no hard set plan as to whether we would defend our lease or look for other viable solutions," Isola said. "We like our space. It fits us well. It keeps our central administration together and cohesive."

Isola said if the building does get sold, the district can look at other options, including splitting the central offices up among other buildings, putting the offices in an existing school or using Southard School, which was closed in 2009. He said having the offices isn't ideal and raises safety concerns, but can be done.

"I'm willing to sit with the township partners and see what the process is," Isola said.

The water company wasn't clear about whether expanding the 10,000-gallon-a-day treatment facility to treat 18,000 gallons of water per day would include the property the administrative offices are on. Barnes said the expansion, as it stands now, would only be on the property the company already owns.

The expansion is about halfway through the design phase, but Barnes said he didn't have any timelines as to when the phase would be finished. When it's over, though, the company will seek permits and approvals om the town for the project, he said.

Kala Kachmar; 732-643-4061; kkachmar@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1IJLCDw