Spice “Zombies” Roaming Florida Parks, Why Government is to Blame

Stories about the ravages of the synthetic drug Spice are becoming more commonplace. Erratic and violent behavior, brain damage and trips to the emergency room are just some of the effects of these chemical concoctions.

Now we can add “zombies” to the list.

Spice, sometimes known as K2, has gained popularity in recent years as some sort of substitute for cannabis that won’t get you fired if it shows up on a drug test. Many people even call it “synthetic marijuana” even though it is nothing of the sort. The DEA has taken steps to ban some of the chemicals contained in Spice, but we all know how well prohibiting a product works in terms of lessening its use.

Now from Clearwater, Florida come reports of bad batches of Spice leaving zombie-like addicts wandering local parks, screaming inhumanly and scaring citizens. This begs the question: if cannabis were legal would Spice use be on its way to becoming an epidemic?

People try Spice because they think it mimics the effects of marijuana, doesn’t carry the threat of legal charges, and won’t show up on a drug test. If cannabis were legal many of these people wouldn’t have tried Spice in the first place; in fact, there might not have ever been a market demand that led to the creation and marketing of Spice.

No matter what your views on cannabis, it doesn’t make you walk around like a zombie and scream at people.

Of course there will always be a small group of people who will try anything if they think it will get them high; bath salts, keyboard cleaner, cough syrup. But people try “synthetic marijuana” and ingest unknown chemicals without really knowing what the effects will be. People assume they are just going to get high and chill; but many of these people now know differently and some of them have paid for that knowledge with their life.

Prohibition causes so much harm, even in ways that can’t be seen until it’s too late. Behavior cannot be banned. Education is the key.