DeKALB – Brandon Clanin knows his criminal record is keeping him from having the career he wants.

Clanin, of DeKalb, was released from prison in 2009 and completed a year of parole. He said he’s not the same person he was when he was convicted of burglary and residential burglary for incidents that happened in May 2005, when he was 28 years old.

Now 36, he started a home computer-repair business called Computer Problems in 2010, has an associate degree in computer technology from the University of Phoenix, and is working with a local employment center to obtain grants to further his education. He said he just wants employers to give him a chance after many have turned him down because of his record.

“I feel a felony background automatically eliminates me from a good job that involves brain work,” Clanin said. “I regret the foolish choices I was making. When I was going through bad times growing up, I didn’t have a good perspective on who I am or what I wanted to do.”

Robert Brame, a criminology professor at the University of South Carolina, led a January study published in the Crime and Delinquency journal, which showed 49 percent of black men and 40 percent of white men have been arrested by the time they turn 23. These arrests can hurt their ability to find work, go to school and participate fully in their communities.

Brame has also done research that shows the older someone’s criminal history is, the less predictive it is of future behavior.

“If you’re going to use it to screen people, if the rationale behind that is people might commit crimes in the future,” Brame said, “our research shows the older the criminal history is, the less valid it is to exclude people.”

Unlike some states, Illinois does allow convicted felons the right to vote, or to serve on a jury, once they have served their sentence. Convicted felons, with the exception of some people convicted of drug crimes, are eligible to receive federal student aid for college. The expansion of the Affordable Care Act this year even gave more recently released prisoners access to Medicaid.

However, those searching for jobs find many employers are not willing to give them a chance, and make no distinction if a felony conviction came 2 years or 10 years ago.

Tax credits of up to $1,500 an employee are available to employers who hire felons, and the Illinois WorkNet Center, 1701 E Lincoln Highway, DeKalb, works with people who have criminal records.