Kids tech company Fuhu had a terrific Black Friday sales promotion, featuring $149 Nabi-branded tablets for $99.

“It was an incredible deal,” said Samantha Begel of Cape Coral, Fla., who ordered two of the child-friendly computer toys for her children from Nabi’s website. (The tablets are also sold at major retailers.)

Fuhu Nabi Elev-8 Fuhu

But the tablets haven’t shown up, and she said emails and hours on hold on the phone haven’t produced a refund or an explanation.

Ms. Begel isn’t the only one waiting for her purchase. Fuhu sent out emails warning the Black Friday sale was such a hit, deliveries could be delayed, though the company is hoping to catch up on orders soon.

Nabi’s Facebook page lit up with consumer gripes. “This is so aggravating!!!” one customer wrote. “They could at least pick up their phones!!!”

“I’m hoping I get reimbursed, but at this point I went ahead and ordered the Kindle Fire for my kids,” Ms. Begel said. “They are three and four, so they don’t understand that Santa gives out IOUs.”

It will really take some explaining if kids instead find their stockings stuffed with forms to file claims as unsecured creditors of the struggling toy maker. Fuhu filed for chapter 11 bankruptcy protection Dec. 7, low on cash and inventory, and has since secured court approval on critical motions to ensure it can continue business as usual, Chief Executive James Mitchell told Bankruptcy Beat in a statement.

Fuhu has product to sell and is shipping orders on an expedited basis, he said. Wait times on the customer support lines should ease.

“We understand the inconvenience this has placed on our valued customers and apologize,” he said. Some consumers are now reporting on Facebook they are getting notified their orders have shipped.

In court, a lawyer for Fuhu’s main lender, Tennenbaum Capital Partners, said it is making accommodations to ensure the company can get product to customers. Seems nobody wants to be the guy in the Grinch suit this year.

In court papers, Fuhu blamed its bankruptcy troubles including delayed delivery last holiday season from the world’s largest contract manufacturer, Foxconn Technology Group. Foxconn denied it was responsible for Fuhu’s struggle to fill orders.

“Yes, the production hiccup in 2014 had a significant effect on Fuhu’s business that contributed to our current situation,” Mr. Mitchell said. Foxconn, however, was an early supporter and investor in Fuhu, he added. “We hit a rough logistics patch, but those relationships remain intact and an ongoing business relationship between the companies remains a potential part of the picture moving forward.”

Once a high-flyer that topped magazine lists of growing, promising private companies, Fuhu sold a lot of tablets and other children’s technology products geared to guiding them into the online world safely. Revenue for 2013 topped $195 million. The company has a tentative deal to sell its tablet business to toy maker Mattel, though that is subject to higher bids at an auction Fuhu wants to hold next month.

Write to Tom Corrigan at tom.corrigan@wsj.com and Peg Brickley at peg.brickley@wsj.com