By Eric Boehm | Watchdog.org

They’re from the government and they don’t want your help.

Except, sometimes, when the do.

One of the more interesting, though relatively inconsequential, aspects of the government shutdown has been the inconsistent policy from the federal government when it comes to accepting assistance from states and private donors who want to spend their own cash to keep certain things running during the shutdown.

As Watchdog.org reported last week, at least two states have been prevented from using a combination of state and private funds to reopen national parks closed after the federal government shutdown on October 1.

But the federal government has accepted funds from a private donor keep a different program running.

Head Start, a federally subsidized preschool program for 3- and 4-year-olds that is run by the Department of Health and Human Services, was partially closed by the federal shutdown. Seven programs in six states — Alabama, Connecticut, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi and South Carolina — were closed, affecting about 7,000 kids.

But then, two heroes emerged.

John and Laura Arnold, philanthropist billionaires from Texas, announced last week they would spend $10 million to keep those Head Start programs running until the end of the month.

The private donations were praised by the government and by groups that support Head Start.

“The Arnolds’ most generous act epitomizes what it means to be an angel investor; they have selflessly stepped up for Head Start children to ensure their path toward kindergarten readiness is not interrupted by the inability of government to get the nation’s fiscal house in order,” said Yasmina Vinci, executive director of the National Head Start Association.

The shutdown only affected states with programs that received a grant on Oct. 1, but if the shutdown rolls into November almost all other states will also see their Head Start programs’ subsidies cease, affecting an estimated 86,000 children.

Joy Pullman, an education policy analyst at the Heartland Institute, a free-market think tank based in Chicago, said it’s just more inconsistencies on education policy from the Obama administration.

“It’s not kind to families to cut it in the middle of the year, but really that program should be phased out because taxpayers are not getting a return on their investment for that program,” she said.

Since 1965, taxpayers have spent $180 billion on Head Start — more than 1,000 times the amount of the Arnolds’ gift. Despite all that cash, a 2012 HHS audit found little to no long-term benefits to children who went through the program.

But if the Arnolds want to spend their own money on supporting Head Start for a few weeks, it’s nice of the government to let them. Other offers of assistance have not been so well received — even to the point of stubbornness.

Those national parks — The Grand Canyon in Arizona and Mount Rushmore in South Dakota — bring enough tourists to their respective states to count as major economic drivers.

“We cannot afford to turn away this kind of revenue,” wrote Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer in a letter to the National Parks Service, offering state dollars to keep the park open to tourists. “To do so will unnecessarily devastate the employment of thousands of Arizonans who depend on the Grand Canyon – especially when there is a common sense alternative.”

On Saturday, the town of Tusayan, Ariz., presented Brewer with a check for $426,500 as a partial payment to open the park.

Nationally, the closure of the national parks is costing $76 million per day, according to an assessment of the parks’ economic value to local communities done by the Coalition of National Park Service Retirees.

And even on an individual scale, offers of help have been rudely turned aside.

Chris Cox, a South Carolinian who took it upon himself to mow the lawn on the National Mall, was ordered to cease and desist by law enforcement in the nation’s capital.

The whole thing seems wildly inconsistent. It’s great that private donations have been able to fill a gap in government services during the shutdown — whether you think those services should be provided by the government in the first place, or not — so why can’t states and private donors do the same with the national parks? Florida Gov. Rick Scott declined to use state money to reopen the three national parks in the Sunshine State.

The Department of Health and Human Services did not return calls for comment. Neither did the National Park Service.

So if you’re playing along at home, here’s how it seems to work: offer to mow the grass in front of the Lincoln Memorial, get threatened with arrest.

Offer to spend $10 million to keep 7,000 in a federal day care program, get hailed as a hero.