Edited by Joe Fornabaio

In this week’s best photos, a woman votes in Afghanistan, a boy is rescued after an explosion in Syria, a woman reads messages to passengers of the missing Malaysia Airlines flight in Kuala Lumpur, and more.

A woman shows her inked finger after voting at a polling station in Herat, Afghanistan, on Saturday. An estimated seven million Afghan voters defied threats of violence and ballot-stuffing to vote for their next president, and preliminary results show that Ashraf Ghani and Abdullah Abdullah may be headed for a runoff in late May or early June. Afef Karimi/AFP/Getty Images

A participant dressed as the Hindu goddess Kali on Tuesday celebrates the Ram Navami festival in Allahabad, India. The festivals across India mark the birth of Lord Rama and also signal the end of nine days of fasting. Sanjay Kanojia/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images

Hungarian women cast their ballots inside a polling station near Budapest during parliamentary elections. Laszlo Balogh/Reuters

A farmworker walks through a wheat field in Panipat, Haryana, India on Tuesday as the government’s guaranteed agricultural prices threaten to scuttle inflation forecasts. Rising prices have been a key issue in India’s election campaign. Prashanth Vishwanathanan/Bloomberg

Men rescue a boy after an explosion from what activists said were explosive barrels dropped from helicopters by forces loyal to Syria’s President Bashar al-Assad in Aleppo, Syria, on Sunday. Hosam Katan/Reuters

A boy searches for eatable watermelons in the polluted and filthy Buriganga River. There was a bumper production of watermelons in Bangladesh this season because of favorable weather and improved farming. Zakir Hossain Chowdhury/NurPhoto/Zuma Press

A woman at a shopping mall near Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, reads message cards tied up for passengers on board the missing Malaysia Airlines Flight 370 on Thursday. Associated Press

Two women match each other—and the pedestrian crosswalk—on Tuesday in central Shanghai. Aly Song/Reuters

The shadow of Air Force One projects on the ground as the plane, with President Barack Obama and first lady Michelle Obama aboard, approaches Austin-Bergstrom International Airport in Austin, Texas, on Thursday. Carolyn Kaster/Associated Press