'This is our first real fire station'

Len Cole, with Len's Excavating, uses a bulldozer to dig out the area for the foundation of the new Four Mile Fire Station west of Boulder on November 6, 2014. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

To donate to the Four Mile Volunteer Fire Department's station construction contact the department at 303-449-3333 or by calling Chief Bret Gibson at 303-444-0882. For more information or to donate online, visit Fourmilefire.org

When an excavator churned up its first load of dirt on the site of the Four Mile Volunteer Fire Department's future station just off of Fourmile Canyon Drive in the foothills west of Boulder last week it was an event 10 years in the making.

Though work has finally begun on a structure the department officials say is sorely needed, hurdles remain. Specifically, those officials are seeking help raising the final third of the money needed to pay off the facility's estimated $1.57 million price tag.

The plot where the station is being built, located at 1740 Fourmile Canyon Drive near where the roadway intersects with Poorman Road, was donated to the district about a decade ago, Chief Bret Gibson said. After years of ironing out legal wrinkles, gathering community input and working to secure funding, crews began digging the foundation for the 3,000-square-foot structure on Oct. 31, with eyes to complete it by June or July.

"This is our first real fire station," Gibson said, pointing out that it will have a large meeting room, office space, bathroom and kitchen. "We currently have four fire garages. One is in a Quonset hut and another is a single-truck garage at the bottom of Fourmile Canyon and the lease is expired."

The hut, located at Nine Logan Mill Road, was the Four Mile volunteers' first station dating back to the 1960s, and was previously used as veterans' housing in the city of Boulder and a garage for Boulder County Transportation, Gibson said.

"It's hard to be proud of your fire department when you're working out of that," he said. "It gets flooded all the time so every time it rains we have to pull our trucks out. It's risky to have half a million dollars worth of fire engines in that facility and just not a smart move. So we really have to build this new station. It's not a desire, it's a must."

So far, funding for the project has been collected from several sources, including a grant from the Colorado Department of Local Affairs, and the sale of the home of former Four Mile Firefighter Chris Hendrickson, who willed her property to the district several years ago after passing away from leukemia. The district also sold pint glasses with the Four Mile Fire logo on them, and, after the event was cancelled due to the flood in 2013, the district in September held a foot race up Fourmile Canyon that netted $3,000.

"Beer glasses, footraces and boot campaigns generate a small amount of money but when we're talking about this type of capital expenditure they're really not up to the task. What we really need is the community to step up and write us checks," Gibson said, appealing to all residents of Boulder County, not just those who live in the roughly 13-square-mile fire district just west of Boulder.

"We do protect the backdrop of the city of Boulder and about 4,000 acres of city and county open space."

Former Four Mile firefighter and member of the district's board, David Hustvedt said the new station is important because it will be able to better house the four paid firefighters Four Mile employs on weekdays, provide a jumping off point for crews during critical events like a wildfire, and be able to better host joint training meetings with neighboring districts like Sunshine and Gold Hill. He said a new facility goes a long way in helping a primarily volunteer department recruit, certainly more so than a "decrepit" Quonset hut.

He pointed out the losses the district suffered in 2010's Fourmile Fire, including many homes that are the basis for its taxes, a station in Salina and a truck, as well damage done to a station in last year's flood as reasons the district needs community support now.

"We certainly would welcome any contributions supporting the department," he said.

Not everyone is excited about the construction.

Pam Penfold, whose property is a stone's throw away from the site, across Fourmile Canyon Drive, said the canyon has been inundated by noise since the work began, often starting around 7 a.m. and lasting past sundown. She said she is also concerned the "modern structure" will stick out like a sore thumb in the mountainous area, as well as bring constant noise and steady traffic to the neighborhood.

"It's really depressing," she said. "It's basically ruining our lives in this once quiet neighborhood."

Penfold said that she is not surprised the district is still seeking funding for the project. She had questions about where the money would come from since the planning process began. She emphasized that she appreciates the work firefighters do in her wildfire-susceptible neighborhood, but wishes Four Mile officials had heeded more of the public's advice when planning for the new station.

"Our fire chief probably does a really good job but this is his edifice and he's going to get it done by God even if it puts them in debt," she said.

Dwight Jones, who lives in the Four Mile district, about 5 miles from the construction site, said he too is concerned with the aesthetics of the station, saying it looks "like a spaceship that's about to take off."

That said, Jones, who lost his home in the 2010 Fourmile Fire, and is preparing to move into a new home he and his wife are building in the area, is willing to overlook his visual concerns for the good of the department.

"Other than that artistic critique I really support what they are doing," he said. "I don't expect it to negatively impact a lot of the traffic. It seems like the appropriate way to go. They might be putting my house out someday."

Joe Rubino: 303-473-1328, rubinoj@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/rubinojc