One day before the health care exchanges go into effect, the most popular question Americans posed to the government isn’t, “Can I purchase insurance before the Jan. 1, 2014, deadline?” or, “Can I add my 36-year-old son who’s living in my basement to my policy?” Nope! It was more along the lines of, “How do I get out of it without hurting my wallet?”

As of Monday morning, these are the most popular questions listed on Healthcare.gov’s website:

Jeryl Bier, who has a talent for ferreting out interesting tidbits and glaring inconsistencies from federal websites, made the discovery and posted it on The Weekly Standard.

The more the public becomes aware of the Affordable Care Act’s higher-than-normal premiums, excessive co-pays and annual deductibles in the thousands of dollars, the more it wants no part of it.

Rasmussen released the results of its latest telephone survey Monday, indicating that 50 percent of Americans oppose the individual mandate requiring most Americans to purchase health insurance, while 36 percent approve.

That confirmed an NBC News/Wall Street Journal poll conducted earlier in the month that found 44 percent of respondents thought the health care law was a bad idea, while only 31 percent approved of it.

U.S. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y., told U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, that he should try Obamacare — he might like it, the Huffington Post reported.

Similarly, Democratic National Committee Chairwoman and U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, D-Fla., said that after Americans have experienced Obamacare, “they’re not going to want to let it go,” according to HotAir.

Of course, it’s easy for Schumer and Wasserman Schultz to make such claims — they made themselves exempt from the law’s individual mandate.

U.S. Sen. Max Baucus, D-Mont., who helped draft and later supported Obamacare, referred to the law’s implementation as a “train wreck coming.”

I think of it as a beached whale — something that will naturally suffocate and die from its own weight.

.

[poll id=”105″]