U.S. Rep. Mike Conaway says he has the accomplishments and experience to retain his 11th District seat in the U.S. House.

Wade Brown, Conaway’s Republican challenger in the March primary, thinks he can do a better job at representing the will of the constituents here.

Brown criticized Conaway at a candidate forum in January for his voting record. Conaway defended his record.

The two square off in the Republican Primary on March 4. Brown ran, and lost, in the same primary in 2012. The winner of the primary will face Libertarian Ryan T. Lange in the general election in the fall.

Born in Big Lake and now living in May in Brown County, Brown turns 44 on Tuesday. He describes himself as a constitutional conservative running on the Republican ticket, and said he finds common ground with the Tea Party’s views about the role of government.

He fills in as a Bible study teacher at his church and has a business partnership of a hay farm and also buys and sells land.

“I have people who help me with that,” he said, adding that he still serves as a Marine officer in the reserves. He left active duty in 2011 and touts his experience in the military as an important qualification.

He explained why he thinks he’s qualified to be the new representative for District 11.

“There are a couple of important aspects of being a Congressman,” he said. “You’ve got to have had experience making important decisions about policy and law and regulation. I’ve actually been in charge of policy oversight for about 25 percent of the Marine Corps’ ground combat equipment in the past. I have not only overviewed policy, but I have written it. I’ve also written classified operations orders that were used in real word environments with counter-insurgency and counter-piracy.”

He said those aspects of the job affect people’s lives, and depending on the type of policy or regulation you write, “it can have very far-reaching effects.” He said he has experience leading a staff and knows how to work with people.

Brown said a representative also must possess the ability to work with people from a variety of cultures and backgrounds, and he thinks his time in the service gives him experience in that regard.

Conaway said he hopes people here will continue to give him their trust.

“I’ve been doing the job they’ve wanted me to do now for nine years, and I certainly intend to keep doing that,” Conaway said. “I’ve gained a great deal of experience throughout that process. It’s now time to harvest that experience: Can you work for the folks in District 11? I have earned the trust and confidence of my colleagues to be put in leadership positions.”

Conaway discussed his three chairmanships — ethics committee, a subcommittee in the agriculture committee and the intelligence committee — said he will continue to use the “same work ethic, decision-making process that I’ve been using to create one of the most conservative voting records in Congress over the nine years for the folks in District 11.”

He said he intends to be the next chairman of the House Agriculture Committee. Having people in chairmanships from Texas is important, as it will have the potential to have six different whole committee gavels next year.

“I intend to be one of those if I can get folks in District 11 to re-elect me one more time,” he said.

Brown said the district’s predominantly rural composition also helps him because of his small-town background.

“I think I live and breathe sort of our 11th District way of living more than my opponent does, by far,” Brown said. “I’m in and out and among the people on a daily basis. I am one of the people, so that’s an intangible. But it’s important, because I know how much a gallon of gas costs — I know where the cheapest gas in town is. I know what a gallon of milk costs. These things have an impact on me and my family and the people of my community.”

He said many people he hires and works with on a daily basis live paycheck-to-paycheck, and that’s the norm for many people in this district.

“I’m actually able to be in touch with the sentiments and values of the people of our district,” he said.

He said this district needs new blood in Washington.

“We need a complete fresh viewpoint and a willingness to act at the national level,” Brown said.

He said the local level candidates have talked in public forums about how the federal government has been intruding on their local decision-making. He said as the Affordable Care Act is one example.

“The representative we have now does not even stick with his own party’s platform,” he said, noting the platform opposes bailouts and “we know that Mike Conaway voted for the largest bailout in U.S. history. That’s a fact. It’s not spin, it’s not twisting his record around — it’s just a fact.”

He mentioned the national debt, too, explaining that lawmakers must hold the line and force a balanced budget. He said Conaway has been in a habit of voting for bills to increase the debt.

Conaway disputes Brown’s characterization, as he has voted more than 6,800 times in Congress, and “any challenger can cherry-pick issues within issues” to say that the elected official is not representing the wishes of the constituency.

“The Omnibus bill, for nothing else, prevents the president from bringing the Guantanamo Bay prisoners — the worst of the worst of the Islamic jihadists that we have in Guantanamo Bay — to the United States,” Conaway said. “So by extension, my opponent then would argue that those prisoners should be brought to the United States. We cut spending for the fourth year in a row, puts us back to the 2009 level. It fixed the disabled military retirees’ (pension program). So, apparently, my opponent is not in favor of fixing the military retirees’ pension plan, if he’s going to cherry pick like that. And he’s choosing to do that.”

Brown said the nation is in a “constitutional crisis” and doesn’t like how President Barack Obama vows to bypass Congress to enact measures if need be. Conaway won’t stand up to Obama, Brown said.

“I’m concerned about doing the right thing. Period. End of story,” Brown said. “When the president gets out of bounds, you check the president. That’s the role of the other branches of government, to check the other branches. Certainly, the House is failing to do that. Mr. Conaway is line with the rest of the House’s actions, or the lack of action.”

Conaway, though, takes issue with Obama’s leadership. This next session is “going to be a continuation of divided government,” Conaway predicts.

“The president is not going to lead this nation the way he should,” he said. “He’s not going to provide that kind of united leadership that’s essential for divided government to work. The last time divided government worked well was with Reagan.”

By contrast, Obama has not led for five years, Conaway said, and Conaway doesn’t anticipate he will lead for the next three years.

“This coming year, the last year of this session, we will be limited as to what we can do in terms of the big deal,” he said.

He said there exists a long list of items that should be done — balanced budget amendment, stripping spending, reduction of entitlement, revamping of the tax code and immigration reform — but he doesn’t have much optimism because Obama won’t lead. He thinks it’s important that Americans elect a GOP majority in the Senate this fall so that Republicans can weaken the president.

Republicans will continue to pass bills in the House to “help show the American people a better way forward, a brighter future for this country, a more imaginative world that we could live in if we had some help in the Senate and a different kind of White House,” Conaway said.

He lauded the recently passed farm bill because it was good for production of agriculture and because it produces modest reforms in the food stamp program.

Brown pledges to serve as a Congressman “receiving only the salary and benefits were I still on active duty.” He said he will serve for about half pay and will not participate in the Congressional retirement system. He would not take lesser pay as a symbolic gesture, but thinks other lawmakers should do the same. He said he would encourage others in Congress to reduce their own pay.

“Leadership is servant-hood and sacrifice,” he said. “Those are two absolutely essential elements in any true leadership.”