President Barack Obama’s signature on the health insurance reform bill at the White House, March 23, 2010. (Official White House Photo by Chuck Kennedy)

20 million.

That’s how many people now have the health coverage they need thanks to the President’s health care law. In fact, for the first time ever, more than 90% of Americans have health coverage, with the U.S. uninsured rate averaging 9.1% for the first three quarters of 2015.*

In that same time, our businesses have added 14.3 million jobs — the longest streak of private-sector job growth in history.

6 years. 20 million people. 14.3 million jobs.

That’s what the Affordable Care Act has meant for America. Take a look back at the photos and videos that capture the history of this landmark legislation — from its passage to the people its helped today.

* This sentence was updated on April 5, 2016 to reflect the most recent uninsured data. It previously read, ‘In fact, for the first time ever, more than 90% of Americans have health coverage, putting the U.S. rate of uninsured Americans at 8.8%.’

President Barack Obama addresses a town hall meeting on health care insurance reform inside a hangar at Gallatin Field in Belgrade, Montana, August 14, 2009. (Official White House photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama delivers remarks on Medicaid fraud and health care reform at St. Charles High School in St. Charles, Missouri, March 10, 2010. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama, Vice President Joe Biden, and senior staff, react in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, as the House passes the health care reform bill, March 21, 2010. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama stops to talk with Amy Wilhite and daughter Taylor, who has Acute Myeloid Leukemia (AML), a fast-growing cancer of the blood and bone marrow, following remarks on the 90-day anniversary of the signing of the Affordable Care Act, in the East Room of the White House, June 22, 2010. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

Because of the Affordable Care Act, young adults can stay on their parent’s health insurance plan up to the age of 26. This and other parts of the law are making a difference in the lives of millions of Americans like Erick Moberg.

Senior advisors and officials listen as President Barack Obama delivers remarks regarding the U.S. Supreme Court decision upholding the “Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act,” in the East Room of the White House, June 28, 2012. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama, with Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius and Chief of Staff Denis McDonough, participates in a meeting on the Affordable Care Act in the Roosevelt Room of the White House, July 23, 2013. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama holds a meeting with Vice President Joe Biden to discuss the problems associated with enrollment in the Affordable Care Act, in the Oval Office, Oct. 10, 2013. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama delivers remarks regarding the Affordable Care Act (ACA) at Faneuil Hall in Boston, Massachusetts, Oct. 30, 2013. (Official White House Photo by Amanda Lucidon)

President Barack Obama delivers remarks at an Affordable Care Act event at Temple Emanu-El in Dallas, Texas, Nov. 6, 2013. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama greets Linda and Russ Dickson, a Texas couple who wrote a letter to the President about the Affordable Care Act, at the Lyndon Baines Johnson Presidential Library in Austin, Texas, April 10, 2014. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama receives word of the Supreme Court ruling onAffordable Care Act subsidies during the Presidential Daily Briefing in the Oval Office, June 25, 2015. (Official White House Photo by Pete Souza)

President Barack Obama, with Vice President Joe Biden, delivers a statement regarding the Supreme Court ruling on Affordable Care Act (ACA) subsidies, in the Rose Garden of the White House, June 25, 2015. (Official White House Photo by Amanda Lucidon)