Wilkinsburg holds its second annual house and garden tour today. For those who think there isn’t much to see, just ask Brian Hill. He and his wife Janis Tucker were living in Edgewood but enjoyed walking around the many communities that surrounded the Frick Park area.

“We would walk the neighborhoods, and when we passed [this house] we always said to each other, ‘If that house ever comes up for sale, we should buy it.’ ”

In 2008, the owner put it up for sale and they bought it. Today, it's one of five houses open from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. for the tour.

Wilkinsburg House & Garden Tour When: 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. today. Tickets: $18 beginning at 10 a.m. today at the check-in site, Mifflin Avenue United Methodist Church, 905 Mifflin Ave.,15221. Proceeds benefit the Wilkinsburg Community Development Corp. Information: www.wilkinsburgcdc.org. Market: In addition to the self-guided walking tour, there will be a marketplace with live entertainment, food trucks, artists and vendors by the tour’s last stop, Biddle’s Escape, 401 Biddle Ave. at South Trenton Avenue.

It is easy to see why the couple fell for this Colonial beauty. The four-bedroom, 2 1/2-bath home boasts more than 4,400 square feet of living space and is on a lovely tree-lined street. Built in 1925, it features a porte-cochere on the side and a stunning front entry.

They had lived in the house for several years before they started on the overgrown landscaping. The couple wanted to be eco-friendly and are in the Nine Mile Run watershed. So they contacted the watershed association and its Stormworks affiliate for help in reducing the amount of runoff from their property into storm sewers. Designer Sara Madden designed a rain garden filled with native plants that does the job beautifully, with rain barrels that water vegetables and roses and Eco-Tek permeable pavers that allow rainwater and snow to seep through the driveway instead of running into the sewers. There is a bridge, too.

“When there is a lot of rain, it fills up underneath like a little moat,” Mr. Hill said. “You need the bridge to cross over. In a couple of hours, it has all been absorbed into the ground.”

Inside, the home has many original features, including a large foyer with original wainscoting, bannisters and hardwood floor. The sun room and formal living room have crown molding, French doors, brass hardware and big, beefy fireplace mantels.

“We have a young kids so our goal was to make it a modern family home and keep it intact,” he said.

The formal dining room has been converted to a TV room and the breakfast room into a dining room. Upstairs, the old music room is now an office. The previous owners updated the kitchen with a center island.

“We’re very much in the macaroni and cheese and pizza family stage right now,” Mr. Hill said, laughing.

That leads to the reason they most love their home.

“This is a fantastic, family friendly neighborhood in every respect. We walk to Frick Park, Whitney Park is just down the hill and the neighbors are great.”

Rosa Colucci: rcolucci@post-gazette.com, Twitter, PGRosa_Colucci.