Land needed for future growth of high school

The Thompson School District is looking to buy 8.6 acres, pictured here, from the town of Berthoud for $705,000 for the future expansion of Berthoud High School. The purchase will be before the Board of Education for approval this Wednesday. ( Pamela Johnson/ Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Thompson School District Board of Education meeting. When: 6 p.m. Wednesday. Where: District offices, 800 S. Taft Ave., Loveland.

The Thompson School District is looking to buy nearly 9 acres next to Berthoud High School for future growth.

"This is a purchase with an eye to the future for 10 to 20 years out," said Dan Maas, chief operations officer for the district.

"This will be our only chance to acquire property next to Berthoud High School."

The district wants to spend $705,000 to buy 8.6 acres from the town of Berthoud — land directly north of the high school that formerly housed a BMX track. The option will be before the Board of Education for approval on Wednesday.

The standard lot size within the district for a high school is 45 acres. Both Thompson Valley and Mountain View hit that standard, while Berthoud High is below that level with 36 acres and Loveland High sits on 28 total acres.

While enrollment at Turner Middle School and Berthoud High School is below capacity, the two elementary schools within the town, Ivy Stockwell and Berthoud Elementary, are approaching capacity, Maas said.

In the future, the district will need to expand the high school to accommodate more students, and this is the only available piece of property next to the school, Maas said.

"If we don't do this, within 20 years, we may have to acquire an entirely different site and build an entirely new school," Maas said.

Advertisement

The town has agreed to sell the property to the district for $705,000, which computes to $81,000 per acre, according to the district. This is lower than the standard rate of $90,000 per acre that the school district usually spends on property; at that higher rate, the cost would be $774,000.

Pamela Johnson: 970-669-5050, ext. 526, johnsonp@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/RHPamelaJ