Cecile Richards, the Planned Parenthood Action Fund president, was on hand to give the organization's presidential endorsement to Hillary Clinton at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday. (Allegra Boverman/Union Leader) Cecile Richards, the Planned Parenthood Action Fund president, was on hand to give the organization's presidential endorsement to Hillary Clinton at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday. (Allegra Boverman/Union Leader)

Planned Parenthood endorses Clinton

Planned Parenthood supporters react to the endorsement of Democrat Hillary Clinton for President Sunday at Southern New Hampshire University. From left, Daianara Lynch of Bellmore, N.Y., and Zoee Davidson of Stony Brook, N.Y., both employees at Planned Parenthood of Nassau County, in Hempstead, N.Y. (Allegra Boverman/Union Leader) Hillary Clinton talks to supporters of Planned Parenthood, which endorsed the Democrat for President at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday afternoon. (Allegra Boverman/Union Leader)

HOOKSETT — Planned Parenthood endorsed Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton during an event at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday, the first time in its 100-year history the group has backed a primary candidate.



“I have stood with you throughout my life and certainly throughout my career and I promise you this: As your President, I will always have your back,” Clinton said to a room full of a few hundred Planned Parenthood supporters dressed in pink and holding signs proclaiming “the power of pink.”



“I shudder to think about what the Republicans would do if given the chance,” Clinton said. “Planned Parenthood should be funded, supported and appreciated, not undermined, misrepresented and demonized.”



Planned Parenthood officials have been criticized for months, after a series of undercover videos surfaced showing body parts of human fetuses being offered to organ harvesters by Planned Parenthood officials in California.



The group denied the accusation.



New Hampshire withdrew funding for Planned Parenthood following a 3-2 vote by the Executive Council on Aug. 5.



Last week, the U.S. House and Senate passed legislation to block federal funding for Planned Parenthood and repeal the Affordable Care Act. President Obama vetoed the legislation on Friday.



Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood, was in New Hampshire Sunday and said the organization did interviews with all of the Democratic candidates. She said Clinton had “overwhelming support.”



“Over the past few months, at community forums around the country, Planned Parenthood advocacy and political organizations spoke with supporters on the ground about what they want from the next President,” said Richards. “They want a President who believes access to health care isn’t a luxury, it’s a human right. They want a President who will demand that nobody is paid less just because they are a woman. We deserve 100 cents on the dollar. This year we have that candidate.”



Richards said Planned Parenthood intends to spend at least $20 million in the 2016 campaign.



pfeely@unionleader.com

HOOKSETT — Planned Parenthood endorsed Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton during an event at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday, the first time in its 100-year history the group has backed a primary candidate.“I have stood with you throughout my life and certainly throughout my career and I promise you this: As your President, I will always have your back,” Clinton said to a room full of a few hundred Planned Parenthood supporters dressed in pink and holding signs proclaiming “the power of pink.”“I shudder to think about what the Republicans would do if given the chance,” Clinton said. “Planned Parenthood should be funded, supported and appreciated, not undermined, misrepresented and demonized.”Planned Parenthood officials have been criticized for months, after a series of undercover videos surfaced showing body parts of human fetuses being offered to organ harvesters by Planned Parenthood officials in California.The group denied the accusation.New Hampshire withdrew funding for Planned Parenthood following a 3-2 vote by the Executive Council on Aug. 5.Last week, the U.S. House and Senate passed legislation to block federal funding for Planned Parenthood and repeal the Affordable Care Act. President Obama vetoed the legislation on Friday.Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood, was in New Hampshire Sunday and said the organization did interviews with all of the Democratic candidates. She said Clinton had “overwhelming support.”“Over the past few months, at community forums around the country, Planned Parenthood advocacy and political organizations spoke with supporters on the ground about what they want from the next President,” said Richards. “They want a President who believes access to health care isn’t a luxury, it’s a human right. They want a President who will demand that nobody is paid less just because they are a woman. We deserve 100 cents on the dollar. This year we have that candidate.”Richards said Planned Parenthood intends to spend at least $20 million in the 2016 campaign.pfeely@unionleader.com

To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Ann Marr said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 5:52 am



What an awful endorsement for any Presidential candidate to get! Access to healthcare is now available to all women through Obamacare. Planned Parenthood is nothing more than an abortion clinic.

Ed Holdgate said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 6:30 am



Planned Profit-hood and the hoodlum: a match made in he11 if ever there was one. One day, humanity will deprecate abortion just like virgin sacrifice, prostitution, genocide, slavery, and cannibalism. Abortion does not make you "un-pregnant" -- it makes you the mother of a dead child.

david taylor said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 7:48 am



The only thing sicker than PP is the Republicans who fund it, as PP turns around and spends the money on Democrats.

Joseph Brunoli said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 8:03 am



Planned Parenthood is in the tank for Hillary. No surprise because Hillary gave the daughter of Cecile Richards (in photo) a nice cushy well paid job with the Clinton Campaign in Iowa.Quid pro quo. Pay to play. Corruption, nepotism and backroom dealing. That is what the Clintons are all about.http://www.progressivestoday.com/surprise-planned-parenthood-presidents-daughter-works-hillary-clinton/

Robert Rivett said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 8:17 am



That top picture, ugh. They look like they are about to lick each other.

dan sloan said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 8:44 am



20 million for campaign donations? is that taxpayer dollars that they are spending? why are we funding them again????

Leo Paradis said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:02 am



Hill is the poster child for more abortions. If only....

Martin Janoschek said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:14 am



Just goes to prove PP is the poster child for war against women, endorsing the wife of one of the biggest names in female sexual assault.

Sally Wood said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:19 am



Clinton, you had my vote, up til now.....you just lost it.

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:35 am



Of course Planned Parenthood endorses Clinton. Bill has most likely sent many women to planned parenthood for abortions and they can't afford to lose that kind of business.

dennis buckley said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:49 am



When is Hillary finally going to admit she is a lesbian?

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:51 am



I knew when I logged into this article I would see the usual rampant ignorance and misogyny. Thanks for not disappointing me!

Bob Mulholland said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 10:10 am



There are many Republicans who believe, if a 16 year old girl is raped and impregnated and has an abortion should be prosecuted and sent to jail. I see some of them are posting comments here.

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 10:49 am



Bob Mulholland boy when it comes to telling lies and trying to scare the ignorant into voting for your party the lunatic left never disappoints. I'd say those who believe life is a precious gift would simply like the chance to offer an alternative to certain death without the lies being told about them. It's not surprising how the left will never talk about or put on a TV talk show all the women who go into depression after having an abortion. Then of course there's the selling of dead baby parts like a real barbaric society would do.

Thomas DePuy said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 10:51 am



To champion abortion is sick beyond words. Even if you are pro-abortion, it is a violent, horrendous surgical act, that ends your own child's life. To rally for that with the color pink (representative of a woman's vagina color) is an even greater insult. This right these feminists talk about is the right not to have to be inconvenienced with a 20 minute Dr appt to get on birth control, for girls who are unable to say no to what a man has. Abortion should be a last resort; the end result of many failings, not something celebrated. My level at disgust of this is off the charts. Sad, that the one cause that women seem to celebrate is the right to not have to make a 20 minute Dr appt, so that they can abort their child if they choose. Funny its supposed to he about women's health, what about a mans health? Prostate cancer, STDs and family planning? Well a man just is told- go to your Dr. Duh. A woman has the"freedom" to abort her child if she wants, but a man is liable financially at least to pay for 18 years support whether he wants or not. He's told "you should have thought of that before" . equality huh? Also, I'll support equal pay next time I see a team of women building a bridge in freezing rain at 3am. Unreal. Unreal. Unreal.

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 11:04 am



Linda, This question is for you, Were we not told by King Obama that Obamacare would cover everything, So Linda why do we need Planned Parenthood?

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 11:22 am



Women have been having abortions since time since time immemoriam. The only difference between the abortions now and the ones during Christ's time is that now they are legal and much safer. Get over it.

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 11:29 am



Linda, Please answer the question, Didn't King Obama tell us peasants that Obamacare would cover everything, so why do we need planned parenthood? It's not a tough question!

Jim Peschke said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 12:21 pm



If we had Planned Parenthood and Obamacare during Christ's time we'd all be taxed to pay Judas' 40 pieces of silver, all in the name of "Women's Rights". Jesus would be kicked out of public school for using his own name.

David McConville said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 12:34 pm



*You will know them by the company they keep.* Hillary and PP, perfect.

Matt Lulling said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 12:42 pm



Kevin Dumont, perhaps if you were a women instead of a misogynist right wing nut job, you'd know.

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:09 pm



DUMONT I'm not answering your question because I am not well versed in the Affordable Care Act. And because you sound like an ***** every time you say "King Obama". PESCHKE, are you saying women should have no rights?

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:10 pm



LINDA HARRIS but only Nazi Germany would have sold the dead babies for experiments and money. What you don't like is Christians offering an alternative to abortion and seeking a true family structure complete with a mother and father and marriage. Single parent homes do tend to need to live off government and that plays right into your parties quest for power and control of society.

MICHAEL LANE said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:12 pm



LeMont "when it comes to telling lies and trying to scare the ignorant into voting for your party the lunatic left never disappoints." I have seen far more lies coming from the far right. Death panels. PP selling fetal parts. Illegals voting in mass numbers. Mysterious deaths surround the Clintons. WMD. I don't need to go any further, people get the whole picture.

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:19 pm



Liberal Lulling you truly are a freaking *****! Harris of course you cannot answer why does that not surprise me. Liberal "independent voter" Lame does Hillary Clinton come to mind the women has told more lies and is more corrupt than anyone else combined. So I killed 3 idiots with one stone!

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:25 pm



Hillary Clinton, Bought and Paid For! Yes she will represent everyday Americans well! LMAO!

Irene Bean said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:27 pm



My name is Irene Bean and I am writing as a concerned citizen. Yesterday, Hillary Clinton gained the support and will receive money from Planned Parenthood. I was under the understanding that monies given to a non-profit group / organization are to be used solely for group, ie: the single mothers, families that cannot afford proper care, children and health issues. If this is so, then how is it that a non profit group, such as Planned Parenthood, is allowed to put their voice and give their money to a political group? Something is radically wrong with this picture. Does anyone else agree? Irene Bean

Thomas DePuy said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:42 pm



Irene bean: its an excellent point/question. I am also confused. I am also interested in Kevin Dumont's question. I was under the impressions the ACA covered everyone. What now is the purpose of PP?

Thomas DePuy said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:50 pm



To Ms. Brown: there is quite a big difference now and the " time of Christ" of women aborting their own children. Women can simply abstain from sex for a day or so, ( if God forbid they can control themselves that long), then call their Dr. And make an appt to get on birth control- whichever method they choose.

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:53 pm



DEPUY: Ah, I see. It's up to the women to "control themselves".

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 1:56 pm



Lane it's bad enough democrat leaders lie right to our faces, but you lying about things I've said doesn't deserve a reply as I have no desire to defend things I've never said and playing your deceitful childish games. It's OK Lane most Americans are already tired of the lies and showed you in last years election. You better concentrate on trying to correct the lying habits of the democrat party because i think many citizens have had enough, even though the democrat party hasn't figured it out yet and keeps selling them more of the same. You really should be in some institution being studied.

Ann Marr said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 2:17 pm



"I have noticed that everyone who is for abortion has already been born." - Ronald Reagan -

PAUL LUNDWALL said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 2:19 pm



Our tax dollars at work.

Thomas DePuy said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 2:19 pm



Linda: yes, it is up to a woman to control herself. Would you prefer it be up to the man? If an abortion were a joint decision, than I would say it is up to both man and woman to control themselves. However, since the argument is that its a woman's body and its her choice, than yes,it is up to a woman to control herself, of course. I see that you have not responded to any questions, but with questions.

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 3:16 pm



Thomas, Linda and Lame never answer questions they are exempt from that, besides if you supply facts they will just dismiss it.

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 3:27 pm



Thomas DePuy what you touch on is an interesting discussion. Though the woman may be the child's host for 9 months, what she is carrying is not just hers. And honestly DNA testing could show the child to be more of the mans genetic makeup than the woman's. But in the end this discussion is really about being a responsible adult and frankly taking responsibility for ones actions and owning them is just one of the values society has thrown away in the name of political correctness where every bad behavior has an excuse.

NORMAN LEBLOND said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 3:51 pm



Just like a Clinton to stick a finger in the air to see which way the political winds are blowing to get elected. Scary that a group like this has any influence. Talk about far left fringe..... here it is. Planned Fetal Tissue Harvesthood.

Pam Smith said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 3:52 pm



LINDA - Dear Lord your insanity never ceases to amaze me. FIRST, you want the "govt out of your wombs/bodies" right? Then why don't you sick abortion loving murderer's pay for your OWN birth control pills, abortions, morning after pills & take NOTHING in funds from the govt for ANY part of your disgusting bodies?! Better yet, don't be a pig & take responsibility if you are going to be a careless *****. You want the govt out of the picture unless it's forking over the blood money for killing babies in the womb. AND, it's easy to be pro-choice when YOU are NOT the one being KILLED. What a sick, sick, sick society. And PLEASE save us from your rape/incest GARBAGE - it accounts for less than 1% of the PP murdered babies.

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 4:01 pm



Woman's body, woman's choice. Men can certainly be snipped if they can't control themselves.

JAMES MURRAY said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 4:10 pm



@Linda HarrisAMEN!

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 4:27 pm



Linda Harris, Please answer this question didn't Barack Obama tell the American People that with Obamacare it would cover everything , So please explain in your own words why the taxpayers still need to FUND Planned Parenthood. Thanks in Advance!

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 4:33 pm



As I said, Kevin, I am not well versed enough on the Affordable Care Act to answer that.

George LeMont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 4:57 pm



LINDA HARRIS does it ever dawn on you that what you really offer is the division of society and more specifically the breakup of the family unit? You have everything so divided men getting women pregnant today and not being accountable to raising the child is but one more bad behavior getting out of control. but then your party does do very well with more and more needy people stuck in poverty so it does fit the plan I would imagine.

kevin dumont said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 5:00 pm



One more thing long at these photos you think these women won the powerball. Pathetic bunch if you ask me!

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 5:23 pm



GEORGE, women are perfectly capable of taking care of themselves. To be honest, women don't really need men anymore.

john green said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 5:56 pm



Lets see, if a woman in child is murdered and the child dies in her womb,The one who committed the murder is charged with murder for both mother and baby. So how is it that a woman killing her baby in her womb is not murder.. You all cant have it both ways. Abortion is murder plain and simple. ABORTION IS MURDER

PAUL LUNDWALL said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 6:50 pm



Linda PP has nothing to do with woman's rights.

PAUL LUNDWALL said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 6:55 pm



Hillary was working on UFOs and Area 51 last week. This sick wonan sure gets around trying to please every group possible. Two weeks ago she promised a cure for Alzheimer's. What is next? Perhaps giving refugees that right to vote?

Alan Schwantz said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 8:32 pm



Hildabeast is down to her last few places that will endorse her.With the new FBI investigations against the Clinton foundation she is a sinking ship...

LINDA HARRIS said Monday, January 11, 2016 at 9:54 pm



John Green, you are comparing apples and oranges. Woman's body, woman's choice.

George LeMont said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 7:42 am



LINDA HARRIS all I can say is Wow! Keep handing out the drugs to society Linda, maybe Sean Penn will help you.

MICHAEL LANE said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 7:53 am



LeMont there is a saying about a shoe fitting. Are you the only person on the far right? Did I name you as one of the many liars (although you do repeat some of the lies)? I would not hang my hat on the lowest voter turnout in 75 years as showing us anything. We shall see in November.

Thomas Daniels said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 10:14 am



Linda Harris.. ..I believe that the information you claim that you do not have.. is readily available on the pp website... "DUMONT I'm not answering your question because I am not well versed in the Affordable Care Act. " Might I suggest that you go to the planned parenthood website.. www.plannedparenthood.org/about-us/newsroom/the-affordable-care-act....It takes about about thirty seconds to read.... After reading, you should be able to answer Mr DuMont's question... Glad I could be of assistance. I look forward to your response.

kevin dumont said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 10:40 am



Thomas.. Cue The Crickets.

john green said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 1:46 pm



Linda, no comparing apples and oranges. Im talking about a live baby in a womb . Murder is murder , you cant have it both ways

PAUL LUNDWALL said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 2:00 pm



Just remember Hillary was not the First Lady of the White House perhaps third or forth but not first.

George LeMont said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 2:59 pm



Lane Hillary is about to be indited, but only if Obama listens to the FBI and allows it and doesn't use his dictator like powers to brush Hillary's abuse of power under the rug. She might not make it to the election, but then being a felon or a pervert never seems to stop democrat voters from putting people into office.

kevin dumont said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 3:50 pm



George, These are the people Liberals like Lame adore, come on now felons have rights too.

MICHAEL LANE said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 4:36 pm



LeMont says what right wing news outlet? FOX news is the only outlet reporting an expansion of the FBI investigation. And all you on the right wing have her convicted, sent to jail and charged.

MICHAEL LANE said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 4:42 pm



green can a "baby in the womb" breathe on its own? If not, it is a fetus.

MICHAEL LANE said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 4:59 pm



DePuy I take it that you are not currently married. A boyfriend or husband has no responsibility? You sound like most right wingers who seem to believe only single women seek out abortions. You seem to think that men are not involved in the decision (sometimes an abortion is demanded by the male partner). I think you are a misogynist.

LINDA HARRIS said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 5:32 pm



John Green, it is not a live baby. It is a fetus or a zygote.

LINDA HARRIS said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 5:35 pm



Thomas Daniels, thanks for your help, hun.

kevin dumont said Tuesday, January 12, 2016 at 7:00 pm



Linda and Mike.. Too bad your parents didn't get rid of the "fetus".

Post a comment