Topics: biking, Cars, Dream City, Editor's Picks, L.A., Los Angeles, public spaces, traffic, Walking, Innovation News, Sustainability News

Los Angeles, like the maligned experiment of a famous artist, attracts its self-appointed champions. The world may scoff, but there’s always a contrarian to love what’s loathed, a “chic debunker of current anti-L.A. mythology,” as Peter Plagens once labeled the English architecture critic Reyner Banham. In 1971, Banham wrote a book lauding the democratic virtues of Angeleno urbanism; the next year he produced the charming BBC documentary “Reyner Banham Loves Los Angeles.” Joan Didion, another enamored arrival, famously savored the city’s freeways. In this month’s GQ, Brett Martin mounts a defense of Downtown L.A., of “Blade Runner” fame, which he calls “a Great City in the heart of the City That Destroyed Cities.”

Here’s another piece of Los Angeles mythology that can be laid to rest: The city is not just for cars.

It’s not quite the pristine, skyscraping Los Angeles of “Her” — whose protagonist never enters an automobile — but it is equally far from the sticky stereotype of the Missing Persons lyric, “Nobody walks in L.A.” In fact, if that song, “Walking in L.A.,” maintains a curious cultural relevance here, it is precisely as a foil for planners, journalists and politicians defending the city’s peripatetic appeal. “Don’t listen to the Missing Persons,” Mayor Garcetti said in October. “People do walk in L.A.!”

Indeed, the city is in the midst of a renaissance of walking, biking and public space. Since 2010, eight CicLAvia events have shut down miles of road for cyclists, walkers and joggers — the latest drawing over 100,000 people. Two weeks ago, the city drew 25,000 revelers to its inaugural New Year’s Eve gathering in newly created Grand Park. WalkScore gives L.A. a higher rating than Portland, Pittsburgh and New Orleans. And sometime over the course of the next month, Garcetti will announce the candidates for his “Great Streets” program, intended to remodel dozens of L.A.’s thoroughfares as pedestrian destinations.

Before I could even begin to debunk the myth of auto-centric Los Angeles, however, L.A.’s own complete streets advocates — aware of the conventions of the genre — gave me a preliminary debunking. “There’s this recycled myth that L.A. was built around the car, and pretty much everyone who ever writes anything starts with that,” explained Malcolm Carson, the policy director for environmental health at Community Health Councils, a local nonprofit. “Empirically, it’s just not true. The vast majority was built around streetcar lines, the most extensive rail system in the world.”

Supporters of redesigned streets tend to recount this history, which offers a window on their mission in Los Angeles. “This vision of L.A. as the freeway capital of the world is only a small piece of what L.A. really represents,” says Manal Aboelata, a managing director at Prevention Institute, which has pushed for more walkable communities in the city’s poorer neighborhoods. “It has great bones. It has fantastic neighborhoods, many of them built at a time when designing was really for walkability.”

In their view, building the freeways was the great experiment, the imported philosophy, the reshaping. And it never really worked. Traffic and air pollution pushed the city to reorganize its transportation future around a heavy rail system, which opened in 1990 and continues to expand. Banham had a bon mot for his assimilation — “Like earlier generations of English intellectuals who taught themselves Italian in order to read Dante in the original,” he wrote, “I learned to drive in order to read Los Angeles in the original” — but his premise was flawed. An older city was there. “We’re trying to unearth that original blueprint,” Carson says.

Nobody walks in L.A.? “Totally wrong!” exclaims urban designer Deborah Murphy, the founder of Los Angeles Walks, the city’s pedestrian advocacy organization. “Los Angeles is not a car community.”

This has been true in parts of Central Los Angeles for some time, but the movement has certainly picked up steam since Murphy started L.A. Walks in 1998, which she attributes to the influence of a new generation of Angelenos. “Younger people have decided not to own cars, take public transit, and be generally part of the solution rather than the problem. My generation had those ideals. But they weren’t necessarily committed.”