Joe Raedle/Getty Images

A foreign national living in the United States on a work visa is arrested on suspicion of driving under the influence of marijuana, alcohol and prescription drugs, while drag racing in a residential area. Given the climate of hostility toward immigrants in many parts of the country, and the Obama administration’s love affair with deportation, you’d expect him to be sitting in a holding cell awaiting a one-way trip out of the country.

At least you would expect that if he were poor, obscure and, say, Hispanic. But what if the malfeasant were wealthy, famous and, say, Justin Bieber?

Let me be clear: I’m not saying that Mr. Bieber should lose the visa he was granted because of his “extraordinary ability in the sciences, arts, education, business or athletics.” (I also don’t think it was right for Richard Nixon to try to deport John Lennon 40 years ago, using a misdemeanor pot charge as a bogus excuse.) Nor am I commenting on how extraordinary Mr. Bieber is not. (Oops.)

It’s just worth pointing out that apart from the humor value of the traffic bust, which followed closely on the heels of Mr. Bieber’s infamous neighbor-egging caper, it is in a small way emblematic of the capricious, unbalanced and racially charged way in which immigration policy is conceived and enforced in this country.

It’s a bipartisan failing. Under President George W. Bush, Immigration and Customs Enforcement enjoyed high-profile busts — like the Postville Raid of 2008, when agents found (mostly) Mexicans and Guatemalans working without papers in a meat plant in Iowa, arrested them, and then deported them, devastating scores of families and the town where they lived.

President Obama promised to focus more on removing violent and dangerous criminals, and kept promising to do that, but deportations in his first term rose to record levels, about 400,000 a year. That number has dropped recently, but thousands of non-criminals and minor offenders are still being swept into the dragnet.



The answer is not to treat all immigrants equally badly and deport Mr. Bieber. We certainly don’t want to discourage Canadian entertainers from coming to America. It would be hard to put on a concert or movie or TV show without them, given the disproportionately large number of “American” talent that comes from Canada.

The answer is to stop pretending that deportation — which punishes hard working people but not their employer-enablers — is an effective tool for dealing with our immigration problems.