Doctor Alexander Imich, holocaust survivor and parapsychologist, chatted about his long life with Ralph Gardner in 2011. Natalie Keyssar for The Wall Street Journal

Dr. Alexander Imich, who had been the world’s oldest man, died over the weekend at his Manhattan home. He was 111.

His niece told the Associated Press that Dr. Imich’s health began declining in the past several weeks. The chemist and parapsychologist’s life was not only long — it was eventful and colorful. Born in a Polish town that was then part of Russia, Dr. Imich and his wife fled the Nazis in 1939, eventually moving to the United States.

The Wall Street Journal’s Ralph Gardner interviewed Dr. Imich in his West End Avenue home in 2011, back when he was just 108 years old. Mr. Gardner described him as a whip-smart fellow whose years hadn’t made a dent in his memory or recollection.

Occasionally Dr. Imich would lapse into silence—only for a few seconds—and I’d wonder whether it was a sign of senility, or at least flagging stamina. But that wasn’t it, because his next recollection, or retrieval of a name or date from the distant past, was just as confident, his voice just as robust, as anything that he’d said previously.

Some of Dr. Imich’s remembrances were painful — the impact of anti-Semitism on his career aspirations, the freezing temperatures in a labor camp, the loss of his family members in the Holocaust. Other stories were far more fanciful.

He also told the story of the time he heard an explosion in his apartment and discovered a visitor, whose arrival he’d been awaiting at his front door, seated on the floor behind him. He also believes in UFOs and has a photograph on his desk of friends he says were abducted by aliens. Finally, he believes that humans can survive largely without food, and attributes his longevity, at least in part, to how little he eats. Whether he’s right about any or all these things scarcely matters. “I’ve never seen Alex tired,” said Ms. Kaufman, who works for Selfhelp, a support organization for Holocaust survivors. “All that stuff he was talking about keeps him going.”