A project to build a skilled nursing care facility in Concord Township moved one major step closer to reality this week when township trustees approved rezoning the parcel along Capital Parkway.

The operator of the facility, VRC Management, has pledged to become the fourth regular employer to join the Concord-Painesville Joint Economic Development District and first since 2008 when the JEDD was established.

VRC Management President Michael Francus said the facility will employ as many as 120 people, all of whom will pay the district’s 1.75 percent income tax rate.

A quarter of that money generated goes to the city of Painesville and the rest goes mostly to paying for projects in the Auburn-Crile Road Business Corridor.

Francus, who is also the developer of the project, said construction of the one-story, 78,000-square-foot facility is expected to start either in late spring or early summer.

The facility is proposed to have 104 beds, 72 of which his company will operate.

Lake Health will operate the remainder of the beds for geriatric psychiatric and acute rehabilitation patients, he said.

Francus said this facility will help Lake Health’s goal in reducing readmissions and health care costs, all of which are tied to the Affordable Care Act.

“This is a cooperative effort between my organization and Lake Health to really start watching their discharges very, very carefully,” Francus said.

Concord Township trustees held a public forum and vote Feb. 19 to reclassify the 9-acre parcel into the township’s first Gateway Health District lot.

Before casting his vote, Trustee Chris Galloway said the lot’s current zoning for research and limited industry has a “much higher economic development impact,” and losing it will not help the township strike a good balance between residential and commercial properties. Right now, the township consists of only 7 percent of commercially zoned land.

Galloway also said the nature of the facility will add greater strain to emergency resources.

“Normally, I would be disinclined on a project like this in that location, but being that the applicant and the current property owner have both expressed a written desire to bring the property and business into the Joint Economic Development District we’ve established with Painesville, I am going to say it’s a benefit to the community as it relates to the development portion of this,” said Galloway, who is a JEDD board member. “It is for that reason, I will vote in favor of this.”

Concord Acting Administrator Kathy Mitchell said the project is awaiting a site plan review from the Board of Zoning Appeals, which could be scheduled as early as its May 14 meeting.

Advertisement