Manhattan Fireworks

Well, now. Macy's is moving its annual July Fourth fireworks show from the Hudson River to the East River. It will be spectacular for the folks in Brooklyn and Queens. Not so good for the New Jersey side. The Star-Ledger reports that Macy's spokesman Orlando Veras insisted the change was not intended as a slight against the Garden State, nor did politics factor into the decision to go east.

"We’ve been working on this particular show for over two years," he said. "We wanted to celebrate ‘The Star-Spangled Banner’ with a show against an iconic backdrop and the Brooklyn Bridge certainly is that."

OK, so they block out the view from Jersey. There's always Philadelphia, which knows a thing or two about July 4th and also right across the river from the Garden State.

Bob Ingle State Issues Columnist: Bob Ingle is a New York Times Best-Selling Author. His The Soprano State sold out in two days and became a best seller the first week. It was made into a movie. His Chris Christie: The Inside Story Of His Rise To Power received laudatory reviews from outlets as varied as The Wall Street Journal, The Hill, The Washington Times, Publishers Weekly, NPR, ABC, among others. His syndicated column is read in Gannett newspapers in New Jersey, his blog “Politics Patrol” and Tweets are read in countries around the globe. He has appeared on all major TV and radio networks. For eight years he was a regular on 101.5 FM radio and currently is regularly on heritage station WCTC and Internet radio. He has won numerous major journalism awards, including Best of Gannett, National Headliner and Society of Professional Journalists. In high school he was a TV producer at a network affiliate in Atlanta as well as on air on two of the city’s top radio stations while writing a column for The Atlanta Journal and being talent in Coca-Cola ads. For 12 years he worked in various bureaus for the AP, including Seattle as an editor where his coverage area – the Pacific Northwest, Alaska, British Columbia, the Yukon and the Northwest Territories was the largest geographically outside the AP New York General Desk. He later was a columnist for The Atlanta Constitution and was marketing director for Georgia-Pacific Corp., world’s largest manufacturer and distributor of building products, then Fortune 36. There, among other things, he was in charge of TV production where a series of shows was the forerunner of the DIY network. He oversaw print ads and production of TV commercials in California. He lectured on marketing, including internationally. His marketing campaigns are found in marketing text books and his political books are texts in colleges. He speaks to college audiences and other groups whenever time allows.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1iv5yiq