Q: Is it true that dark-skinned people don’t get skin cancer?

A: No. And because they often assume they are not at risk, their cancers tend to be diagnosed at a more advanced stage, and patients are likely to face a bleaker outcome.

“It’s true that the vast majority of melanomas occur in fair-skinned people, but it’s important to know that dark-skinned people can get skin cancer, too,” says Maral Skelsey, who heads the Georgetown University Medical Center’s dermatologic surgery center. “They often are dismissed by their general physicians in terms of risk. I hear it so often: ‘No one told me I could get skin cancer.’ ”

Melanoma rates among all Americans have been increasing for the past 30 years, probably due to failure to take sufficient protective measures against ultraviolet ray exposure and to increasing use of tanning booths. Melanoma accounts for fewer than 2 percent of skin cancer cases, but it kills more frequently than the others. In 2014, an estimated 76,100 new cases of melanoma will be diagnosed, with about 9,710 deaths, according to the American Cancer Society.

To be sure, melanoma is many times more common in whites (1 in 50) than in African Americans (1 in 1,000) or Hispanics (1 in 200). But the danger for affected people of color is greater: The five-year survival rate for African Americans is 73 percent, compared with 91 percent for Caucasians, according to the American Academy of Dermatology.

That difference is probably due to later diagnosis and treatment: The initial melanoma diagnosis is not made until the disease is at an advanced stage for an estimated 52 percent of non-Hispanic blacks and 26 percent of Hispanics, compared with 6 percent of non-Hispanic white patients, according to the Skin Cancer Foundation, a public education and research organization.

Acral lentiginous melanoma is an aggressive cancer that disproportionately afflicts African Americans and other dark-skinned people.

The disease is most often found on the palms, nail beds and soles of the feet. These are areas of the body that have less pigment and receive less exposure to the sun; they also are locations people are most likely to ignore. Reggae musician Bob Marley died in 1981 at age 36 from ALM, initially thought to have been a soccer bruise under his toenail.

“This is a deadly form of skin cancer which disproportionately afflicts blacks and can behave more aggressively,” says Suraj Venna, director of the Melanoma and Cutaneous Oncology Center in the Washington Cancer Institute at MedStar Washington Hospital Center. “The way to combat this is to educate people from these communities, as well as their health-care providers.”

ALM can arise in skin that appears to be normal, and can develop within a mole. It often starts as a slowly enlarging flat patch of discolored skin and is sometimes mistaken for a stain.

Dermatologists stress that dark-skinned people should never be complacent about their risk of skin cancer. These experts recommend regular full-body examinations for them, just as for fair-skinned individuals, and urge them to be especially vigilant about routinely checking locations where ALM typically develops.

– Marlene Cimons, The Washington Post