TATTOO removal gone wrong has left tens of thousands of Australians scarred and infected by unregulated laser machines used by untrained beauticians.

The Society of Cosmetic Physicians says cleaning up the problem is costing Medicare a fortune and leaving clients scarred for life.

And because beauticians have no indemnity insurance their unhappy clients can't get compensation.

While doctors who remove tattoos are required to be trained, insured and use machines approved by our medicines safety watchdog, beauticians do not.

Society president Dr Gabrielle Caswell says she sees at least one patient a month whose amateur tattoo removal went wrong.

"If you do it incorrectly you coagulate the ink, you turn it into a super heated liquid and you get a boggy, infected mass," she said.

One patient who had a small dolphin tattoo removed from her ankle by a beautician developed an ulcer and required antibiotics for nine months, she said.

More than 2.2 million Australians have tattoos but the job of removing them can be expensive and painful. It has become a growth industry with many tattoo parlours now offering the services as well as beauticians.

Dr Caswell says these operators are using cheap, unapproved laser machines to do the job and they have rarely been properly trained.

If these powerful machines are not properly operated they can severely burn the patient, cause infections and even hide a developing melanoma by removing the pigment a doctor needs to identify it.

And if the laser is not properly housed light can escape onto the street and damage the eyes of passers by, she said.

The Therapeutic Goods Administration approves which laser machines can be used by doctors but has no role in regulating machines used by beauticians.

Patients are usually unaware there is no regulation of the machines in the beauty industry.

"Patients will say to me if it's a dangerous device surely it would be regulated," she said.

However only two states - Queensland and Western Australia - have any regulation in the area.

Regulated machines cost over $140,000 but unlicensed machines made in China and Korea are being bought into the country from as little as $20,000, Dr Caswell said.

Proper tattoo removal needs four different types of laser machines and up to ten sessions but many beauticians use just one machine and try to do it in a single session, she said.

A federal government working party is currently investigating whether regulation is needed.

Dr Caswell says to make the area safe the machines must be licensed, the room the machine is housed in must be licensed, the operator must be trained and licensed and they must have indemnity insurance.

The road to no ink, more than $1000 later

IT WAS only a small cross tattoo on her foot but it would take Rebecca Moerman a year and cost her more than $1000 on futile attempts to have it removed.

The 25-year-old never hated her tattoo but decided to have it removed because it was still visible in some shoes and not entirely appropriate for work.

She originally visited a beautician in Canberra for a treatment that involved the tattooed skin being opened up so it would bleed and, with the aid of a cream, form a scab that would slowly soak up the ink.

Mrs Moerman would have to keep the sore dry for the next few weeks until the scab fell off, taking with it some of the ink.

The monthly treatments were a bearable pain but the results were almost unnoticeable, she said.

"The place is not at all dodgy," Mrs Moerman said.

"I'm just very angry at myself that I went (back for more treatments when it wasn't working).

"I wanted to believe it was working, I wanted to persist with it."

After 13 treatments at a cost of between $70 and $90 each, Mrs Moerman called it quits and has started laser treatments that have almost completely removed the tattoo immediately.

Jeffrey Heimann, of Laser X Tattoo Removal which has finally taken care of Mrs Moerman's ink, said it was important people asked questions before signing up to have work done.

"(Tattoo removal) is a bit like getting a tattoo in that not all tattooists are artists so you're never guaranteed you're going to get a work of art," Mr Heimann said.

"Make sure you go to somebody who specialises in tattoo removal, that that is all they do. They will then certainly have ... a vested interest in you having a good outcome."