A couple weeks ago, one could see the stark contrast and difficult decision facing the Republican Party in the coming year. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz was on a stage at Liberty University in Virginia, formally announcing his candidacy in front of 10,000 students at a well-orchestrated tent revival of sorts. Up in New Hampshire at about the same moment, Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who has not announced his candidacy for president but seems to be getting closer and closer to doing so, was learning about the latest in 3-D printing research.

He was touring Nashua Community College, where he talked about jobs, the economy and NASCAR racing. Earlier in the day he had discussed issues with voters over breakfast at another small college. The Kasich events were not much on show. They were being done, however, to showcase the new-and-improved Kasich, who many remember as the arrogant Congressman who wielded the budget axe during the Clinton years. The new Kasich tends to be more down-to-earth and less look-at-me.

Story Continued Below

"In politics, I'm not here to distinguish myself from anyone else," Kasich told the media at the community college. "You ever play golf? Play your game. Get a good score, it works. I don't ever look at what anybody else is doing. I find that when I do, my game gets worse. I don't look to distinguish myself.”

But the question for the Republican hierarchy and voters is whether John Kasich can distinguish himself in the big field of Republican presidential prospects. Is he pretty much just Jeb Bush-lite without name recognition? Is he a man who had his chance on the big stage with a short-lived 2000 presidential campaign, but might be on the Joe Biden career path if everything falls into place? Or is he the most electable Republican candidate running?

***

One thing we can say for sure is that the prospects for any GOP victory in 2016 run through the Midwest. Four states that Obama took in 2012 are states that Republicans need to take for a win (or at least three out of the four): Ohio (18 electoral votes), Pennsylvania (20), Michigan (16) and Wisconsin (10). Sen. Cruz “is dead in the Midwest,” says Ohio State University political science professor Paul Beck, and adds that “Bush certainly has an appeal to independent voters, but he has been not been in office for a long time. Voters are less likely to care what he did in Florida ten years ago.”

Some are seeing Kasich as a candidate who might be able bridge the divide in the party without coming off as too moderately squishy to the far right. As in any election, independent voters are the key, and Kasich has courted them with great success during his two Ohio governor wins. His secret lies in his ability to pick up the moderates in the suburbs without upsetting the Tea Party too much. He has pushed for elimination of the income tax in Ohio and ways to balance the federal budget while also increasing taxes on cigarettes and on some businesses (a tax increase on shale and gas drillers, for example). And he seems to have done these things in Ohio with only the 10 percent on either extreme really upset.

Kasich has also deftly avoided getting in too deep with the far right in Ohio, thus avoiding the mess Indiana Governor Mike Pence finds himself in with Religious Freedom Restoration Act. He has worked with anti-abortion groups to reduce the number of clinics by requiring hospital emergency care affiliations, and that has dropped the number of clinics from 14 to eight in the past few years. But unlike Texas, the abortion fight in Ohio has been very low key and the goal has always been to reduce the number of abortions performed rather than make them almost impossible to get.

The general consensus among analysts in that no one other than Kasich, Jeb Bush, Scott Walker and Chris Christie can win the general election and Republican voters will eventually see the wisdom on not choosing an unelectable candidate. “The conservatives like Cruz and Paul will certainly do well in the Iowa caucuses and the early South Carolina primary, but as the primaries get into March and April, it is going to become more and more difficult for them in more moderate states,” says Kyle Kondik, managing editor of Sabato's Crystal Ball, a nonpartisan political newsletter produced by the University of Virginia Center for Politics.

“And you can be sure that Bush and Walker and Kasich are going to let primary voters know that voting for those candidates is a waste of their vote.”

With Christie looking like he is going to stay out, it will likely be Walker and Bush and Kasich out there going after the Wall Street money and Republican middle-ground voters. Walker runs more to the right than Kasich or Bush but seems to have some difficulty being in the spotlight. His strange refusal to answer a simple question on evolution while In England a few months ago is an example of that. “The more we see of Walker, the more we see that he does not appear ready for prime time,” says Stephen Mockabee, political science professor at the University of Cincinnati.

***

The primary opponent for Kasich right now appears to be Jeb Bush . Bush is already locking up piles of establishment donor funding, the same backers Kasich needs if he is to have any chance. But Bush has the legacy factor, and many conservatives did not like his brother or his father, and the anti-Bush crowd can argue that he will be a bad candidate for Republicans to pound the anti-Hillary Clinton no-more-from-that-family message.

If Kasich gets in the race, he will have a decent record to run on. He has reduced taxes on small businesses, taken a state that had an $8 billion budget deficit when took the governor’s office in 2011 to a $1.5 billion surplus today. His record is about job creation mostly—and though some of his programs have had minimal success and suffered a lack of transparency with regard to some publicly-funded corporate hand-outs—he won 86 out of 88 Ohio counties in November (admittedly, against a poor Democratic candidate) because his administration has stopped most of the Rust Belt economic bleeding in Ohio.

Like Bush, Kasich will take heat for his support of common core and immigration reform (though he is seen by most as less supportive than Bush was in Florida). But the big issue facing Kasich—especially in the primaries—is his bringing the Medicaid expansion to Ohio. The expansion moved the qualifying income for Medicaid in Ohio from $24,250 for a family of four to $32,500. That added more than 450,000 to the Medicaid rolls in Ohio in 2014.