The Obama administration today sent out warning letters to 310,000 Obamacare consumers with citizenship or immigration inconsistencies or questions who have not responded to requests asking them to submit documentation.

About 2,800 of these letters went to Alabamians who bought insurance under the Affordable Care Act. A sample letter is below.

Those who do not respond will receive a final notice in September informing them that their last day of coverage will be Sept. 30.

In May, the administration had as many as 970,000 people with citizenship or immigration data-matching errors, according to the government's announcement today.

"Since then, we've closed about 450,000 of these cases and have an additional 210,000 in progress," the release said. "We continue to receive up to 60,000 documents a day."

About 8 million people enrolled in a plan under the ACA, the administration has reported.

"Over the last several weeks, the Marketplace has reminded affected enrollees in the Federally-facilitated Marketplace via mail, email,and phone to send in their supporting documents so they can keep their Marketplace coverage, and insurance companies have reached out directly to these customers as well," said Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services Administrator Marilyn Tavenner. "The good news is that many have responded."

Notices are being sent in English and Spanish and provide instructions on how to submit the necessary information and keep their coverage.

Those who get a letter should log into their HealthCare.gov account and select their current application to upload their documents.

You can also mail their information to our London, KY address.

Officials ask to ensure timely processing, consumers mailing in a copy of their documents should include the bar code page from our notice with their documents.

"Since this is an urgent matter, we are activating our networks on the ground to reach people directly in the communities where they live," Tavenner said. "Whether it is online, via our call center, or with one of our local partners, consumers will have a number of ways to find the help they need to continue their coverage," said Tavenner.

&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;a href="http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/1274066/letter.pdf"&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;Letter (PDF)&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;/a&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt; &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;br /&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt; &amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;a href="http://s3.documentcloud.org/documents/1274066/letter.txt"&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;Letter (Text)&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;lt;/a&amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;amp;gt;