The charity Doctors Without Borders yesterday voiced concern and annoyance over the treatment of its nurse, noting the quarantined volunteer was at University Hospital stuck in paper scrubs in an unheated tent.

The nurse, 33-year-old Kaci Hickox, hasn't received any indication of what is in store for her, and her organization hasn't been able to get much information on her behalf, said an official with Doctors Without Borders.

A preliminary blood test for Ebola was negative, according to state officials.

“There is a notable lack of clarity about the new guidelines announced yesterday by state authorities in New York and New Jersey,” said Sophie Delaunay, executive director of Doctors Without Borders.. “We are attempting to clarify the details of the protocols with each state’s departments of health to gain a full understanding of their requirements and implications.”

The nurse, who was returning from a volunteer stint in Sierra Leone, was the first returning health care worker to encounter a quarantine policy that changed while her flight was over the Atlantic Ocean. On Friday, Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo broke with federal guidelines to impose a 21-day quarantine on any West African traveler who had encountered Ebola workers - no matter what their health upon arrival.

Hickox was given the standard medical screening at Newark Liberty International Airport, and had no fever. But given her travel history, she was taken to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention quarantine station at the airport, where she said she was held for several hours.

After a non-contact temperature registered a fever, she was transferred to University Hospital. Once there, she said doctors took her temperature with a conventional thermometer and she had no fever.

"Hospital personnel are keeping her in isolation and have not informed her of any next steps, including additional blood tests to confirm Ebola infection with certainty," said Delaunay, of Doctors Without Borders.

"She has been issued with an order of quarantine, which does not clearly indicate how long she must remain in isolation. While she is being provided with food and water, the tent is not heated and she is dressed in uncomfortable paper scrubs. She was permitted to bring personal belongings into the tent," Delaunay said.



"Doctors Without Borders is very concerned about the conditions and uncertainty she is facing and is attempting to obtain information from hospital officials," she added.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com, or at (732) 902-4557. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.