Buy Photo Gordon Hintz (Photo: Oshkosh Northwestern)Buy Photo

When trying to discover the priorities of our leaders in government, the best place to begin is always with their budgets. Even in difficult economic times, budgets should be a reflection of values of a state and its residents. Therefore, you don't have to be an expert in public policy to begin to understand why Governor Walker's proposed budget has been so deeply unpopular.

Governor Walker's budget is a "crisis budget" at a time when other states are investing in opportunity and growing their economies. We are told by Governor Walker and his Republican Legislature that we have to make "tough cuts" and this budget "invests in priorities." Yet, just last spring, the state was projected to have a budget surplus. Governor Walker and the Republican legislators were up for election, so they passed a permanent $541 million tax cut. While it may have made for good politics at the time, it was poor fiscal management. The Walker Administration recently had to delay a debt payment of $103 million, which taxpayers will pay additional interest on, just to keep our current budget in the black.

Another misplaced priority has been the increased use of the manufacturing and agriculture tax credit, a measure slipped into Governor Walker's first budget that eliminates most state income taxes on owners of factories and farms once it is fully phased in. When the credit was passed in 2011, it was estimated that it would cost $128 million annually by 2016-17. However, it is now estimated that it will cost more than twice the amount expected. Delaying the final phase in of this credit by two years could restore nearly $78 million to the budget and help avoid further cuts.

As we have seen over the last year, Wisconsin's economy has not responded well to Governor Walker's slash-and-burn strategy on Wisconsin's most valued institutions, like education. Yet, Governor Walker seems to have learned nothing. The Governor's budget contains the largest cut ever to the UW System and cuts public school funding while spending hundreds of millions on a school property tax credit that provides an average of $5 savings for homeowners. Of course half of this tax cut will go to second homes and commercial property, not residential homeowners. When it comes to a choice between an extra $5 back on your property tax bill, or sacrificing on quality education for our kids, I have yet to meet someone who chooses the $5.

Maybe the biggest casualty of Governor Walker's presidential ambitions is his stubborn political decision to reject the federal Medicaid expansion funding. We are the only state in the upper Midwest which has not accepted this funding. Taking the expansion money would provide 81,000 additional Wisconsinites access to health care, save state taxpayers $345 million, and add an estimated 10,000 health care jobs.

If Wisconsin had some positive economic results to show for the recent borrow-and-cut policies, you could make a case for continuing this direction. But we don't. Wisconsin remains dead last in the Midwest in job growth over the past four years and 40th in the U.S. overall. The "crisis budget" we are dealing with has been self-inflicted and intentional. Cut revenue enough that government has no choice but to reduce its programs and expenses. We didn't have to be in this position and we don't have to make these cuts now. Instead of slashing and borrowing, we need a state budget that invests in opportunities for the people of Wisconsin.

Rep. Gordon Hintz represents the 54th Assembly District, which includes the city of Oshkosh. He may be contacted at (888) 534-0054 (Madison), (920) 232-0805 (District) or Rep.Hintz@legis.wisconsin.gov.

Read or Share this story: http://oshko.sh/1yEOChG