Dallas-Fort Worth urgent care clinics and investors are positioning themselves for a potential bonanza of insured customers in 2014.

In recent months:

– Dallas-based PrimaCare’s 11 DFW clinics last month were bought by NextCare, the fourth-largest U.S. urgent-clinic operator.

– Dallas-based private-equity firms Elm Creek Partners and HealthCap have made significant urgent-care investments and have an appetite for more.

– Addison-based Concentra, the nation’s largest urgent-care operator, is expanding its primary-care services.

Urgent-care clinics have grown by 20 percent to 9,400 in the last four years and treat 3 million patients a week, according to the Urgent Care Association. According to a trade group survey, 40 percent of clinic operators were planning to expand their operations in 2013, and other predictions foretell that the Affordable Care Act’s insurance expansion could double the number of retail clinics by 2015.

Urgent-care clinics generally are freestanding physicians’ offices with extended hours that treat common injuries and illnesses, and perform screenings and some imaging. Evidence has shown that care delivered at these sites is less expensive and of comparable quality to hospital emergency departments (ED). Studies have estimated that the cost of care at urgent-care centers are $228-$414 less than the ED for similar cases, possibly saving the U.S. healthcare system $4.4 billion annually.

The American Medical Association and other physician groups, though, have contended that walk-in health clinics provide a lower quality of care and contribute to fragmentation of the U.S. healthcare system. However, many health systems are entering into joint ventures or establishing retail health clinics themselves.

CVS-based MinuteClinic has created clinic partnerships with health systems in 19 markets, including the Cleveland Clinic and UCLA Health System in Los Angeles. Health-system physicians serve as medical directors for the retail clinics and collaborate on patient education and disease management initiatives. MinuteClinic also electronically shares medical histories and visit summaries with its partners. MinuteClinic chief executive officer Andrew Sussman said last year the company was exploring a similar arrangement in North Texas.

Michael Slubowski, president and chief executive officer of Sisters of Charity of Leavenworth Health System in Denver, predicted at the Dallas Southwest Transactions Conference in May that only about half of a hospital system’s future revenue will come from “population health,” which he defined as public insurance programs, small employers, and health-exchange customers. He called the remainder “retail health,” driven by price sensitivity because of high deductibles, demand for e-visits and people with chronic conditions seeking value based on price and outcomes.

PrimaCare chief executive officer Don Dillahunty said his company will continue to do business under its current name. He said NextCare, which has 85 clinics nationwide, was eager to enter the North Texas market. He noted that North Texas is a very competitive market and growing because of favorable demographics.

Dillahunty said urgent care and retail clinics chase the same market: affluent women he called “soccer moms,” who tend to be household healthcare decision makers.

And there’s plenty of room for growth. As of Aug. 1, North Texas has 1.7 clinics per 100,000, compared with 4.9 clinics in Louisville, 4.5 in Nashville, and 2.0 in Houston, according to Tom Charland, chief executive officer of Merchant Medicine and publisher of the newsletter The ConvUrgent Care Report.

Boutique private equity firm HealthCap made a significant investment in Colleyville-based Urgent Care for Kids, which had after-hours pediatric care clinics in DFW and Houston. Brian White, co-founder and chief executive officer, said the clinics generally double their growth annually for the first three years of operation. He said the company plans to open 4 or 5 more clinics in 2014 and 2015 in North Texas, Houston, and Austin.

White called the growth of freestanding emergency departments in DFW “insane,” and believes consumers are becoming more sophisticated about the costs and services of those, compared with urgent-care offerings.

“Retail health is going to have to change dramatically to meet the demand [created by the ACA],” said Zach Wooldridge, co-founder of Elm Creek Partners, which recently bought a majority stake in urgent-care provider Millennium Healthcare Management. “We are going to have to find ways to solve the [access] problem. The average middle-class family is going to do what they have to do to get convenient and cost-effective care when they need it, regardless of whether it is paid for [by insurance].”

Charland agreed, saying high-deductible health plans and lack of primary-care access are giving walk-in clinics “the best opportunity in a generation to reduce their dependence on health insurance revenue streams.”

“Urgent care operators are taking advantage of the primary-care shortages,” he said. “Instead of injuries and sudden illnesses, they now take appointments for preventive care and have a more typical menu of primary-care services. At first, urgent care and retail clinics did not want to talk about [those services] because they did not want to be seen as disrupting medical homes. That’s changing with physician shortages.”

Wooldridge said Elm Creek would like to do additional urgent-care acquisitions, although his firm is approached frequently about divesting the Millennium clinics.

“We get calls every week asking whether they are for sale,” he said. “This is a fun business to be in because it is in such demand.”

Steve Jacob is founding editor of D Healthcare Daily and author of the book Health Care in 2020: Where Uncertain Reform, Bad Habits, Too Few Doctors and Skyrocketing Costs Are Taking Us. He can be reached at [email protected]