Lehigh Valley Health Network is consolidating some of its physician practices where there is overlap, resulting in an unspecified "small" number of workforce reductions, the network announced Tuesday.

A LVHN statement did not give specifics how the practices will be consolidated, and spokesman Brian Downs declined to elaborate except to say only a "handful" of practices are affected and employees will have a chance at other jobs within the network. The Health Network has relationships with more than 140 practices in the Lehigh Valley.

Downs said patients of the merged physician groups will be notified of the change and about rescheduling appointments. "There will be minimal impact on patients other than going to another practice or service that's nearby," Downs said.

LVHN is the largest employer in the Lehigh Valley with a payroll of 14,000 workers. The network includes four hospitals — Salisbury Township, and Allentown, Bethlehem and Hazleton. It also has a dozen health centers in five counties and numerous primary- and specialty-care physician practices in the region.

Lehigh Valley Physician Group is among the largest medical groups in the U.S., according to LVHN's website. More than 700 physicians and more than 300 advanced clinicians represent 47 medical specialties in the affiliated practices. LVPG practitioners perform about 2 million visits annually in practices, hospitals and other affiliated locations.

In its most recent IRS Form 990 filing for Lehigh Valley Physician Group, from July 1, 2013, to June 30, 2014, the physician group recorded revenue of $412.5 million and expenses of $424.5 million — a deficit of nearly $12 million.

In the statement, LVHN says: "While more patients than ever are using Lehigh Valley Physician Group [LVPG] and our outpatient services overall, we have an opportunity to consolidate LVPG practices where there are multiple practices nearby. These factors have resulted in changes to our workforce.

"The number of staff affected by these changes is small, but every single individual is a colleague and is important to us. We are working with each person affected by the changes and anticipate the majority of them will remain with LVHN in different capacities."

The statement ends by saying LVHN will continue to make "periodic adjustments" based on market needs and local and national trends in health care.

Earlier Tuesday, Downs said the matter is related to the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, in the area of "fee for service vs. fee for value," and government reimbursements from Medicare and Medicaid.

"In the past, the government paid for all you did," Downs said. "Now we get paid in a bundle payment and this is it, all based on value."

Experts generally agreed with LVHN's premise about the change in government payouts for health care in the overall rising cost of health care.

"A lot of change is going on that is forcing health systems to consolidate, redefine how medicine is being delivered," said Tom Croyle, president of the Lehigh Valley Business Coalition on Healthcare

Croyle said Medicaid typically pays below the cost of services, while Medicare's payouts are based on employer groups and individual insurance coverage.

Lehigh Valley Health Network's 2015 fiscal year — its second full fiscal year under the Affordable Care Act — ended June 30 with revenue of $1.9 billion, 13 percent higher than the year before. Operating income, the difference between day-to-day income and expenses, surged $30 million — 72 percent — to $72 million.

LVHN intends to merge later this year with Pocono Health System, which includes Pocono Medical Center in East Stroudsburg.

asalamone@mcall.com

610-820-6694

Morning Call reporter Jon Harris contributed to this story.