Ron Brabander, 58, of Woodland Park was riding his snowbike alone on Friday near Chaffee County’s Lost Lake atop Cottonwood Pass when he was buried and killed in an avalanche.

The death of Brabander marks the first-ever snowbike avalanche fatality in Colorado and, according to avalanche accident records, the second-ever in the country.

The exploding popularity of snowbikes — off-road motorcycles that are easily converted into snowmachines with a narrow snowmobile-like track replacing the rear wheel and a ski up front — portends that Friday’s tragedy won’t be the last.

“It’s not difficult to traverse really steep terrain with these,” said Brock Bolin, the safety director for the Flathead Snowmobile Association in Montana’s heavily snow-machined Flathead Valley, where avalanche researchers logged what could be the country’s first-ever snowbike fatality in February 2012.

“You just drive it like you are on flat ground. That can potentially get people in trouble because they can traverse steep slopes that would be difficult to do on a snowmobile,” said Bolin, whose Yamaha dealership in Kalispell, Mont., has sold more than 120 Timbersled snowbike conversion kits in recent years. “You are able to just putt along in steep terrain that could potentially be dangerous avalanche terrain.”

Snowmobilers who heard the avalanche around 11 a.m. Friday on the heavily trafficked east-facing slope quickly scanned the avalanche debris with their transceivers but did not pick up a signal. The group informed a Chaffee County search-and-rescue team training in the area and those searchers found Brabander buried about six feet deep, according to a preliminary report by the Colorado Avalanche Information Center. A piece of the snowbike was visible in the debris.

“I had to ask what it was,” said Chaffee County Sheriff John Spezze. “I pictured him pedaling the thing.”

Forecasters with the Colorado Avalanche Information Center investigated the scene on Friday. Their initial analysis indicates either Brabander was not carrying avalanche rescue equipment or, if he was wearing an avalanche beacon, it was not working or turned on.

They ranked the slide — which stretched almost 1,300 feet across the ridge near the summit of Cottonwood Pass — as an R2D2, which means it was relatively small for the size of the slide path and while not large enough to gouge the landscape, level a building or break trees, it was powerful enough to bury a person.

Ethan Greene, the executive director of the center, said he has seen snowbikes around the state but not many.

“It’s easier to get into complex terrain on of those machines than a snowmobile,” Greene said. “One person referred to them as the fat skis of snowmobiling.”

Wide powder skis have enabled skiers to venture deeper into steep backcountry terrain earlier in the season. The broad, floating skis are easy to use with a slight learning curve, not unlike snowbikes.

“That poses a concern for me as a retailer knowing that a person who might be more of a dirt biker without much snowmobile experience can walk into the shop, buy this thing and get onto crazy avalanche slopes in less than 20 minutes,” Bolin said.

Last year, snowmobile pioneer Polaris Industries Inc., a powersports Goliath with $4.5 billion in annual sales last year, acquired Idaho’s private Timbersled, a market leader in the blossoming snow bike industry.

“With Polaris’ financial backing, this sport is not going to get any smaller,” said Bolin, who first rode a Timbersled in 2012. “Once people swing a leg over one of these, they absolutely cannot believe how fun it is. We are seeing more and more of these things every day.”

Of the 18 avalanche fatalities reported so far in the U.S. for the 2015-16 season, six have involved motorized riders. Snowmobile avalanche deaths vary, from as few as 1 of the 24 total avalanche fatalities in the country in 2012-13 to as many as 17 of the 36 total avalanche fatalities counted in 2009-10.

But three of Colorado’s four avalanche fatalities this season have involved snowmachines. That’s more than any other state.

“That’s unusual for Colorado,” Greene said. “Colorado typically has less motorized accidents than the rest of the country but that doesn’t seem to be the case this year,” Greene said.

More troubling for Greene is the number of solo backcountry travelers involved in accidents this season. Two of Colorado’s avalanche fatalities this season — Brabander and Denver’s Todd Musselman, who was killed in an avalanche while hiking near St. Mary’s Glacier last month – involved solo travelers.

“And we’ve had a couple close calls with people traveling by themselves that could easily have been fatal accidents,” said Greene, noting four more solo travelers have been killed by avalanches this season in Idaho, Utah, Wyoming and California. “It seems like we are seeing more people traveling by themselves.”

Jason Blevins: 303-954-1374, jblevins@denverpost.com or @jasonblevins

Total avalanche fatalities in the U.S. / Number of snowmobile avalanche fatalities

2015-16: 18 / 6 (As of Feb. 6)

2014-15 : 11 / 2

2013-14: 35 / 11

2012-13: 24 /1

2011-12: 34 /9

2010-11: 25 /4

2009-10: 36 /17

2008-09: 27/16

2007-08: 36 /13

2006-07: 20/10

Source: Colorado Avalanche Information Center.