By Steve Wilson | Mississippi Watchdog

Mississippi and Louisiana compete for top billing in producing the best football players, the best music. They also compete for a more dubious distinction.

Mississippi again topped the nation (42.9 percent) in the percentage of its state budget provided by the federal government, State Budget Solutions says in a report on federal aid to states in 2013.

Louisiana was second, with 41.9 percent of its general fund budget coming from federal money. The aid includes health-care spending and highway and education money.

State Budget Solutions used U.S. Census Bureau data in compiling its report.

The trend of federal aid to states was reduced nationally, but it was still high. As a whole, states received 30 percent of their budgets from the federal government, down from 31.6 percent in 2012. Decreased federal assistance due to reduced reimbursements for Medicaid, which dropped nationally between 2012 and 2013, was a reason, says the report.

Joe Luppino-Esposito, editor and general counsel of State Budget Solutions, says Mississippi has topped the report’s rankings on federal aid to states since 2008, when State Budget Solutions began these reports. He said the national trend, while positive, is concerning when it comes to the relationship between the federal government and the states.

“The federal government has unbalanced federalism by enticing states to take more federal funding, and therefore, ceding more control,” Luppino-Esposito said. “But states weren’t forced into doing this. They gladly gave up some of their sovereign power just to grab some cash.”

In Mississippi and Louisiana, the disconnect between their dominant political cultures and the level of federal funding is extreme. Both states have voted for Republican candidates in the past few presidential elections and have two GOP senators and only one Democratic member each in the U.S. House. Both states have Republican governors and Republican-led legislatures.

At least in one respect, Mississippi has decided not to increase its percentage of federal aid to its state budget. Gov. Phil Bryant has stood firm against the expansion of Medicaid in the state. Thanks to the Affordable Care Act’s broader income eligibility requirements, state funding of Medicaid will increase 14.7 percent in fiscal 2016, to more than $1 billion.

Kenneth Townsend, assistant professor of political science at Millsaps College, told Mississippi Watchdog via email the disconnect between the rhetoric from state policymakers against federal interference borders on hypocrisy.

“There is a great irony — indeed one might even say hypocrisy — in the way that some Republican leaders in Mississippi denounce earmarks and the once widely accepted practice of lawmakers ‘bringing home the bacon’ for the state,” Townsend said. “Without federal transfers, Mississippi would be in an even more dire situation than it already is, and I fear that we simply shoot ourselves in the foot by railing against ‘big government’ and … decrying the liberty lost by selling out to the federal government when it is the federal government that keeps our state going.

“Until Mississippi’s economy grows, resulting in substantial increases in state revenues, Mississippi’s budget will continue to rely heavily on federal funding sources.”

Only nine states received less than a quarter of their budgets from the federal government, led by oil-rich North Dakota, which got less than 20 percent.

Get regular updates on Mississippi through our Facebook or Twitter accounts