OPINIONS (Photo: JULZ PETERSEN)

Over the past several years, arguments for Medicaid expansion in Missouri have been made using sound economic, budgetary and public health rationales. They have collapsed, however, under the reflexive antipathy toward the Affordable Care Act by conservatives in the state legislature.

The result: Tens of thousands of Missouri’s workers go without health insurance compared to states that expanded Medicaid, according to a study by Families USA. Expansion states, on average, saw a 25 percent decline in their rate of uninsured workers, compared to just 13 percent for Missouri — a difference of nearly two to one.

It shouldn’t be this way. State/federal partnerships, like Medicaid expansion, have a history of success and have been a hallmark of Republican governance for more than a century.

Consider the Land Grant College Act of 1862, sponsored by Congressman Justin Morrill — a founder of the Republican Party — and signed by Republican President Abraham Lincoln. Under the Act, the federal government gave states federal land they could manage or sell to endow colleges specializing in agriculture and engineering. The states would pay for the construction and maintenance of the schools.

Since 1862, more than 20 million people — many who could not have otherwise afforded it — have graduated from the 100 Land Grant colleges that were created in every state and territory.

Another example is the Federal Highway Act of 1956, which created the Interstate Highway System. Republican President Dwight Eisenhower decided the project had to be a state/federal enterprise because otherwise our nation “would be a mere alliance of many separate parts.”

Studies have shown that every $1 invested in the Interstate System returned $6 in economic benefits.

Medicaid expansion is in the best tradition of these historic state/federal partnerships. Helping low-income Missourians get health care is an investment in human capital every bit as important to our future as building universities and roads.

In Missouri, Medicaid is very restrictive. Parents of dependent children cannot receive coverage if their incomes exceed a meager 22 percent of the federal poverty level, approximately $370 a month for a family of three. Other adults — singles and childless couples — can’t get coverage even if they have no income at all.

Medicaid expansion would extend eligibility to adults with incomes at or below 138 percent of the federal poverty level — or about $2,130 a month for a family of three.

The majority of the expansion population — about 300,000 in Missouri — are working men and women who earn too much to qualify for traditional Medicaid, but not enough to be eligible for subsidies on the health care exchange.

The federal government would pay 95 percent of the cost in 2017, sliding to a permanent 90/10 ratio by 2020 – the precise split of the Highway Act.

The Missouri Legislature should revisit Medicaid expansion during this year’s session with a vision that extends beyond short-term election cycles, but rather looks toward the horizon and builds for generations to come — as great Republican leaders like Lincoln and Eisenhower did.

Ron Pollack is executive director of Families USA, the national organization for health care consumers.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1Szx9LJ