The presidential campaign season enters its next phase this Thursday, Aug. 6, when the Republican candidates gather in Cleveland for their first primary debate. The event, which will feature the top 10 GOP candidates based on national poll results, will help set the tone of the political season and will establish critical “first impressions” for lesser-known candidates.



Fox News Channel and Facebook are joining forces to present the first debate, with anchors Bret Baier, Megyn Kelly and Chris Wallace moderating. Viewers and Facebook users can submit questions to the moderators through Facebook, some of which will be selected for use in the debate.



Many questions will be submitted, but few will survive the winnowing process. Fewer still will focus on the economy, even though the next president will inherit an economy that faces complex issues. These issues include the expanding divide between wealthy and poor, the future of manufacturing and unions, the challenges of addressing inefficiencies and inequities in U.S. health care, and many more.



In light of the complex economic challenges our next president will face, here are five questions the candidates should be asked and why their answers are important:



1. If the U.S. economy were to enter a recession during your presidency, would you advocate for a reduction in federal spending, so that federal deficits did not rise in the face of decreased tax revenues? Or would you advocate for an increase in federal spending, increasing the deficit in an effort to speed the economic recovery?





If historical trends in the business cycle hold true, the next president can expect an economic recession at some point during his or her term. Economists generally believe the benefits of deficit spending rise, and the costs fall, when the economy is in recession. Voters should be aware if a presidential candidate holds economic views that are outside the mainstream on this issue. Bad fiscal policy could increase the pain of our next recession.2. Voters often hear about “job-killing regulations,” but rarely do we hear any specifics. Could you highlight specific regulations that should be abolished because of their negative effect on jobs?Any regulation involves complicated tradeoffs, but politicians are prone to catchy slogans that ignore those tradeoffs. Regulations do impose costs on employers, but they also pursue goals, such as worker and environmental safeguards, that many people value. By focusing on specific regulations, voters will see how candidates grapple with these difficult tradeoffs.3. Do you think unions play a positive or negative role in the health of our economy? As president, would you seek to increase or decrease worker participation in unions?Unions are frequently criticized for protecting unproductive workers, inhibiting merit pay, and shackling employers with unsustainable pension programs. But they also deserve some credit for promoting better wages and working conditions. According to the International Monetary Fund, roughly half of the increase in income inequality over the last 30 years can be attributed to declining union membership. Efforts to increase, decrease or improve the role of unions could have important effects on how our economy evolves.4. In 2014, a survey conducted by the Pew Research Center found that over three-quarters of conservatives believe that “poor people have it easy because they can get government benefits without doing anything.” Do you believe poor people in America have it easy?Whether and how to address poverty has always been a contentious political issue. A candidate’s disposition toward the poor is key to understanding the priorities he or she would apply to poverty-related programs as president.5. Unlike insurance aspects of the Affordable Care Act, the Medicare reforms intended to reduce costs and improve quality have received little political attention. These include financial rewards for high-performing hospitals and accountable care organizations, and the creation of new “episode-based” payment mechanisms. Do you support these reforms? Are there other measures you would advocate to improve Medicare payment systems?Our ability to contain Medicare spending, while ensuring the elderly’s access to quality health care, is a critical factor in determining the country’s long-term fiscal health. Medicare payment reforms are a work in progress. The next president will be instrumental in determining whether these reforms are sustained, improved upon or abandoned.