On Friday, the Washington Free Beacon published a list of things liberals see as racist, although it's probably easier these days to list those things liberals do not see as racist. Andrew Stiles not only presented the "List of Things That Are Racist" for the week, but provided the source links. Naturally, the vast majority came from MSNBC and Salon, a far-left online publication.

The items marked racist include talking about Ebola, the American Revolution and children's books with white characters. Being half-white, opposing Barack Obama and supporting Herman Cain are also things the left has declared racist.

According to MSNBC, observing that Obama likes to play golf is considered racist. Saying "Obamacare" is also racist, according to the cable outlet known here as the official network of insane liberal hate. So too, is referring to Obama as "Obama," according to Chris Matthews.

Criticizing liberals for constantly accusing people of racism is also racist according to Salon. Noting that white people sometimes use heroin is also racist, according to the liberal media outlet.

"Tom and Jerry" cartoons, cupcakes, and of course, peanut butter and jelly sandwiches are all things that have been deemed racist. Vox claimed that describing the Hong Kong protests as "clean and orderly" can also be seen as racist.

A few things did not make Stiles' list, like dry asparagus. "Constitution" and "Founding fathers" -- words that Juan Williams once said are racial code -- also did not make the list. Black stick figures did not make the list, nor did calling Juan Williams by his first name. That's understandable, as Stiles said the list "has grown incomprehensibly long."

Citing Salon, Stiles balanced the list with one item the liberal site did not see as racist. It seems that suing a fertility clinic after giving birth to a mixed race child you wish was white is not racist.

In an update, Stiles said his article was declared racist, citing a tweet by Daily Beast columnist Jamie Kirchick. "This @AndrewStilesUSA article is racist," Kirchick wrote.

"Haven't you figured it out?" one person asked Kirchick. "Embarrassing liberals is racist."

"This tweet from me - the one you are reading right now - is racist," another person wrote. Another Twitter user said Kirchick has a "surprising lack of self awareness."

"Liberals tend to devote a significant portion of their daily lives to proving how not racist they are," Stiles explained. "One particularly expedient way of doing this is to declare that something a conservative has said or done is totally racist, and then to place oneself in opposition to the thing that was racist." In short, liberals constantly use the race card to silence any disagreement. The problem, however, is that by declaring everything racist, liberals minimize the impact of real racism when it happens.