I’ve written a lot (including a full book chapter) about why you might want to avoid letting your health insurance plan auto-renew – including the possibility that your premium costs could be significantly different in the new year. But if you choose to auto-renew your current plan, you could be in for another alarming surprise: an entirely new plan that was selected by your health insurance carrier on your behalf in a process called “mapping.”

When your plan is phased out

Prior to 2014, individual health insurance in almost every state was medically underwritten. When carriers made changes to a plan, they would typically “sunset” the old plan: existing enrollees could remain on it, but only the new version was available to new applicants. In this scenario, premiums for the sunset plan tended to increase significantly over time, as the risk pool would no longer be adding newly underwritten members.

Pre-2014, if carriers made changes to a plan and applied them to existing enrollees, state regulations could require the carrier to allow existing enrollees to transition to any of the carrier’s other plans, with no medical underwriting. Carriers tended to avoid that scenario in an effort to prevent adverse selection.

But that’s no longer an issue. Every policy is available to every applicant during open enrollment. Medical underwriting is no longer used, and people are no longer stuck with the plan they have because of their medical history. So it no longer makes sense for carriers to sunset products; instead, they make changes as necessary, applying them to existing policyholders as well as new applicants. And in turn, every policyholder has the option of switching to any other plan during open enrollment, regardless of pre-existing conditions.

Although new plan designs were rolled out on a regular basis prior to 2014, carriers are working in a significantly different landscape now. Nationwide, carriers have struggled with financial losses in 2014 and 2015. The adjustments they’re making in order to remain viable and competitive mean that plan changes are more common than they were prior to 2014.

When plan designs are phased out and replaced, carriers “map” insureds to different plans that are the “most similar” to what they currently have. It’s a better option than having policyholders lose their coverage altogether if they don’t return to their exchange to actively research and select a new plan.

Unfortunately, even if you’re mapped to the “most similar” plan, it could mean that the premium, provider network, and design of your mapped policy could all be different from what’s in your existing plan.

Mapping and the exchanges

In September 2014, HHS clarified that auto-renewal would be the default provision to avoid gaps in coverage for exchange enrollees who don’t return to actively select a new plan for the coming year during open enrollment. (State-run exchanges are free to set their own guidelines, but for 2016, all of the state-run exchanges are defaulting to auto-renewal except Hawaii, where insureds have to switch from the state-run exchange platform to HealthCare.gov). In most cases, the expectation was that the same plan would be available in the coming year, and the enrollee would simply be auto-renewed into that plan.

HHS confirmed in August that auto-renewal for 2016 would be available for most current enrollees. But that does not mean they’ll all be renewed onto the same plan they have in 2015, or that the provider network will still be the same. If a current plan will no longer be available, the carrier can “map” insureds to a new plan that they deem to be “most similar” to the current plan.

Mapping to the ‘most similar’ plan

For cases where an existing plan won’t be available in the coming year, HHS implemented a hierarchy for determining what plan would be considered “most similar” to an enrollee’s current plan. HHS noted that the insurance carriers (as opposed to state regulators or the exchanges) are uniquely qualified to determine which plan is most similar to a plan that will no longer be available.

When a plan must be replaced, the carrier submits a “crosswalk” designation to the exchange, indicating which plan should be substituted during the auto-renewal process. The exchange uses that data to map current enrollees onto plans for the coming year, assuming the enrollees don’t return to the exchange to actively select their own plan.

Illinois and Arizona are examples of states where some enrollees will be auto-renewed onto different plans with narrower networks in 2016 because their carriers will no longer offer their current PPO networks and/or benefit designs. Some of the insureds may be able to secure a broader network in 2016 by switching to a different carrier, but that means avoiding auto-renewal and opting instead to select a different plan for 2016.

Can you be mapped to a new carrier?

The HHS guidelines indicate that an exchange cannot map enrollees to a plan offered by a different carrier. So if your health insurance carrier is exiting the exchange or pulling out of the individual market altogether – as is the case with 12 CO-OPs in November and December – the exchange generally won’t automatically re-enroll you in a similar plan from a different carrier. (New York State of Health made an exception for CO-OP members who lost coverage at the end of November.)

If your carrier is pulling out of the exchange but continuing to offer off-exchange coverage in your area, state regulations on guaranteed renewability will apply; the carrier may be able to auto-renew your coverage outside the exchange (which means you’d lose any premium subsidies and/or cost-sharing subsidies you were receiving in the exchange), or you may be directed to select a new plan during open enrollment.

Could you be mapped to a higher premium?

It’s very possible that the mapped plan could have a higher premium, despite the fact that it will be the plan deemed “most similar” to what you’ve got now. Overall, rates are increasing by an average of about 12 percent in 2016, including both on- and off-exchange plans. So whether your plan changes or not, chances are the premium will be higher than it was this year.

But for eligible enrollees, premium subsidies will offset some of the increase, regardless of whether the insured is mapped to a new plan. Subsidies will still be available for most exchange enrollees who have them in 2015 and opt to let their plans auto-renew. There are some exceptions however, detailed in the renewal section of my open enrollment ebook.

Can you avoid mapping?

If you want to have a hand in determining your new plan, you have to return to the exchange and actively select a plan for 2016. (In most states, the deadline to do that – and have the coverage effective in January – was initially December 15. But in nearly every state, it’s now been pushed out to at least December 17 – you may still be able to select your own plan and have it take effect in January.

Pay attention to the notices you’ve received recently from your health insurer and your exchange – they’ll tell you in advance if your current plan is being discontinued or modified.

And don’t rely on auto-renewal. Instead, log back into your exchange account and actively select a plan for 2016. That will give you a chance to compare all of the available plans, which may be very different from what was available when you shopped last year or the year before. It will also give you a chance to update your personal information with the exchange, including any recent changes in income (resulting in fewer surprises when you reconcile your subsidy on your tax return).

And in the event that your existing plan will no longer be available after the end of the year, selecting your own plan for 2016 gives you much more control over the situation than simply letting your health insurer map you to the plan they consider most similar to what you had this year.

What happens after December 15?

If you find out that your plan has changed and you’d rather pick a different option, you can still do so anytime until January 31.

If you pick a new plan between December 16 and January 15, the coverage will be effective February 1 (although in most states, plan selections can be made until December 17th or even later and still have a January 1 effective date). The plan onto which you were mapped will be in force from January 1 until your new plan selection takes effect.

What if my carrier is going out of business?

Some people don’t have the option to auto-renew. That’s the case for about 660,000 CO-OP enrollees, along with a not-insignificant number of other insureds in several states whose carriers have recently announced that they’re exiting the exchange or the entire individual market at the end of the year.

If your carrier is exiting the market, you’ll need to select a plan from another carrier in order to avoid a lapse in coverage. In that case, the best option is to enroll in a new plan by December 17 in most states. However, you can enroll anytime until December 31 if you specify that you’re using a special enrollment period triggered by loss coverage – it’s best to utilize this option only as a last resort, and seek help from a broker or navigator before doing so.