A woman sits with an insurance agent from Sunshine Life and Health Advisors, as she picks an insurance plan under the Affordable Care Act, at the Mall of the Americas on Nov. 2, 2015, in Miami. Joe Raedle/Getty Images

As the nation's attention turned to the Iowa caucuses, the third period during which Americans could sign up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act crept quietly to a close Sunday.

During open enrollment for Obamacare, customers can sign up for health insurance through online "exchanges" that allow them to compare and purchase plans. The exchanges in the past have faced technical glitches that led officials to extend sign-up deadlines, but this year saw relatively little disruption.



Final enrollment numbers were not made immediately available. But the Obama administration released figures Friday showing that 11.6 million people had already signed up for or renewed a health plan through state and federal exchanges since the period began on Nov. 1, outpacing enrollment at the same time last year, when final tallies reached 11.7 million. In previous years, the federal government's online exchange site, HealthCare.gov, saw an increase in traffic as hours ticked away toward the deadline, and officials appeared to see a similar surge in activity this year.

"As we expected, we continue to see an increase in activity, with all systems running smoothly, as we head into the final hours of the deadline for 2016 coverage," Lori Lodes, a spokeswoman for the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which manages HealthCare.gov, wrote in an email to reporters Sunday. "We don't expect to share any late-night numbers."

Even after the enrollment totals are released, they will provide only a snapshot of who winds up covered by insurance over the course of the year. Some customers drop out of the rolls willingly or do not pay premiums, or later begin a job that provides insurance directly. Last year, 2.4 million people had left the exchanges by the close of the third quarter.



[READ: For Obamacare, Who Is Running States Matters]

People who did not sign up for health insurance by the deadline will pay a penalty of up to $2,085 for a family or 2.5 percent of their income in excess of 2015 income tax filing thresholds – whichever is higher. There are exemptions for life circumstances like divorce, marriage or job loss.

Ahead of this year's open enrollment, Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell told reporters that the government hoped to sign up a quarter of the 10.5 million Americans who were previously uninsured and qualified for coverage. She is scheduled to meet with President Barack Obama on Monday.

Lowering the number of uninsured is a major goal of Obama's health care reforms, and open enrollment plays a key role in achieving that goal through the Affordable Care Act. The Obama administration received a bit of a blow last week when a report from the Congressional Budget Office projected that enrollment under the law would be lower than it had previously estimated – at 13 million, down from 21 million. These estimates changed in part because the CBO had previously thought employers would drop plans, telling employees to go to the exchanges, but this largely hasn't happened.



For the first time, the federal government did not extend its final deadline for people to enroll through HealthCare.gov, which residents in 38 states use. The health insurance industry has grumbled against the practice of moving deadlines, saying it struggles to set prices for customers when it cannot predict who will come and go from insurance rolls.

Some states and the nation's capital, however, operate their own exchanges, and announced they would give their residents more time to sign up. Both Maryland and the District of Columbia said they were extending their deadlines in part because of the massive snowstorm in the region that effectively shut down both the federal government and private workplaces , though D.C. Health Link officials also cited "increased demand."

In California, state officials announced the deadline would be extended to Feb. 6 for those who had already begun the process of signing up by Sunday. In Washington state, the exchange website was down much of the day Saturday, and state officials said anyone who faced difficulties because of that likely could receive an extension, though the site is scheduled to be down at various points this week for maintenance.



Updated on Feb. 1, 2016: This story has been updated to include new information.