Tony Abbott’s strategy to win last year’s election involved visiting Victoria, on average, once a fortnight, claiming Melbourne as his ‘‘second home’’ and forging a working relationship with the man who led the Liberals back into power at a state level, Ted Baillieu.

Interviewed by the Herald Sun’s Phil Hudson early last year, Abbott confessed that he felt much better placed to appreciate Melbourne than he was just a few years earlier – and very much at home.

‘‘Ted has gone out of his way to be helpful to me,’’ he added, explaining that, while the two leaders had very different styles, ‘‘I get on with him extremely well.’’ A few weeks later Baillieu was gone, toppled by his colleagues after a little over two years as premier.

Abbott’s efforts were rewarded in the September federal election when the Liberal Party picked up three seats from Labor in Victoria (La Trobe, Deakin and Corangamite), one more than the party managed in Queensland, and Baillieu’s successor, Denis Napthine, was expected to put the state Coalition back on track to retain office.

Advertisement

Fast-forward to this week and it is hard to comprehend how far the Liberal Party has fallen, at a state and federal level, in the state that produced its founder and most towering figure, Sir Robert Menzies.

Napthine’s Coalition is in grave danger of being the first one-term administration in Victoria since 1955, and Abbott is leading the most unpopular first-term federal government since polling began.

Not too much should be read into the state breakdown of the monthly national Age-Nielsen Poll because of sample size but, even allowing for this qualification, this week’s Liberal primary vote of 29 per cent in Victoria rocked some federal Liberal MPs.

A more accurate, but still grim, picture emerges when you average out the state-by-state results in the past three polls and compare them with the average of the last three polls before last September’s election.

Here, the Coalition’s Victorian vote is nine points down on the 43 per cent primary at the election, compared with a drop of five points in New South Wales and six in Queensland.

Abbott’s personal approval ratings are similarly worse in Victoria than elsewhere, with an average disapproval rating of 61 per cent for the past three months, compared with 54 per cent in NSW.

Voters generally distinguish between state and federal governments and issues, but the extent of the Liberal malaise was highlighted in a separate Age-Nielsen poll of state voting intentions.

Based on preferences at the last election, the poll had Labor in front on two-party terms, 56-44. Based on how those polled said they would allocate preferences, it was even more dire for the Liberals: 59-41 to Labor. Most disturbing for Napthine, however, was that one in three said their voting intention was influenced by Abbott’s budget.

The obvious explanation for this state being so bad for Abbott is simple enough: Victoria is the least conservative state in a country being led by one of the most conservative prime ministers in memory.

Scott Morrison’s proud boast this week, when he told Parliament that ‘‘stopping the boats is just the start for this government; we are just getting warmed up’’, may resonate in western Sydney, but it worries many with small-l liberal values, especially in the leafy suburbs of Melbourne.

Victoria is also the country’s best exemplar of multiculturalism, with the second-biggest population of Chinese-born voters and biggest population of Indian-born voters. Many are unnerved by Abbott’s determination to wind back protections against racial discrimination by repealing section 18C of the Racial Discrimination Act in order to enhance free speech.

There is also growing anger within these communities at one of the federal budget’s lesser-known nasties: changes to family reunion laws that mean the only option for those wishing to bring their parents to Australia is to pay more than $100,000 for the necessary visas.

As the president of the Federation of Chinese Associations, Vincent Chow, sees it, both issues have damaged the Abbott government’s standing and – by association – hurt Napthine’s prospects.

Another ingredient is the lack of Victorian faces at the upper levels of Abbott’s cabinet. Kevin Andrews, Andrew Robb, Greg Hunt and Bruce Billson are all capable ministers, but are hardly household names and none are leadership contenders.

The Liberal brand has also been tarnished by the state party’s handling of the challenge posed by anti-abortion independent Geoff Shaw and, most recently, by the determination of some to trash the standing of Baillieu, whose decency is respected across the political spectrum.

The circulation to Liberal Party members of the recording of a private conversation between Baillieu and Sunday Age state political editor Farrah Tomazin prompted some awkward questions for all, but none more awkward than what motivated those behind the exercise.

If the aim was to force Baillieu out of Parliament, it won’t succeed. Those usually not prone to conspiracy theories fear something altogether more sinister: an attempted takeover of the party by hardline conservative forces. Either way, the effect has been to turn the political spotlight on the Liberal Party’s own deep divisions and deflected it from Napthine’s attempts to sell a solid pre-election budget.

The investigation is also pointing towards an awkward conclusion, with a senior staffer in the office of a Victorian federal minister suspected of playing a key role in the skulduggery. No wonder voters have trouble differentiating between federal and state.

It all adds up to what one insider dubbed a perfect storm, with no easy recovery path in either sphere. Rooting out the saboteurs is the job of state director Damien Mantach; restoring the faith with the middle ground is the bigger challenge for Abbott and Napthine.

Napthine craves clear air, but is thwarted by his own side; Abbott needs to remove the distractions that suggest ideology is driving him. The best outcome on 18C, assuming he will not retreat, would see a watered-down change defeated in the Senate.

Prudence would also suggest that the Prime Minister keeps his distance from his ‘‘second home’’, at least until Victorians have delivered their verdict in the November state election, and concentrate on reconnecting next year.

Michael Gordon is political editor of The Age.