When it comes to Canada’s National Radon Action Month in November, the Kitigan Zibi Anishinabeg First Nation has already more than done its part.

Since 2008, the community, which covers about 134 square kilometers in Quebec, about a 90-minute ride from Ottawa, has aggressively tested for the odorless, colorless radioactive gas in nearly 95 percent of its on-reserve homes – and then taken on the task of improving all of them. Of the more than 440 homes tested, 180 came up with radon levels above what Health Canada now considers too high – 200 becquerels per cubic meter (200 Bq/m³).

The findings did not surprise the First Nation leadership, based in Maniwak. Already, the community has been struggling with a “radioactive” problem with their water.

In 2000, almost 60 percent of the community’s homes were determined to have dangerously high levels of natural uranium in their water supplies. The community would end up paying almost $170,000 every year since then to supply drinkable bottled water. Recently a safe local source of water has been found and residents are encourage to use that source, but many aspects of the uranium-in-the-water incident left a bad taste with community members. When tackling the issue of radon, the band leaders did not want to repeat that experience. They’ve ended up making homes healthier while creating a radon expertise being tapped by other communities within and outside First Nations.

“When the water issue came up,” recalled band Chief Gilbert Whiteduck, “Health Canada didn’t have a very good communication strategy.” The first word that came out was don’t drink the water and don’t let your pets drink the water. Then almost immediately came the announcement that it was ok for pets, since they have shorter lives anyway.

“It was idiotic,” said Whiteduck, not mincing words. “Everyone was in a panic.”

“There was no real technique to actually solve the problem,” added Marcel Brascoupe, a band member who was assistant community service director at the time. “There was a lot of frustration in the community.”

Then came the questions about using bottled water and the safety with the plastic bottles and also delivering the five liter jugs of water which are hard for an elderly person to bring inside and can easily freeze if someone is not home.

Trying to find systems to handle the uranium in the water left the community both wary and ready when it took on radon.

Modest radon testing done in about 85 homes in the 1990s already showed the likelihood the community would need mitigation for homes, explained Branscoupe. In the mid-90s, though, the radon “actionable” trigger level was much higher – 800 Bq/m³. While many of the homes ranked above 200 Bq/m³, few hit that higher level.

When Health Canada issued new guidelines with lower levels, Brascoupe and others recognized that their community homes would have a problem. Of those homes originally tested, 16 hit the new “actionable” levels.

Long-term exposure to high levels of radon has been linked to lung cancer. In fact, other than smoking, it is the second highest cause of lung cancer in Canada and the United States and the highest cause – ahead of even second-hand smoke – for non-smokers.

The announcement of this environmental health concern had to be done with more finesse and planning than the water issue, the band council knew. Two decisions by the band became critical to dealing with radon in the community. One was that all homes needed to be tested – unless homeowners declined – and two was that there had to be a plan, with financing, in place to fix the problems when they were found.

RELATED: Radon: The Invisible Killer In Native Homes Across Indian Country

Health Canada wanted to test only some of the homes, Whiteduck recalled. “We told them, ‘No, we were testing them all.’” Initially, the band funded the tests through its Aboriginal Affairs money so all homes could be tested.

The timing, though, turned out to be right for the community to find federal funding. It was just after the 2008 recession hit that this issue came to light. By quickly creating a plan of action for training, testing and mitigation systems, the band was able to tap stimulus money. One of the investments was in training of Kitigan Zibi members to do the testing and to install the radon mitigation systems.

“There was not a lot of expertise in Canada at the time,” Brascoupe said. “We brought two experts from the U.S. to actually train our community members.”

Ten people were trained. “That type of expertise became something that was exportable to other First Nations,” Brascoupe added.

Brascoupe himself has since become a certified trainer and is certified to do radon testing and mitigation. He retired from his job with the band in 2011 and has become a private general contractor specializing in radon issues. The trained band members are his staff. “I’m the only Canadian trainer who actually trains contractors both on-reserve and off- reserve.”