Topics: AlterNet, Bernie Sanders, Hillary Clinton, Iowa, New Hampshire, Elections News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

As 2015 comes to a close, the ghost of Barack Obama’s stunning 2008 upset win over Hillary Clinton in Iowa is casting a long shadow on the current Democratic presidential race and raising the question, is Bernie Sanders gaining crucial ground?

The short answer was provided by Clinton herself in an email blast sent after Saturday’s debate: “I don’t know how else to say it except by saying it: We could lose the nomination.”

Here are five factors that underscore Clinton’s assessment that the first two contests for the 2016 Democratic nomination—the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary—are within reach for Sanders.

“The other candidates on that stage last night would like nothing more than for our team to sit back and relax right now, but I am not taking anything for granted,” Clinton said, before asking supporters to contribute to her campaign.

1. Sanders is beating Obama’s Iowa benchmarks. Bernie is now doing better in Iowa against Clinton than Obama was doing in 2007, according to recent polls. Obama trailed Clinton in Iowa by nearly 30 percentage for most of 2007 and in polls that December. In contrast, the latest CBS poll puts Sanders 5 points behind Clinton in Iowa, according to Real Clear Politics tally. For December, her lead has averaged 14.9 percent.

Obama won Iowa because of exceptional grassroots organizing, especially among young people. Sanders has said that he hopes to repeat that pattern. In 2008, 240,000 Democrats attended the Iowa caucuses, compared to 125,000 in 2004. Obama was the choice of 57 percent of caucus goers under 29 years old and of more than one-fourth of the first-time caucus attendees that year. An early December Des Moines Register/Bloomberg poll that found Sanders was 9 points behind Clinton also said he was leading among participants under 45, independents and first time caucus goers.

2. Sanders is holding his New Hampshire lead. In New Hampshire, which is next to Sanders’ home state of Vermont, he is leading but that contest is also tightening, according to Real Clear Politics. Sanders averaged an 8.6 percent lead in December, but this is where a different ghost of 2008 looms. That year, the Obama campaign was out-hustled on street corners by sign-carrying Clinton supporters, many bused in from New York, giving her a surprise victory.

Top Sanders aides have called both New Hampshire and Iowa must-win states, because the states that follow, Nevada and South Carolina, are seen as Clinton strongholds. Both Bill and Hillary Clinton have spent enormous energy in recent years to build bridges with leaders in Latino and African-American communities. That creates a big hurdle for Sanders, whose response has been to reach out to younger activists like his recent sit-down with Atlanta-based artist and actor Killer Mike.

If Sanders wins Iowa and New Hampshire, and Clinton wins Nevada and South Carolina, the next contests are in Colorado, Minnesota, Massachusetts and Vermont, all of which occur March 1 and are seen as strong states for Sanders.

3. Sanders is breaking campaign donation records. Sanders is showing that it is more than possible to run for president with the support of millions of people contributing $25 or less, in contrast to almost all other 2016 contenders in both parties who have wealthy benefactors. On Monday, his campaign spokeswoman told Democracy Now that he has 2.3 million contributions, which broke Obama’s record of 2.2 million donations.

Sanders breached Obama’s benchmark during Saturday night’s debate, which was seen by an estimated 8 million people nationally. “The average donation during that period was $25 or less,” the campaign told the New York Times, which speculated that he “could beat Hillary Clinton for contributions in the final fundraising quarter of the year.” One other underappreciated facet of Sanders’ supporters is he is raising more money than almost all of the Republicans, even some backed by billionaire-fed super PACs.