Dorothy Schwieder (Photo: Copyright 2000 The Des Moines Register;Question)

A rose to the memory of Dorothy Schwieder, one of Iowa's great historians, who died Aug. 13 at the age of 80. Schwieder was a prolific author of Iowa history, including "Iowa: The Middle Land" that has long been regarded as the gold standard Iowa history text. Schwieder was a pioneer in her own right as the first woman to become a tenured professor in the Iowa State University history department. The Iowa Commission on Status of Women named her to the Iowa Women's Hall of Fame in 2012. She produced many works of scholarship, including on Iowa's Old Order Amish and popular works of Iowa history. She was one of those rare scholars and teachers who help compile the story of the state while making it interesting and accessible to all readers.

A thistle to Iowa Workforce Development officials who tried to keep the public in the dark about a computer glitch that resulted in some excess unemployment payments. The overpayment glitch, by itself, is no big deal. But the way the department handled news of the glitch was: According to records produced for a legislative committee, workforce staff members were told not to say anything about the incorrect payments. A department spokeswoman told the Associated Press that was done to avoid "rumor mongering." That was a mistake. It's always better to put out the facts. The best way to fuel the rumor mill is by clamming up.

James Harlan (Photo: file photo)

A rose to the legacy of a famous pioneer Iowan, U.S. Sen. James Harlan, whose statuary likeness will be on display in its new home in Mount Pleasant this week. Harlan's statue, which occupied a spot in Statuary Hall in the U.S. Capitol for more than a century, was removed to make way for a new statue of Norman Borlaug, the Nobel Prize winner and father of the Green Revolution. The Harlan statute has been moved back to Mount Pleasant where he was president of what is now Iowa Wesleyan College and will be unveiled in a ceremony in Mount Pleasant Thursday. Harlan, who represented Iowa in the U.S. Senate in two stints between 1855 and 1973, was a close friend of President Abraham Lincoln and U.S. secretary of Interior under President Andrew Johnson. Though he left Washington, Harlan's place in Iowa history will be preserved, thanks to Iowa Wesleyan.

A rose to the Krantz family for continuing a four-decade tradition on the east side of the Des Moines metropolitan area. Adventureland Park celebrated its 40th anniversary this summer. That is 40 years of white-knuckle adventures on a growing array of carnival rides, including a sprawling roller coaster that has terrorized many a brave kid (and a few reluctant parents). Adventureland, the adjacent hotel and campground next to the Prairie Meadows Racetrack and Casino in Altoona is one of Iowa's premier destinations for entertainment. A lot of people thought the late Jack Krantz was crazy when he launched the theme park in a cornfield in 1974, but he proved them wrong, and four of his children — John, Matthew and Michael Krantz and Molly Vincent — are carrying on the tradition today.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1txjcTR