STEVE COLE/CHRISTIE & COLE STUDIO INC./ISTOCK

RICK FERRI: There are thousands of mutual funds and exchange-traded funds (ETFs) available to U.S. investors. Choice is good, but too much choice can be stressful. Some investment services limit the choice to only mutual funds or only ETFs. That’s not the best approach because you will miss opportunities on both sides.

Whether to use mutual funds or ETFs doesn’t have to be an either/or selection; it’s a matter of what you’re trying to do in your portfolio and which investments are most likely to get you there. Embrace the freedom to use whatever is best. There shouldn’t be pressure to use only one or the other.

Well-constructed portfolios are a composition of diversified risks. Using a broad asset-allocation approach, we seek exposures to the unique risks of different asset classes expected to provide a future return. The next step is to analyze indexes that track each asset class. Many types of indexes have been introduced in recent years and have made this analysis more complex, so it’s best to keep it simple with the broadest capitalization-weighted indexes available.

After selecting indexes that represent the risks you’re seeking, research the products that track those indexes. Sometimes these products exist as mutual funds, sometimes as ETFs and sometimes as both. When there are both, you have a choice to make.

A benefit of mutual funds is that they trade at their end-of-day, net asset value (NAV). This means all buyers and sellers on any given day get the same price. That’s appealing to me. Commissions can be an issue. Mutual funds purchased directly through a no-load fund company also have no commission to buy or sell. There’s typically a commission charge when a mutual fund is bought or sold through a brokerage firm, and the commission can be high. In addition, there may be restrictions on how often you’re allowed to trade mutual funds.

ETFs are traded on stock exchanges. This allows you to buy and sell shares during the day when the exchanges are open. The main problem with ETFs is pricing. The price you receive may not be NAV or even close to it. It depends on the liquidity of the underlying securities. Trading ETFs is not free either. Commissions are charged by brokerage firms unless an ETF is part of a no-commission program. Even then there is always a pricing difference between the buy (ask) and the sell (bid).

Where you invest also matters in the choices you might make. Access to low-cost index strategies may only be available through ETFs if you invest through a full-service broker or through one of the new automated “robo-adviser” investment services. If you’re a do-it-yourself investor and select your own custodians, or you invest with an independent adviser who doesn’t limit their portfolios to only ETFs or mutual funds, you’ll have access to everything in the marketplace.

In short, don’t limit your investment selection to only mutual funds or ETFs. Invest in whatever is best.

Read the latest Investing in Funds & ETFs Report.