Loveland family of six plans to share lessons on self-sufficiency with Haitian mothers

Members of the Salier family, from left, Jeremiah, Sarah, Ruby, 7, Gia, 5, Bella, 9, and Emma, 11, work together on Sept. 5 in their garden outside their home in downtown Loveland. ( STEVE STONER )

Sarah Sailer and her family of six turned their front, back and side yards -- including what was once a driveway -- into an urban farm that cycles out different produce year round.

"We try to grow as much of our food as possible," Sarah said.

The Sailers' desire for simple living developed out of a need to change their diets when Jeremiah, Sarah's husband, and the oldest of their four daughters, Emma, 11, suffered antibiotic damage to their guts.

The family was in a tough financial spot and couldn't afford to buy organic produce and other organic foods, so Sarah studied self-sufficient gardening and, with Jeremiah's help, dug up the lawn to build several gardens, a greenhouse, a chicken coop and several rabbit hutches on their one-fifth-acre yard.

Sarah Sailer picks a cucuzza squash that she grew in the garden at her home in downtown Loveland. ( STEVE STONER )

Sarah, 36, does most of the gardening, while Jeremiah, 38, a contract carpenter, does the building. She home schools their four daughters, Emma; Bella, 9; Ruby, 7; and Gia, 5.

"We want them to understand the way we live in America is not normal for the rest of the world. We have so many privileges," Sarah said.

Three years ago, the Sailers added to their corner garden, later expanding to gardens on all sides of the house to grow tomatoes, potatoes, broccoli, cucumbers, beans, beets, carrots, squash, cabbage, lettuce, kale, strawberries and all kinds of other produce. This fall, they will build hoop houses to grow food in the winter months, in addition to what they can grow in the greenhouse.

Advertisement

"It's a challenge. How much food can we keep alive throughout the winter?" Sailer said.

Inside the house, the Sailers keep grow lights in the basement for starter seeds and use the kitchen to grow fermented and other living things, such as sourdough starter, kefir grains and kombucha scoby.

"Cooking is probably my biggest passion. I love to grow food because I love to cook," said Sarah, who uses recipes from her Italian family and makes up some of her own. "It's exciting. I can just walk in the backyard, bring in a bunch of things and create a meal."

The Sailers raise chickens and rabbits in the backyard for their own meat and eggs. They compost. And they buy local when they can't grow or raise their own food.

The family wants to take what they learned about gardening to Haiti to teach mothers how to keep their children healthy. To raise money for the trip, Sarah, who went there in April, will be teaching sewing classes starting this month, and the family and neighbors will plan fundraisers, such as a silent auction or farm-to-table meal.

Sarah's cousin, Amy Syres, had asked Sarah and her family to help with the gardens on the two acres of land she and her friend, Jenn Schenk, purchased in Haiti for their Second Mile Ministries.

The ministry supports mothers of malnourished children who are at a dangerous point of not being able to care for their children and face giving them up to orphanages to make sure they get food. The mothers learn how to care and provide for their children, and they receive the nourishing food and medical care they need.

"They are teaching these mothers job skills so they can avoid poverty," Sarah said.

To find out more about the urban farm, the sewing classes and the Haiti trip, go to Sarah's blog, thriftygoodlife.com, or email Sarah at sarahksailer@gmail.com.

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com.