A winter storm has intensified and is now expected to drop up to 10 inches in southern New Jersey counties, according to the National Weather Service.

Parts of Salem and Camden counties had already accumulated up to 7 inches of snow by early afternoon and snow was continuing to fall at 1 to 2 inches an hour, said Alan Cope, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service.

A line of storms that developed unexpectedly and moved west to east is responsible for the additional snow, he said. Previously, only about 3 inches of snow was expected.

"It's one of those finer details of the storm that we didn't anticipate," Cope said.

A winter storm warning has been issued for Salem, Gloucester, Camden, Burlington and Ocean counties. A winter weather advisory has been issued for most of the rest of the state. The advisory for northern parts of the state don't expire until 8 a.m. Monday.

Farther north, snow and ice in other parts of the country have caused departure delays in those areas that, in turn, meant arrival delays at the bi-state region's three major airports. Arrivals from those locations were delayed an average of 1 hour and 8 minutes at Newark Liberty International, while John F. Kennedy had arrival delays averaging 54 minutes, and LaGuardia 42 minutes, according to the Federal Aviation Administration.

Other parts of New Jersey are expected to see less snow accumulation. Parts of Burlington and Ocean counties may see up to 6 inches; Mercer, Monmouth and Cape May counties are now expected to get between 2 and 4 inches and more northern counties should still expect 1 to 2 inches of accumulation.

Snow showers are expected to transition to mixed precipitation and rain around 5 p.m. in South Jersey, around 6 to 8 p.m. in Central Jersey and around 9 to 10 p.m. in the northern portion of the state, he said.

However, in northern counties — including Sussex, Warren and Morris counties — precipitation is expected to continue through much of the night, which could make for a dangerous Monday morning rush hour, especially for commuters driving north of Route 80, said Tom Kines, an Accuweather meteorologist.

"I think you've got to be prepared that there may be at- or below-freezing temperatures at 7 a.m. tomorrow morning, especially in the northern part of the state," Kines said.

Due to the expected icy conditions, New Jersey Transit will begin cross-honoring tickets at 6 p.m. today and will continue through the day on Monday.

Even though the state did not altogether escape ice and snow, meteorologists said the brunt of the massive low pressure system that wreaked havoc in the West and Midwest isn't expected to have as big of an impact in New Jersey, where the arctic temperatures in that front will be greeted by warmer air from the South, Kines said.

And a separate coastal storm that's moving up the coast is expected to be pretty tame, Kines said.

"As far as coastal storms go, it's on the weaker side," he said.

The powerful weather system out West is being blamed for a handful of deaths and has forced people to deal with frigid temperatures, power outages by the thousands and treacherous roads.

Temperatures in Montana and South Dakota were more than 20 degrees below zero during the day Saturday while much of the Midwest was in the teens and single digits. Wind chill readings could drop as low as 50 below zero in northwestern Minnesota, weather officials said.

Icy conditions were expected to last through the weekend from Texas to Ohio to Tennessee.

In California, four people died of hypothermia in the San Francisco Bay area and about a half-dozen traffic-related deaths were blamed on the weather in several states.

Icy, treacherous sections of Interstate 35 north of Dallas were closed for hours at a time over the last day as tractor-trailers had trouble climbing hills, wrecks occurred and vehicles stalled, authorities said.

Jody Gonzalez, chief of Denton County Emergency Services, said about 200 people were in shelters in the Sanger area after getting stuck on the highway. People in that area of I-35 were driving through ruts in 4-inch-thick ice, he said.

Texas Department of Transportation spokeswoman Michelle Releford said road graders and more sand and salt trucks were being sent to try to ease the ice problems.

"We're sending in everything we've got," said Releford.

About 75,000 customers in the Dallas area were without power Saturday, down from a peak of more than 270,000. Oklahoma utilities reported more than 7,500 power outages across the state and western Arkansas.

Some 400 departing flights from Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport were canceled, about half of the usual schedule, the airport said. About 3,330 passengers had stayed overnight in the terminals.

Staff writer Steve Strunsky and The Associated Press contributed to this report.