Allen Iverson had an NBA filled with near-misses, controversies both on and off the court, and ended his playing days broke.

Still, as he is set to go down in Philadelphia 76ers history, the guard said he has no regrets.

Allen Iverson saw his No. 3 jersey rise to the rafters on Saturday night, putting him alongside other Philadelphia legends like Wilt Chamberlain, Charles Barkley, and Julius Erving.

“I don’t regret anything,” Iverson said when announcing his retirement at the start of the NBA season. “If I could take back all the mistakes that I made throughout my career, I would have had a perfect career. I would have missed no shots. I would have made no turnovers. I would have went right instead of going left when I was supposed to, every game. I would have got on [I-76] at 4 o’clock instead of getting on 76 at 5. I can’t take it back. I can’t take anything back. So I don’t regret it.”

The 38-year-old Iverson played large despite his 165-pound frame. He made 11 consecutive All-Star Games and took the Sixers to the 2001 NBA Finals, where they lost in five games to the Los Angeles Lakers. He was a seven time All-NBA selection, the 1997 Rookie of the Year, a three time steals leader, and a four time NBA scoring champion.

Iverson, who was drafted No. 1 overall in 1996 from Georgetown, said he was grateful for his change to play in the league.

“It was a blessing for [God] to even get me here, get me to this point so I can retire,” he said. “It was a blessing just to play one NBA basketball game…. But I’ve won scoring titles, MVPs, I’ve done a lot in this league. Being 160 pounds soaking wet, coming from Newport News, Va. I mean, what more can you ask for? And my family is taken care of for the rest of their life. Regrets? I don’t have none.”

Though he may have no regrets, Allen Iverson had a difficult transition out of the league. Despite earning $200 million during his 15-year NBA career and scoring $50 million in Reebok endorsements, he was broke when he retired.