LIMA — While the Affordable Care Act has promised greater access to health insurance since its 2010 inception, it has not been kind to small business owners.

That was the message from Karen Irwin and Jason Bradford of the National Association of Health Underwriters to area business professionals Thursday at Shawnee Country Club during the Lima/Allen County Chamber of Commerce’s Connections Luncheon.

“It has been hard on small businesses,” Irwin said. “In 2002, the cost of health care represented about 18 percent of a family’s annual income. Today, it’s 35 percent, and they’re projecting by 2030 that it will represent 60 percent of our income.”

Irwin attributed these higher costs in part to increased government regulation through the colloquially named Obamacare.

“The premiums and the plans are government regulated, so each insurance carrier has to abide by these regulations,” she said, “what’s covered, how it’s covered, what out-of-pocket (expenses) can be implemented. There are taxes and fees everyone is responsible for. In some cases, it’s on the insurance carrier and in other cases, it’s directly related to the employer.”

These increased regulations and fees are then felt by the employees signing up for health insurance, with Irwin noting that funding these requirements needs to come from somewhere.

“For the employer, in order to be able to afford offering their employees benefits, they have to lower the type of coverage they can afford to offer, which increases the out-of-pocket contributions from employees,” she said. “It is all directly related to these Affordable Care Act plans, designs and the regulations attached to them.”

Bradford acknowledged that the ACA has come with some benefits, giving access to covereage to millions of Americans who had no coverage before.

“But it put a lot more burden on small and large employers in that process,” he said.

Beverly Beery of Beery Insurance Services in Lima noted that, given the current situation, gaining health coverage from your employer may become a thing of the past.

“We find that as health care costs continue to rise, I think the viability of employer-sponsored health care is threatened,” she said. “We haven’t seen where the Affordable Care Act has brought the cost of insurance down at all. If anything, it’s caused it to go up, so the preservation of a sustainable market-based healthcare system is critical.”

National Association of Health Underwriters northwest Ohio chapter president Karen Irwin, along with health insurance agent Jason Bradford, speak to Lima business professionals Thursday at Shawnee Country Club on how the Affordable Care Act has affected small businesses. http://limaohio.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/web1_ACASmallBiz.jpg National Association of Health Underwriters northwest Ohio chapter president Karen Irwin, along with health insurance agent Jason Bradford, speak to Lima business professionals Thursday at Shawnee Country Club on how the Affordable Care Act has affected small businesses. Craig Kelly | The Lima News

Small businesses affected greatly

By Craig Kelly [email protected]

Reach Craig Kelly at 567-242-0390 or on Twitter @Lima_CKelly.

Reach Craig Kelly at 567-242-0390 or on Twitter @Lima_CKelly.

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus