The president is actually smiling because his approval rating is the highest it's been in 20 months. Brendan Smialowski/AFP/Getty Images

‘Tis the day before Christmas, the 358th day of 2014, and all through the House not a creature was stirring – all the members are out of town, on a month-long break along with the Senate. One possible exception: a tough-talking New York Republican who pleaded guilty to tax fraud but says he’ll break his campaign pledge and stay on the job. The White House got a couple of nice stocking stuffers from the economy and the general public, who may be becoming ever so slightly more optimistic about the president and the state of things. Protests over police brutality, however, are continuing in New York and elsewhere, and there’s more to analyze after police in the St. Louis area shot and killed another African American man who allegedly was holding a weapon at the time. With that, here’s today’s Three Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less, with a bit of Christmas cheer on the side:

Sugar Plum: The Democrats got a much-needed Christmas gift: more signs the economy is improving. The nation’s gross domestic product, expected to grow only 3.9 percent, shot up to 5 percent in the third quarter, the fastest growth in more than a decade.

Nice: President Barack Obama got something nice in his stocking, too. A new CNN/ORC poll shows his approval rating has scooted up to 48 percent, the highest it’s been in 20 months. He’s still underwater – 51 percent don’t like the way he’s doing his job – but more people are feeling better about things, and the improving economy is a likely factor.

Naughty: As expected, Rep. Michael Grimm a New York Republican, pleaded guilty to tax fraud in federal court Tuesday, and faces 33 months in jail. But if you expect Grimm – a former Marine and FBI agent who won re-election even though he’d been indicted – to keep his campaign promise to step down if he convicted, don’t hold your breath.

Ho, Ho, Go: Rep. Nancy Pelosi, the House’s top Democrat, is reminding everyone that Grimm said he’d step down and is calling on House Speaker John Boehner to basically fire him. No word on whether Boehner, who has a few enough Republicans in Congress to spare, will go along with Pelosi’s demand.

Blue Christmas: Despite New York Mayor Bill de Blasio and Police Commissioner William Bratton’s pleas that they take a timeout after two NYPD cops were murdered, demonstrators hit the streets again Tuesday, protesting police violence and the deaths of Eric Garner and Michael Brown. At the same time, police in a St. Louis suburb shot and killed an African American teenager who they saidallegedly aimed a gun at an officer on a routine patrol.

Spreading Pieces on Earth: The NRA has a Christmas wish list, and it includes guns for the naughty as well as the nice. Washington’s most powerful lobbying group wants Congress to put guns in the hands of convicted felons, the mentally ill, convicted domestic-violence offenders and drunk people in bars. Guns for, well, basically everyone, no questions asked.

They Know if You’ve Been Bad or Good: When computer servers at Sony Pictures Entertainment were hacked, and experts pointed the finger at totalitarian North Korea, it seemed an obvious question: North Korea has the Iinternet?? It does - but only a few have it, the state tightly controls access and personal computers are as regulated as firearms (you listening, Wayne LaPierre?)

Christmas Cheer: And now, the coolest Christmas song ever:





Stat of the Day:

Duly Noted: On this date in 1914, during World War I, impromptu Christmas truces began to take hold along parts of the Western Front between British and German soldiers who, in some cases, exchanged gifts and even played soccer with each other.