We are nearing the end of summer vacation for many across the area and communities are shifting gears to back to school events. Skinner Park in Toxey, Alabama, held one such event where hundreds gathered for a day of fun.

In just a few short weeks, the silent halls of schools will once again be bustling with students heading back to school, in advance of that, several back to school events are being held. The town of Toxey held one such event in an attempt to bring the community together in unity and give away free supplies to students heading back to the classrooms.

"We're really trying to help the parents for those who are in need." Organizer Bishop Charles Dailey of Divine Purpose Outreach Ministries said. "We have a lot of businesses, a lot of churches, and organizations coming together for the same common cause. Really trying to make their dream a reality."

Those in attendance were given loads of food, fun, and fellowship and just the understanding that the community is there for them.

"An event like this lets us get out in the communities," Bishop Legget of Vision Life Family Worship Center said. "Where some people may not come into those four walls, it's a time not only to show love and give school supplies, but just let them know about the goodness of God also."

"Wow, just to be able to get the kids together and to do something to help the parents that are not really able to do this for their kids, it means a whole lot to the community," Pastor Leggett of Vision Life Family Worship Center stated.

On hand at the event was a barber who was giving free hair cuts to those in need, it was a way for him to give back to those who needed it the most.

"I'm just giving them something that I never had and I want to see this place better," Barber Labarron Franks said. "I just want everybody to just try to come together as one and just try to support each other."

At the end of the day, organizers say the event was a successful one and can't wait to do it again next year.

"It's important for the kids," President of Southern Choctaw Independent Youth Football League Bruce Grayson said. "It gives them something positive to do. Trouble is so easy to get into these days and it's so hard to get out of, as we know."

Choctaw County students head back to class on August 11th.