The hotly anticipated glimpse into which Obamacare plans are for sale come Nov. 1 could begin as soon as Oct. 25.

For Illinois consumers and small businesses, they'll find some big changes, notably more so-called narrow-network plans that limit which doctors and hospitals they can choose in return for paying less than for a broad PPO plan with more choices.

Humana is the latest insurer to drop its only PPO plan on the Get Covered Illinois exchange, confirmed Cathryn Donaldson, a spokeswoman for the Louisville, Ky.-based insurer.

“Our goal—both on- and off-exchange—is to provide quality, affordable health care and coverage,” Donaldson said in an email. “We consistently assess our current product offerings and make changes in order to maintain sustainable and affordable health plans for our members.”

She added that Humana plans to expand its reach downstate.

The company sold some of the most expensive plans, in terms of both monthly premiums and deductibles, during the 2015 enrollment period that ended in February, according to a Crain's analysis. For example, the premium for a 27-year-old in the Rockford area who bought a Humana Platinum HMO plan was about $385 a month. The deductible, or the amount consumers pay before insurers start to pick up some of the tab of their medical bills, was $1,000 for the year.

But if consumers have a lot of medical bills, such as those with chronic diseases that require constant medication and supplies, a more expensive plan can be a better bargain. In a platinum plan, for example, the insurer picks up a higher share of a consumer's medical costs than in a bronze plan.

Humana isn't the only insurer to join the national trend of dropping broad plans in favor of limited ones on the exchange this year. Blue Cross & Blue Shield of Illinois, the largest insurer in the state, has created a narrow-network plan with Advocate Health Care, the biggest hospital network in Illinois.

Advocate, which has 12 hospitals and more than 4,000 doctors, also is creating one with Hartford, Conn.-based Aetna. Both Blue Cross and Aetna say their plans are priced competitively; in Aetna's case its deal with Advocate was so attractive it lured the national insurer back to the Illinois exchange after taking a year off.

Experts say insurers are responding to consumers who are shopping based on price. Narrow-network plans can be cheaper for consumers, but they're a win for insurers, too, since they can exclude pricy hospitals.

Enrollment for the third year of the Obamacare exchange begins in less than two weeks. Window shopping, when prospective buyers can see which plans will be available, could begin as soon as Oct. 25, those familiar with the matter say.

A spokeswoman for the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services, which operates the federal exchange HealthCare.gov, would confirm only that window shopping “will be made live prior to the start of open enrollment.”

In Illinois, consumers and small businesses are routed through Get Covered Illinois to HealthCare.gov, where they can use federal subsidies to buy plans. Illinois is one of 37 states that use the federal exchange platform.