Ian Crane walked into a doctor’s appointment last February hoping to be cleared to ride his bike outdoors for the first time since he nearly died on the final day of the USA Pro Challenge last August. Eager to escape the tedium of riding indoors on a trainer and feel the wind in his face again, he was expecting good news.

He got his wish, but it came with a heartstopping blow. The doctor told him he could ride outside, but not for long, because there was a cyst growing deep within his brain that needed to be removed.

“I entered the appointment pretty excited and jovial,” Crane recalled recently. “He was a little bit more stern.”

It was a cruel setback for the Seattle-based Jamis-Hagens Berman rider who crashed chin-first through the rear window of a stopped team car while traveling an estimated 25 mph, about 8 miles south of Boulder on Colorado 93.

A year later, on the eve of the fifth Pro Challenge, which starts Monday in Steamboat Springs, Crane is thankful he can still ride a bike, albeit not in competition.

PHOTOS: USA Pro Challenge 2015 across Colorado

Crane was airlifted to St. Anthony’s Hospital, where it took an estimated 3,000 stitches to close the wounds in his mouth, plus another 50 stitches and staples in his face, neck and chest. He also suffered a broken shoulder blade, a broken bone in his skull and a deep brain injury. He spent 13 days there before being transferred to the University of Washington Rehab Center in Seattle. After eight days there, he began outpatient physical therapy in mid-September.

He wore a neck brace until Thanksgiving, and it took months to strengthen his atrophied neck muscles enough for him to ride outside. Then in February the doctor was telling him he would have to cut through those muscles to remove the cyst in his brain. Crane got to ride a few weeks before the surgery and participated in a team training camp.

“He was struggling when all the other guys were going hard, but knowing everything he went through, it was very impressive to keep having a good attitude,” said team director Seba Alexandre. “I don’t know if I would have that strength to do what he did — just wake up every day and try to train and get back on the bike.”

Crane savored those miles, knowing the “terrifying” brain surgery to come.

“I got to be reminded of just how great the bike is,” Crane said. “You can learn this when something gets taken away from you, just how amazing it is.”

Crane came through the surgery and was able to get back on the bike by June, but it has meant riding in a lot of pain.

“Regardless of how fast I’m going or where I’m going, I just really love riding my bike,” Crane said. “I was having pretty debilitating neck-related cramps, starting about 15 minutes into riding. All muscular ability would shut off at about the hour point, and I just wouldn’t be able to turn my head — wouldn’t be able to move my neck at all — which is pretty terrifying when you’re riding out on the road.”

He can tolerate longer rides now, “for however long I want to deal with my neck hurting,” but he doesn’t know if he will ever be able to race again.

“I’d love to be able to race at a high level and be competitive and be a professional still. (But) I’m worried now about being able to physically live a long and happy life. I have a lot of residual issues from the crash and surgery that I’m still working through. I feel pretty far away from my speedy past self. I am doing what I can to improve on those issues, but I still can’t go on a bike ride without it being incredibly uncomfortable.”

He’s still dealing with the effects of his traumatic brain injury. He underwent speech therapy. Driving in traffic makes him anxious.

“The fact is that I’m a different person than I was a year ago, so I am relearning how I react to things and how I respond, how I act and communicate,” he said. “A lot of TBI (traumatic brain injury) survivors will get frustrated with themselves for how they act. ‘New normal’ gets thrown around a lot. For me, it’s just who I am.”

He’s grateful his team stood by him. Alexandre offered him a contract for 2015 mere days after the crash, knowing Crane wasn’t likely to return to competition this year.

“I knew it was going to be very difficult for him to race again at this level this year,” Alexandre said. “But he was part of the team, and he is part of the team. When he had the accident, I wanted to do what I’d expect if my kids in 20 years race bikes, that somebody who is in charge would do that for my kids.”

Crane never blamed the tour or the driver of the car he hit. He didn’t want to sue anybody. He is determined to accentuate the positive.

“Honestly it’s just the type of person I am,” Crane said. “It’s been a way that I can keep myself motivated to continue to improve and get better. I take responsibility for how my loved ones are handling it as well. The outward positivity not only affects myself but plays a big role in how my family and my girlfriend are able to see it and handle it.

“It’s very easy for a traumatic situation like this to cast a pretty dark light on, not only the people involved, but the race and the state. The easier option is what people go for, to blame other people, to sue people. But for me it just made more sense to have a more positive attitude toward this.”

Crane and Alexandre have gone out of their way to praise the emergency treatment Crane received at the scene and the care he got at St. Anthony’s.

“Within 30 minutes he was inside of the hospital,” Alexandre said. “Other places in the world, he may be dead. It’s something I will never forget, seeing him on the ground with all the blood around him.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or twitter.com/johnmeyer

Monday’s stage 1

Distance: 96.6 miles

Start time: About 11:47 a.m.

Projected finish time: 3:15-4:10 p.m.

Where: Neutral start at Lincoln Avenue at the courthouse in Steamboat Springs. Actual start at Evans Street.

Brief description of course: 49-mile circuit featuring two loops through towns of Steamboat Springs and Oak Creek. One intermediate sprint at mile 47.9 in Steamboat and king of the mountain on Route 27 at 21.9 miles and 70.7 miles into the stage. Final sprint into Steamboat.

Key climbs: Category 4 climb at Mile 21.9 and Mile 70.7 on Route 27.