Procurement

Can IT procurement be saved?

If, as U.S. CIO Steven VanRoekel said, the launch of the HealthCare.gov site was a "teachable moment," it's only fair to ask: Is it a learnable moment?

Can the tens of thousands of people involved in government procurement — employees and contractors alike — absorb any life lessons for navigating the often bumpy road of large government IT projects?

Yes, say contractors, project managers and government watchdogs — or at least "yes, but."

High-profile government procurement projects sometimes take a wrong turn or crash spectacularly into technological or logistical ditches. Sometimes they can be resurrected or salvaged, and sometimes they are scrapped. The smoldering remains can be attributed to the myriad miscues, oversights or missteps in a hugely complex system.

In other words, bungled launches didn't start with HealthCare.gov, and the Obama administration's Department of Health and Human Services is hardly alone in its stumbling.

In 2006, the Department of Homeland Security picked Boeing to oversee its $1.9 billion program dubbed SBInet, which sought to revolutionize border security by integrating infrastructure, technology and border security agents.

Unfortunately, it didn't work.

After an initial deployment showed that the technology was far from integrated, DHS pulled the plug on the showcase program in 2011 and distributed the funds to more conventional border security programs.

Other examples abound, but there is never a single reason for big projects to wash out, said Scott Amey, general counsel at the Project on Government Oversight.

Complex federal procurement rules can contribute to the failure of advanced IT systems such as HealthCare.gov or SBInet, but Amey contends that even a wholesale overhaul of those rules probably wouldn't help much. Others say spending cuts and budget uncertainty have sped up an erosion of the federal procurement workforce. Still others blame rules they say place a crippling emphasis on getting the lowest price at the expense of what might work best.

Ultimately, said Roger Waldron, president of the Coalition for Government Procurement, successful federal contracts happen when the government understands what it wants and what it is asking of bidders, and bidders understand how to work with the government. It's not just about getting to yes — it's about getting to yes, I know exactly what I want, and here's how I want you to give it to me.

The people

In federal procurement, getting what you want starts with people who know how to ask the right questions. A risk-averse workforce that is behind on training can drag down the entire enterprise.

Unfortunately, training that keeps employees up-to-date on changing IT technology has been one of the first victims of sequestration cuts, said Dan Gordon, former administrator of the Office of Federal Procurement Policy and now an associate dean at George Washington University Law School.

"The loss of training makes our people less current in understanding how to run their procurements," Gordon said. "It makes them less current in their knowledge of the industries. It makes them less comfortable in dealing with technological innovation. It damages the procurement system in many ways, which are unfortunately probably too subtle for the public to appreciate. But from the point of view of sophisticated interaction with vendors, it has real impact."

The dearth of training shows itself in bloated contracts, the purchase of outdated equipment and amateur negotiations with the private sector, Gordon said. If you don't know or understand the latest technology, you're going to get left behind. Without adequate training, "you can't run a fair-opportunity competition to award a task order worth hundreds of millions of dollars, which is part of our business."

The resulting imbalance gives the advantage to contractors who have more advanced training in negotiations and procurement and who know their products better. "We pay a price as taxpayers when we don't let our acquisition workforce get the same top-level training that private industry's people have," Gordon said.

When he talked about government contracts at an annual procurement conference earlier this year, all the attendees were from the private-sector side of the business.

"Traditionally, the audience is a good mix of government employees and contractors, all of whom work in the federal procurement arena," Gordon said. "This year, I was disappointed that there were almost no federal attendees. One result was that the open lines of communication that a conference can foster couldn't function because the government people were absent."

Rob Frazzini, leader of Deloitte Consulting's federal digital practice, pointed to another weakness for the federal acquisition workforce: too much of an incentive to avoid risk, which makes employees embrace the legacy waterfall acquisition model instead of an agile model. He said the more fluid agile approach results in products that coincide with current technology.

"These are not uneducated people. These are not uncaring people," Frazzini said. "These are quality, talented individuals who I believe lack the support of the organization and lack the tools necessary to allow them to change into a more agile environment."

He added that a lack of training contributes to a growing gap between the private and public sectors.

Agencies "may not be as particularly nimble as the commercial market because of the size and scope, but they need to stay up with that commercial market," he said. "So I don't believe ignoring agile or a more enlightened approach to development is possible. What I believe needs to happen is a process of looking at how to give a procurement officer the tools necessary and educate the customers effectively so that they can indeed manage risk while at the same time producing a higher-quality outcome."