Thompson Valley girls lacrosse goalkeeper Ally Guerrero was the heart and soul of the Eagles, helping her become this year's player of the year. ( Cris Tiller/Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Respect isn't given, it's earned.

And admiration requires sacrifice.

Minutes before Thompson Valley girls lacrosse's game with Heritage/Littleton on April 3, Ally Guerrero suffered an allergic reaction.

Eagles' coach Brian Ackman had to deliver the bad news to the rest of the team: their starting goalkeeper couldn't go.

"You could see it in their eyes," Ackman said of the team's reaction. "They had lost the game before it even started."

It was a tough blow right before a game, and Ackman didn't expect to have his senior the rest of the way. But despite her condition, Guerrero made a valiant return to the cage in the second half.

"I wish I could end this with a win, but we didn't," Ackman said, his squad falling 15-8. "But Ally did win every player and coach right then and there."

Guerrero's heart helped her become the glue of the Eagles, their leader, and this year's girls lacrosse Player of the Year.

She blossomed in her second year as Thompson Valley's starting varsity goalie, making 164 saves, a .518 save percentage and being named second-team All-Conference.

Guerrero carried the burden of being the Eagles' last line of defense and their unquestioned leader.

Advertisement

"I like that pressure because it drives you because the team's depending on you, and it kind of turns the ego away because you're focusing on the team element," she said. "The team really means a lot to me; it's really been the high point of my high school career. I really want to give them the best I can, and at the end of the day, that's all that mattered."

The season as a whole wasn't what the team had hoped for, finishing 6-9, but Guerrero was pleased with the growth her team showed from the previous year, her first as the varsity team's starting goalie.

And Guerrero deserves a large chunk of credit for the Eagles being more competitive this past season, according to Ackman.

"You can never replace a player like Ally. As a coach, you get lucky every decade or so to have an individual like Ally on your team," he said. "She led this team by example. The players saw her dedication to the game, her position, the team and life. (They) didn't want to let her down, so they played a little harder."

Fort Lewis in Durango took notice of Guerrero's ability in the cage, and the respect she commanded from her teammates, giving Guerrero a partial scholarship to play Division II lacrosse next year.

Guerrero admits she never envisioned herself as a college athlete, at least not until recently. As a junior, she talked about just trying to catch up to the speed at the varsity level of high school. It drove her to work relentlessly through the summer, working out five days a week, two times a day on three of them.

"I honestly think that workout component and that seriousness in my training really helped out in the season. I think that's what sets me apart from other goalies," Guerrero said. "I feel like that's my trademark. A lot of goalies are naturally talented, and I have the utmost respect for them, but I'm not that goalie.

"Anything good that happens on the field is from hard work, so it's exceptionally important to me."

No, respect isn't given. And for that matter, neither is success. Good thing then that Guerrero doesn't mind working for either.

Contact Reporter-Herald Sports Writer Cris Tiller at 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/rhpreps