Rick Laurenzo is busy updating a software platform that he believes can alleviate certain headaches for human resources professionals.

TYSON TRISH/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER Rick Laurenzo is president of Decusoft, a software company in Ramsey.

Recently enacted laws, at local and federal levels, that govern what companies must keep tabs on have made human resources more complex to navigate, he said. Laurenzo is president of Decusoft in Ramsey, a developer of software for managing employee benefits and compensation. His company plans to release next spring a new version of its software platform, which he said will help HR professionals comply with the latest regulations.

Decusoft, which also has an office in Dallas, lets users pick the applications and services they need rather than flood them with features they don't need, Laurenzo said. "Everybody's moving to big integrated packages, which push everybody into the same box," he said. "For some applications, specifically compensation, it doesn't work well."

So Decusoft's platform can adapt to fit companies' needs rather than force them to change the way they do business for the sake of the software, Laurenzo said. "They key is to do it in such a way that they don't have to be programming experts," he said.

The integrated software packages on the market, Laurenzo said, can handle tasks such as performance tracking well — but not so much with employee compensation. That is Decusoft's sweet spot, he said. "It all comes down to pay-for-performance," Laurenzo said, referring to compensation that changes based on how well an employee meets their goals.

In traditional arrangements, a highly performing employee might get a 3 percent raise while a weak performer got a 1 percent salary increase. He said that does not offer much incentive, so some companies are changing how they reward hard work. "The world is moving towards complex, variable pay," Laurenzo said. "If your company and division do well, you get bonuses appropriately."

The complexity of calculating such compensation, he said, does not mesh well with some integrated software.

That requires customizable software, which is where Decusoft comes in. "The big players are trying to sell to the masses, being everything to everybody," Laurenzo said.

In 2002, Decusoft was spun out from computer infrastructure provider Computer Design & Integration, which Laurenzo helped co-found, in Teterboro. Before he dove into the technology world, he was a teacher, coach, and guidance counselor. After he delved into programming, Laurenzo took jobs in application development and as an IT director. He caught the entrepreneurship bug, which eventually led to Decusoft.

Laurenzo said in addition to the rise of variable pay, the regulatory scrutiny now placed on executive compensation is making human resources more of a challenge. "Our software helps with auditing, regulating, and getting a handle on the data," he said.

For example, Decusoft can give a clear picture of changes to an executive's salary, and why those changes were made. "It's a lot more transparent than it used to be," Laurenzo said.

Keeping up with the law

Others who develop software for the human resources market also see need growing because of regulatory changes. CEO Isaac Oates of New York City-based Justworks, also a provider of software for benefits, payroll, and compliance, said human resources has become more complex because of recent laws.

"The Affordable Care Act requires employers to track how many hours employees work in order to determine eligibility for tax credits," he said, "and access to the government's small business health insurance marketplace."

Local laws, Oates said, have called for deeper record keeping. Jersey City's earned sick time ordinance and New York City's paid sick leave law both went into effect this year, requiring employers to track certain number of employee days. "Digitization makes it much more efficient for employers to meet these requirements," Oates said, "and keep track of changes as new regulations come in place."

In this shifting regulatory environment, Laurenzo said Decusoft aims to keep its platform uncomplicated enough for HR professionals to manage with little handholding. "The key is to giving the end-users a simpler, easier way to do the job," he said.