Courtesy photo Mike Townsend, who was born in Middletown, is co-founder of the online service that matches caregivers with “HomeHeroes.” He says the Affordable Care Act has changed the playing field between care centers and those who tend to the elderly. “When you change incentives, everything drastically changes,” he said.

MIDDLETOWN >> City native Mike Townsend, 28, made the Forbes 30 Under 30 list for 2015 with other young game-changers who are transforming the world.

These entrepreneurs aren’t just “improving how we do healthcare, they’re reinventing it,” according to Forbes.

Also named was Gil Addo, 29, CEO and cofounder of Rubincon MD. Like Townsend, Addo was born in Middletown.

A University of Connecticut graduate, Townsend is cofounder and COO of HomeHero, a marketplace and technology platform that connects families with in-home care for seniors.

Advertisement

“Healthcare is in a really interesting time period,” said Townsend. “The Affordable Care Act has changed the environment between agencies, care centers, hospitals, payers. When you change incentives, everything drastically changes.”

The tech idea was inspired by the challenges of managing home care for partner Kyle Hill’s grandmother.

“Kyle’s grandma is our longest-standing client,” said Townsend. “It was a real struggle to manage care long distance.”

Families who care for aging parents quickly learn that finding and managing in-home care is a stressful and time-consuming process. So Townsend and his partners sought a way to locate the best caregivers and to securely track and organize appointments, contacts and medications.

Caregivers outline their care needs, and can view videos of local healthcare professionals. Once they contact the “Hero” directly, staff will organize appointments, medications and even manage payments.

“We helped and became inspired by using technology to make the process easier,” said Townsend, now a resident of Santa Monica, California.

Townsend visits his family in Connecticut regularly, and also enjoys time at their Block Island house, he said. Parents Lisa and Tom Townsend remain in their Middletown home where Mike Townsend grew up with brother Devon Townsend, 26, now a resident of Venice, California.

Townsend’s brother also develops apps, like one called “I’d Cap That,” which adds captions to user photos.

“We hang out and brainstorm all the time,” said Mike Townsend, who studied engineering at UConn.

After graduation in 2010, Mike Townsend took a job as a design engineer at Brookstone Inc., moving to Singapore. Later, he moved to Los Angeles to help design radar systems for military-grade unmanned aerial vehicles as a mechanical engineer at ITT Corp. in Los Angeles.

As his career evolved, he became active in the payment industry, founding ZingCheckout, one of the first web-based point-of-sale systems in 2010, and Flowtab, a mobile payment app for the nightlife industry in 2011, he explained.

Launched in January 2014, HomeHero is a marketplace and technology platform created with the aim of helping families manage senior care and distribute personalized healthcare technology in the home.

With a current staff of 28, HomeHero is operating from Santa Monica, a city with the second-highest senior population in the country, Mike Townsend said.

The platform is now available in four California cities, and has provided “a million hours of care so far, and improved the lives of thousands,” he said.

“As much as I’d like to roll it out in Connecticut tomorrow, a lot is determined by city climate for seniors, the regulatory environment,” said Mike Townsend, pointing to the natural inefficiency of changing large systems. “We are riding the efficiency wave.”

For information, visit homehero.org.