A proposed residential and commercial project along Friendship Road in South Hall could establish a trend for developers looking to piggyback on the opening this spring of Northeast Georgia Medical Center Braselton.

The Hall County Planning Commission will consider the proposal Monday.

While not the first development to sprout as a result of the hospital’s emergence, the proposed mixed-use community would be the largest to date.

“I think the county has done a great job with the planned development down there,” said Brian Daniel, president of Carroll Daniel Construction in Gainesville. “A lot of exciting things going on.”

Daniel has an ownership stake in the property, which is being developed by Friendship Road Development LLC, and his company will manage construction of the mixed-use project if approved.

He said the new hospital was the catalyst for the proposed development.

The residential component includes 139 assisted living and independent living units on close to six acres.

It would include dining areas, administrative offices, activity rooms, storage facilities and parking.

The commercial component includes up to 10,000 square feet of retail and office space on about three acres.

Medical offices, a pharmacy, bank, restaurants and retail center with gift shops, dry cleaners and a liquor store are possible.

The economic benefit in Hall County has already been felt from the hospital’s opening. NGMC officials said they spent an estimated $40 million with vendors and contractors in the regional service area, with more than 60 such businesses based Hall County.

“An increase in complementary clinical and retail business is a natural progression from the opening of the hospital, and we expect more as the hospital grows,” said Anthony Williamson, president of NGMC Braselton. “Local economic impact is something we have anticipated all along as we have planned for the opening of (the hospital).”

The proposed mixed-use project does face an immediate hurdle to approval, however.

Hall County Planning Director Srikanth Yamala said while his staff is not recommending any changes to the residential component, the commercial proposal doesn’t quite fit a “planned residential development” re-zoning status because it’s likely that a larger portion of customers for the retail center will not live on site.

According to county staff reports, “This does not satisfy the intent of the commercial uses permitted within a PRD.”

Yamala said he is recommending a smaller re-zoning designation, such as highway-business or office-institutional, for the commercial component.