Topics: 2016 Elections, benghazi committee hearing, congressional republicans, Editor's Picks, Mitch McConnell, Paul Ryan, Planned Parenthood, President Obama, Republican Party, Elections News, News, Politics News

Since President Obama took office, Congressional Republicans have made it their business to obstruct everything he does. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell said it best in 2012: “Our top political priority over the next two years should be to deny President Obama a second term.”

And that’s how they’ve governed in the Obama era. Like political arsonists, they’ve pursued no real positive agenda, choosing instead to undermine the president and stage symbolic protest votes to appease a disillusioned base. This is a big reason why something like 13 percent of the country approves of the job Congress is doing.

For a brief moment, when Paul Ryan was elected Speaker of the House, there was hope that things might change, if only a little. Although Ryan is hardly a moderate, he is nonetheless a serious legislator. His victory, one hoped, was a sign that House Republicans finally saw the light, finally realized that obstructionism wasn’t a viable governing philosophy.

Well, that’s not happening.

There were already rumbles in conservative circles after Ryan agreed to pass $1.1 trillion spending bill earlier this month. To the hardliners on the right, any deal that removed the threat of a government shutdown constituted a gutless compromise, a conservative heresy.

Now it appears that Ryan earned the faint support of Congressional Republicans by promising to get back to the business of negation and legislative navel-gazing. This was evident in Ryan’s statement about his plans for Congress in January:

“When we return in January, the House will put an ObamaCare repeal bill on the floor and pass it and put it on the president’s desk…We are going to keep working to give families relief from this law while we work to dismantle and replace it altogether.”

Keep in mind that a Republican-led Congress has already tried 56 times to repeal ObamaCare, knowing they never had the veto-proof majority they need. Each of these votes, like the recent Benghazi hearing, was a masturbatory exercise in political theater. Achieving a tangible legislative outcome was never the goal; instead, they were blinkered protest events, designed to please the Tea Party wing of the GOP.