Sixty-two of America's 100 busiest airports consider themselves "breast-feeding friendly," according to a 2014 study. The real number was six.

Researchers for the journal Breastfeeding Medicine surveyed airports about their accommodations for nursing mothers. Of the 62 that gave themselves high marks, 25 of them said their "lactation room" was the family restroom.

That's right: The unisex bathroom where parents can change diapers or supervise a toddler going potty doubles as a place for moms to nurse their infants or express breast milk with a pump. Um, no.

What's a lactation room? Hint: It doesn't have a toilet. But it doesn't have to be elaborate. All it needs is a door with a lock, a table and chair, and an electrical outlet.

Only eight of the airports surveyed had such a room — and at two of them, it was outside the boarding area, on the other side of the security checkpoint. If you don't understand why that's a problem, ask a breast-feeding mom.

Or ask U.S. Rep. Tammy Duckworth. Since her daughter's birth in November, she's been dismayed at the lack of suitable nursing spots as she shuttles between her Illinois district and her office in Washington. She's sponsoring the Friendly Airports for Mothers Act, which would require major airports to provide lactation rooms.

In Illinois, a similar bill passed both houses of the General Assembly in May. Chicago's Midway Airport already has a lactation room, and O'Hare International Airport plans to have them in all terminals later this year.

We hate to think it would take an act of Congress to get other airports to follow suit. But we've watched for years as governments at all levels took steps to require accommodations for nursing mothers.

There are laws that exempt breast-feeding mothers from jury duty, laws that allow mothers to nurse their babies in jail, laws that prohibit day care centers from excluding breast-fed babies.

Most states have laws stating explicitly that nursing isn't lewd behavior or doesn't violate public indecency laws, and that a mother may breast-feed her child in any place where she would otherwise be allowed.

But it's still not unusual to hear about a dust-up at a restaurant or shopping center after a nursing mother is asked to cover up — or told to go sit on the toilet to feed her baby.

More and more mothers are insisting on their right to do what comes naturally, wherever they are. Let the squeamish look away. But pumping is another matter. In the U.S., more than half of women with a child under a year old work outside the home. If they're breast-feeding, they need a private place to express their milk.

The Affordable Care Act requires most employers to provide an area — not a bathroom — where women can pump, and to allow them breaks to do so. Many states have laws that go further, such as requiring a refrigerator in the workplace.

Duckworth is right: That doesn't help mothers who are traveling. It also doesn't help when they're at the mall, the ballpark or the Department of Motor Vehicles.

The authors of the Breastfeeding Medicine study argue that lactation rooms should be added to the design standards for buildings under the Americans with Disabilities Act.

Here's a better idea: Step up, America. Show Mom some respect. Stop telling mothers to go pump in a unisex bathroom, while other parents and babies line up outside, waiting to change a diaper. Create a private space for breast-feeding moms — not because it's the law but because it's the right thing to do.

A customer service rep for one airport told the researchers that lactation rooms "are as important as free Wi-Fi." We don't need to conduct a survey to tell you which is more common.