ICD-10 day has passed. Take a deep breath. We are still here.

Healthcare Finance spent the bulk of Thursday's rollout monitoring the buzz, speaking with experts and reporting on any issues that may have arrived, and while the true effects of the change will be felt in the coming weeks when claims are processed, bills delivered and accounts-receivable days wane, we have a few observations of the day that we'd like to share below.

[Also: ICD-10 arrives: See how it went]

1. It really was like Y2K

Just like the onset of year 2000 had caused a lot of speculation about computer systems failing, bringing just about every business tied to a computer system to the brink, ICD-10 prophets predicted doom on Oct. 1. But, alas, the industry survived. We heard from people who saw minor glitches, but the reality is most of the software upgrades that preceded the switchover worked. No disaster here.

2. It was felt mostly in the trenches

Poring over online chatter about ICD-10, and there was so much that the #ICD10 Twitter hashtag was trending in some cities, the biggest gripes came from physicians, nurses and other medical professionals, most lamenting the huge time-suck that came from having to search through 70,000 codes to find the right one. As for the corner-office crowd, we'll see that angst as the financial indicators begin to roll in.

3. AMA sat it out

Journalists are often besieged by press statements, and yesterday was no exception as the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, the American Hospital Association, AHIMA joined a host of other healthcare orgs in acknowledging the importance of the day and offering ways to help those who may need it. Then there was the American Medical Association, the largest collective voice of U.S. physicians. We all know the AMA fought for years to block ICD-10, and only changed course a few months ago when CMS said it would be lenient on denials for the first year, but it was interesting that they didn't take the opportunity to at least broadcast a "we're here for you" to the doctors it represents. In fact, some on Twitter pointed out that the AMA had deleted a 2011 statement from its Web archives about its loathing for ICD-10. The organization's website also still features a "preparing for the transition" link front and center on its homepage. In case they missed it, the transition has passed.

4. Everybody's got a tool

Online code databases, apps for converting ICD-9 to ICD-10, EHR upgrades, consulting services, KPI dashboards, webinars. You name it and surely there was company advertising its services. It's supply and demand at work, and that's not a bad thing.

5. The "weird ICD-10 codes" meme is over

We're surprised "orca" or "macaw" weren't trending topics on Twitter yesterday based on the sheer number of posts poking fun at some of the highly specific and, yes, somewhat weird ICD-10 codes included in the new set. For those in the trenches it seemed a way to blow off steam and laugh at what was a very busy changeover for folks. For mainstream media, these codes were the perfect news peg to engage a larger consumer audience on the importance of the changeover. But, sure, there was some overkill. While it may seem silly to have diagnosis codes for spacecraft-related injuries, is it really that much of a stretch, especially as space travel is becoming a consumer good? We had fun with it too, but it's over. And as the day progressed we saw more chatter online pointing to the fact that despite the detail, these weird codes are there to diagnose real people with real injuries. And take it from someone who's had "trouble with in-laws." The pain is real folks. The pain is real.

Twitter: @HenryPowderly