Johnny rotten. Johnny Manziel? Please end the Johnny Football-to-Denver rumors. There’s no way Broncos honcho John Elway would want Manziel, right?

Michael, just says no

Kiz: Breaking news! We need new office furniture here at Kickin’ It Headquarters. Why? When our staff heard the Manziel rumors, we fell out of our chairs, laughing so hard that the chairs did not survive the fall. What Manziel needs more than a job is help. Broncos coach Gary Kubiak was happy to offer a fellow Texas A&M alum some friendly advice and heartfelt support. But hire him? No way. Rather than give Manziel the keys to his offense, here’s thinking Kubiak knows it would be far safer for all concerned to call Johnny Football a cab.

Now and for Trevor. I enjoyed your column on Rockies shortstop Trevor Story and his late grandfather. We’ve known the Story family for 30 years, and my son played Little League ball with Trevor. His grandpa, Darrel the milkman, was special. He was my deacon at church and, as a fellow truck driver, he would always ask about my trips and tell me to “Keep it between the lines.” So, for me, the most memorable line in your column was: “Every time Story rounds the bases, it’s a milk run.” I’ll think of that whenever I watch Trevor play.

David, Texas proud

Kiz: Until the home opener, Story had never taken batting practice at Coors Field. Then the rookie went out and smacked two home runs in front of John Elway, Peyton Manning and 49,358 of his new best friends in Colorado. But, in every crowd, there’s one Mr. Grumpypants. For proof, read on. …

The Weiss and what fors. Don’t tell the easy Story. Tell the real story about the Rockies. They took on too much money for the bullpen and have a bad manager in Walt Weiss.

Jon, plays hardball

Kiz: Weiss knows as well as anybody that another 90-loss season would not be good for his future in the Rockies dugout. But Tony La Russa or Joe Maddon would look like lousy managers with bad starting pitching. Through four games of this season, the earned run average of Colorado starters was 8.15. And Weiss managed to go 2-2 in those games? I’d call that a minor baseball miracle.

Irv ahead of the curve. And today’s parting shot is our way of telling Irv Brown: No, it was you that made this show.

I turned in for the first time to a sports-talk radio show 33 years ago, heard Irv and thought I had died and gone to heaven. He was the best: knowledgeable, entertaining, insightful and an incredibly nice guy. All the best to him in retirement.

Doug, got in the hunt