The Hampton Inn & Suites in Mishawaka booked its first reservation for a University of Notre Dame home football game before contractors had even enclosed the building.

The hotel does not even open for another two months at Heritage Square shopping center, but already youth hockey teams have reserved rooms for next winter and people are calling every day to inquire about rooms.

Is this surprising?

Given that there are more than 40 hotels and more than 3,000 rooms in St. Joseph County, you might think there's ample supply to meet demand.

But then again, the new Hampton is located in a popular commercial complex with a grocery store, independent restaurants and locally owned boutiques and shops just outside its door. And a multimillion-dollar mixed-use development is getting under way at Cleveland and Gumwood roads.

In addition to the new 99-room Mishawaka Hampton Inn, which is scheduled to open Aug. 26, site preparation is now under way for two more hotels along the Main Street corridor.

"Notre Dame is obviously the largest area attraction, but after that, the north side of Mishawaka offers visitors a great amount of shopping and dining that is ideal when considering a place to stay," says Ken Prince, Mishawaka city planner.

Though the Hampton Inn is in close proximity to both Martin's Super Markets and a multi-tenant building to the south, the location is actually what will sell the property, says Hampton General Manager Kelly Tefft.

"We're already seeing demand because of our location, and the business we bring in for the stores and restaurants makes it a win-win for everyone," Tefft says. "And people seem to be getting more comfortable coming out of the recession. I think we're getting back to the kind of demand we saw prior to the downturn."

Local hotel numbers support her observation.

Rob DeCleene, executive director of Visit South Bend Mishawaka, said year-to-date hotel occupancy in St. Joseph County is 51.6 percent, up 3 percent from 2013.

"In a perfect world, 60 percent occupancy is our goal, but it's nice to see the number over 50 again because we haven't had that for a few years," DeCleene says. "It tells us that people are traveling again and perhaps the 'staycation era' is winding down a bit. With the economy improving, it's also natural that business travel is up."

The national hotel occupancy rate is finally expected to recover to pre-recession levels this year, reports Houston-based hotel industry research group PKF Consulting.

Strong increases in lodging demand also continue to support new hotel growth occurring in many markets, the research firm states in a recent report.

In addition to the new 99-room Hampton Inn, the Holiday Inn & Suites and Candlewood Suites on Douglas Road will add about 200 more rooms to the market when they open later this year or in early 2015, DeCleene says. When those properties open, there will be about 4,200 rooms in St. Joseph County.

"Talk about an Embassy Suites near Notre Dame has become quiet, but maybe the chatter will resurface," DeCleene says. "I think (another hotel is) inevitable because there's so much activity going on. It's similar to the concept of the Mishawaka Hampton, where you're steps away from campus, shopping and dining."

DeCleene also hopes downtown South Bend gains another new hotel brand, given the announced closing of the Magnusson Grand Hotel that will allow the Chase Tower's new owner to renovate the building.

The DoubleTree by Hilton purchased the former Marriott property on North St. Joseph Street in 2011 and invested millions in an extensive hotel renovation project.

"It has been one full year since the renovation was completed and year-over-year, our occupancy continues to grow at a record pace," says Jim Wynn, general manager of the 298-room downtown DoubleTree.

"We would love to see an ownership company with integrity and a commitment to downtown bring the Chase building back to life," Wynn adds, "much like we have done with our property."

Finalists named

Will it be Hensell's Oaken Bucket or The View Tavern?

Cast your vote for your favorite burger in St. Joseph County in the final round of Burger Wars. Voting ends at noon Monday when the winner will be named at visitsouthbend.com.

We'll also post the results on our Facebook page.

The local winner will compete against the best in six other counties for the title of Best Burger in Northern Indiana. The contest is sponsored by the Northern Indiana Tourism Development Commission.

Have you heard

A Single Rose Florist, 118 S. Hill St., near downtown South Bend, is hosting its annual plant exchange through the end of June. Share extras with new gardeners and choose a plant for yourself. All plants must be potted and of a good size, says owner Rosemary Ponto-Maurer. There is no cost to participate in the exchange. ... Join our next live chat about local retail and restaurants at noon Tuesday at southbendtribune.com.

Heidi Prescott's column runs on Fridays and Sundays. Contact her at hprescott@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6070. You can also talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket. Hear her weekday reports at 6:52 a.m. and 8:52 a.m. on The WSBT Morning News with JT at WSBT-AM (960) and WSBT-FM (96.1).