Taking NJ Medicaid’s measure — Medicaid and related programs serve as the health care lifeline for 1.3 million financially hard-pressed people in New Jersey, including elderly, children and disabled.



— Medicaid (not to be confused with Medicare, a payroll-tax funded program for seniors) is funded jointly by the federal and states taxes.



— At $8.5 billion, Medicaid in New Jersey is the second biggest item in the state budget behind public school aid.



— Nationally, the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, will add some 20 million more to the 80 million now enrolled in Medicaid by hiking income-eligibility limits to accommodate many of the now medically uninsured.



— A large share of the $1.87 billion of contracts the N.J. Dept. of Human Services awards annually — the average for last five years, making the department the biggest font of contracts in state government — pertains to Medicaid.



— The Trentonian

New Jersey’s Medicaid program is a raging river of tax dollars, flowing at a rate of nearly $1 million a minute, around the clock, seven days a week, 365 days a year, without letup.

And even before the anticipated expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, or ObamaCare, the state is struggling to keep the river from overflowing its banks and washing away countless millions of dollars in waste or fraud.

In this struggle, the state’s Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services, in the Department of Human Services, pays contractors millions of dollars to help make sure Medicaid’s billions of dollars reach the hard-up people for whom they’re intended.

But some of these contractors have emerged recently at the center of controversy themselves.

Advertisement

A company that was hired to recover funds owed to Medicaid has been paid millions of dollars for “unbillable outcomes” under its contract, reports the Office of the State Auditor. The office is part of the nonpartisan Office of Legislative Services.

Two other companies hired to provide health care under Medicaid failed to take the anti-fraud actions stipulated in their contracts, according to reports of the Office of State Comptroller.

The “unbillable outcomes” case focuses on an outside company the state retains to pursue “third-party liability recovery” claims. These claims involve money the state is owed to reimburse it for Medicaid assistance it paid out to people who had other coverage.

According to the audit report, New Jersey’s Medicaid program paid the company $7.5 million for identifying third-part-liability coverage which the firm previously had already identified and “where no new insurance coverage was identified.” A state audit team reported finding these under “codes” associated with new identifications.

The audit report did not allege any wrongdoing on the company’s part or even identify the firm by name. State Auditor Stephen M. Eells confirmed to The Trentonian that the company alluded to in the audit is HMS, a nationwide enterprise with local offices in Hamilton and East Windsor. The firm boasts of having recovered more than $2.5 billion for government clients nationwide in 2011 and having enabled them to avoid more than $7 billion in misspent funds.

The audit report also said state Medicaid administrators had “waived” status reports on unresolved HMS money-recovery cases but “could not provide any documentation supporting the waivers.”

The audit was addressed to Medicaid’s state administrator, the Division of Medical Assistance and Health Services, and to the Office of State Comptroller’s Medicaid Fraud Division.

Mark Anderson, director of that division — which itself has ferreted out tens of millions of dollars in fraud or questionable spending in New Jersey Medicaid program — said Medicaid administrators have “consistently” taken the position since 2008 that “re-verification” of Medicaid recipients’ other coverage “was intended to be a billable outcome.”

Anderson conceded, however, that on this point “the language of the contract is lacking in clarity” and should be tightened. The contract, previously extended five times, runs out at the end of this month.

Meanwhile, New Jersey’s top Medicaid administrator, Valerie Harr, acknowledged that in some cases the contractor’s “claim amounts have been inaccurate.” She said “various corrective actions have been taken” and that she will “continue to monitor the situation and take further corrective actions as needed.”

Elsewhere in the struggle to minimize Medicaid dollars lost to waste or fraud, the Office of State Comptroller under Matthew Boxer last July faulted United Health Care Community Plan of New Jersey for insufficient vigilance against waste and fraud.

Community Plan failed to maintain the level of anti-fraud staffing and training its $800 million-a-year contract stipulates, the comptroller reported. Total questionable costs Community Plan reported averting came to only one-tenth of 1 percent of the sum Medicaid pays it annually, the comptroller added.

Also previously faulted by the comptroller for lax efforts in guarding against Medicaid waste and fraud was Horizon N.J. Health.

Other recent controversies bedevilling New Jersey’s Medicaid have included:

A report that $7.1 million in improper Medicaid payments went to New Jersey prison inmates. (The prison system provides its own medical services for inmates. Inmates on Medicaid when they enter prison are not supposed to continue receiving it beyond the end of the month they were incarcerated.)

A spot check audit of 50 pending claims submitted by the Adult Medical Day Care program reported that 90 percent of the claims lacked documentation to support payment.

Allegations that a dentist in East Orange, banned from participating in state contracts, submitted Medicaid claims in the names of unlicensed colleagues at Gentle Dental Group. The Office of State Comptroller is seeking $1.3 million in Medicaid reimbursements.