Reprinted from ACO BUSINESS NEWS , a hard-hitting monthly newsletter on the latest industry actions to design and create ACOs, for hospitals, physicians, health plans and their advisers.

Antitrust laws treat collaborations among health care providers — including accountable care organizations — differently from the way they treat price-fixing schemes. But that doesn’t mean ACOs will never merit scrutiny from the Federal Trade Commission, FTC Bureau of Competition Director Deborah Feinstein says.

To date, the FTC hasn’t opposed the formation of an ACO, Feinstein told attendees at the recent National Accountable Care Organization Summit in Washington, D.C., sponsored by Global Health Care LLC. In addition, it hasn’t taken any enforcement action against ACOs, nor has it received complaints that might warrant further inquiry.

“As a result, we are confident that antitrust concerns are not preventing the formation of beneficial ACOs,” she said. However, the FTC’s lack of action so far doesn’t mean ACOs can become complacent — they still need to make sure they aren’t engaging in anticompetitive activity, she added.

Feinstein said the FTC looks carefully at whether the providers in question are financially or clinically integrated, and whether the agreement between them is necessary to accomplish the precompetitive benefits of the integration. In addition, the commission asks several threshold questions when reviewing provider collaborations such as ACOs:

Does the proposed arrangement offer the potential for pro-consumer cost savings or quality improvements in the provision of health care services?

Is there bona fide integration or is this simply a mechanism to enhance leverage with payers through joint negotiation?

Even if there is bona fide integration, are any price or other agreements among participants regarding the terms on which they will deal with health care insurers reasonably necessary to achieve the benefits of the collaboration?

“If the answer to these questions is ‘yes,’ then the collaboration is not considered a per se illegal agreement, but rather is evaluated under a rule of reason standard, which assesses whether the likely effect of the collaboration will be to benefit or harm competition or consumers,” Feinstein said.

Certain ACO features or behavior are likely to raise red flags for antitrust enforcers, especially for ACOs that have high market shares or other indications of market power, she says. These include:

Preventing payers from steering patients to certain providers.

Tying sales of the ACO’s services to the private payer’s purchase of other services from providers outside the ACO.

Requiring exclusivity that discourages providers from contracting with payers outside the ACO.

Restricting a payer’s ability to make available to enrollees information on cost, quality, efficiency and performance.

“These types of conduct, in combination with high market shares, may prevent private payers from obtaining lower prices and better quality service for their enrollees,” Feinstein said. “Additionally, regardless of market share, the sharing of competitively sensitive information among ACO participants that threatens or leads to price fixing or other collusion for competing services provided outside the ACO raises significant antitrust concerns.”

The “rule of reason” standard evaluates how the proposed agreement will affect the health care market in question, including whether the parties will continue to operate independently and what other alternatives are available for potential customers of the joint venture, she said.

“Ultimately, we make a determination as to whether a particular agreement, on balance, benefits consumers or is likely to diminish quality, reduce output or increase price,” Feinstein said.

The FTC’s analysis of ACOs “is similar to our analysis of joint ventures in any market,” she said. The FTC has issued several antitrust advisory opinions explaining what it wants to see in clinical integration by health care providers, and ACOs must meet those standards to benefit consumers, she says.

Newly formed ACOs can ask the FTC — which works with CMS and the Department of Justice (DOJ) on this issue — for expedited review of their organizations in order to obtain antitrust guidance, Feinstein said.

The FTC continues “to hear claims that antitrust principles are at odds with the mandates of the Affordable Care Act,” she told conference attendees. However, those arguments “misunderstand the focus and intent of federal antitrust enforcement,” Feinstein explained. “Stated simply, there is no ‘approved way’ to compete. Conversely, there is no laundry list of infractions that could automatically undermine a business arrangement.”

Instead, “the antitrust laws proscribe behavior that, on the whole, reduces consumer welfare,” she said. “Ultimately, we believe that the imperatives of developing lower cost, higher quality health care can coexist with continued enforcement of the antitrust laws.”

Contact Feinstein via the FTC public affairs office at (202) 326-2180.

© 2014 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including a $75 discount on a subscription to ACO Business News.