President Barack Obama’s decision to postpone executive action on immigration has outraged Latino activists, as well as a number of Democrats and Republicans. The only ones breathing a sigh of relief are the Democratic candidates in swing states such as Arkansas, North Carolina, Alaska and Louisiana. Obama's recent talk of unilateral action on immigration has become a distraction for those candidates, who were having to spend their political capital criticizing the president’s decision to bypass Congress and go solo.

Immigration reform has become a hot button issue in the midterm elections. (A Gallup poll in mid-July noted that one in six Americans believe immigration is an important problem our nation is facing.) But Democratic candidates in red states are in danger of losing competitive races where the Latino voting population only makes up 2 to 3 percent of voters. So they pressed the panic button and begged Obama to hold off on his decision. These candidates, like Sens. Mark Pryor, D-Arkansas, and Mary Landrieu, D-La., have separated themselves from the president by publicly stating that he should not pursue executive action on amnesty, and instead work with Congress.

[SEE: Cartoons on Immigration]

In an interview Sunday on "Meet The Press," the president blamed the delay on the shifting politics associated with the recent surge of illegal immigrants from Central America crossing the border. But the president’s delay is a dishonest political maneuver. The reality is clear: He made a decision sacrificing Latinos for the sake of saving the Democratic candidates.

After all, the president has made it very clear that he will take executive action on immigration regardless of his critics’ opinions. His decision to delay is meant to move the issue away from the midterm elections and instead turn it into a 2016 presidential election issue, which will force Republican presidential contenders to explain their immigration reform positions.

But his move actually buys Republicans some extra time to court Hispanic voters. If Republicans cannot resolve immigration reform in Congress, they will continue to lose the support of Latino voters nationwide.

Latino groups are calling the president’s decision a betrayal, and they feel as though Democrats consider them political pawns. Obama promised that he would take action by the end of the summer and then walked away.

The problem is that Obama knows taking unilateral action on immigration is unpopular. In a poll from Investors Business Daily, 63 percent of Americans said they oppose executive action from Obama on immigration and want him to work with Congress to fix the problem. Even editorial boards from major newspapers have warned against the president’s unilateral move. An editorial in The Washington Post stated that Obama would “trigger a constitutional showdown with Republicans.” And all hope for a bipartisan resolution in Congress will be lost if the president moves alone, which hurts Latinos and our nation’s economy.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

Republicans are warning that the president issuing an executive action on immigration is a raw use of his power. It would provide Republicans with more ammunition in making the case for Obama’s imperial presidency, at a time when Republican voters are already energized and have a significant advantage going into the midterm elections. According to the latest George Washington University Battleground poll, Republicans have a four-point advantage on the generic congressional ballot, where likely voters are asked which party they would prefer to vote for in Congress, which is a result of a “passionate base and dissatisfaction with Obama.”

Americans should not be shocked that the president plans to pursue an executive action on amnesty after Congress’ inability to pass immigration reform this summer. Back in the spring of 2014, Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart, R-Fla., told The Washington Post, “I’m convinced that if we don’t get it done by the August break, the president, who is feeling a lot of pressure from having not done anything on immigration reform, will feel that he has to act through executive action.” Diaz-Balart’s warning was right on target.