WASHINGTON — Republicans got almost nothing to show for the 16-day government shutdown that ended last week, apart from a drubbing in the public eye.

But don’t expect Sen. Ted Cruz to relent. Even in the rubble of this budget episode, the leading instigator of the showdown won’t rule out dusting off the same tactics when the budget fight flares again in four months. Why should he?

As a man in a hurry to change Washington, the Texas freshman may have no better alternative to the noisy, process-gumming approach he pursued in his battle to derail Obamacare. As a 2016 White House contender, he’s basking in tea party adoration. As a maverick on a mission, he can shrug off pressure within the Senate because — for better or worse — no one has any real leverage over him.

Fundraising? He’s fine on his own. Re-election? That’s five years away, and activists who love his spunk dominate Texas GOP primaries.

He’s the most reviled man in Washington. But detractors in both parties are powerless to make him go away, be quiet, or play ball.

“I don’t expect him to moderate. We don’t think he should moderate at all,” said Chris Chocola, president of the conservative Club for Growth, Cruz’s biggest backer in last year’s election. “One thing about Congress, there’s no CEO. Everybody’s an independent contractor. Everybody answers only to their constituents who elected them to office. And Cruz has struck a chord with a lot of people.”

As one strategist close to Senate GOP leaders, who spoke only on condition of anonymity because of the political sensitivity involved, put it: “He can be a conservative bomb thrower for as long as he wants. … If that’s his only goal, he’s going to be unstoppable. … There’s no cost to him now. I think he thinks there’s no cost to him at all.”

Here are the factors that make Cruz likely to continue — and perhaps even escalate — his confrontational ways:

Cruz was never going to be a wallflower. A central part of his appeal to Texas voters last year was that he would push his tea party agenda from the start, rather than quietly learning the ropes for a few years, as Senate tradition once dictated.

In Texas, Cruz is the rising star among Republicans. He sets the benchmark for Republicans facing voters next year. He is not up for re-election himself until 2018, and it’s unclear if Democrats will be more of a factor by then.

“A more competitive political system in Texas might moderate the behavior,” said James Henson, director of the Texas Politics Project at the University of Texas at Austin. “The truth is that Ted Cruz can go to Washington and assume that for his foreseeable political future in Texas, his fate is determined in the Republican primary.”

That climate also makes it hard for other leading Republicans — including Texas’ senior senator, John Cornyn, who faces re-election next year — to intervene with Cruz.

When the less ideological Kay Bailey Hutchison held the state’s other Senate seat, Cornyn never had a problem standing out as the more conservative. That hasn’t been true since the election of Cruz, who rejected his advice to avoid the budget showdown. Cruz also has refused to endorse him for re-election — a gesture that would come at little political price.

Cornyn has so far escaped any serious challenge. But he will be looking over his shoulder until Dec. 9, the deadline for candidates to file to run in the GOP primary in March.

In fact, the two top Republicans in the Senate — Minority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky and Cornyn, his deputy — face re-election in an environment favorable to tea partiers. McConnell’s main challenger collected an endorsement Friday from the Senate Conservatives Fund — a group Cruz raises money for and serves as pitchman.

So Senate GOP leaders are loathe to take Cruz to the woodshed, even assuming that they’d like to, or that it would make a difference.

“There’s just no sense picking a fight and risk alienating a group of people who you need to support you,” said Scott Howell, a Dallas-based GOP strategist whose client list has included Cruz patron Jim DeMint and senators across the party’s spectrum.

Spend any time discussing Cruz with Republican strategists and senators and their exasperation quickly froths.

They complain he spent months selling a strategy that was doomed to fail. He promised that Obamacare could be defunded without all the mess of a government shutdown — without ever saying exactly how that would happen.

“It was what I said in July, which was a plan that wouldn’t work,” complained Sen. Roy Blunt, R-Mo.

Aides to Cruz did not respond to requests for an interview with the senator for this report.

In a very real sense, there’s hardly any pressure Cruz can’t shrug off.

Last December, McConnell persuaded him to sign on as vice chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee, which works to win Senate races across the country. Not only has Cruz done little in that capacity, he has rankled fellow Republicans by working so closely with outside groups — including the Senate Conservatives Fund — that put pressure on GOP incumbents.

But McConnell can’t strip Cruz of the post without triggering a huge backlash. Nor can he deprive Cruz of committee assignments.

When it comes to money, Cruz doesn’t need much help. He got elected with only modest backing from traditional business interests that once held sway within the GOP.

His broader base of activist-donors pumped $1.2 million into his coffers in the last three months — not bad for someone whose next election is five years off. Fundraising for a presidential run might be another matter, but that’s not a concern right now for Cruz.

“His power and his pursuits are not derived from the same place that other people’s are. If you want to go far in the Senate you cannot act like he acts. But he doesn’t want that,” said the strategist with ties to GOP Senate leaders. “We don’t have anything that he cares about.”

As Howell put it, “Any attempts to muzzle him are futile. He’s going to do and say what he wants to regardless of what people think.”

Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., called Cruz a “laughing stock” last week. But that’s not the perception among tea partiers.

“Senator Cruz is trying a new tactic, one so rarely seen in Washington that to many it may seem strange and unfamiliar: He is putting principle above party,” said Catherine Engelbrecht, founder of King Street Patriots, a Houston-area tea party group that will welcome Cruz as a hero Monday night.

Jenny Beth Martin, national coordinator of Tea Party Patriots, lauded Cruz for standing up to “the establishment and the ruling elite in Washington, D.C.”

“The fight was winnable,” she insisted. Cruz and others have blamed Senate Republicans for not being as willing as those in the House to press the fight.

She and other fans agree that Cruz is impervious to pressure to conform — and they hail him for it.

“Obviously that’s not his overriding concern is being the most popular guy in the Senate,” Chocola said. “You can’t bribe people with earmarks anymore. I don’t think Cruz has any problem with fundraising. So what can leadership offer?”

Club for Growth, Cruz’s top contributor, directly gave his campaign $700,000. The group spent $18 million on federal elections last year, including $5 million on a torrent of ads against Cruz’s rival, Lt. Gov. David Dewhurst, according to the Center for Responsive Politics.

The group raises money from a range of corporate and investment interests. Federal campaign records show that 10 people, topped by PayPal co-founder Peter Thiel, accounted for more than half the $20 million the group raised. Other top donors included a biotech billionaire from Arkansas, Steve Stephens, who chairs the group’s board, and a Boston buyout specialist, John Childs.

Another arm of the Club for Growth is shielded from having to disclose its donors under federal law.

Cruz critics such as Steve Schmidt, who ran Sen. John McCain’s 2008 presidential campaign, find Cruz’s tactics indefensible.

“He’s the architect of this political massacre and the leader of a pack of political lemmings who went over the cliff, following a strategy that had no endgame, that resulting in Obamacare becoming more popular and Republicans becoming less popular,” Schmidt said.

But he agreed that Cruz seems immune to persuasion or pressure.

Cruz and his supporters, Schmidt said, “live in an alternate universe where defeat is victory, and the cause wasn’t Cruz but the weak-kneed Republicans who betrayed Ted Cruz’s courage and sacrifice.”

The Teflon armor may not come off until the White House race heats up.

Cruz’s apparent goal: to position himself as the most pure, most anti-Obamacare, most uncompromising conservative around.

“Today, he’s colorful and quotable, which insulates him to some degree,” said Howell, but “the barbs will come fast and furious when the White House race gets underway, because he’s not endearing himself to a lot of people.”

Follow Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.