Reporters describe Donald Trump events as frightening and unsettling for those in the media. Trump relegates the media to rectangular pens they're not allowed to leave, singles out reporters with personal insults and refuses entry to those he doesn't like, and whips up his crowds against reporters he says are "very dishonest people." Will there be a free press under a President Trump?

Most people believe torture is effective, yet there is no evidence that it works better than non-abusive tactics. The absence of efficacy should remove all reason to torture, yet, some presidential candidates are calling for banned practices like water-boarding and worse. It doesn't help that terrorist acts, such as we saw in Brussels this past week, drive up support for torture, even in people who don't typically condone it. Are we losing sight of the ethical implications by focusing on whether it works or not? And, if it doesn't work, why would we even consider it?

Lastly, the Tampa Bay Rays played the Cuba National Team Tuesday in a historic game that marks the second time an American team has played Cuba, the first since Fidel Castro came to power. President Obama watched the game with Cuban President Raul Castro.

Obama is the first sitting U.S. president to visit Cuba since 1928. He brought Rachel Robinson, widow of Jackie Robinson, the baseball legend who broke the color barrier in America in 1947, following Cuba's lead. Can Cuba teach us something about race relations?

GUESTS:

Seth Stevenson - Senior writer at Slate Magazine and the author of Grounded: A Down To Earth Journey Around the World

- Senior writer at Slate Magazine and the author of Grounded: A Down To Earth Journey Around the World John Schiemann - Associate professor of Political Science at Fairleigh Dickinson University and the author of Does Torture Work?

- Associate professor of Political Science at Fairleigh Dickinson University and the author of Does Torture Work? Doug Glanville - Former MLB player, currently an analyst for ESPN and ESPN.com, who can be seen on Baseball Tonight. He’s also the author of The Game From Where I Stand: A Ballplayer's Inside View

MUSIC:

“Freedom Of The Press” from Cradle Will Rock

“Torture Me” by Metric

“Guananey” by Compay Segundo

You can join the conversation on Facebook and Twitter.

Colin McEnroe, Chion Wolf, and Greg Hill contributed to this show.