John Ketzenberger

Many see business as a monolithic entity. They have a hard time distinguishing differences between industries, companies or the people who work in them. They may identify small business as separate from big corporations, but that's about as subtle as it gets for many people.

There are, of course, as many differences in business are there are businesses and businesspeople. The Indiana Chamber of Commerce, for instance, has about 5,000 members. You don't think it's a challenge for the chamber's leadership to decide how it represents its members' diverse interests in the halls of power?

Now we've established that concept, there is one issue before the General Assembly that has the chamber's full interest, and that of the majority of businesspeople in Indiana. Senate Bill 101, modeled on the federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act, is the focal point of this unified opposition.

"The reason, in one word, is litigation," said Cameron Carter, the Indiana Chamber's vice president of economic development and federal relations. "We believe if (SB 101) passes, it's going to be a litigation nightmare.

"We believe Indiana doesn't need this when there already is federal protection on the books," Carter added.

He's referring to the 1994 act that sailed through Congress with just three "no" votes and was signed by President Bill Clinton. The law was spurred by the case of two American Indians who were fired from their jobs at a rehabilitation clinic after using the psychoactive drug mescaline in religious ceremonies.

The legislation united liberal and conservative interests as seen by its easy passage through Congress. The new law was meant to prevent laws that "substantially burden" a person's free exercise of religion and established that even a religiously neutral law could be deemed a burden.

Originally the law applied to states, too, but the Supreme Court limited it to federal laws in a 1997 ruling.

For most of the next two decades, there was little controversy, but passage of the Affordable Care Act and legalization of same-sex marriage in most states has changed that. Many religious institutions have challenged the ACA's contraception requirements. Some also see the rise in state laws that mirror the federal law as a backlash to the proliferation of same-sex marriage laws, mostly through judicial challenges.

Nineteen states in recent years have passed a version of the federal law and several others have joined Indiana in considering it now.

The Indiana Chamber opposes SB 101 because of the costs associated with it, Carter said. The actual cost of dealing with the discrimination lawsuits many believe will arise if the state law passes the legislation is the obvious concern, but the chamber also worries about the cost of lost opportunities if Indiana is perceived as a less-welcoming place for people with a variety of religious beliefs — or none at all.

"We think it could damage the Indiana brand, if you will," Carter said.

Freedom Indiana, the driving force in defeating House Joint Resolution 3 last session — the referendum to include a ban on same-sex marriage in the Indiana constitution — recently reconstituted to oppose SB 101 for the same reasons. The difference this year is that the Indiana Chamber did not take a position on HJR 3, although several individual businesses opposed the measure.

Two "religious freedom" bills were introduced in the Indiana Senate this year. The one viewed as more restrictive failed to move, but SB 101, authored by Sen. Dennis Kruse, R-Auburn, cleared the Senate 40-10 along party lines. Kruse's bill is seen as extending the federal law to Indiana.

Its fate in the House is less certain because of a key distinction made by Speaker Brian Bosma, R-Indianapolis, during the effort to enact a same-sex marriage ban through referendum. At the time, Bosma called for a hiatus on HJR 3, until there was a decision in a key case before the U.S. Supreme Court.

Carter would like to see Bosma make a similar determination on SB 101. The U.S. Supreme Court heard oral arguments Feb. 25 in the case of an Oklahoma teenager who claims her practice of wearing a hijab caused her to be rejected for a job on the sales floor of fashion retailer Abercrombie & Fitch. The federal Religious Freedom Restoration Act is at the center of her case.

It makes sense to wait until the federal challenge is determined. As much as it probably pains the state's rights advocates, who never seem to hesitate to note the federal law won approval under Clinton, it's best to have one law to determine the fine balance between religious freedom and discrimination.

Business doesn't need to waste resources trying to track or defend lawsuits generated by the plethora of state laws, and Indiana should avoid any perception as a place that is not welcoming.

John Ketzenberger is president of the Indiana Fiscal Policy Institute, a non-partisan and non-profit organization to research state budget and tax issues. You may reach him by e-mail at jketzenberger@indianafiscal.org or on Twitter @JohnKetz.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1BOJGWV