It takes a while but Spring Valley routs Mondovi for Homecoming win

Spring Valley took advantage of several Buffalo miscues to break-open the Dunn-St. Croix Conference contest in the second half and win its Homecoming game 46-8.

The delay took place at halftime with SV leading 20-8. The Buffs' 1-4 overall, got the ball to start the second half. But they fumbled the opening kick-off and the Cardinals recovered. One player later Jed Schlegel scored on a 31-yard touchdown run and the rout was on.

Mondovi simply could not hold onto the football as another fumble led to a Spring Valley score drive capped off by an eight-yard run by Jake Rielly. Then Matt Fesenmaier picked up another Mondovi fumble on the Buffaloes' next possession and returned it 20 yards for a touchdown. Within the span of five minutes Mondovi was now down 40-8.

"I liked the way we pounced on and took advantage of the opportunities presented up," SV head coach Ryan Kapping said. "We hadn't done this consistently this season but now we're starting to do so and we're playing better as a result."

The Cardinals, 4-1 overall, finished off the scoring at end of the ballgame when Seth Schlegel intercepted a pass and returned it 56 yards for a touchdown with no time left on the clock.

Spring Valley played much of the ballgame with a no-huddle offense and it helped them build their halftime lead. Mondovi struck first on its opening drive, topped off by quarterback Jake Ede's two-yard TD run. Valley responded on its first possession with quarterback Remington Schneider throwing an eight-yard TD pass to Jed Schlegel. The conversion was no good so Mondovi led much of the first half 8-6. But SV took control of the ballgame in the second quarter, getting an 18-yard TD pass from Schneider to Logan Newton and a two-yard scoring run by Fesenmaier, whose two-point conversion run made it 20-8 at halftime.

"The last 10 minutes of the Colfax game we played with such a chaotic intensity to come back, the coaching staff felt it was some of the best football we've played all season," Kapping said. "So we felt a no-huddle offense with increased tempo and activity and energy was the best way for us to play and it showed itself tonight. This was the most complete game we played all season so far. Everyone was enthusiastic and excited both on the field and on the sidelines and that spilled over to our defense and special teams as well."

Valley will be at Boyceville next Friday. The unbeaten Bulldogs are finishing their contest with St. Croix Central today in Hammond trailing 8-0 in the third quarter.