Topics: abstinence-only sex ed, affirmative consent, consent, Poetry, Rape, Sex, Sex and love, sex ed, Sexual abuse, spoken-word poetry, Texas, Video, Life News

My entire academic education took place in Texas public schools. Despite the fact that the vast majority of my home state abides by an abstinence-only sex education program — one that is medically inaccurate at best and psychologically damaging at worst — I managed to escape the common horrors of sex ed, thanks to a health teacher who had little regard for the board of education. Still, even though my sex education did include mention of condoms, hormonal birth control, STI treatment and (gasp!) the possibility of sexual intercourse outside marriage, it was conspicuously lacking in the consent department. There was no talk of “yes” meaning “yes” or even of “no” meaning “no”; we just didn’t discuss what it means for two people to willfully engage in a consensual sexual act.

I came to understand consent in the aftermath of a manipulative and abusive relationship I had with one of my teachers when I was 14. Granted, my sex education class happened after that — a problem in itself — and so it would be difficult to suggest that my abuse resulted directly from my lack of knowledge about consent. Except, not really. There were plenty of other factors that contributed to my detrimental and ultimately non-consensual relationship, but certainly my inability to recognize consent (or a lack thereof) was one of them.

Teaching consent is often decried as being overly difficult and full of gray areas, especially given the all-too-common “no means no” understanding of what constitutes rape. These excuses are cop outs. Affirmative consent policies and open dialogue about rape — simple acts of naming and description — help to provide clarity that is necessary to promote healthy sexual behavior. It’s really not that hard — and if you want a handy, artful guide, here’s a beautiful poem that quite clearly explains just what is consent.