You always know a food fad has gone mainstream when the supermarkets pick it up. Take gluten-free, for example: Marks & Spencer, Sainsbury's, Waitrose, Tesco, even Co-op have specialist ranges to cater for this (largely imagined) food intolerance.

Lately, another celebrity-driven trend has found its way into the food halls of middle England: clean eating. The idea - pushed by endless bloggers, celebrities and trendy cookery writers - is simple: you ruthlessly avoid processed foods and stick to healthy, vitality-packed 'real' foods instead.

That's why your supermarket is packed with nuts, seeds (chia, alfalfa, pumpkin), quinoa (pronounced key-nooa, in case you didn't know), dairy alternatives (almond milk, rice milk) and goji berries (disgusting, since you ask).

Sarah Vine, above, calls herself a failed orthorexic - although she has got her family hooked on 'courgetti'

Put it this way: when Starbucks starts selling protein pots and goji berry yoghurt, you know something's up.

But some experts are warning this new obsession with only eating virtuous food can tip into a condition called orthorexia - meaning a fixation on righteous eating. Though by no means a clinically recognised eating disorder, it can have worrying repercussions.

The New York blogger Jordan Young has found that what started off as a health kick has turned into something more sinister.

'I was becoming more and more limited in what I was comfortable eating,' she writes. 'I even joked about it with friends, calling certain foods, like eggs, "fear foods" because I had stayed away from them for so long.'

So extreme was her obsession with 'clean' eating that she began to cut out entire food groups. The result: she began exhibiting many of the symptoms of anorexia.

Not just anxiety around eating foods not on her 'approved' list; she also became lethargic and her periods stopped. Effectively, her obsession had made her malnourished.

Absurd as this may sound, it is not as rare as you think. I've met countless orthorexics as a health and beauty writer, women who become distressed when faced with a piece of toast under their egg-white omelette or who recoil in horror at the concept of a milky coffee.

My friends are at it, too. As far as I can tell, one lives off nothing but rocket salad, seeds and the odd prawn. Another regularly embarks on three-day juice cleanses - not to lose weight but because she says it makes her feel 'energised'.

Clean eating may make you glow with inner health and smugness, but as a culinary experience it is almost exclusively without pleasure

Even I, lazy, fat and greedy as I am, have succumbed to this pressure - though I would describe myself more as a failed orthorexic than a true follower of the faith.

My orthorexia takes the form of buying mountains of green things and berries, together with all the approved literature declaring a ban on sugar, carbs and starches - and then having to order a takeaway because no one in the family wants to eat what I've produced.

Truth is, clean eating may make you glow with inner health and smugness, but as a culinary experience it is almost exclusively without pleasure.

Evangelists would argue I'm wrong: they would point to the recipe books filled with pictures of beautiful, multi-coloured salads. But a raw vegetable is still a raw vegetable, even if it is cut into pretty shapes.

That said, I have had a few successes. I've managed to introduce the children to cauliflower mash by mixing ever more veg into their potato mash until the ratio is 50/50. They occasionally inquire whether I have 'done something' to it, whereupon, like all good mothers desperate to get some veg into their children, I lie through my teeth.

And my courgetti - 'spaghetti' made from courgettes thanks to the acquisition of a gadget called a Spiraliser - while not exactly popular, has become a family staple, if laced with butter and salt.

Gwyneth Paltrow, above, has influenced current trends in healthy eating with her blog, Goop

Mostly, though, our guinea pig gets the best of my attempts at clean eating after it's been spurned by everyone else - so much so he's become a little funny about eating carrots that haven't been properly Spiralised. Just my luck: an orthorexic guinea pig.

My husband, meanwhile, just makes a point of lining up the rotting vegetables he finds at the bottom of the fridge in what can only be described in a passive aggressive manner.

So where did this clean eating trend stem from? It began in earnest, as so many things did, in the Sixties, as part of an alternative, more natural lifestyle. It became fashionable in certain circles to consume whole, unprocessed foods, to try as far as possible, to live off the land. It was all very principled and rather hard work. Today, things are rather different.

This modern fad is driven in large part by vanity - eat clean and you will look and feel better - but also by opportunity. Quite simply, consumers in the West have easy access to affordable, fresh food all year round. There's no need to live on a farm or belong to a collective in Wales.

In fact, there's something of a class element to the whole thing: the rich eat clean, because they can afford to; the poor eat what they can afford, which is no longer simple fodder - potatoes, vegetables, cheap cuts of meat - but highly processed, high-sugar, high-salt foods that will send them to an early grave.

There's another, all important factor: celebrity. The power of the internet has amplified the influence of women such as Gwyneth Paltrow, with her lifestyle blog Goop.

Actors and reality TV stars double up as lifestyle gurus, posting incessant images of themselves to their millions of fans. How they look is paramount and what all the glossiest, most glamorous and best preserved have in common is one thing: healthy eating.

It was U.S. nutritionist Dr Steven Bratman who coined the term orthorexia at the end of the Nineties. He was seeing patients increasingly fixated with the idea they could 'cure themselves' through diet.

Sarah often ends up ordering a takeaway after making healthy food for her family, as they don't want to eat it

He describes, not without humour, extreme food faddism where entire food groups were declared 'verboten' and eccentric myths were put forward about certain foods.

Onions caused excessive sexual desires; raw food gives you arthritis; fruits are poisonous; fermented foods aid digestion. And so on.

Such were the differences of opinion, and the passion with which these ideas were espoused that Dr Bratman began to develop a theory. This was not normal.

'Many of the most unbalanced people I have ever met are those who have devoted themselves to healthy eating,' he wrote.

The legendary Spiraliser, above, from Lakeland

His conclusion was that this was an actual eating disorder. He describes the symptoms: 'Iron self-discipline bolstered by a hefty sense of superiority over those who eat junk food.'

And in the same way that an anorexic will pride themselves in being able to go long periods without food, for the orthorexic, strict adherence to their principles becomes a quasi-religious experience.

'As orthorexia progresses, a day filled with sprouts, umeboshi plums and amaranth biscuits comes to feel as holy as one spent serving the poor and homeless,' he writes.

To a greater or lesser degree, orthorexics are everywhere. In any office, there will be the person who prides themselves on snacking on organic blueberries while everyone else is chucking down Maltesers.

In restaurants, people will leave their untouched potatoes piled on the corner of their plate or peel the pastry off their quiche.

Even children are mini-orthorexics. You see 12-year-olds sucking down green smoothies, babies who have never eaten mashed banana. I know a 13-year-old boy who won't eat chips, but prefers salad with oil and apple vinegar dressing (an orthorexic classic).

Unsurprisingly, an entire industry has sprung up catering for the needs of the obsessive clean eater. The Lakeland catalogue is their retail bible. It is to clean eating evangelists what Vogue is to fashionistas.

Here you will find ever more exotic ways of preparing your vegetables, from the legendary Spiraliser to a copy of Jamie Oliver's Everyday Superfoods (a bit of a latecomer to clean eating, is our Jamie, but he's catching up fast, as his new chiselled jowls and trim trousers suggest) to the ubiquitous NutriBullet and its hardcore cousin, the Vitamix (a snip at £399.99, but then it does have the same pulverising power as a small off-board motor).

Like all these fads, the thing to do is to adopt a few sound principles and apply them to normal eating

All the main exponents of clean eating have one thing in common: they advocate full immersion.

If you're not swigging nut milk and chomping through cauliflower pizza bases at every meal, you're a traitor to your body.

But the truth is that you can learn a lot from the clean-eating doctrine without becoming a fully paid-up orthorexic. As with most things in life, there is a middle way.

I call it orthorexia light, and it's based on the principle that life's all about moderation. And so, yes, I own a Vitamix and, yes, I use it to make the children (and the husband) a healthy smoothie in the morning.

But I also use it to make pancake mix for a treat, peanut butter or their favourite, sorbet.

As for the greens, I've discovered Waitrose does an excellent line in frozen veg - beans, peas, kale, spinach and the rest - which can be chucked in a wok with a knob of coconut oil (an orthorexic staple) and then turned into a delicious side dish within minutes.

Berries and other soft fruit can also be bought frozen - and are much cheaper than the fresh varieties.

Like all these fads, the thing to do is to adopt a few sound principles and apply them to normal eating.