Kiawah Island Club teaching pro Charles Frost (left) watches the shot of one of his star pupils, former Clemson All-American Ben Martin. Both golfers will be competing in the PGA Championship next week at Whistling Straits.

Kiawah Island Club teaching pro Charles Frost will take two goals to Kohler, Wis., site of next week’s PGA Championship: Help prize pupil Ben Martin succeed at Whistling Straits; play well himself.

Charles Frost at a glance This week: Participant at PGA Championship in Kohler, Wis. Day job: Head club professional at the River Course on Kiawah Island Age: 39 Hometown: Gainesville, Ga. College: Emory Family: Wife Elizabeth; couple expecting first child in December

Frost fully expected the teaching role. Martin, a 27-year-old former Clemson All-American who plays out of the Kiawah Island Club, has been flexing his game on the PGA Tour over the last three years.

PGA CHAMPIONSHIP When: Thursday-Sunday Where: Whistling Straits, Kohler, Wis. TV: TNT (Thursday, Friday and early groups on Saturday and Sunday); CBS (Saturday and Sunday)

But Frost didn’t qualify for his first Major until finishing 10th at the PGA Professional National Championship in Philadelphia on July 1. It was Frost’s fifth attempt to make it via the tournament for the nation’s top club pros.

Now the goals are tangled up in hot August focus.

“We’re going to play a couple practice rounds together up there,” Frost said. “I think Ben will be as much help to me as I will be to him. If he has any mechanical issues or anything like that, we’ll talk about it but I think he’s going to be just as valuable to me when we talk about managing the golf course.”

Frost, 39, came to Kiawah’s River Course from Quail Hollow in Charlotte in April of 2014. He will benefit in Wisconsin from the advice of another Lowcountry-based pro. Two-time PGA Tour winner Russell Henley, 26, also plays out of the Kiawah Island Club, and has taken lessons from Frost.

Competition-ready, Frost finished second at the 2015 Carolinas PGA Section Professional Championship on July 30. Before joining Quail Hollow as Director of Instruction, he played on several tours and won the South Carolina Open, North Carolina Open and Carolinas PGA Assistant’s Championship.

It doesn’t take someone with a History degree from Emory University to know that club pros are ultimate underdogs at golf Majors. But Frost has such college knowledge, and might have caught a PGA venue break. Whistling Straits, like Kiawah’s Ocean Course, site of the 2012 PGA Championship, is a Pete Dye-designed links course.

This gem is tucked alongside Lake Michigan between Milwaukee and Green Bay. It is well-known to golf enthusiasts as the site of the 2004 PGA Championship won by Vijay Singh in a playoff over Justin Leonard and Chris DiMarco and the 2010 PGA Championship won by Martin Kaymer in a playoff over Bubba Watson.

“I’ve played the Ocean Course several times,” Frost said. “It’s also similar to the Sea Island (Georgia) course, where I worked before I went to Quail Hollow. So it’s a course-type that I have a lot of familiarity with. I’ve always enjoyed Pete Dye courses and Whistling Straits is a classic Pete Dye design.”

It’s all so exciting for Charles and Elizabeth Frost. The couple had to scramble to arrange accommodations near Kohler for Frost’s sister, brother-in-law, parents, in-laws and a few college buddies. Fortunately, Elizabeth knows her way around Whistling Straits; she works for an agency that represents several golfers and had booked their PGA reservations months in advance.

The real planning starts post-PGA. The Frosts are expecting their first child in December.

“Yeah,” said Frost, who lives on Johns Island. “We have a lot going on.”

There is a lot to look forward to. That first Frost kid will be five when the PGA Championship returns to the Ocean Course in 2021.

Follow Gene Sapakoff on Twitter @sapakoff