Salud Para La Gente Board Chairman Mark Pimentel speaks about Watsonville’s health needs at a fundsraising campaign kickoff for a new wing at the East Beach Clinic. (Arielle Berger -- Santa Cruz Sentinel)

WATSONVILLE >> About 80 people gathered at Salud Para La Gente’s East Beach Clinic Tuesday to kick off fundraising for its $10 million renovation and new wing set to open in April.

The health clinic has remained open despite construction, which began this fall on the 8,000-square-foot pediatric wing and 14 new exam rooms. The addition would allow the clinic, which currently serves around 26,000 low-income patients, to serve 10,000 more, said Dori Rose Inda, Salud Para La Gente CEO.

About 80 percent of funding has been raised so far, through a collection of federal grants, tax credit money and private foundation awards. The list of donors includes Sutter Health, which awarded the clinic $750,000 last week, Rose Inda said.

About eight new jobs will also be added, possibly including two doctors, she said.

Rose Inda said she’s seen a surge of newly insured low-income patients due to the Affordable Care Act.

“There aren’t enough providers to manage that demand, and this expansion definitely addresses that,” said Rose Inda, who added that Spanish-speaking behavioral health doctors are difficult to recruit. High diabetes rates in Watsonville are a concern, and the expansion adds a nutritionist and classrooms for shared medical visits, which have proven successful in achieving behavioral change, she said.

“Salud has been recently very successful at recruiting great providers, so we’re confident that if we have the space and we’re out there looking for more doctors and providers, we’ll be able to find the excellent quality that we’re looking for,” she said.

Audra Earle, Watsonville Community Hospital CEO, was one of a handful of speakers Tuesday that included Rep. Sam Farr and local health and education officials. Earle said a third of the hospital’s patients attend Salud Para La Gente clinics for primary care, which helps keep non-emergent patients out of the hospital emergency room.

“That means when your loved one is having a heart attack, they are quickly able to get the care they need,” Earle said.

The clinics also partner with the hospital to provide follow-up care, such as lab tests and maternity check-ups, she said.

“This keeps those patients from falling through the cracks,” Earle said.

The clinics have also partnered with Pajaro Valley Unified School District to place health centers at six schools for students and parents.

Murry Schekman, assistant superintendent, said the school clinics have helped lower suspension and expulsion rates and increase school attendance.

Advertisement

June Ponce, Salud Para La Gente’s capital campaign coordinator, said growing up in Watsonville has shown her a health access gap that the clinics help fill.

“It’s in the heart of downtown Watsonville, and if Salud did not exist, where would the 26,000 patients go? Who would provide services to them? Where would someone go if they didn’t have money?” Ponce said.