Imagine a city where there is no traffic gridlock, driverless taxis are the most efficient way to travel and traffic signals are sequenced to respond to individual cars rather than some random pattern. A city where data, technology and innovation all exist in perfect harmony to provide an infrastructure that works.

If this sounds like a utopian dream, the United States Department of Transportation wants to make it a reality.

As part of its ongoing plans to upgrade American infrastructure, the DOT has launched a Smart City Challenge. The agency is offering mid-sized American cities—those with a population of between 200,000 and 850,000 residents—the opportunity to submit proposals for their visions of the future. The DOT will then award the winning city with $50 million of funding to implement these ideas and create a model for other cities to follow.

In-The-Wild Testing Ensure your apps work every time, everywhere, and for every user Get It Now

Building On Private Sector Knowledge

The funding for the Smart City Challenge will come from a public-private partnership between the DOT and Vulcan—an investment vehicle founded by Microsoft co-founder Paul Allen. Vulcan will provide $10 million to the winner and work closely with them to ensure that the project remains on track, while the federal government will pick up the tab for the remaining $40 million.

In a press release, U.S. Transportation Secretary Anthony Foxx said that the Smart City Challenge was a chance for smaller metropolitan areas to define practical ways to address current challenges. America’s aged infrastructure is a continual source of concern for both federal and state government and this competition could be an opportunity to address already identified concerns.

“We encourage cities to develop their own unique vision, partnerships and blueprints to demonstrate to the world what a fully integrated, forward-looking transportation network looks like,” said Secretary Foxx. “America can remain the global leader in maintaining the safest, most efficient system in the world: I am looking for Mayors who share that belief to join us in the boundaries of what is possible.”

Cities who want to participate in the challenge have until February 4, 2016, to submit their proposals. Applicants will need to demonstrate how the city will leverage data, technology and apps to provide residents with an improved living and transport experience.

Five finalists will be chosen by the DOT in March 2016—presumably with some input from Vulcan—and they will compete for the $40 million of federal funding. The winner will be announced in June 2016.

A Potential Blueprint, Not A Federal Mandate

The DOT has set some guidelines for applicants. Cities should have a population density of a typical mid-sized city—Fort Meyers FL, Savannah GA, Bakersfield CA, for example—and an established public transportation system. The city must have an environment that allows proposed strategies and leadership that wants to innovate.

“Ideally, the winning city will view Intelligent Transportation Systems, connected vehicles and automated vehicles as the next logical step in its existing, robust transportation infrastructure,” the DOT said. “It should also aim to have critical systems in vehicles and infrastructure that communicate with each other, allow for active citizen participation and integrate new concepts that leverage the sharing economy.”

See Also: Smart Homes Are The Future, But Devices Need To Be Cheaper

Smart cities have become a priority for the Obama Administration. In September 2015, the government launched a Smart Cities Initiative that would be investing $160 million in federal-led tech research. The majority of that funding—around $45 million—would be channeled toward the National Science Foundation and National Institute of Standards and Technology. The rest would be shared by the various governmental agencies responsible for maintaining a working physical and digital infrastructure.

The initiative identified four key strategies;

Creating test beds for Internet of Things applications and developing new multi-sector collaborative models.

Collaboration with the civic tech movement and forging intercity collaboration.

Leveraging current federal activity—sensor networks, broadband infrastructure, for example.

International collaboration with countries that were already investing in smart cities

All of these strategies will (in theory) enhance the quality of life for residents. At the same time, federal investment could go some way into making the Internet of Things an indispensable part of America’s urban future in line with Gartner’s Hype Cycle. The Smart Cities initiative even brings some big tech names into the picture with both IBM and AT&T holding developer events in selected cities in the New Year.

Which all sounds really proactive and a clear sign that the government knows exactly the path it needs to take. The one concern is that interagency decision-making does not always align with the pace of technology.

Making Cities Smart Is The Logical Move

Yes, the infrastructure throughout the country could do with being upgraded as Last Week Tonight reported earlier this year.

And the technology already exists to make smart cities a blueprint for the future—the DOT issued a “blue paper” in February 2015 entitled Beyond Traffic 2045 that identified current chokepoints—but dovetailing federal ambition with available tech is not a guarantee of success … the online debut of the Affordable Care Act is a high-profile example.

Let’s not forget that not every city is the same. What works in one may be a nightmare in another. The DOT admitted as much when it outlined how the Smart City Challenge would work in practice—one-size-all is not the intention, more that cities should adapt proposals for their own needs.

The Risks & Consequences of Poor App Quality Learn how poor app quality can lead to lost revenue and a damaged brand Get It Now

The only other caveat is that the timeline for submitting proposals and choosing a winner is quite short … by government timelines at least.

Applicants have less than two months to get their act together and the winner is announced before government takes a well-earned summer break next year. Which is not a long time to assess, argue, reassess, plan and decide on how your city should work in the future. On the plus side, USA Today reported that Congress has just passed a $305 billion five-year transportation infrastructure repair bill and President Obama should be signing it very soon.

In the meantime, Secretary Foxx will taking the Smart City Challenge on the road and is slated to make appearances at both CES in Las Vegas and South by Southwest in Austin in 2016. Provided he can convince people that building smart city infrastructure an exciting investment, app developers could have another road to follow.