Sound Off! (Photo: serazetdinov, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

VETERANS: People should not discriminate against disabled veterans, these people are not doctors. Some disabilities are not visible by just looking at a person, such as brain trauma, spinal cord, cancer, and others too many to mention. Live and let live.

2016: In an apparent attempt to control who is able to talk to the candidate — and reduce the possibility of embarrassing moments — the Hillary Clinton campaign is severely restricting the crowd size at a Virginia event. Get back, you peasants!

AGGIE FOOTBALL: I was at our spring football scrimmage. There were less than 1,000 fans in attendance. The University of Georgia had 93,000 at its spring game. What the heck are we doing playing SEC teams?

2016: Sarah Palin is badmouthing Paul Ryan for not supporting Donald Trump right off the bat. She says he is aspiring to run for president in 2020. Well, I wish he was running for president right now.

SPORTS: On the football schedule for the high schools, Centennial can't be playing Gadsden and Mayfield on Oct. 7.

DA: A vote for James Dickens is a vote for Amy Orlando and Susana Martinez. I call that regressive. Do we need to go back to the same?

D'AMMASSA COLUMN: The latest Desert Sage editorial could have been written by an ISIS sympathizer, accusing the U.S. of purposely destroying a hospital in Afghanistan and murdering innocents when going after terrorist leaders. Yet the editorial offers no alternatives for the drone air strikes that have taken out thousands of murderous terrorists who behead their own people.

POLITICS: "The truth or nothing but the truth" is a phrase that doesn't exist in the White House.

POLITICS: Hillary locked up super delegates before she announced, then arranged the Trump plant to ensure her election.

LCPS: You mean that if the high schools change their schedules to seven periods a day, students are going to actually have to try to pass every class. Oh my, there goes that wonderful graduation rate in the high 60s.

CODES: What does it take for codes to come and check when there are complaints about weeds and tires? We don't have sidewalks. Maybe that's why. Codes needs to be doing their jobs.

SCOTUS: When Hillary Clinton wins the November election for president, Barack Obama should immediately withdraw the nomination of Garland for Supreme Court to allow her to pick the most liberal 25-year-old she can find for the job, so that Mitch McConnell can eat crow.

MUSIC: The Pulse issue on music events this summer was great, but omitted a major event for southern NM, the Silver City Blues Festival on May 27-29. This year's headliner is Taj Mahal.

OBAMACARE: Thank you, Sun-News, for reporting that county health care costs increased 18 percent last year and 25 percent this year. Hey, Democrats, how is your AFFORDABLE health care plan working out?

POLITICS: Why have six out of nine New Mexico super delegates already pledged their support, before the results of the New Mexico primaries are known? Appears they don’t care what the voters think.

BEHAVIORAL HEALTH: The legislators who want to "get to the bottom" of the Martinez mental health debacle should start with her September 2010 meeting at the United HealthCare group's DC office. They gave her $25,000 and a nice note, in return we gave them millions of our taxes to "manage" the system.

AGGIE ATHLETICS: Cutbacks everywhere at NMSU except in athletics. Is Lou advising the basketball coach. For free? For pay? For expenses? Why didn't they say?

Be heard. Call 575-541-5466 or email soundoff@lcsun-news.com to submit an item.

Read or Share this story: http://lcsun.co/1TdKiwm