“Donald Trump’s position on health care is that he supports Bernie Sanders-style socialized medicine for everyone,” Ted Cruz said. | Getty Painting him as a liberal, Cruz assails Trump over abortion, 'Trumpcare' He also ups the ante in his efforts to get Trump to debate him.

WEST DES MOINES, Iowa — Ted Cruz accused Donald Trump of embracing “socialized medicine” and accepting partial-birth abortion. He mocked “gentle Donald” for being “frightened” by debate moderators and offered up details for a one-on-one debate. He pushed the term “Trumpcare.”

Scrambling to regain his footing in Iowa after falling behind Trump in another poll, a fiery Cruz unloaded on his closest rival in the state on Wednesday night, packing as many contrasts as he could muster into a 40-minute speech.

Story Continued Below

“Don’t listen to what I say, don’t listen to what Donald says — really, don’t listen to what Donald says, don’t listen to what any of the candidates say,” Cruz said here at a rally full of social conservatives. He continued, “Show me your record. Show me when you’ve walked the walk.”

Cruz proceeded to contrast his record with Trump’s on issue after issue, from health care to abortion to same-sex marriage to the Wall Street bank bailouts, a ratcheting-up of his standard stump speech that reflects his need to retake the momentum from Trump less than a week before the Iowa caucuses.

“Donald Trump’s position on health care is that he supports Bernie Sanders-style socialized medicine for everyone,” Cruz said. “He doesn’t think Obamacare goes far enough, he wants to expand it.”

He went on to add, using a term recently used by a supportive Cruz super PAC, “‘Trumpcare’ is socialized medicine.”

“Donald is entitled to have that view — you might even call that view a New York value,” he said, using one of his favorite critiques of Trump. “As Donald might observe, both he and Bernie Sanders are native New Yorkers. But if you care about Obamacare, there’s a clear difference in opinion.”

He took the same approach — casting Trump’s positions as liberal, and then contrasting with his views — on a wide range of policy debates.

Cruz was aided in his efforts to draw contrasts by a number of socially conservative heavyweights, including prominent activists Tony Perkins and Bob Vander Plaats, as well as Reps. Louie Gohmert of Texas and Steve King of Iowa, and former Texas Gov. Rick Perry, most of whom took, at a minimum, oblique shots at Trump. But Vander Plaats was particularly explicit as he made the case that in Iowa a vote for anyone other than Cruz is a vote for Trump. It’s a message Cruz and his allies have been pushing hard in the final weeks before the caucuses as Trump has continued to lead.

“He made a run at president, going up in the polls, [by] taking on the establishment. Now he says the establishment is warming up to him because it’s all about the ‘art of the deal,’” Vander Plaats said, referencing Trump’s best-known book. “I’m telling you right now, the sanctity of human life is not up for the art of the deal. God’s design for marriage, family, is not up for the art of the deal. Religious liberty is not up for the art of the deal. … Our relationship with the nation of Israel is not up for the art of the deal.”

The crowd, which ate up the Trump criticism, cheered.

Cruz also doubled down on his invitation to have a one-on-one debate with Trump, who is declining to participate in Fox News’ Thursday night contest, saying that he has booked a venue for Saturday night.

“I’m going to propose a venue: Western Iowa Tech in Sioux City. We already have it reserved. Eight p.m. Saturday night, a two-hour, one-on-one debate,” Cruz said. “Now, if gentle Donald cannot handle [Fox News moderator] Megyn Kelly, how about for a moderator instead, Mark Levin?”

The crowd applauded at the reference to the conservative radio host.

“Or if he doesn’t like Mark Levin, how about Sean Hannity? And if he doesn’t like Sean Hannity, how about Rush Limbaugh? And if gentle Donald is frightened by Mark and Sean and Rush, then we’ll have no moderator whatsoever,” Cruz said.

“Yeah, let’s do it!” shouted someone in the crowd.

Cruz offered to let Trump invite half the audience, and said he would invite the other.

But it’s not the moderators that “Donald is afraid of,” he continued. “He’s afraid of you.”

Meanwhile, Keep the Promise, a cluster of super PACs backing Cruz, announced that if Trump accepted Cruz’s debate challenge, the groups would donate $1.5 million to veterans’ groups.