‘This is an atrocity. Clinics wouldn’t be able to handle the influx … They’re stretched to the limit already.’ Patricia Smith state representative, D-Baton Rouge

The controversy is just the latest in a long string of conservative policies on women’s health pushed by Jindal and legislators in Louisiana — both Republican and Democratic. In 2014 a bill that requires that information on the supposed mental health effects of abortion be distributed to women seeking the procedure was passed, along with Jindal-endorsed House Bill 388, which mandates that the state’s five abortion clinics have admitting privileges at a hospital within 30 miles, a requirement that clinic operators say would effectively shut them down. HB388, sponsored by Democrat Katrina Jackson along with 50 co-authors, was modeled in part on the 2013 Texas regulation that has so far shuttered 22 of the 41 clinics there. The Louisiana law, which was written in concert with two anti-abortion organizations, clarifies that existing “informed consent” procedures — including a pamphlet depicting fetal development, an enforced 24-hour waiting period for the patient and information on the long-term risks of an abortion — must be administered to all women seeking the procedure, whether administered surgically or with pharmaceuticals. To date, HB388 has been blocked from implementation by a federal court injunction, and all five of the state’s clinics remain open. But Jessie Nieblas, a co-founder of the New Orleans Abortion Fund, a nonprofit that provides financial assistance for low-income women seeking abortions, said that the law’s passage has nonetheless had an effect on Louisiana’s women. “All of these attacks really do contribute to this culture of stigma and fear around seeking an abortion,” she said. “We’ve seen some people wonder if it’s still legal, wonder if there is going to be violent protesters at the clinics.” Nieblas said that since April 2013, her organization has provided assistance to over 400 women across Louisiana and in neighboring Mississippi. According to survey data collected by the organization, the average age of its aid recipients is 26. About 70 percent already have children, and 1 in 5 is Catholic. “Abortion can’t be separate from other portions of people lives. It’s related to education, income, equal pay, access to primary care … All these other issues go into whether or not someone makes a decision to have an abortion,” she said. A recent study by The Associated Press found that Louisiana was one of only two states where abortions have increased in recent years, rising 12 percent from 2010 to 2014.

Undercutting sex education

Jindal has built a reputation as a staunch promoter of abstinence-only sexual education programs in schools, declaring in-depth discussions about sexual health are best left to families. “There is a religious contingency in this state that says it’s the parents’ responsibility to teach their kids about this stuff,” said Cindy Bishop, a representative of the Louisiana School–based Health Alliance, which receives state grants to provide preventive and mental health care to low-income students. “They’re not doing it, obviously, because the children are getting pregnant and we have very high STD rates.” She said Louisiana laws prevent school-based clinics from distributing or discussing contraception with students under any circumstance. “Even if we have a girl that comes in and says, ‘I’m 15, and I’ve already had two kids. How do I stop from getting pregnant?’ we are not allowed to discuss contraceptives.” Louisiana is one of 27 states that do not mandate any substantive sexual health education in school. But the state provides curriculum support to schools through the Governor’s Abstinence Education Program, which focuses on abstinence until marriage and includes claims that condoms are on average only 85 percent effective against pregnancy. State officials note that local school districts are able to build more comprehensive sex education programs on their own. In reality, though, building more robust programs is difficult at cash- and resource-strapped schools and can still draw political opposition. “Many [teachers and administrators] are not aware of the sex education laws in Louisiana,” said Rheneisha Robertson, the chief operating officer of the Institute of Women and Ethnic Studies, a health education and advocacy nonprofit that teaches HIV- and teen-pregnancy-prevention programs in New Orleans schools. “They are not aware of what can and cannot be taught.” Earlier this year, state Rep. Wesley Bishop, D-New Orleans, proposed two bills that would mandate comprehensive sex education and allow schools to survey students on risky sexual behavior. Even though the measures applied only to schools in New Orleans, the state legislature voted it down. He said that while many Republican representatives admitted in private that they supported his bills, they could not “bring that vote home with them.” But he’s optimistic he can get legislation passed once a new governor comes into office next year, “as opposed to a governor that will put his head in the sand and act like there is no need to treat this,” he said.

Medicaid, private hospitals