LITTLE ROCK — Republican Asa Hutchinson won the Arkansas governor’s race Tuesday, defeating Democrat Mike Ross to put the state’s top office back in Republican hands after Democrat Mike Beebe’s eight years in office.

Republican candidates swept all seven of the state’s constitutional offices in an election that saw the GOP take over as the state’s official majority party.

The second time was the charm for Hutchinson. He ran for governor in 2006 and lost to Beebe, who was prohibited by term limits from running for a third term this year. Hutchinson ran this year on a platform that included pledges to strengthen vocational education, require the teaching of computer science in every high school and cut state income taxes.

“This election is about a new day in Arkansas,” Hutchinson said in a victory speech at a watch party in Little Rock.

“It’s also a new responsibility for the Republican Party that’s had a great victory tonight,” he said. “We need to make sure that we earn the respect and support of the people of Arkansas by governing well, by working hard and acting honorably.”

In a concession speech in Little Rock, Ross urged Arkansans to work together for the state’s future.

“There is much more that unites us than divides us, and we are stronger as a state when every person has a voice and every one of you is heard. So tonight I call upon all Arkansans, no matter your political party or philosophy, to set aside our political differences and put Arkansas first,” he said.

Hutchinson, 63, of Rogers, is a former U.S. attorney for the Western District of Arkansas, 3rd District congressman, administrator of the U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration and undersecretary for the U.S. Department of Homeland Security.

Ross, 53, of Little Rock, is a former Nevada Quorum Court member, state senator and 4th District congressman. He also had a plan to cut state income taxes and pledged to make pre-kindergarten accessible to every 4-year-old in the state and fight to protect the private option, Arkansas’ version of Medicaid expansion.

As of 10:45 p.m., Hutchinson had 55 percent of the vote, Ross had 42 percent, Libertarian Frank Gilbert had 2 percent and Green Party candidate Joshua Drake had 1 percent, according to unofficial and incomplete election results from the secretary of state’s office.

The Republican Governors Association spent $6.2 million on 10 different television ads in the race. The RGA worked to tie Ross to President Barack Obama and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, D-Calif., although Ross was part of the conservative Democratic Blue Dog Coalition in the House and voted against Obama’s signature piece of legislation, the Affordable Care Act.

RGA Chairman and New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie said Tuesday, “The promise of a more competitive, prosperous Arkansas under a strong, principled leader is what drove Asa Hutchinson to a much-deserved victory in this race. Hutchinson will make an excellent governor and work hard to make Arkansas prosperous.”

Races for all seven of Arkansas’ constitutional offices were on Tuesday’s ballot. Early returns suggested a Republican sweep.

In the lieutenant governor’s race, Republican U.S. Rep. Tim Griffin of Little Rock defeated Democrat John Burkhalter of Little Rock to win the office that has been vacant since Feb. 1.

Republican Mark Darr resigned as lieutenant governor after being fined $11,000 for misuse of campaign contributions and public funds.

By 10:45 p.m., Griffin had 56 percent of the vote, Burkhalter had 40 percent and Libertarian Christopher Olson had 4 percent.

In the attorney general’s race, Republican Leslie Rutledge of Little Rock defeated state Rep. Nate Steel, D-Nashville. Term limits prohibited Democratic Attorney General Dustin McDaniel from seeking a third term.

As of 10:45 p.m., Rutledge had 51 percent of the vote, Steel had 44 percent and Libertarian Aaron Cash had 5 percent.

Republican incumbent Secretary of State Mark Martin of Prairie Grove won re-election, defeating Democrat Susan Inman of Little Rock.

Martin had 60 percent of the vote, Inman had 36 percent and Libertarian Jacob Holloway had 4 percent as of 10:45 p.m.

Republican Saline County Clerk Dennis Milligan of Benton won the state treasurer’s race, defeating Democrat Karen Sealy Garcia of Hot Springs.

By 10:45 p.m., Milligan had 56 percent of the vote, Garcia had 38 percent and Libertarian Chris Hayes had 6 percent.

Democrat Martha Shoffner resigned as treasurer in May 2013 after her arrest on public corruption charges. Shoffner was convicted on federal charges of extortion and bribery in March and is awaiting sentencing.

Republican state Rep. Andrea Lea, R-Russellville, won the state auditor’s race, defeating Democrat Regina Hampton of Little Rock.

As of 10:45 p.m., Lea had 56 percent of the vote, Hampton had 38 percent and Libertarian Brian Leach had 5 percent. Auditor Charlie Daniels is retiring.

Republican Land Commissioner John Thurston of Little Rock won re-election, defeating Democrat Mark Robertson of Little Rock.

Thurston had 56 percent of the vote, Robertson had 38 percent and Libertarian Elvis D. Presley had 6 percent by 10:45 p.m. The percentages add up to more than 100 because of rounding.

The party that controls a majority of Arkansas’ constitutional offices is considered the state’s majority party and gets two of the three seats on each of the state’s 75 county election commissions.