Welcome to Overnight Regulation, your daily rundown of news from Capitol Hill and beyond. It's Tuesday evening here in Washington. Sleep tight. Don't let the bed bugs bite. Here's the latest.

THE BIG STORY

The Obama administration will consider evicting tens of thousands of public housing residents who earn too much money to qualify for government assistance.

The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) announced Tuesday an effort to root out these "over-income" tenants who are living in government-assisted homes that could be used to help even poorer families. http://bit.ly/1PxuwMe

ADVERTISEMENT

"Some of those families significantly exceeded the income limits," HUD wrote in the Federal Register, warning that "scarce public resources must be provided to those most in need of affordable housing."

Currently, federal law does not prohibit over-income families from continuing to live in government-assisted homes, as long as they met the income requirements when they moved in.

HUD released an advanced notice of proposed rulemaking Tuesday seeking public comment on what to do with over-income tenants.

This stems from a July 2015 inspector's general report that found as many as 25,226 over-income families are living in public housing facilities even though they are not eligible for government assistance.

Many of these families were eligible when they moved in, but as their incomes have grown they no longer need the housing benefits, the agency noted.

HUD is grappling with whether to evict the over-income tenants, and how long to give them to find new homes. The agency wants to make public housing units available to those families who are most in need, but it also urged caution against evicting tenants who enjoy a "minimal or temporary rise in income."

"An increase in income is a good and welcomed event for families, and when a family's income steadily rises, it may be an indication that the family is on its way to self-sufficiency," HUD wrote.

"Any changes that would require the termination of tenancy for over-income families should be enacted with caution so as not to impede a family's progress," the agency continued.

ON TAP FOR WEDNESDAY

The Senate Judiciary Committee will hold a hearing to discuss the need for transparency and accountability in asbestos trust funds. http://1.usa.gov/1nZSXaQ

The Senate Environment and Public Works Committee will hold a hearing to examine the Stream Protection Rule and the impact it has on the environment. http://1.usa.gov/1Pb6NxY

The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee will hold a hearing to examine the federal administration of the Safe Drinking Water Act in Flint, Mich., following the water crisis there. http://1.usa.gov/1Ko8pHP

The House Agriculture Subcommittee on Nutrition will hold a hearing to review incentive programs, which aim to increase low-income families' ability to purchase fruits and vegetables. http://1.usa.gov/1Pxlter

TOMORROW'S REGS TODAY

The Obama administration will publish 208 new regulations, proposed rules, notices and other administrative actions in Wednesday's edition of the Federal Register.

--The Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) will consider new rules that would root out "over-income" tenants in government-assisted housing projects.

HUD is concerned that tens of thousands of families living in public housing are not eligible for those government benefits, because they make too much money. They may have qualified originally, but as their income increased they failed to report it.

The advanced notice of proposed rulemaking comes in response to a report from HUD's inspector general that found 25,226 families are living in public housing even though they are ineligible.

"Some of those families significantly exceeded the income limits," the agency noted.

The public has 30 days to comment. http://bit.ly/1UHi24X

--The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) will propose new animal welfare regulations.

The USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) will propose new procedures for handling dolphins in captivity. The rules will address the "humane handling, care, treatment, and transportation" of these marine mammals.

The public has 60 days to comment. http://bit.ly/1VIlRqG

--The Federal Communications Commission (FCC) will issue new rules for utility poles.

The rules will affect cable and telecommunications service providers that pay a fee to the owners of utility poles they use.

The new rules go into effect on April 1. http://bit.ly/1X15arV

--The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) will update a list of agricultural colleges and universities serving Hispanic communities that are eligible for government assistance.

The changes went into effect on Oct. 1, 2015. http://bit.ly/1Qaotti

NEWS RIGHT NOW

Construction company to pay $1.8M for illegal federal contracts http://bit.ly/1nEcsoT

Feds might crack down on swim-with-dolphin programs http://bit.ly/1PeoA7h

Group urges EPA to protect waterways from pesticides http://bit.ly/1SWkpD8

GOP lawmaker proposes blocking food stamps for terrorists http://bit.ly/1PT26P3

OPM opens additional, but limited insurance enrollment for Feds - The Washington Post http://wapo.st/1VsxL7R

Supreme Court ruling has Florida scrambling to fix death penalty law - The New York Times http://nyti.ms/1QFpVH0

FBI joins broad criminal probe into Flint's contaminated water - The Wall Street Journal http://on.wsj.com/1P3XcLx

BY THE NUMBERS

25,226: Number of families living in low-income housing even though they make too much money to qualify for government assistance.

(Source: HUD inspector general).

TWEET OF THE DAY

"Happy #GroundhogDay. Let's hope we're not stuck in an endless loop of voting to repeal the ACA [Affordable Care Act]. Oh wait..." Sen. John Larson (D-Conn.) tweeted along with a clip from the movie "Groundhog Day" with Bill Murray.

House Republicans on Tuesday evening are voting to override President Obama's veto of a bill to repeal much of ObamaCare.

We'll work to stay on top of these and other stories throughout the week, so check The Hill's Regulation page (http://thehill.com/regulation) early and often for the latest. And send any comments, complaints or regulatory news tips our way, tdevaney@thehill.com or lwheeler@thehill.com. And follow us at @timdevaney and @wheelerlydia.

Click here to sign up for the newsletter: http://bit.ly/1pc6tau