A new study released yesterday by the Texas Policy Evaluation Project (TxPEP) of the University of Texas has found that 34 percent of unintended pregnancies that occur within two years of a woman giving birth take place because of barriers women face in accessing their preferred method of contraception. This year 67 percent of Texas women studied reported experiencing barriers to contraception access; only 12 percent of women reported facing no barriers.

Furthermore, 95 percent of women who had unintended pregnancies had expressed interested in long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs), like intrauterine devices (IUDs) and other implants, as well as sterilization, before they got pregnant.

On January 1 of this year, Texas implemented a change to the state's Medicaid policy, providing reimbursement for LARC insertion in hospitals immediately following a delivery.

According to the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG), the immediate postpartum period is a particularly favorable time for IUD or implant insertion as "women who have recently given birth are often highly motivated to use contraception, they are known not to be pregnant, and the hospital setting offers convenience for both the patient and the health care provider."

Additionally, ACOG notes, women are at risk of an unintended pregnancy in the period immediately after delivery: In a study in which women were instructed to abstain from sexual intercourse until 6 weeks postpartum, 45 percent of participants reported unprotected sex before that time.

ACOG recommends that physicians provide LARCs the same day as requested, whenever possible, if pregnancy can be reasonably excluded; offer LARC methods at time of delivery, abortion, or dilation and curettage for miscarriage; screen for sexually transmitted infections at the time of IUD insertion (and if the screening test result is positive, treat the infection without removal of the IUD); and offer the copper IUD as he most effective method of emergency contraception. These recommendations are all suggested as practices by the Centers for Disease Control (CDC) as well.

Furthermore, ACOG encourages ob-gyns to advocate for coverage and appropriate payment and reimbursement for every contraceptive method by all payers in medically appropriate circumstances; under the Affordable Care Act, most insurance plans cover all contraceptives, including LARCs, at no cost and Title X providers may be able to offer them at low or no costs to applicable patients as well.

In a statement, Dr. Amy Young, Chair of the Department of Women's Health at the University of Texas at Austin, said, "This study demonstrates that increasing access to IUDs, implants, and sterilization for women who want these options can prevent unintended pregnancy in the two years following delivery. Texas is now in a better position to make access to highly effective contraception a reality than it was in 2012 and 2013. But much remains to be done operationally and fiscally so that hospitals and clinics can actually meet the large demand for these methods."