MARSHALL — An appeals court this week reversed a district court's decision to exempt East Texas Baptist University from including emergency contraceptives in its insurance plan.

A group representing the university said Tuesday that it might appeal that decision.

The 5th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals in New Orleans issued a ruling against ETBU and several other schools that had filed a lawsuit against the federal government's Affordable Care Act.

The schools were required under the act to provide insurance coverage that included emergency contraceptives, but they charged it violated their religious beliefs, citing the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.

The three appeals court judges disagreed, saying there was no proven substantial burden to their religious beliefs.

"The acts the plaintiffs are required to perform do not involve providing or facilitating access to contraceptives," the court's opinion, issued Monday, reads.

"Because the plaintiffs have not shown that the regulations substantially burden their religious exercise ..."

ETBU spokesman Mike Midkiff deferred comment to the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty, which represented the schools in the lawsuit.

"We think the panel got the law and the facts wrong today," said Eric Rassbach, who serves as deputy general counsel at the Becket Fund for Religious Liberty and counsel to ETBU and Houston Baptist University, which also is part of the lawsuit.

"We are examining the decision with a view to next steps, which may include an appeal to the full 5th Circuit or to the Supreme Court."

The Becket Fund for Religious Liberty is a nonprofit public interest group that served as lead counsel for the lawsuit.

ETBU does not provide employees with emergency contraceptives; however, it provides preconception birth control.

Former ETBU President Samuel "Dub" Oliver previously said the university finds no fault with most of the health care mandate, but requiring employers to provide emergency contraceptives, such as Plan-B and Ella, crossed the line for the university.

The U.S. District Court for the Southern District of Texas in Houston ruled in the schools' favor Dec. 27.