Google Executive Chairman Eric Schmidt used an appearance on NPR on Monday to announce his company was cutting ties with the American Legislative Exchange Council, a conservative organization composed of private companies and state legislators, over the group’s position on “climate change.”

“Everyone understands climate change is occurring, and the people who oppose it are really hurting our children and our grandchildren and making the world a much worse place," Schmidt told NPR’s Diane Rehm. "And so we should not be aligned with such people – they're just, they're just literally lying.”

As Schmidt might find out to his misfortune, “literally lying” may turn out to be a defamatory, even libelous, claim. There are plenty of people who believe the productive activities of mankind have affected the planet’s mean temperature, and there are a number of scientists who either say it hasn’t, that the evidence is still out or, even if it has, that the consequences are negligible. The debate, despite what President Barack Obama, former Vice President Al Gore and others have repeatedly alleged, is far from over.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on Energy Policy]

Lisa Nelson, the council's CEO, responded to the news in the statement by calling the decision “unfortunate” that “public pressure from left-leaning individuals and organizations who intentionally confuse free market policy perspectives for climate change denial” could produce such a result.

It’s true the group has been in the left’s crosshairs for some time. Indeed, the left has been applying backroom pressure to convince the council's corporate partners they will be subject to boycotts, smear campaigns and other public pressure tactics unless they disassociate themselves from the council. This, of course, is the real dark side of American politics – all of which is funded by the real “dark money” that threatens to corrupt the political system and infringe on the constitutional safeguards concerning speech, freedom of thought, freedom of association and the right to petition the government for redress of grievances.

The point that few people are making about Schmidt’s decision, which is apparently tied to the the council's skeptical attitude toward taxpayer subsidies for renewable energy projects, is that Google is an energy hog.

[SEE: Cartoons on President Obama]

It takes a lot of electricity to power the company’s server farms. It takes even more to keep them cool so the circuits don’t overheat and fry. Climate control is an expensive line item, energy-wise. Google has a vested interest, which Schmidt apparently doesn’t feel the need to mention, in having taxpayers fund research into making wind and solar power cheaper and more efficient. And here’s the important part: able to meet baseload power needs to the same degree that only the current traditional energy triad can manage.

If this can’t be achieved, while at the same time federal and state governments continue to mandate that the energy mix include increasingly larger proportions of electricity made from so-called renewable sources, then power is going to become very, very expensive.

The council's position on the issue is not as draconian as Schmidt made it out to be. “ALEC believes renewable energy should expand based on consumer demand,” Nelson said in a statement, “not as a result of a government mandate.”

“Many misunderstand the American Legislative Exchange Council and its legislator-led, free market priorities. ALEC members believe the Federal Government exerts too much control on state and local decision-making. Google’s renewable energy commitment – as well as those found throughout private industry – is completely consistent with ALEC policy because the companies in question chose renewables absent a mandate,” she said.

[GALLERY: Cartoons on the Economy]

It’s interesting that so many were so readily willing to accept Schmidt's apology for Google's relationship with the group in the first place, a move he called a “mistake” in his interview with NPR. Sierra Club Executive Director Michael Brune described the decision to the Los Angeles Times in this way: “I think maybe the left hand was not aware of what the right hand was doing.” Is Brune saying obliquely that the left has veto power over the activities undertaken by corporate America in promotion of its own interests and bottom line? It seems that maybe he is.

What’s really going on is that there is a concerted effort underway involving government-funded researchers, the academy, corporate insiders, some politicians, parts of the media and left-wing pressure groups to silence anyone who dares to suggest that global warming may be not actually be happening, at least not in the ways the conventional wisdom currently dictates. It is true that someone may not be telling the truth, but it is at least as likely that it is the proponents of the idea as it is the skeptics. The proponents of global warming orthodoxy want to isolate their opponents, making it easier to pick them off and shut them up, one by one. To them, conservative ideas – ideas grounded in a belief in the free market – are not just wrong but in fact dangerous. As such, they believe they are justified in preventing these ideas from being disseminated or exchanged among policymakers. There’s a lot more to this incident and to the whole story than people are telling.





Clarified on Sept. 24, 2014: Clarification: An earlier version of this blog post described the American Legislative Exchange Council as a lobbying group.