When Louisiana State University surveyed students in 2009 to find out what they most wanted in their new recreation complex, one feature beat out even massage therapy: a lazy river.

But with dozens of schools building the water rides, the university had to do one better: When its lazy river is finished in 2016, it will spell out the letters “LSU” in the school’s signature Geaux font.

In the university recreation center arms race, the latest thing is to turn a piece of campus into something approaching a water theme park.

At Auburn University in Alabama, for example, students can soak in a 45-person paw-print-shaped hot tub or scale a 20-foot wet climbing wall before plunging into the pool.

Designs for North Dakota State’s facility, on which construction is scheduled to begin next year, include a zip line that students can ride out over the water, a 36-foot-diameter vortex of swirling water and a recessed fireplace on an island in the middle of the pool that students can swim up to. A small “rain garden” is planned to mist lounging students.

Meanwhile, a company called the Aquatic Development Group, a purveyor of pool climbing walls, has installed a $1 million wave rider at Pensacola Christian College in Florida and is working with six other schools.

“A lot of students don’t want to swim laps, but a leisure pool is a great equalizer: I can get my toes wet, I can play, I can study or I can go full in,” said Jack Patton, who leads the sports-facilities group at RDG Planning and Design, an architecture firm in Des Moines, Iowa.

The focus on pools for play comes with a shift in university rec centers from just places to sweat to more social spaces, complete with hangout areas.

Laurie Braden, LSU’s director of recreation, said today’s students are more sophisticated about health and well-being.

“Students — I don’t know if demand is the right word — but certainly they expect that the amenities to help them have a balanced life will be in place.”

With college costs climbing and outstanding student loan debt at a record $1.2 trillion, schools justify these facilities as important for recruitment and retention.

Administrators also like to point to studies conducted at Purdue University and Michigan State, which have shown that students who hit the gym do better academically than those who don’t. Floating down a river is not exactly a major calorie burn, but that’s not the point.

“When you think about our sedentary lifestyle today, if you can get some kid out on a zip line instead of playing video games and eating pizza, that’s a huge win,” said David Greusel of Convergence Design, whose projects have included a water slide at the University of Toledo.