Sioux Falls, SD

It's been a long road home for Private First Class Lawrence Gordon. The World War Two Veteran lost his life during the war, but his family never got to bury him, until now. Gordon is being brought home to Canada, but it's been a difficult process for his loved ones.

Lawrence Gordon enlisted in the United States Army after Pearl Harbor was bombed. He lost his life in Normandy nearly 70 years ago.

"I'm sad that he's not here or that he didn't get a chance to live a full life," Jed Henry said.

His body wasn't found and Gordon's family spent a lifetime without properly saying goodbye. Gordon's nephew, who bears his name, asked the United States Government to find his uncle's body. He was told Gordon was buried at the Brittany American Cemetery in France.

"I went there expecting to visit his grave, and when I got there they said 'Sorry there's no grave, his name's on the wall of the missing,' and that's the first time I knew he was missing in action," Lawrence Gordon said.

He didn't know how to find his missing family member. Jed Henry learned about Gordon's story while researching his grandfather, who served in the same unit. They met and started finding out ways to help bring Gordon across the Atlantic, but they say they were met with resistance, especially from the United States government.

"I believed up until a couple years ago that as a country we're committed to leaving no man behind. I don't think it's ever been an honorable mission. I think it's just been something we say we do but it doesn't seem like we're interested in doing that good of a job," Henry said.

Through hard work, paperwork and support from the French and German governments, Gordon is finally able to come home. Now his body is being brought across the country, making various stops along the way. It's a victory tour, but also to show what they feel is a flawed system in the United States government.

While in Sioux Falls, Gordon and Henry met with Malcolm "Butch" Haugen, the Commander of VFW Post 628

"I would want closure. I would want to know where my loved one is and to get them back here for those families is their closure. Until then, they will never have it," Malcolm Haugen said.

That's why Gordon's loved ones hope the 70 year road back home can help other families roads be a little bit smoother.

Today Gordon's body was brought to Rapid City. The trip will end with him being brought to Canada on August 11th, and he will be buried in his hometown in Saskatchewan on August 13.