Is Bud Pierce the kind of Oregon Republican who can win a statewide election?

The gubernatorial candidate and his campaign staff made their first trip to Umatilla County last week and met with the East Oregonian editorial board.

During the short sit-down, there was no mention of the social issues that have hampered Republicans in this state for decades: gay marriage and abortion most notably. Both are reliable election losers in this state.

“The party needs new messengers and new messages,” he said, frankly.

As a practicing cancer doctor, he actually said something nice about Obamacare. For years he raised millions of dollars to help pay medical care for the uninsured, and he is happy that he no longer has to do that.

So what makes this guy a Republican?

Well, for one thing, he talked about his displeasure with Democratic-controlled Oregon state government. He thinks it needs to run much better — not necessarily smaller, just smoother — if the state is going to grow and prosper. He said state workers are a talented lot, but their hands are tied by moribund bureaucracy, managers that don’t want to make a waves and an atmosphere where imagination and excellence are so far out of the norm as to be unwelcome.

He said rural Oregon has been forgotten in the Valley-dominated statehouse.

And that shows in economic and population declines in much of Oregon, outside of the main population centers. Pierce said he would incentivize the movement of people and resources to rural areas. No, Eastern Oregon doesn’t have to be an urban center, put it has to attract enough people to make businesses profitable. And it has to have enough economic variety to keep the best and brightest from fleeing to metropolitan lights. He spoke of the need to support airplane subsidies in rural areas, like Pendleton. He called a significant statewide minimum wage hike an undue burden on economically depressed areas. He said Portland wouldn’t stand for valuable, empty high rise buildings that occasionally burned and endangered the town. That’s what rural Oregon has to deal with as our forests become more unhealthy and temperatures increase.

And the Republican he bases his politics on? No, he didn’t mention Ronald Reagan. Instead, it was Abraham Lincoln.

Pierce was short on details and heavy on generalities. But that’s how you begin to introduce yourself to voters, and let both sides drill down into specifics as a long and arduous campaign moves along.

Clearly, it’s going to take a new kind of GOP candidate to have success in Oregon — a state, remember, whose most beloved politicians have been out-of-the-mold Republicans. We’re not comparing Pierce to a Hatfield or McCall, but we notice he comes from their tradition rather than the more modern, defiant, intransigent and losing one.

Pierce has his work cut out for him just to win the GOP nomination, much less unseat probable Democratic nominee Kate Brown. But when a candidate so clearly has a focus on rural Oregon, it’s hard not to hope they stay in the game for a long time and have a significant impact on the race.