How a HAC Prevention Investment Saved $5.3 Million

By implementing new programs and stepping up enforcement of hospital-acquired condition prevention efforts, Cleveland's MetroHealth System saved approximately $5.3 million in medical costs between 2011 and 2014.

It's long been considered good clinical practice for hospital staff to wash their hands before and after coming into contact with patients and their surroundings, but now there is a financial incentive as well.

As part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program went into effect for fiscal year 2015. Hospitals that rank in the quartile of hospitals with the highest total HAC scores will have their CMS payments reduced by 1%.

Add that to CMS' readmissions penalties, and senior healthcare leaders now have plenty of motivation to find strategies to prevent the spread of infections within their organizations.

A Focus on Hand Washing

Cleveland-based MetroHealth System, a safety-net provider with 731 licensed beds and $905 million in fiscal year 2014 operating revenue, has been focusing intensively on hand hygiene since 2010, says Alfred Connors, MD, the system's executive vice president and chief medical officer.

The need for more vigilance became clear when a bacterial infection spread from one patient room to the next, Connors says. The patient in the second room had been transferred from another hospital where tests had shown he did not have the bacteria.

1 in 5 Eligible Hospitals Penalized for HACs

"Four days later, he was sick with a bloodstream infection that was the same bacteria as the patient in the next room, even though we had supposedly put him in isolation. It was clear that our processes for protecting him didn't protect him," Connors says.

The patient ultimately died, and while it is not clear that the death was caused by the infection, it nonetheless spurred MetroHealth into action.

"I reported it to our CEO and to the board as a possible bad outcome due to a quality issue. They were highly motivated and very clear with me about how much they wanted me to fix this problem and how unhappy they would be with me if I didn't," Connors says.

"We decided to make the hospital safer. If someone comes in and doesn't have an infection and gets one here, then that is because we didn't protect them effectively. We didn't isolate someone else who had an infection or we didn't keep an infection from coming in on the doctor's hands."