NYE revellers party hard in Edinburgh Gardens 0:15 Play video Paramedics had to treat 20 people during a NYE party at the Edinburgh Gardens in Fitzroy.

A SYDNEY real estate agent has been identified as the man behind a New Year's Eve party that spiralled out of control, trashing a park in North Fitzroy and leaving a man with serious facial injuries.

Police have vowed to crack down on New Year's Eve dance parties in Edinburgh Gardens after the event got out of hand on Tuesday.

But the party organiser, Hugh Gilbert, said he didn't witness any kind of strife on the night when at least 15,000 revellers descended on the park.

"I didn't see any trouble with the police. It must have happened after I left,'' the Sydney real estate agent said.

"It was a great night."

Partygoers left a sea of rubbish behind and Yarra Council faces a $30,000 clean-up bill.

One man was knocked unconscious and suffered facial fractures when he was punched in the face.

The Noble Park man, 31, was partying on the northern side of the park when he noticed a scuffle and was approached by another man and attacked.

The offender - a thin man in his early 20s with black hair - disappeared into the crowd.

The victim, who lost several teeth in the attack, is awaiting surgery at St Vincent's Hospital.

Police had only deployed 12 officers to patrol the park, despite warning signs on social media of a large crowd and a similar-sized party last year.

They struggled to contain the wild party and it was not until extra police flooded the park in the early hours of the morning that they were able to close down the "illegal dance parties" and disperse the crowd.

But by then 20 people had been treated for serious cuts from glass on the ground and intoxication, and the council tennis courts had been vandalised.

Gilbert said it was the second time he had promoted the event on social media.

But so great was the paramedics' workload they were forced to set up a makeshift triage centre at the edge of the park were they treated people for serious cuts from the glass on the ground and intoxication.

Ambulance Victoria operation manager Paul Holman slammed the Edinburgh Gardens partygoers for tying up resources with "self-inflicted wounds".

One female police officer was allegedly punched in the face at the park. A 17-year-old boy was arrested and is assisting police with their inquiries.

Victoria Police deputy commissioner Tim Cartwright admitted police had learnt from the trouble at Edinburgh Gardens and would work closely with council to increase infrastructure next year.

"We did have a police contingent there but all I can say is that we have learnt and if there is an event there next year it will be much better controlled," he said.

"We will be working very hard with council to make sure that happens."

Rubbish littered the gardens yesterday morning, with Yarra councillor Roberto Colanzi tweeting several photos of the carnage.

He tweeted: "Edinburgh Gardens a sea of crap this am".

Victoria police also criticised the lack of organisation from Yarra Council on the night.

But Yarra Council Mayor Jackie Fristacky said many residents' had told her there was a "good atmosphere" and it was "great night".

"It is just a shame that there was so much litter," she said.

She said the council's response needed to better control the crowds while still ensuring people were able to enjoy the night.

More than half-a-million revellers made their way to central Melbourne to enjoy the fireworks.

But with the huge party came a huge amount of rubbish: 12 tonnes were collected on the night with Melbourne City Council estimating the clean-up bill at $212,000.

A police officer was bit on the shoulder as he responded to reports of an affray at Hosier Lane. Police arrested 23 people in the CBD.