McLemore has been charged with one count of accessory after the fact for his involvement in the murder of JaRay Wilson.

Wilson went missing in October, 2012. In December 2013, her remains were found buried in a shallow grave about two miles north of Weatherford.

A charge has been filed on Friday against a man who reportedly helped the suspect accused of shooting and killing Weatherford teenager JaRay Wilson.



Nineteen-year-old Caleb McLemore was arraigned Friday morning. According to court documents released on Friday, McLemore has been charged with one count of accessory after the fact for his involvement in the murder of JaRay Wilson.

5/22/2014 Related Story: 2 More Suspects In JaRay Wilson Murder To Turn Themselves In

Wilson went missing in October, 2012. In December 2013, her remains were found buried in a shallow grave about two miles north of Weatherford.

5/14/2014 Related Story: Medical Examiner Releases Autopsy Report For JaRay Wilson

The Oklahoma Bureau of Narcotics received a tip that led them to the remains. That same informant also led police to a suspect in the case, 19-year-old Tucker McGee. McGee has been arrested and charged with first-degree murder.

On December 17, 2013, investigators spoke with McLemore at the Elk City Police Department. McLemore originally denied knowing anything about the disappearance and murder of Wilson. He later decided to cooperate with authorities, and told them that on or around October 14, 2012, the day Wilson was murdered, he received a phone call from McGee.

McGee reportedly asked McLemore to pick him up at the "marijuana field," a field north of Weatherford where wild marijuana is commonly grown. McLemore agreed and picked McGee up. McGee then told McLemore that he killed JaRay Wilson by shooting her in the head.

McLemore said he agreed to meet with McGee and the informant the next day to bury Wilson's body. McLemore admitted to driving McGee to the field where Wilson's body was found.

According to court documents, McLemore knew that McGee had hidden the pistol used to kill Wilson in his computer tower, and he encouraged McGee to get rid of the gun. As of May 21, 2014, authorities said they have not located the weapon.

McGee, McLemore and the informant who helped police locate Wilson's body, agreed not to tell anyone about the murder.

A juvenile suspect was also arraigned Friday morning during a closed juvenile hearing. No further details about that hearing are available at this time.



News 9 Reporter Chris McKinnon is following this story. Stay with News 9 and News9.com for updates.