Join the debate. What do you think of the ESL increase? Leave a comment below.

THE CASE FOR

TOM KOUTSANTONIS

THE State Government will immediately return the discounts to the Emergency Services Levy if Tony Abbott overturns the $898 million cuts over four years to South Australia.

Tony Abbott is failing South Australia. He is letting Holden close its doors in 2017, he is planning to have our submarines built in Japan instead of South Australia and he is ripping up agreements to fund our hospitals and schools.

Tony Abbott thinks he can sit in his ivory tower in Canberra and expect there to be no consequences. But there are.

The direct cause and only reason for an increase to your Emergency Services Levy is because Tony Abbott cut $898 million over the next four years from health and education in South Australia.

Tony Abbott’s cruel cuts to health alone are the equivalent of closing an entire hospital, removing 600 beds from the system or doubling elective surgery waiting times. These cuts are unsustainable.

These cuts were delivered just a few weeks before the South Australian State Budget was due to be finalised.

It meant the State Government was forced to make difficult choices in a very short space of time.

To cover just half of Tony Abbott’s cuts to health we removed the general remission (discount) that we provided on the Emergency Services Levy and directed that funding (approximately $90 million per year) to our health system.

It is not something we wanted to do but that we had to do if we are to continue to keep our hospitals open.

By removing the discounts, taxpayers are now paying the full amount of the Emergency Services Levy. Every dollar people pay on their Emergency Services Levy goes to emergency services organisations that keep our communities safe.

The Emergency Services Levy, introduced by the Liberal Party, was the fairest, most equitable option we had to address the cuts imposed on South Australia.

We wish we could protect all South Australians from Tony Abbott’s cuts. We have ensured our most vulnerable are protected - with pensioners and concession card holders receiving no increase on their Emergency Services Levy.

But the discounts on the Emergency Services Levy can be returned immediately.

Join our campaign Federal Cuts Hurt at federalcutshurt.com.au and help us fight Tony Abbott’s cuts.

If Tony Abbott overturns his $898 million cuts to South Australia, we will return the discounts to the Emergency Services Levy.

Tom Koutsantonis is Treasurer of South Australia

-------------------------------------------------------

THE CASE AGAINST

STEVEN MARSHALL

HOUSEHOLDS and businesses across the state have slowly been receiving their Emergency Services Levy bill over recent weeks. It’s fair to say almost everyone has been shocked by the massive increases.

Some bills have increased by over one thousand per cent. Charities, schools, multicultural groups, farmers and homeowners have all been slugged.

And Labor said nothing about this before the last election. The people of South Australia have been deceived on a massive scale by this Labor Government.

You could be forgiven for thinking that these increases will provide more money for emergency services in South Australia.

But they won’t be getting a single cent from these hikes. The extra money Labor are gouging from us won’t buy a single new fire engine or employ any additional emergency personnel.

Perhaps the deepest cut of all is that while Labor have ratcheted up the ESL, they continue to deny CFS volunteers the same cancer compensation that is provided the paid fire fighters.

Labor’s increase in the ESL will reap them about $90 million extra per year, while last year’s budget deficit was the largest in the state’s history.

They can’t manage the State budget, so they’re slugging the household budget.

Jay Weatherill and Tom Koutsantonis have tried to con South Australians that these increases are somehow connected to the Federal Budget.

The simple fact is that every other state in Australia has the same federal budget, and none of them have jacked up taxes because of it.

Weatherill and Koutsantonis have to stop the whinging and take responsibility for their economic vandalism of the South Australian economy.

At the last election, we promised no new taxes and had a plan to reduce the tax burden on South Australians.

We would never have done what Labor have and increased the ESL. If Geoff Brock and Martin Hamilton-Smith switched their support tomorrow, we would immediately reverse these increases.

We need to focus on creating jobs in South Australia and helping families with rising cost of living pressures. We need to make sure our next generation stays in South Australia and that this state has the opportunities to attract the best and the brightest to make their future here.

Labor’s increase to the ESL simply does the opposite of that.

Steven Marshall is leader of the State Opposition

------------------------------------------------------------------------------

ROGER FLAVELL

The Emergency Services Levy has gone up by 1000 per cent or more in places and made people very unhappy. They want the Government to understand it is unacceptable.

In metro area it has gone up by 100 per cent. The further you are from the city the more it has gone up.

Volunteers right across the state are very angry regarding the levy and (emergency services) sector reform (proposal announced last month). It is causing considerable angst

It appears to volunteers and farmers that Government is just not listening to what they are being told. It’s time the Government stopped and thought about where its food comes from.

It is a concern for the CFS. We rely heavily on farmers in those country areas.

Farmers and their fire units are extremely important to get on top of fires early, often before fire trucks get there.

A lot of farmers are saying where they used to go 10km, if this is the way the Government is going to treat us perhaps we will just do our place and the neighbours and the rest will have to look after themselves.

The big worry is if they can’t assist as much in the future it will put a high load back on to volunteers and the incidents will get larger before they get to them.

The rural sector has been really struggling for a long time and one day people will just say how do we keep going.

There will come a time when it gets too hard for volunteers and it (emergency services response) will need to be handed over to paid people.

Roger Flavell is the president of the CFS Volunteers Association

---------------------------------------

IAN YATES

The problem is how quick the rise is coming in and the proportion of it.

It’s a very large increase at very short notice which makes it hard for people like self-funded retirees who have a fixed income to adjust their budgets to absorb the shortfall.

The changes in Federal Government funds could have been spread across other measures rather than being lumped into the ESL.

And people are confused because the Commonwealth cuts were in health and education but the ESL is meant to fund the emergency services.

The ESL was always an odd way of taking taxes because it had all of the different subsides and the effect of taking them away has is being felt most strongly by average families and farmers.

Ian Yates is chief executive of the SA Council for the Ageing.

---------------------------------------------------------

MARGARET KOHLHAGEN

The government needs to realise that they are putting private landlords out of business because some of them will end up selling because they won’t be able to make ends meet, between their mortgages, council rates, emergency services levies, management fees, etc, it will send a lot of private landlords to the wall financially.

When you look at a lot of landlords, they are picking up tenants that the Housing Trust are no longer housing, they are no longer able to provide affordable rent to them if the government continues to increase our fees.

Any landlord that is going to incur a massive increase, at the end of the day it will be the consumer that is going to have to pay, the consumer here is the landlord who will pass it on to the tenant.

It’s going to have an impact on rentals - it may not be imminent - but you will see it when leases are being renewed. I’d say rents would go up by a minimum $10 or $20 a week.

Margarat Kohlhagen is Landlords Association of SA president