So a billionaire, an evangelical minister and a corporate raider walk onto the CU campus in Boulder.

Wait — you think this is a joke?

Wednesday night’s GOP presidential debate — featuring the caricatures of Donald Trump, Mike Huckabee and Carly Fiorina — is taking place at the University of Colorado because apparently Republicans don’t know much about Boulder.

So maybe it is a joke.

At least we should be amused by the warm welcome sure to come from the denizens of the People’s Republic of Boulder, one of the nation’s great bastions of liberalism and philosophical veganism.

The debate, which will center on economic topics, is sure to be a hit with the hundreds of protesters expected to gather outside the Coors Events Center.

The one smart thing the organizers have done is to limit the number of tickets for students to a mere 100 in the 11,000-seat arena, reserving the rest for party operatives, campaign officials, donors and television crews — all of whom are less likely (but not guaranteed) to laugh outright at the candidates or heckle them derisively.

You’ve got front-runner Trump, the blustery billionaire who represents, well, pretty much everything that Boulderites abhor: greed, xenophobia, vile braggadocio and bad hair. His idea of bolstering the standing of lower- and middle-class Americans is pretty much to call them losers for not being billionaires.

There’s former Arkansas Gov. Huckabee, a Southern Baptist minister who once argued that Jesus would oppose the minimum wage. Really.

And Fiorina practically ran HP into the ground under her leadership, tanking its stock and axing hundreds of workers after her catastrophic acquisition of Compaq. Yet she improbably runs on her self-proclaimed business acumen.

Then there’s the struggling former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, whose motto seems to be “just like my brother, only worse,” and who wants to — get this — cut taxes on the rich. Again.

Of course, he’s not unique in backing what U.S. News & World Report described as the GOP’s “unwavering fealty to trickle-down economics,” the theory that tax cuts for the rich and deregulation of businesses encourages the wealthy to invest and create more jobs.

Every Republican candidate clings to what critics originally called “voodoo economics” back when Ronald Reagan advocated it, and it since has been discredited by every serious economist. Research released this summer by the International Monetary Fund confirmed that instead of encouraging “job creators,” trickle-down economics only widens the income disparity between rich and poor and actually slows economic growth.

On the other hand, when poor people make more money, the economy as a whole grows, according to research covering 159 countries. It makes sense: When rich people have more money, they hoard it and count their dividends; when poor people have more money, they spend it on goods and services. It’s why Henry Ford famously paid his assembly-line workers enough to afford the cars they were building; it was good for business.

Yet on Wednesday, the GOP debate will include the voice of Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky – who has proposed a flat tax that would completely flip the decades-old progressive tax pyramid in which the wealthiest pay the highest rates – and Sen. Marco Rubio of Florida, who would eliminate taxes on capital gains and dividends, which almost exclusively benefit the wealthy.

Not a single one of them – and not even Jesus, according to Huckabee – supports raising the minimum wage. Every one of them would repeal Obamacare, despite its success in keeping people out of medical bankruptcy. And every Republican candidate views poor people merely as moochers and welfare queens who only want free stuff from Democrats rather than, you know, decent-paying jobs.

Of course, outside the sanctuary of the CU arena, none of this will play well in Boulder, where everyone from the ivory-tower professors to the semi-homeless buskers on the Pearl Street Mall recognize that until Republicans abandon trickle-down economics, they no longer can claim to be fiscally conservative — nor responsible.

And that’s no joke.

Steve Lipsher (slipsher@comcast. net) of Silverthorne writes a monthly column. A longer version of this essay is at denverpost.com/opinion.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.