Ellie Libby, 71, has been packed for months, knowing she will have to move out of her apartment on South Ridge Place in Longmont after her rent was raised. She has finally found an open unit at the Quail Village Apartment complex that will accept her Section 8 voucher. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

Ellie Libby, 71, is moving.

After four-and-a-half months of searching, she has finally found an open apartment unit that will accept her Section 8 voucher.

The voucher, funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development and administered through the Longmont Housing Authority, is supposed to subsidize market-rate rent for low-income families.

But in Longmont, with the lowest ratio of vacant rentals in Boulder County, landlords are either choosing not to participate in the voucher program or to raise rents above what voucher-holders can afford.

Libby said she's lived in Longmont for 15 years and saw rent prices stay low for a long time but creep up ever since the September 2013 flood.

"Longmont is the last bastion of the working class," Libby said. "The people who can't afford Boulder are now coming into Longmont even more than they did before, and none of the other surrounding towns are able to accommodate that."

Libby said her landlady raised her rent $260 a month this year, which puts the unit out of range of her housing voucher.

"It's a big jump. You expect $50 or maybe even $75, but that was a big jump even with housing compensating a little bit," Libby said. "I can't blame her. Landlords really haven't gotten a big increase in their rents or any increase in a long time."

Advertisement

Longmont Housing Authority officials said hers is a story they are becoming all too familiar with in the current rental market. The voucher subsidizes portions of rent and utilities for people, based on their family size, income and apartment size.

But as rents rise, said LHA Executive Director Michael Reis, neither incomes nor the upper limit for rent subsidies rise with them fast enough, leaving unmanageable gaps for lower-income people.

"If rents go up typically 5 or 7 percent, the program can usually keep up fairly well. But when they're going up significantly faster than that, then people are starting to get caught in this math problem," Reis said.

Longmont's vacancy rate for the second quarter of 2015 was 3 percent, higher than the first-quarter number of 1.8 percent, according to the Denver Metro Vacancy Survey. Boulder County overall has a vacancy rate of 5.3 percent, while the city of Boulder (non-university area) has a vacancy rate of 4.7 percent.

The survey found that the average rent in Longmont is $1,350 a month, while in Boulder County it's $1,520 and in the city of Boulder (non-university area) it's $1,505.

Opting out of voucher program

In some cases, Longmont landlords are opting out of the voucher program altogether.

Theodora "Cookie" Vaphides, 72, lives with her 13-year-old granddaughter and is growing increasingly worried she won't find a place to accept her housing voucher before she is kicked out of The Legacy Apartments at the end of February.

In March, Vaphides said, The Legacy informed 37 voucher-holders living there that it would no longer be participating in the program. Vaphides' lease on her third-floor Legacy apartment is up in December, but management agreed to let her live in a first-floor apartment until February due to an upcoming hip-replacement surgery, she said.

A representative of the Legacy Apartments declined to comment.

In the meantime, Vaphides has been scrambling for six months to find anywhere that will accept her voucher.

"I'm on Zillow, I'm on Craigslist and I have a granddaughter who helps me and I always put in, you know, 'I'm a 72-year-old lady with a 13-year-old granddaughter and I'm Section 8' so that they don't waste their time responding to me," Vaphides said. "And some respond and say, 'No, sorry, we don't take Section 8,' and sometimes they don't respond at all.'"

Vaphides said she has looked at senior living, but it won't allow her granddaughter to stay there.

"I wanted her to finish at Westview (Middle School) because she's in eighth grade this year, but I might have to move to Lafayette or Louisville or something like that."

'Landlords can get higher rents'

Reis and his staff said some properties may be choosing not to accept vouchers because their low-income tax credit requirements are expiring. As part of the low-income tax credit program, the federal government subsidizes housing construction, and in exchange the development must reserve a certain percentage of units for affordable housing and accept housing voucher-holders for a period of time. When those requirements expire, it is up to the property managers to decide whether to continue participating with the voucher program.

And in today's market, Reis said, there are other people who will pay more for those same units.

"There are more people renting because they can't afford homes so they're moving to the rental market. They can pay higher rents, and landlords can get higher rents," Reis said.

The LHA is having to compensate for higher rents by funding fewer vouchers at higher levels.

Instead of 509 vouchers funded at lower levels, the LHA is down to funding 434 vouchers, said LHA Housing Manager Marcia Miller.

"There's going to come a point in time when nobody can afford these apartments," Libby said.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci