“It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of wisdom, it was the age of foolishness.”

In “A Tale of Two Cities,” Charles Dickens quilled those lines about 18th century France and Britain. But as often happens with great writing, the expressed sensibilities about one time in history also apply to others like, say, 21st century Washington.

For the seventh time President Obama staged a lavish state dinner Tuesday night, this one to celebrate President Francois Hollande and the United States’ historic friendship with France. America’s linguistic, cultural and political affinity for Great Britain usually take center-stage.

Truth is, there might not be a United States as we recognize it without our even older friendship with France. Albeit with less than altruistic motives, France sided with the North American colonies against Britain in time to eke out a rebel victory in 1781.

With the French fleet blocking British escape by sea, the colonials and French troops bombarded Yorktown, Virginia for three weeks, forcing a royal surrender that effectively won the American Revolution.

Tuesday’s state dinner was the usual self-indulgent Washington lavishness oblivious to the unemployed, food-stamped lives of millions of back-country Americans. The 350 strutting attendees playing dress-up were a combination of Obama cronies, B-level Hollywood types, media, campaign bundlers and assorted beltway politicos who can consider themselves D.C. royalty until Jan. 20, 2017.

They were over-fed and entertained in what passes for the Palace of Versailles in Washington, a heated tent on the White House lawn decorated like a Monet spring painting.

Still, it felt good to celebrate an enduring national friendship, given that Obama’s ignorance and naivete have iced relations with other friends, for now.

Barack “Cinco de Quatro” Obama opened the evening, as American presidents since Jefferson must, trying to make light of his linguistic ignorance. “Bonsoir!” he said. “Please, have a seat. I have now officially exhausted my French.”

The French president, as many foreign leaders can, spoke half his remarks in English and half in French. Bien fait!

Hollande, who earlier awarded France’s Legion of Merit to the Tomb of the Unknown Soldiers, expressed profound appreciation for American military assistance in World Wars I and II and, most recently, delivering French combat troops to prevent an al Qaeda coup in Mali.

“I promise we shall never forget them,” said Hollande, who came to Washington wife-less this time, owing to some recent mistress messiness in French media.

In a sly rhetorical nod to bilateral discord over the centuries, Hollande added: “We love Americans, although we don’t always say so. And you love the French, but you’re sometimes too shy to say so.”

He may also either have made news or been rather optimistic when he spoke about sanctions and talks with Iran in the past tense: “Together, we have removed the unacceptable threat of an Iranian nuclear weapon.”

The revealing details from the state visit may have come Monday as les deux presidents toured the unique Monticello home of Jefferson, an early U.S. ambassador to Paris. It’s become a regular occurrence with Obama that his overheard asides reveal more about his attitudes and character than his increasingly lengthy and repetitive public statements.

Remember when Obama was caught complaining to another French president about having to deal with Israel’s Prime Minister Netanyahu so often? (He’s coming again March 3.) Or Obama’s obsequious 2012 plea to a Russian leader for understanding until after his reelection when he could be more flexible on missile talks?

As Obama and Hollande exited Jefferson’s Virginia home, the Chicagoan decided to depart from the schedule and walk the grounds. Obama was overheard saying to his hostess, “That’s the good thing about being president, I can do whatever I want.”

The regal comment is likely to resonate — much like “You didn’t build that” — because it fits the developing public perception of Obama as an imperious ruler. As he spoke in Virginia, the Democrat’s administration announced in Washington a 27th unilateral change to the ObamaCare law — extending a business compliance deadline for another year beyond what Congress stipulated.

Obama attempts to portray it as a minor administrative adjustment to accommodate businesses, not as what it really is, a political postponement of the law’s social and financial pain to save more Democrat derrieres in this year’s elections.

The Obama banquet might have pleased old French royalty before losing their heads in la Revolution. But it would hardly fit into Michelle Obama’s healthy menu for ordinary Americans. One estimate put the taxpayer-financed fare at 2,500 calories per person with 152 grams of fat.

Guests were served caviar, quail eggs and 12 varieties of potatoes. Colorado rib-eye beef. A salad harvested from the White House garden by peasants. And Hawaiian chocolate-malted ganache, maple syrup fudge and cotton-candy balls.

Not a single serving of American fries in sight.

RELATED:

What Rand Paul needs to stop doing

Time for a real executive as our chief executive

Not a smidgen of credibility in Obama’s IRS claim