\The HealthCare.gov website, where people can buy health insurance, on a laptop screen, shown in Portland, Ore. (AP Photo/Don Ryan, File)

By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Sarah Carrillo realizes getting trained to help people consider options for insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act is well worth it when she thinks about one woman she assisted recently.

The 20-year-old women will pay a $40 a month premium, possible because her income qualified her for a subsidy since she works part time at a retail store.

"She got both dental and health," Carrillo said. "She has a lower deductible, I want to say it is $1,400, but she has a $1 co-pay to see a primary care physician. She was really happy."

Open enrollment for coverage under the law — also known as Obamacare — began Nov. 1 and runs through Jan. 31, 2016 for coverage next year.

It's the third year of the law that requires uninsured people to get health insurance if they don't have coverage through their employer, or who are not covered under government-sponsored insurance, such as Medicaid.

Exemptions are available from the mandate and from paying a penalty for people whose income is so low they don't file income taxes, or for others with a coverage lapse of three months or less, for religious beliefs and a handful of other reasons.

The Health Planning Council of Southwest Florida is providing counselors like Carrillo, called navigators, to meet with people who need coverage. The navigators will go over plans and assess circumstances based on income and health needs.

Physicians Regional Health System in Collier County is providing an office for Carrillo to meet privately with people at the Collier Boulevard campus every Tuesday and the Pine Ridge hospital campus every Thursday.

"We are seeing a lot of re-enrollees, at least 50 percent are re-enrollees, if not higher," Lynne Thorp, the health council's regional director for the navigator program, said.

After Thanksgiving, the health council will add two more people, one at each hospital, to help meet demand as people enroll, Thorp said.

Enrollment is going smoother in part because the federal government has streamlined its marketplace website for people to look up plan availability in their area of Florida, one of 37 states that did not establish its own website marketplace for insurance plans, she said.

In addition, the nonpartisan organization, Enroll America, created a website tool, www.EnrollSWFL.com, which anyone can use to type in their ZIP code and get connected to local information, Thorp said.

Physicians Regional also has two employees who are certified to assist people look at plan options and sign up, said Ivy Conrad, patient access director at Physicians Regional. The two certified patient assistants work at the Collier Boulevard hospital.

Thorp applauded Physicians Regional for dedicating two employees to help with open enrollment.

"I think it is a great fit to have the navigator program in the hospital," she said.

For this current year, more than 23,000 residents in Collier and nearly 42,000 residents in Lee enrolled in ACA plans.

In Lee and Collier counties, Florida Blue and United Healthcare are the only two insurers, but there are 32 plan options in Collier and 23 plans in Lee.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, CMS, reported that during the second week of open enrollment, between Nov. 8 and 14, more than two million applications were submitted. Sixth-six percent were consumers re-enrolling and 34 percent were new enrollees. During the first week of open enrollment, more than one million signed up or renewed.

The Kaiser Family Foundation released study results Nov. 18 that shows nearly three-fourths of consumers using the federal marketplace to buy coverage will pay an average of 15 percent more in premiums next year if they stay in their current year plan.

Out of 2,365 counties examined across 36 states in the federal marketplace next year, a 40-year old paid an average of $264 a month, before subsidies, in 2015. But that will increase to $283 a month in 2016.

What's also key is that the penalty for not having coverage in 2016 will be 2.5 percent of income or $625 for each adult and $347 for each child uninsured, whichever amount is higher, Thorp said. The penalty is levied when people file income tax returns.

The penalty for being uninsured this year is $325 or 2 percent of income, whichever is greater.

There's another twist to penalties and that involves employers, who are required now to submit to the IRS information that they provide affordable coverage for their workers, which means the IRS has a way now to check to see if someone has coverage or not.

"So there is a checks and balance in the system," Thorp said.

For assistance in Southwest Florida, consumers can schedule a free appointment online with a navigator at www.EnrollSWFL.co or call 1-866-547-2793.