"... if you build a system that offers that kind of service, people will come and people will use it."

BOSTON — A year after the failure of Massachusetts' health insurance exchange, 125,000 people have purchased plans and another 286,000 have enrolled in Medicaid using the state's revamped website.

State officials on Friday released the final numbers for the open enrollment period that began in November and ended this month for people seeking to buy subsidized or unsubsidized health insurance through the state's individual market.

Maydad Cohen, outgoing special assistant to Gov. Charlie Baker overseeing the fixes to the Health Connector, called the conclusion of open enrollment "a great finish for a project that's felt like a marathon and a sprint all at once for this team."

The final numbers are on the high end of what state officials had predicted before open enrollment started, with around 222,000 people who had been on temporary coverage after the 2014 website debacle signing up for insurance this year through a mix of MassHealth (Medicaid), the state-subsidized ConnectorCare or private plans purchased with or without a federal subsidy. The rest of the signups came from people who were already on Medicaid (but not due to the website failure) or were new to the system.

Around 41,000 people paid for unsubsidized coverage, while 83,000 purchased plans through ConnectorCare or using federal subsidies.

The closure of open enrollment marks a milestone in the state's recovery from the website debacle. In 2013, the state rolled out a new health insurance exchange to conform with the Affordable Care Act. However, due to technological problems, the website was unable to enroll people in coverage. The state extended existing state-subsidized plans and put people on temporary Medicaid. Former Gov. Deval Patrick fired the technology vendor and brought in new leadership to create a new website. This year, the site has largely worked. There have been customer service glitches, including long waits for call centers and problems with an online payment portal that is hosted separately from the main website. But the site has withstood heavy traffic.

According to state data, 4.8 million people visited the website during open enrollment, compared to 750,000 people last year.

Last year, the site was unable to determine what plan a person was eligible for. This year, it determined eligibility for more than 500,000 people. (Not all those people bought insurance.)

At least 15,000 people enrolled each week, with spikes of more than 40,000 a week at the busiest times – generally, right before deadlines.

This year was the first time people could purchase dental insurance online, and 30,000 people did. Dental coverage is generally unsubsidized, though some people were able to use tax credits. Last year, just 2,500 people buying coverage through the Connector purchased dental insurance.

"It follows on the concept that if you build a system that offers that kind of service, people will come and people will use it," Cohen said.

Going forward, the state still has more to do in terms of improving the system and analyzing the data.

Cohen said state officials will be putting out surveys, examining data and looking at things including the makeup of the population that was put on temporary MassHealth and why some people who had temporary coverage or who used to site to determine their eligibility did not actually buy insurance.

Technical improvements are likely to include integrating the payment system into the main website, doing more with email documentation and billing, and allowing customers to make more changes to their accounts without calling customer service. Cohen said the call center "continues to be a place where we're disappointed in the consumer experience people had."

Baker has put in place new leadership at MassHealth and the Health Connector and has taken control of the Health Connector board. Louis Gutierrez, the new executive director of the Massachusetts Health Connector, has a background in information technology. Baker recently called Gutierrez a "technology person first, a health care person second."

In January 2014, the Boston Globe reported that federal officials estimated that 250,000 people would sign up through the Connector for non-Medicaid insurance in Massachusetts; Connector officials estimated 200,000.

Jason Lefferts, a Health Connector spokesman, said the federal government's estimate was never the one used by state officials. Cohen said he thinks some people will continue to sign up for state-subsidized care during the year – they will still be eligible if, for example, they lose other insurance coverage.