By Peter Ingemi | Watchdog Arena

Tax Day has come, and while its passing will be a source of relief, it also means that we are one year closer to the newest onerous Obamacare provision to be levied on Americans.

This is the so called “Cadillac tax,” which is a 40 percent excise tax on high value health care plans. Like many parts of Obamacare, its implementation was put off to delay opposition.

It’s one of the last big parts of the Affordable Care Act to go into effect — lawmakers delayed the levy until 2018 in part because it is so controversial — but companies are wrestling with it now as they plan employee benefits. Some are already negotiating with unions over benefits that could spill into 2018.

And as my colleague here at Watchdog Arena, Moe Lane, points out, a lot of people didn’t think it would ever see the light of day

When Obamacare was first put together in 2009, it was probably assumed by the unions that this provision could be amended or quietly dropped long before 2018 rolled around. Only, that did not happen. So as of right now the auto workers unions are negotiating with the Big Three automakers to make some sort of deal on the subject.

Alas for the supporters of Obamacare, the political life expectancy of those who voted for Obamacare in Congress has been fleeting. Furthermore, some nasty realities are rearing their head for some of the most adamant supporters of the law, as noted in a piece in favor of the tax at Forbes .

Indeed, the excise tax poses a unique problem for unions’ “gold-plated” health care plans, as my Manhattan Institute colleague, Avik Roy, has noted previously. With benefits that are viewed as being considerably more generous than the private sector overall, unions – public sector unions in particular – expect to get hit hard by the tax.

And while private unions will have to deal with business on this (there were stories of business tweaking the health plans they offer as far back as 2013), public employee unions will be dealing with state governments, many of them allied with these unions, to try to soften the blow.

That’s going to add up to either:

Cuts or renegotiating of those benefits Shifting of budget spending Tax increases on the state level

And all of those choices are going to have dramatic effects not only fiscally but politically.

According to Gallup, since 2012 the number of Americans who think Obama will help their families’ situation has never been above 25 percent (avg 23 percent, current figure 24 percent), and while the 32 percent of the public who currently think Obamacare will hurt them in the long run ties as an all time low, there has not been a single moment where more people polled said they were helped by Obamacare as opposed to being hurt by Obamacare.

There has never been a moment when a plurality of Americans haven’t believed the national impact of Obamacare will be making things worse. Where do you think those numbers will be once the Cadillac tax kicks in, targeting the most loyal of Obamacare’s supporters?

But this has been the path of Obamacare from the start.

First people were told they would not be losing their doctors and health care plans, then they did. The people were told Obamacare would save them money…then it didn’t. Then they were told they would get subsidies to afford their coverage and / or the penalties for not getting a plan would be small, but they kept growing. Through all of this Obamacare has remained the law of the land.

The question becomes as 2018 draws ever closer: Will this Cadillac tax targeted directly at the law’s biggest supporters be the final straw to break the camel’s back?

We shall see.

This article was written by a contributor of Watchdog Arena, Franklin Center’s network of writers, bloggers, and citizen journalists.