Chloe+Isabel Founder and CEO Chantel Waterbury

Social jewelry retailer Chloe + Isabel is growing quickly, thanks to an approach used by many startups these days: relying on army of entrepreneurs leveraging technology to redefine direct sales.

Although the concept is simple–women build online stores featuring their favorite Chloe + Isabel jewelry, then market them via social networks–getting to this point has been hard.

The New York-based company spent much of the past two years building a technology platform so women can customize their stores, integrate marketing with social networks, optimize for mobile and process sales from start to finish. The startup also honed its technique for selecting and training saleswomen to help them become entrepreneurs in their own right.

Now, on the cusp of profitability, the three-year-old startup has raised a $15 million Series C financing round, led by new investor SoftBank Capital to expand beyond the U.S. and beyond jewelry.

Valuation was north of $100 million, according to a person close to the company.

“Asia is a big part of why we’re at the table and will play a big part of its growth going forward,” SoftBank Capital Partner Scarlett O’Sullivan said.

SoftBank Capital, which is affiliated with Tokyo-based Internet, media and telecom conglomerate SoftBank Group, is well-positioned to lend its expertise.

“We know going into Asia is not an easy task,” Ms. O’Sullivan said.

Ms. O’Sullivan said figuring out payment methods, assessing the effectiveness of social networks as a sales tool in Asia, determining whether jewelry or other products are best to launch with, and other issues are still being studied.

Like on-demand transportation startups Uber Inc. and Lyft Inc., temporary job agencies Gigwalk Inc. and TaskRabbit Inc., and hotel alternative Airbnb Inc., Chloe + Isabel taps underemployed entrepreneurial types. Offering an easy user interface for both entrepreneurs and end users, all these companies have mobile at their core and take a share of the revenue that their micro-entrepreneurs generate by selling their goods and services.

Like Stella & Dot LLC, Ruby Ribbon Inc. and other e-commerce startups that have secured venture capital to bankroll their armies of micro-entrepreneurs, Chloe + Isabel sells both online and offline through trunk shows and pop-up stores.

“We are here to help [each saleswoman] build the type of company she wants to build,” founder and Chief Executive Chantel Waterbury said. “We’re all about helping her earn a lot of money.”

Key to the model’s success is picking good salespeople. Almost entirely female and under the age of 34, Chloe + Isabel selects 15% to 20% of applicants based on the strength of an essay they write to apply to the program. Typical goals of successful saleswomen have been the desire to gain experience in retail and use the online boutique as a steppingstone, supplement income and earn a specific amount of cash for a specific purpose, like paying off student loans or going on a vacation.

Once they are accepted and spend $175 for a kit of jewelry worth $600, the women build online stores anchored by a theme, such as Summer Solstice or Morocco. The items, from oversize turquoise rings to thin gold ropes and square-cut gemstones, are then handpicked by the women based on what they think will sell best.

Women select 40 to 50 items to feature from Chloe + Isabel’s inventory of 300 to 350 items. Items cost from $18 to $200. Chloe + Isabel takes 70% of each sale, delivering the balance in the form of cash to the seller and rewarding her with jewelry credits which she can use to reward herself or build her inventory.

The startup offered its first item outside of jewelry, a fragrance, earlier this year and plans to expand into other verticals like handbags and beauty products.

Chloe + Isabel employs 80 and engages with 4,500 salespeople, up from 1,000 a year ago.

Ms. Waterbury declined to disclose the company’s revenue.

Existing investors General Catalyst, First Round Capital, Forerunner Ventures and Floodgate also participated in the round. Chloe + Isabel previously raised $17.5 million, including an $8.5 million Series A round in 2011.

Ms. O’Sullivan will join the board of the company, which is formally known as Chloe and Isabel Inc.

CORRECTION 6/27/14: This story was changed to correct the average age of a salesperson at Chloe + Isabel. The average age is under 34.

Write to Lizette Chapman at lizette.chapman@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @zettewil