Hamdan Bin Mohammad issues resolution regulating hotel amenities and holiday homes in Dubai

Photo Credit:Reuters/STRINGER

Thursday, Dec 25, 2014

Dubai: Shaikh Hamdan Bin Mohammad bin Rashid Al Maktoum, Dubai Crown Prince and Chairman of Dubai Executive Council, on Thursday issued Resolution No (48) of 2014 on hotel amenities’ fees and fines, and Resolution No (49) on holiday homes’ fees and fines. Both resolutions are to be published in the Official Gazette and considered valid from the date of publication, according to a statement by Dubai Media Office.

Resolution No (48) of 2014 defines hotel amenities in Dubai to include economy hotels, floating hotels, resorts, hotel apartments, hostels, dormitories, youth houses and any other facility prescribed by Dubai Department of Tourism and Commerce Marketing (DTCM).

The Resolution states that the Department may collect the relevant fees as prescribed in Appendix (1) and Appendix (2) attached to the resolution for issuing permits, licenses and classification certificates, without prejudice to any fees due to any other government entity, as per the statement.

Article (3) of the resolution prescribed the violations and fines related to the licensing and classification of hotel amenities as defined in Appendix (3) attached to the Resolution. If the same violation prescribed in Appendix (1) is repeated within one year, the fine will be doubled; conditionally the fine does not exceed Dh500,000.

The DTCM reserves the rights to take any additional measures against any derogative hotel amenity, including declassing, demoting, partial or full closing for a period not exceeding six months and cancellation of license.

Article (4) of the Resolution states that the hotel amenities licensed by DTCM are not subject to the fees prescribed in Appendix (1) and Appendix (2) attached to the Resolution if proven discontinuance of business activities during an assessable period, conditionally, the hotel amenity notifies the Department in 10 days before the date of discontinuance of business activities.

This legislation accords with Decree No (17) of 2013 concerning licensing and classification of hotel establishments in the emirates of Dubai and aims to regulate and organise this sector as one of Dubai tourism’s catalysts.

Holiday homes:

Resolution No (49) of 2014 states that DTCM may collect the fees defined in Appendix No (1) attached to the Resolution against issuance of permits and licenses without prejudice to any fees due to any other government entity.

The resolution prescribed the violations and fines related to holiday homes as defined in Appendix (2) attached to the Resolution. If the same violation is repeated within one year, the fine will be doubled; conditionally the fine does not exceed Dh100,000.

Pursuant to the Resolution, DTCM reserves the rights to take any additional measures against any violation, including warnings, suspension and cancellation of license.

Staff Report

Gulf News 2014. All rights reserved.

© Copyright Zawya. All Rights Reserved.