The joyous Sunday dedication of Seattle’s new $134 million South Park Bridge contrasted with a different form of dedication four years ago as the old 79-yearold bridge was being permanently closed to traffic.

About 150 residents of the South Park neighborhood stood outside with signs in a driving rain storm, as Democratic luminaries arrived at the nearby Boeing Machinists’ hall to celebrate passage of the Affordable Care Act.

“For a long time, it seemed like residents were the only ones pushing for it: It’s a tight neighborhood,” said Debbie McNeil, who was out in the rain that day.

“I managed to shake their hands and say to Sen. Murray, ‘Bridge, bridge, bridge!”

The state’s senior senator heard the message and came through with a $34 million “Tiger Grant” from the U.S. Department of Transportation. King County Executive Dow Constantine put together the financing package with a few million here (from Tukwila) and there (Boeing).

The new bridge, unlike its predecessor, is earthquake resistant. A rain garden, made up of a two-foot-thick layer of specially mixed bio-retention soil, filters runoff from the bridge before it goes back in the Duwamish waterway. (The waterway has a new salmon project just upstream.)

The new bridge will carry 20,000 vehicles and nearly 3,000 heavy-duty trucks each day, transporting what King County estimates will be 10 million tons of freight each year.

“This bridge is critical to several neighborhoods: It is critical to South Park, and to Georgetown, and to the industrial area of Seattle,” said Dagmar Cronn, another South Park community leader who was raising hell — constructively — as the old bridge was raised for the last time.

“I have tended to be an optimist and a pessimist at the same time,” Cronn joked. “I was torn between hopes and dreams, and anxiety that this wasn’t going to happen.” She paid warm tribute to Constantine for stitching together the financing package.

The demise of the old South Park Bridge cut off Napoli’s, a very popular (and very good) pizza parlor, from its lunchtime clientele of Boeing workers.

“This is going to make a huge difference for us: Boeing is going to be able to get over here. People with a half-hour break won’t debate whether they can make it around on the First Avenue South bridge,” said Maria Porco as she took orders in a full house.

Among the political leaders on the dais, the new South Bark Bridge is both sweet and bittersweet. King County has a lot of bridges in need of repair. Yet, the Washington Legislature — specifically the Republican-run State Senate — has failed to act on a statewide transportation bill. (The House did pass a plan.)

“This bridge is the last thing of this kind we will do for a while unless the Legislature gets off its butt,” said Constantine as he walked to the bridge.

Seattle Port Commissioner Bill Bryant, a Republican and likely candidate for statewide office, strongly appealed for a statewide transportation package when he spoke at the dedication.

U.S. Rep. Jim McDermott, D-Wash., used the dedication to mock those in the “other” Washington who mock government.

“Today, a lot of people don’t think the federal government has a role in anything,” said McDermott. Gesturing to the handsome new drawbridge behind him, McDermott added: “This is what we call an ‘earmark’.”

The new bridge can be opened for marine traffic. Just two 75-horsepower motors are needed to run it. It features four driving lanes, bike lanes and sidewalks.

The ceremony Sunday featured a Shaker prayer by Muckleshoot Indians, with a call for all who use it to travel peacefully and with good will.

On the dais together sat often-at-odds representatives from Aerospace Machinists Local 751 and the Boeing Company, which squeezed the union — hard — for contract concessions last winter.

“Boeing and the Machinists Union have had a partnership for many years,” said Bill McSherry, Boeing’s government affairs director.

After the ceremony, and pre-July 4th fireworks, the bridge span was lowered and hundreds of neighborhood residents and bridge lovers streamed across, followed by a west-to-east parade of souped up 1950’s automobiles.

The bridge will be opened to vehicle traffic at 6 a.m. on Monday.

The four year process that built it was a morale builder for all involved. Heads came together rather than butting into each other.

“You know,” said Debbie McNeil, “we came out of this pretty much liking each other.” And Mayor Ed Murray was able to smile as he said: “It was the neighborhood that wanted this done.”