By RICKI LINDSAY

Correspondent

Verna Ferris started dancing at age 6 and hasn’t stopped yet. She has made a career of teaching legions of Sarasotans the benefits of proper exercise and healthy movement.

Now, after 35 years in the same location — the Kane’s Too Plaza next to Kane’s Furniture Store — it is time for Ferris to close her studio; the building has been sold.

But at 80, Ferris has no plans to retire. She will still conduct private classes in homes and at various condominiums in town.

“Well-being has no age limit,” says Verna Ferris, a Sarasota icon of fitness and healthy lifestyle for 50 years. “People are healthier today and eating better than they did when I first started in the fitness business, and I am happy to have been a part of that progress over the years.”

Her trademark “dancercise” class, now in its 51st year, was an effort to attract non-athletic adults with her unique combination of dance and exercise. “Exercise, as such, wasn’t very popular 50 years ago,” Ferris notes. “People either played a sport or danced socially, or did nothing at all. I wanted to do something that involved movement and included dance steps that any adult could do without advanced training. I always incorporate some choreography that anyone can do, even in their first class.”

Dance was the natural starting point for the petite, soft-spoken blonde. Before marrying in 1960 and moving to Sarasota in 1964, Ferris was a professional dancer for 14 years, performing in theaters and night clubs all over the United States and Canada. “Those were the days of the big shows,” she recalls. “I danced in shows that featured Bob Hope, Sammy Davis Jr., and many, many other big names. It was a very exciting time, and I took the opportunity to study with dance teachers in just about every city where I worked.'

Ferris’ first, modest studio opened in 1965 on the second floor of what is now a restaurant in the Sarasota Opera house building. A move to Coconut Avenue followed, with a second location in the Kane’s Furniture building in 1980 — when her student and friend, the late Alyce Kalin, asked Ferris to start holding classes in what had been the store’s bedding department.

Eventually, a Bradenton studio was added, for a total of three studios at one time. In addition to the studios, Ferris conducted water exercise classes and other sessions at condominiums and clubs all around Sarasota and up and down Longboat Key. The only other activity-related enterprise in town at that time was a small YMCA.

For four years, Ferris held a full schedule of classes in the furniture store until the Kane’s Too annex was built. She then opened her new Exercise with Verna studio and Kalin opened The Gilded Lilly, a women’s boutique.

“Together, we got to know many of the women in town,” Ferris remarks, adding that she has taught three generations of the several local families. Countless women and men have passed through her studios that at one time employed up to five additional instructors. She is at a loss to estimate just how many students she has instructed over the years.

Ferris programs attracted an even larger audience when she began producing shows for cable TV, which she did for eight years; and for four years she had a segment on the “Time of Your Life” program on Channel 8 in Tampa.

Ferris now has two instructors in addition to herself, with average class sizes of eight to 10 students and as many as 21. The tireless teacher still conducts most of the classes herself — four or five a day — in addition to private sessions.

Her methods are varied, but built upon the principles of using exercise with dance movement to get the body fit while using proper body alignment for balance and coordination.

“I am always changing the exercises so that students don’t get bored, but the same body parts always get worked,” she said. “The exercise business is constantly evolving.”

Ferris has seen many of the trends and fads in her years as an exercise instructor, carefully studying them and incorporating new techniques she felt would be beneficial.

Over time, her classes have included disco dancing, belly dancing, ballet, county and western line dancing, step classes, Jane Fonda exercises, aerobics yoga, Pilates, barre work and her own version of Jazzercise.

She often traveled to New York to study with teachers famous for their particular exercise programs, such as Lotte Berk, whose method was the predecessor to the now popular barre classes.

“I’ve always done barre work and used fitness balls, long before they were considered popular,” she says.

When gyms and weight equipment became important some 30 years ago, Ferris added a fully equipped gym to her studio.

A serious and rare autoimmune disease 10 years ago required a stem cell transplant, and interrupted her career for a while. She has been strong and healthy since then, and doctors attribute much of the success of the transplant to her extensive history of exercise and activity.

Her last checkup at Mayo Clinic in Jacksonville in mid-April shows her to be in excellent health and “just getting better and better.” But Ferris doesn’t take her good health for granted, so some relaxation and travel are in her future plans as well.

“What I do is work, but it’s not,” she says. “What I do is fun and a pleasure and makes me happy and healthy. What more could you ask?”

Her credo is simple: Get moving and stay moving.

“I don’t think that exercise has to be done in a studio or a gym; walking outside is the best exercise because our bodies are the best machines there are,” she claims. “Anything to get the body moving. It doesn’t have to be in a class — but the camaraderie of classes is great and inspiring.”

A passion for doing what she has always loved — dancing and teaching people how to help themselves feel better with exercise — keeps Ferris practicing her craft.

“I am passing along my knowledge of the body and movement, and have fun doing it,” she says, adding that the friendships she has made through her studio bring her the most joy. Fifteen years ago, a surprise 65th birthday party — thrown by 350 of her students and friends — was a tribute to the many relationships she has made through her studio.

The door to that historic spot will close on Friday.

“The building is being sold and I don’t want to open another studio at this point in my life,” she explains. “It’s sad to see the studio come to an end — but it’s time.”