Promising Canadians a national “universal” child care program may make for good politics. But ask any politician to tell you how it would actually work — and who would pay for it — and you’ll get nothing but empty platitudes.

The federal NDP are promising Canadians a national child care program they pledge won’t cost parents more than $15 a day per child. And the Liberals appear to have a similar election announcement waiting in the wings.

If a national child care system capped at $15 a day for everyone and anyone who wants it seems too good to be true, it’s because it is. It’s snake oil and it’s being peddled around the country by sneaky, deceptive politicians who hope to trick people into thinking they could ever get such a plan off the ground.

The most obvious impediment to a national “universal” child care system is that child care is a provincial jurisdiction. Provinces already run highly regulated and well-funded child care programs. The reason federal parties want to horn in on those is because child care is a motherhood and apple pie issue and politicians like the NDP’s Thomas Mulcair are looking for ways to capitalize on it politically.

So they propose a “national” system that would provide funding to existing provincial child care systems with strings attached. The strings — like the $15 cap — would have to be negotiated with the provinces. The NDP is proposing to cover 60% of the cost of each new child care spot if the provinces adhere to whatever conditions are set.

So how would that work exactly? In Manitoba, for example, parents pay a regulated price of $20.80 a day for a pre-school child in a licenced, regulated child care centre that receives provincial government funding. For infants, the price cap is $30 a day, according to Manitoba Family Service’s most recent annual report (2013-14). Under the $15-a-day scheme, the province would have to agree to bring those prices down to $15. Obviously the provinces would demand compensation for that because the difference would have to be made up in operating grants to facilities. The feds would have to cover the difference. And it would vary substantially from province to province, with some provinces getting far more money than others.

Then there’s the question of how spots would actually be added. In order to expand child care capacity so that everyone and anyone who wants a child care space could get one, the province would have to build more child care centres. Who’s going to pay for those? Would they be cost-shared with the feds?

Neither the NDP nor the Liberals, who proposed a national child care program 10 years ago, have answers to any of those questions. They just keep telling us the details would be “negotiated” with the provinces.

Meanwhile, what would “universality” actually mean under a national child care system? Would it really mean whoever wants a spot for their kid could get one? How long would they have to wait for one?

Because right now, pretty much anyone who wants a regulated child care spot in Manitoba can get one. They may have to put their names on five different waiting lists and wait three years or more. But they’ll get one eventually.

Under the NDP’s national plan, how long would people have to wait? A year? Three years? No one knows.

A “universal” child care system would be nothing like Canada’s “universal” health care system. Under that system, the federal government transfers block funding to the provinces who spend the money however they please. There are no strings attached except for the five principles under the Canada Health Act. Provinces don’t have to ensure there are certain numbers of doctors, nurses or hospital beds. Each province runs health care the way it sees fit and Ottawa sends them a cheque every year to help pay for it.

They could do the same for child care with new block funding and no strings attached. But that’s not what they’re proposing. What’s being proposed is that every Canadian who wants a child care spot would be able to get one in a price-regulated, one-size-fits all national program. And that’s pure folly.