WASHINGTON, D.C. - When push came to shove on Wednesday night, Rep. Dave Joyce voted against letting the nation plunge over a so-called "fiscal cliff."

The freshman from Russell Township was one of 87 Republicans who sided with all the House of Representatives' Democrats to adopt Senate-approved legislation that will fund the federal government through Jan. 15 and allow it to borrow money through Feb. 7.

The rest of the Republicans who represent Northeast Ohio in Congress -- Champaign County's Jim Jordan, Holmes County's Bob Gibbs, and Wadsworth's Jim Renacci -- were among 144 Republicans who opposed the deal to re-open shuttered federal facilities and prevent the federal government from defaulting on its debts.

"I simply cannot lend my support to legislation that once again raises the debt ceiling while doing nothing to impose needed fiscal reforms nor address the drivers of the massive debt that is crippling this nation," said a statement from Renacci.

Their divergent votes reflect the safety of the seats the GOP legislators represent, as well as the sway that business interests -- who said the deal would avoid a financial catastrophe -- and Tea Party interests -- who opposed its lack of reforms and spending cuts -- have over the individual Congress members, experts say.

Joyce -- the only one of the group who already has a well-funded Democratic opponent running against him in next year's election -- is less established in his district than his more senior colleagues, and represents turf that could be won by a Democrat under the right circumstances, says University of Akron political scientist David B. Cohen.

Joyce is also more pragmatic and less driven by ideology than someone like Jordan, a past chairman of the conservative Republican Study Committee who represents one of the state's most solidly Republican districts, says Cohen.

"Folks like Renacci, Gibbs and Jordan represent safer, gerrymandered districts where they are really more concerned about a primary opponent than anything else," says Cohen.

Joyce -- who has been criticized over the shutdown by the Democrat seeking his seat, Michael Wager, released a statement on the vote that said it was time for Washington to "turn the page on partisan politics and start working for common-sense solutions and compromise." Although Joyce repeatedly voted for GOP-sponsored bills that made funding the government contingent on defunding Obamacare, he also participated in several bipartisan efforts to end the impasse.

In Northeast Ohio, the shutdown's effects included the furlough of more than 3,000 federal employees and support service contractors at NASA Glenn Research Center and closure of federal facilities including including Cuyahoga Valley National Park.

Business-oriented groups sympathetic to the GOP, like the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, had urged legislators to back Wednesday's compromise measure, arguing that "the full faith and credit of the United States should not be subject to further brinksmanship," and that the consequences of a federal government default "are too extreme to be allowed to occur."

Groups that are more Tea Party-focused – such as Heritage Action and Americans for Prosperity - encouraged Republicans to vote "no."

"The debt ceiling provided an opportunity to not only extend the national credit limit, but to also address the federal government's spending addiction and apply sensible and needed reductions in government spending," said an email from Americans for Prosperity Ohio State Director Eli Miller.

Joyce's predecessor in Congress – Steve LaTourette – who now heads a group for moderate Republicans called the Main Street Partnership – blamed the shutdown on "a handful of members" who were "hell bent on snatching defeat from the jaws of victory."

Instead of capitalizing on problems the Obama administration has experienced in implementing the Affordable Care Act, LaTourette said the group "pursued a strategy that has shut down the government, pushed us to the edge of defaulting on our debt, drove our approval ratings into the tank and essentially eliminated the power of the majority in the House."

"With so many political currents going right for Republicans, the party should be cruising for smooth sailing, right? WRONG." said a statement from LaTourette, who retired from office after complaining the increased polarization of Congress was making it difficult to get anything accomplished.

Inside-the-Beltway political analyst Stuart Rothenberg agreed the confrontation hurt Republicans, saying they "got almost nothing out of the deal to re-open the government and raise the debt ceiling except, of course, that they lost another 10 percentage points in their favorable rating and looked less like an organized political party and more like a disorganized, confused rabble."

"Republican operatives are worried that the showdown will improve Democratic House recruiting considerably for 2014, and it could well damage GOP fundraising, both among small-dollar donors and the party’s bigger hitters," Rothenberg wrote in a piece for Roll Call, a publication that covers Capitol Hill.

Another Washington, D.C. political publication, The Cook Political Report, said the shutdown improved the election prospects of 14 Democratic candidates around the country, including former State Rep. Jennifer Garrison, who is seeking the congressional seat held by Marietta Republican Bill Johnson. Its rating of the race switched from "Likely Republican" to "Lean Republican" after Johnson opposed Wednesday's deal.

"Garrison is still an underdog, but Johnson just voted against reopening the government," the publication wrote on Thursday.

Democratic organizations did their best to make political hay of the shutdown, no matter how their GOP targets voted. The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee put out a press release that criticized Renacci for standing "with the Tea Party in trying to propel our economy off a cliff."

A half-hour later, it sent out another release headlined "Congressman Joyce's $24 Billion Shutdown Finally Ends," which claimed Joyce's "reckless antics cost U.S. taxpayers $24 billion, hurt our economy, and put our country's credit on a negative watch after coming within a few hours of defaulting on our national debt."

“After all that twisting in the wind, the people of Ohio won’t buy into a sham where Congressman Joyce tries to disown this shutdown," said a statement from DCCC Chairman Steve Israel, a Democratic congressman from New York. "He was a partner in a reckless and irresponsible political game that inflicted harm on his local economy.”

Regardless of those harsh criticisms, Baldwin Wallace University Political Science Department Chairman Tom Sutton said he doubts the impasse will sway next year's elections against GOP incumbents unless strong candidates challenge them in next year's primary or general elections.

"There will be no ramifications for either side because of the nature of the districts, in my opinion," agreed Ashland University political science professor Peter Schramm.

Schramm said the recent controversies are minor when compared with past crises the nation has faced, and said the shutdown did not affect that many people.

"America is not made of delicate Chinese porcelain," said Schramm. "It is a pretty tough country. American politics is not everything. If I go out and buy a car, I don't care if the federal government is partially shut down or not."