YEAR-ROUND: The foliage and seed pods of the golden rain tree can add year-round interest to the landscape. ( Photo by Franklin Bonner / Bugwood.org )

In July, when much of the garden is in full swing and it is all we can do to keep the weeds pulled, the zucchini harvested and the garden watered, there is a lull when it comes to trees. Most have finished blooming by now, but one tree provides spectacular show in late June and July.

Golden rain tree (Koelreuteria paniculata) is a small to medium-sized tree often used as a specimen tree. It is native to eastern Asia, China and Korea, and is believed to have made its way to Europe in the mid-18th century. Thomas Jefferson received seeds from a Parisian friend, and planted them in his Monticello garden. This is the first account of the tree being planted in the New World.

It is an incredibly adaptable tree, growing well in our dry, alkaline, clay soils. It is not susceptible to pests or diseases. Once established, it is drought tolerant and is also tolerant of pollution. This, along with its smaller size, makes it a good street tree. Golden rain tree has a broad umbrella — or vase-shaped crown — and mature size is usually 30- to 40-feet tall and wide.

The large, tropical-looking panicles of four-petaled yellow flowers are quite spectacular. These are followed by attractive 1- to 2-inch seed pods that are reminiscent of Chinese lanterns. The seed pods persist into fall, adding late-season interest to the garden. The growth habit is somewhat twisting, adding winter appeal as well.

Advertisement

There are a few downsides. The seeds are plentiful; seedlings could become a problem, especially where trees receive ample water. They are in the same family as maples and, like those trees, golden rain tree has a moderate growth rate and there are reports the tree can be week wooded. Prune to remove any limbs with narrow crotch angles and included bark and to keep the crown open. Trees pruned to maintain a single trunk also can reduce problems with breakage in a heavy snow or wind.

Branches tend to droop as the tree grows, which is part of its charm. If pedestrian traffic beneath the tree is required, the branches can be pruned up or shortened by cutting them back to a side branch.

Golden rain tree is a great choice for gardeners looking for a late-blooming, medium-sized tree. Consider planting one in your garden and enjoy the year-round interest it provides.

If you have questions about this or other garden-related topics, you can reach the Broomfield County master gardeners at 303-464-5554 or coopext_broomfield_mg@mail.colostate.edu.

Colorado State University Extension in the City and County of Broomfield provides unbiased, research-based information about 4-H youth development, family and consumer issues, gardening, horticulture and natural resources. As part of a nationwide system, Extension brings the research and resources of the university to the community. The Broomfield County Extension office is at 1 DesCombes Drive, Broomfield, 80020. For information, call 720-887-2286.