Danny Shaver (Photo: Supplied)

East-central Indiana has many residents who lack health insurance, and enrolling them in Indiana’s insurance programs continues to be a challenge.

Wayne, Union and Fayette counties are estimated to have more than 8,000 residents who are eligible for health insurance but have not yet enrolled, Wayne County Health Department Executive Director Eric Coulter said.

The county health department recently received grants totaling $30,000 to hire a navigator to help residents in the three counties get insurance coverage. Navigator Danny Shaver will work 24 hours a week for the health department to assist eligible residents in completing the paperwork.

“We have the highest percentage of uninsured in this region,” Coulter said. “We also have high rates of smoking, obesity, diabetes and dental problems, as well as a lack of access to medical care.”

HIP 2.0, the state’s health insurance plan for low-income residents who don’t qualify for Medicaid, is improving medical care in the state, Coulter said.

The county health clinic continues to see 20 to 30 newly insured patients each week, but there are thousands without health insurance, Coulter said.

The expansion of health care coverage for low-income residents has allowed the Wayne County Health Clinic to add a full-time pediatric nurse practitioner to its staff, Coulter said.

Nurse practitioner Melinda Fox began as a part-time employee and in November became a full-time employee, Coulter said.

Melinda Fox (Photo: Supplied)

The barriers to enrolling in the state’s health insurance programs are as varied as the patients, Coulter said.

“Some people think it’s too good to be true,” Coulter said of HIP 2.0. “Some think it’s a handout. Having insurance coverage gives us the opportunity to help people with their health problems while they are still treatable.”

Sharrie Harlin, a Reid Health navigator, knows too well how challenging it is to enroll low-income residents in state health programs.

Sharrie Harlin (Photo: Supplied)

Holding public meetings to explain options and enroll residents wasn’t very successful, Harlin said.

“We have more success when we go to them,” Harlin said. “We’re seeing more people since we have moved downtown. We’re most effective when we see people face-to-face. I go to the free laundry days. It’s been most effective to follow the Gleaner’s truck,” Harlin said.

Gleaners of Indianapolis periodically gives food away in Wayne, Fayette and Union counties through its mobile pantries, often drawing hundreds of potential health insurance clients.

“Not everybody there is eligible for insurance coverage, but I’ve signed up 400 to 500 people at those events,” Harlin said. “Face-to-face is the most effective way to get people signed up. They tell their friends, and those friends tell their friends. ‘I met Sharrie at the laundromat’ is what they tell their friends.”

Harlin also has spent time at the North Seventh Street parking lot’s farmers’ markets, at the food pantry at Northside Church of Christ and with Nettle Creek bus drivers.

“I’m wherever two or three are gathered,” Harlin said with a laugh.

Navigators met earlier this month at the Excel Center to discuss ways to work together in 2016. Navigators will work more in the rural areas of Wayne, Union and Fayette counties next year to try to reach those uninsured residents.

Starting a HIP 2.0 application is easy, but following through with all the steps is the challenge, Harlin said.

“They have to have a birth certificate, a photo ID and 30 days’ proof of income. You have to go to Work One and get a printout. Some I’ve talked to six or seven times,” Harlin said.” “It takes about four to six weeks to be approved if you have all the paperwork.”

HIP 2.0 covers Hoosiers ages 19 to 64 who meet income levels. A single individual can earn up to $16,436 a year, couples up to $22,246 and a family of four not more than $33,865 a year to be eligible for the program.

HIP Link is a new program that helps low-income workers participate in their company’s employer-sponsored health insurance program, with the state reimbursing the employee for most of their required contribution to their company’s insurance plan.

The deadline to enroll in the Affordable Care Act insurance program also is approaching, Harlin said. Jan. 15 is the last day to enroll or change plans for coverage to start Feb. 1.

Open enrollment for the Affordable Care Act ends on Jan. 31, with any changes made between Jan. 16-31 effective on March 1.

Indiana has 12 authorized insurance companies for the Affordable Care Act coverage, but only three serve this area and only one — United Health Care — is accepted at Reid Health, Harlin said.

Read or Share this story: http://pinews.co/1YNAGJ2