By Casey Chun

Recently, I had the opportunity to sit down with one of Fordham’s most unique and motivated members. A student in the Gabelli School of Business, senior Felicia Zhang manages to balance a pre-medical coursework among her many other responsibilities and commitments. Moving from the brisk autumn outdoors to a cozy, yet professional, room on the third floor of Hughes Hall, we chatted for a while over coffee while she dictated her life story. Neatly put together, no one would have guessed that she only slept three hours the night before. The only hint of it would be the large cup of coffee in her hand. Caffeine, she says, is what helps her through all of this.

“I have a presentation later,” she told me prior to sitting down. “My thesis is on drug pricing policy.”

Felicia’s goal is to get a medical degree and enter the vast field of healthcare able to draw parallels between business and patient care. She comments that “the political aspect [of medicine] — like the Affordable Care Act and what it’s doing to the industry — has to do with what it’s like to becoming a provider.”

Hailing from the Golden State, she says, “[New Yorkers] are a little more aggressive…Being in this environment has helped become a little less naive — to push and pull.”

That is, in fact, what she has done at Fordham. She is one of the few GSB students on the pre-health route. Last year, she co-founded the Business Innovations in Healthcare Club (BIHC) with James Finora, GSB ’17. She said it is one of her greatest accomplishments. Students on the pre-health route are discouraged by the school’s requirements to pursue both avenues of education. This almost-Janusian combination is difficult to navigate with different requirements from both departments.

“[The administration is coming to know] what our needs are as business/pre-med [students]. Through BIHC, I hope to develop a mentoring program and a precedent for other business/pre-meds.” said Zhang. With a smile on her face, her promise as a dedicated student is evident.

“Would you say your career comes first?” I asked.

There is a moment of hesitation. “Out of what?” she said. “At this point, in college with my privilege, I can be a little selfish and focus on myself — and that means my career.”

“What is one social movement that you think you can place yourself behind?” I asked.

“Black Lives Matter. As an Asian, I feel like…” There is a pause. “How do I put this? As a member of the ‘model minority’ and as a person of color, I believe that whatever the injustices that Asians and Asian Americans feel that are done to them can only be resolved if all people of color could come together. I believe the gravest injustices are done to the Black American populations. Those injustices have to be addressed before the ‘lesser’ injustices of my community,” Felicia said.

“So you’re saying BLM should gain priority in social activism?” I asked.

“It should gain priority from that, when [the policing of black and brown bodies] is addressed, other issues that should be addressed will follow,” she said firmly, obviously giving much thought on this topic before I even asked.

“I do miss home. I can talk about my family. They’re important to me, especially my parents. What makes me love my parents so much is the struggles we’ve endured together. I find myself worrying about my parents and their retirement. I think my father finds enjoyment in duty to the family. I can understand that; I think I would too.”

She is family-oriented. She talks to her parents often and has a genuine concern for them. Caring and studious, I wondered how she balances work while being positive.

“I have this weird sense that I should be doing work in the night hours, and I’d be wasting time if I slept. I feel like sleeping is a waste —” She pauses to reword. “I don’t think it’s a waste of time — but I think I could be doing better things.”

“How do you back that statement up as a pre-med student?”

She smiles and almost immediately responds, “How do hospitals back up how they work resident [students]? I’d rather be saving other people’s lives than sleeping, unless my efficiency is compromised.”