Grit. Resilience. The strength to persist in worthy pursuits past points of frustration.

Going back several years, there's been a wave of interest in the role these kinds of character traits have in building success in school and, for that matter, in life. Some research suggests building up character assets such as these is as important as building up academic skills.

Leaders of the National Assessment of Educational Progress, the closest thing there is to a national testing program, announced recently that they are aiming to include in tests, starting in 2017, questions aimed at shedding light on how strong character traits are. It's a significant recognition of how important these "soft skills" are.

The Wisconsin Character Education Partnership held a conference at Alverno College last week. I attended a luncheon at which the South Milwaukee School District, Catholic Memorial High School in Waukesha and Columbus Elementary School in Columbus were among those honored for their character education programs.

This is all very good. I applaud high-quality character programs, schools that make them a part of their own character, and the growing interest in character education. These are things that should be taught at home — and they often are. But they often aren't. And even if they are, a school is an important place for promoting and enforcing these aspects of being both good and successful.

But what I really want to talk about is the lasagna I had for dinner Monday night. (I try to keep personal stories out of the paper, but I'm making an exception.)

Several of my grandchildren attend Yeshiva Elementary School, a 200-student Jewish parochial school on Milwaukee's west side. One of the longtime teachers is Rabbi Yosef Perlman, an energetic, enthusiastic guy who connects well with kids.

Leaders of the school felt there were more problems with how kids behaved and treated each other than they wanted to see. So it was decided to try something different for the school year that just ended: Perlman was given half of his time to work on getting more kids more engaged in school and more on track for showing character traits the school wanted to see.

Last fall, Perlman proposed to the principal, Rabbi Dovid Kossowsky, that the school create, for the first time, an honor roll. But it wouldn't focus on academic success. It would emphasize effort and character. Kids who pitched in for school life the way you wanted them to.

Monday night, there was a recognition dinner.

Yeshiva Elementary School operates on a pretty bare bones basis and there wasn't money for a caterer. So Perlman decided to make the food himself, with assistance from others. The dinner was to be done in two shifts, with lasagna served at one and sandwiches at the other.

Perlman spent a big hunk of last Sunday making the lasagna and sandwiches. They were all put in a refrigerator at school. Whatever the reason, the refrigerator shut down.

Monday morning, all the lasagna and sandwiches were an unrefrigerated, inedible mess. Perlman admitted later that he was mad and he just wanted to give up.

Instead, he (and a few others) raced to redo the entire thing. Eight big pans of lasagna. Dozens of deli sandwiches.

Come evening, this do-it-yourself school banquet turned out to be a lovely event, unfancy but sweet.

Kossowsky spoke to students about why it was important to recognize hard work and what it takes to overcome obstacles, about what you do when it seems things haven't turned out well and you want to give up, and about the importance of putting in all the effort it takes to get something done right. That is, he told everyone the story behind the food they had eaten.

One of the students being recognized was one of my granddaughters, a sweet child who just finished fourth grade.

For several years, she struggled with reading. It just didn't come easily to her. The school staff worked hard with her. Her parents gave her extra help, including arranging for tutoring. For a long time, it didn't pay off. But she and those helping her persisted.

At the start of third grade, I'm quite sure my granddaughter would not have done well on Wisconsin's standardized tests for reading.

But she kept at it. Grit. Persistence. Stick-to-it-tiveness.

Sometime during that third-grade year, it finally clicked. She now is a good, in fact enthusiastic, reader, and her test scores show it.

This girl might well qualify for an honor roll for academic success. But more important, in our view, she qualifies because of her effort, her attitude and her character.

My granddaughter is fortunate in her surrounding circumstances — family, school, community. Many kids are not so fortunate.

But I am convinced things can be done to spread fortune like hers to more children. Like flowers in a garden, character strengths can be grown and nurtured in ways that increase the likelihood they will bloom in a child.

Just as it is with kids, so it is with schools. A school where persistence, positive energy and the commitment to keep trying are central to the culture is a school where the chances for kids to blossom is increased. There is increasing evidence that when it comes to success in academics — test scores and all that — building good character is an ally of good education, not a distraction.

I hope all children learn what some students at Yeshiva Elementary School learned last week: When it looks like a lasagna disaster is going to bring you down, there may well be an excellent lasagna just ahead — if you're willing to do what that it takes.

Alan J. Borsuk is senior fellow in law and public policy at Marquette University Law School. Reach him at alan.borsuk@marquette.edu.