Many users of Obamacare's insurance exchanges say they are unlikely to do so again. Karen Bleier/AFP/Getty Images

More than half of those who signed up for health insurance on the government’s exchanges say they would not re-enroll the same way this year, according to a survey released Monday by Bankrate.com.

Respondents are particularly worried about premiums going up, and one in five users are disappointed with the technical glitches Healthcare.gov presented, such as slow loading times and error messages, in last year’s open enrollment period.



[READ Obamacare Among Issues Voters Are Unhappy About]

Whether consumers feel confident or not, however, will have little impact on their health insurance coverage unless they actively choose to change plans or cancel the ones they have. Obamacare provides for automatic re-enrollment for people who do not log on to online exchanges and shop for new health insurance.

All survey respondents came from households that used the exchanges during open enrollment last fall and winter, with 51 percent saying they would not use the exchange again in the new season, while 43 percent saying they would.



Shopping on government health care exchanges.

Bankrate.com

Among those who used the exchanges last year, 52 percent reported a positive experience, and 53 percent feel confident that the online health insurance marketplace will operate smoothly this year. These figures show an improvement in consumer confidence since a Bankrate survey conducted in August, in which 39 percent of the general population say they thought the exchanges would work well during the new signup season that begins Nov. 15.

Mark Schlesinger, a professor at the Yale School of Public Health, says in the release about the survey that consumer discontent likely varies widely by location – some states have implemented their own websites for people to buy insurance, while others have defaulted to Healthcare.gov, the one created by the federal government.Thirteen states, including California, New York and Kentucky, have created their own online marketplaces.

"State-implemented exchanges have a lot more resources than does the federal HealthCare.gov exchange, a lot more consumer assistance and navigators to help people make choices," he says.



[READ Americans Using Less Health Care But Spending More Despite Obamacare Promises]

Other than location, survey results varied by income, political affiliation and employment status. Among key findings:

Among respondents who earn less than $30,000 a year, 53 percent say they plan to give the exchanges another try, versus 35 percent of respondents whose income is $75,000 or more.

Republicans who used the exchanges before are either “not too confident” or “not at all confident” that the websites will work this year. Among Republicans, 72 percent felt this way, versus 30 percent of Democratic respondents and 50 percent of independents.

This sentiment was reflected in their plans for this year’s open enrollment season – 66 percent of Republican exchange veterans say they won't return to the online marketplace, versus 41 percent of Democrats and 55 percent of independents.

Women appear more confident in the exchanges; 55 percent of women who used the exchanges before say they're either “very confident” or “somewhat confident” that the websites will work well this time, compared with 50 percent of men.

Among part-time workers, 62 percent of survey respondents are feeling “very” or “somewhat confident” about how the exchanges will perform, compared with 47 percent of full-time workers who used the websites last year.

Part-time workers also say they are are more likely to shop in the exchanges than full-time workers, with 52 percent who took part last year saying they plan to return, while 39 percent of full-time workers plan to do so.

Consumer Confidence in the Exchanges Bankrate.com

Despite dissatisfaction or plans to avoid health insurance exchanges, consumers likely will continue to keep the plans they already have. Doug Hough, associate director of the Bloomberg School of Public Health at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, predicts in the release that most policies will renew automatically, meaning that consumers will not compare new plans and switch their coverage on the exchanges, but that the plan they enrolled in last year will continue to be in effect.

"With 43 percent saying their experience last time was somewhat or very bad, they're not looking forward to doing it again,” he says. “That in itself will encourage people to just go with auto-renew. I predict we'll see lots and lots and lots of auto-renewals."