Photo

NASHVILLE — Tennessee voters backed Senator Lamar Alexander against a Tea Party challenge and turned down an aggressive bid by conservatives and business interests to oust three members of the State Supreme Court in primaries on Thursday.

Mr. Alexander’s victory in the Republican primary was another win for establishment Republicans against Tea Party challengers. And the decision to retain the justices was also a defeat for conservatives who hoped to gain a majority on Tennessee’s highest court.

With 99 percent of the vote counted, Mr. Alexander led six other candidates with 50 percent of the vote, The Associated Press said.

In addition to backing Mr. Alexander, Republicans, as expected, nominated another incumbent, Gov. Bill Haslam, who is running for re-election in November’s general election.

In securing a win, Mr. Alexander thwarted the final attempt by Tea Party supporters to oust a Republican senator this year after challenges in Kansas, Kentucky, Mississippi and South Carolina faltered. The year has proved a marked contrast from 2010 and 2012, when Tea Party candidates toppled Senators Robert F. Bennett of Utah and Richard G. Lugar of Indiana, both Republicans.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The victories of incumbent lawmakers this year helped deprive Democrats of incendiary candidates they would prefer to face in November and raised the chances of a Republican takeover of the Senate.

Mr. Alexander, a former governor who was elected to the Senate in 2002, knew he would be a target because of his long record of compromise and deal making. And he faced an especially aggressive challenge from Joe Carr, a state representative from Rutherford County, which is southeast of Nashville.

Mr. Carr assailed Mr. Alexander as too moderate for this state, which has not voted for a Democratic presidential candidate since 1996, when Al Gore, a Tennessean, was Bill Clinton’s running mate.

But unlike some other Republican lawmakers who did little to prepare for primary challenges, Mr. Alexander moved quickly to secure the backing of Tennessee’s political apparatus, which helped deprive Mr. Carr and other rivals of political oxygen.

The hopes of Mr. Carr, who reported only $1.1 million in fund-raising, were raised in June after a little-known college professor, David Brat, stunned Representative Eric Cantor of Virginia, the House majority leader, in a primary. Mr. Brat had highlighted Mr. Cantor’s support for granting some illegal immigrants legal status and enlisted the conservative radio talk show host Laura Ingraham in his cause.

Tennessee – U.S. Senate

Mr. Carr also got help from Ms. Ingraham, and picked up the same playbook.

“When Lamar Alexander says he ‘voted to end amnesty,’ he isn’t telling the truth, again,” Mr. Carr said this week in a statement. “The truth is Lamar Alexander betrayed Tennessee’s workers.”

But it was not enough to defeat Mr. Alexander, a figure in Tennessee politics for decades who once wore a plaid, flannel shirt and walked more than 1,000 miles across the state while running for governor. In his victory speech, he touted his ability to compromise, The A.P. said. He told followers that if they wanted to make changes to health care and spending, “we’re going to have to work with other people to get it done.”

Tennessee voters also rejected an effort to force three State Supreme Court justices from the bench after conservatives sought to define them as too liberal for the state.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Chief Justice Gary R. Wade and Justices Cornelia A. Clark and Sharon G. Lee all survived to win new eight-year terms on the state’s highest court, maintaining a margin of about 56 percent to 44 percent, The A.P. said.

The justices were all appointed by the governor at the time, Phil Bredesen, a Democrat. Conservative groups targeted them for defeat in this summer’s retention elections, which are normally pro forma votes.

Their critics, including the Republican State Leadership Committee and Americans for Prosperity, affiliated with Charles G. and David H. Koch, mounted a high-profile campaign claiming the justices had been “soft on crime” and hostile to business interests. The justices were also criticized for obliquely supporting the Affordable Care Act because the court in 2006 appointed a Democrat, Robert E. Cooper Jr., as state attorney general; Mr. Cooper later refused to join a lawsuit challenging the measure. (The court itself never ruled on a case concerning the health law.)

The justices, joined by many members of the state’s legal community, said the attacks were baseless and raised more than $1 million, a formidable sum in a state of modest television markets. Their opponents responded by pouring hundreds of thousands of dollars into the race.

Speaking to supporters in Nashville after declaring victory, Justice Clark said, “We have shown citizens of this state and other states that we can’t be bought, that we want fair and impartial courts and that we do not want any outside people messing in the judicial system in Tennessee.”

In an interview, she said she thought her victory might deter challenges to elected judges elsewhere.

“I hope that the hard work that we have put into this will discourage people from unfairly going after other justices,” she said.

The leader of a political action committee that opposed the justices, Tennessee Forum, said after the election on Thursday that the balloting had placed the jurists on notice.

“For probably the first time ever, the Supreme Court has been held accountable to some degree,” said Susan Kaestner, the group’s president, who said she celebrated that the election “wasn’t a rubber stamp.”