As John Kerry and Sergei Lavrov sat together in Geneva on Saturday to announce agreement between the US and Russia on how to disarm Syria of its chemical weapons, the sense of relief in Washington was almost palpable.

After a week in which Barack Obama's political fortunes and reputation appeared to lie almost entirely in the hands of Russia's President Vladimir Putin, America's top diplomat had managed to wrest something from the chaos.

The deal sets a tough, and some would say unachievable, deadline for the elimination of the Assad regime's chemical arsenal, and holds the door just ajar to the possibility - but no more than that - of armed intervention if Syria breaches the agreement that has now been struck .

But to have arrived at this point apparently accidentally after so many zig-zags along the way does not look like the mark of a presidency that is resolute on the international stage.

If the Obama administration's original script had been stuck to, the world would by now have seen US missiles rain down on military targets across Syria as a lesson to its regime - and the wider world - that American warnings are more than mere bluster.

No-one could have predicted the twists and turns of a momentous week of global diplomacy that would leave both America and Mr Obama seriously diminished at home and abroad - but in Washington DC last Sunday night, there were dark omens of what lay ahead.

Behind closed doors at the Naval Observatory, the official residence of US vice-president Joe Biden, a little-noticed prologue was unfolding to a drama whose script would be written in Moscow and Damascus, with Vladimir Putin in the starring role and the US president relegated to part of bit-player.

There, in the Queen Anne-style mansion, Mr Biden was sharing a "family-style" Italian supper with six Republican senators who were crucial to White House hopes of winning a resolution authorising Mr Obama to take military action against Syria.

Just how crucial, however, only became clear just after 7pm when Mr Obama's presidential motorcade – unannounced and unscheduled – came howling out of the gates of the White House to make the three-mile journey up Massachusetts Avenue, past the Lutyens-designed British Embassy, to his deputy's house.

It was an extraordinary breach of protocol that, in hindsight, heralded an even greater loss of face for Mr Obama on the world stage.

White House officials tried to brush off the dash across town by saying that Mr Obama had just "dropped by" Mr Biden's place, but no-one was fooled: American presidents just don't "drop by" to see US senators at zero notice. For all the spinning, it was clear that the White House sensed the real possibility of defeat in the Democrat-controlled Senate.

Not for the first time in the Syria crisis, Mr Obama had telegraphed he was playing a weak hand.

It was against this dismal background that Mr Obama awoke on Monday morning, mulling a potential defeat in Congress that, as one commentator put it, would have left him the most emasculated US president since Jimmy Carter went fishing in Georgia and was attacked by a "killer rabbit".

In London John Kerry, the US secretary of state, was still beating the drums for an intervention that Mr Obama and his aides knew they could not sell.

Stentorian as always, Mr Kerry warned of the damage that would follow if Bashar al-Assad "was free to rub out countless numbers of his own citizens with impunity".

So was there anything that Assad could do to avoid the threatened attack, he was asked? "Sure," he responded, "He can turn over every single bit of his chemical weapons to the international community in the next week." To make clear that he wasn't serious he added:

"But he isn't about to do it, and it can't be done, obviously."

Those 20 words, uttered in exasperation, offered Mr Obama a domestic political lifeline, but one that undermined the notion – as Mr Obama himself would put in his address to the nation later in the week – that "for nearly seven decades the United States has been the anchor of global security."

The 12 hours of breath-taking diplomacy that followed was a testament to the shrewd statecraft of Mr Putin - and to the desperation in Washington to save face.

Back on his plane Mr Kerry swapped his hand-tailored Harvard Square suit for a faded-orange sweatshirt, and took a call from his Russian counterpart, Mr Lavrov, who told him that he had heard his remarks in London and was now preparing to make an announcement.

What only an hour earlier had been belittled by State Department aides as a mere "rhetorical flourish" was suddenly morphing into a "diplomatic solution" that White House aides now said had been under discussion for "months" (a version that Mr Kerry repeated at the closing Geneva press conference).

The clinching moment came just before 4pm, when Mr Obama sat down for a series of pre-planned US television network interviews. How would he respond to the Russian overture?

The chats had originally been billed as the part of an intensive 24-hour push to win backing for air strikes. Now Vladimir Putin had offered a political lifeline, and Mr Obama seized it with both hands. "I think you have to take it with a grain of salt initially," he said, but reluctantly accepted that the Russian offer was "a potentially positive development."

However it was, as countless members of the foreign policy establishment instantly knew, a Faustian pact in which Mr Putin saved Mr Obama's blushes at home in exchange for a dramatic loss of American face abroad.

On Capitol Hill, Harry Reid, the Democrat leader of the Senate, announced the postponement of the planned Senate vote on the use for force - and America's credible threat had effectively been withdrawn until further notice since – as one senior Republican senate aide told The Sunday Telegraph - "Folks here will do almost anything to keep the Russian proposal alive and avoid a vote on using force."

In that moment, the "big stick" that US presidents have carried since the days of Theodore Roosevelt could be heard slipping from Mr Obama's grasp as much of the US breathed a collective sigh of relief.

"The moment the president gave his interviews, everything shifted," a Democratic senate aide told The Sunday Telegraph. "It became clear what the president was thinking and John Kerry's comment wasn't a throwaway."

That meant Moscow rejecting US and French demands that any UN resolution contained the threat of force, confident in the knowledge that the British parliament and now the US Congress, had made clear such threats were empty.

In a sign of who would be in the diplomatic driving seat in the days ahead, Russia called a meeting of the UN Security Council, and then abruptly cancelled it when it became clear that the French would demand any resolution carried the threat of force – something Moscow had no need, or desire to accede to.

It was a clearly weakened Mr Obama who found himself still making the case for intervention in a prime-time address to the nation on Tuesday, even as everyone in the room, in Congress and watching at home knew full well that events had already overtaken him. Even his wife wasn't persuaded, Mr Obama had admitted injudiciously to NBC.

"If you ask Michelle, 'Do we do we want to be involved in another war?'" he said, "the answer is 'No'."

Addressing the nation with the air of a quietly despairing professor who cannot understand how the class is not catching the force of his argument, Mr Obama explained what was at stake and then publicly acknowledged his failure to carry the nation with him.

"What kind of world will we live in if the United States of America sees a dictator brazenly violate international law with poison gas and we choose to look the other way?" he asked plaintively, even as the answer to that question was becoming clear in Moscow, Damascus and Geneva.

For those on Capitol Hill who had taken a political risk and put partisan considerations aside to help Mr Obama win the argument, his performance that engendered nothing but despair.

Bob Corker, one of the Republican senators present at the Biden dinner where Mr Obama had pressing the case for limited intervention for more than an hour with such apparent conviction, couldn't contain his frustration.

"He just cannot follow through," he told CNN of Mr Obama, "He cannot speak to the nation as a commander in chief. He cannot speak to the world as a commander in chief. He just cannot do it... He's a diminished figure here on Capitol Hill."

Just how diminished became clear on Thursday when the New York Times ran a gloating article by Vladimir Putin, scorning Mr Obama's notion of American exceptionalism and scolding the US for its determination to threaten force.

If there had been any doubt that Mr Obama's domestic political fix would come with a heavy international price, it evaporated as soon as Mr Putin's finger-wagging article hit the newsstands.

Sen. John McCain, the hawkish Republican who has called for US intervention in Syria, said the article was "an insult to the intelligence of every American", while Sen. Robert Menendez, the chair of the Senate foreign relations committee said he had "almost wanted to vomit" after reading it.

But the indignation could not deflect from the scale of the Russian president's diplomatic triumph, nor from Congress's role in handing it to him.

"One gets the sense vodka and caviar are flowing heavily these days [in the Kremlin]," said Richard Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations, on MSNBC. "This is his moment after decades of Russian humiliation to remind everyone Russia is back."

And so, when John Kerry and Sergei Lavrov met in Geneva to discuss the Russian plan to put chemical weapons beyond use, it was clear that British, French and American bluster that any plan must be accompanied by the threat of force and strict 15-day deadlines was slipping under the pressure of Russian realpolitik.

"The US is ready for a resolution that does not have the use of force included because it is determined to ensure the UN demonstrates Syrian culpability for chemical weapons attacks," said one US official, implicitly acknowledging that US cannot credibly threaten force if Congress has already made clear it will not authorise it.

And so it was when Mr Kerry yesterday emerged from the third day of Geneva talks. The plan hammered out was full of urgent-sounding deadlines - a full inventory of Syria's weapons by next week, first inspections by November. But it contained no clear commitment to use force to ensure they happen, just talk by Mr Lavrov of the possibility of a "Chapter 7" resolution in the future.

A tired-looking Mr Kerry said there could be "no games, no room for avoidance of anything less than full compliance by the Assad regime" - but stopped short of saying America would punish non-cooperation with military strikes and instead talked vaguely of consequences.

As was so painfully demonstrated in Washington last week, the political reality is that neither he nor Mr Obama is in a position to dictate what those consequences would be.

Additional reporting: Raf Sanchez in Washington and Philip Sherwell in New York