In the wake of China’s surprising devaluation of its currency, strategists are facing a tough question: What could the move mean for China’s demand for U.S. Treasurys?

China held about $1.27 trillion U.S. government debt in May, according to the latest data from the Treasury. It is the biggest foreign owner of U.S. securities, exerting a heavy influence on the long-term borrowing costs for U.S. government, consumers and businesses.

Bloomberg News

China’s purchases of U.S. debt have been slowing down from a torrid pace over the decade through 2013. The world’s second-largest economy is grappling with a slower pace of growth, a reduced pace of foreign reserve accumulation and capital outflows driven by the prospect of higher interest rates from the U.S. Federal Reserve.

Now with China joining the global game of letting its currency soften to boost exports, logically more dollar receipts may find their way back to the U.S. bond market. If the yuan continues to weaken in coming months, analysts say this at least would boost China’s demand for U.S. debt.

However, analysts say the trend of slowing buying from China remains in place. Anticipation of a weaker yuan could spur more capital flows out of China, eroding the nation’s foreign reserves, the world’s biggest in size.

The risks “are skewed toward further capital outflows in coming months,” said interest-rate analysts at J.P. Morgan Securities LLC in a note to clients. “Chinese demand for Treasury bonds has already been muted in 2015, and this suggests demand should remain tepid in coming months.”

Chinese foreign exchange reserves have fallen by more than $300 billion from their peak in June 2014 to $3.651 trillion recently, a more than 8% decline over the period, according to J.P. Morgan. As a result, on a six-month rolling basis, Chinese Treasury purchases have slowed to just $10 billion, their slowest run rate since late 2013, according to J.P. Morgan.

[RELATED: China Fears Spark Fresh Market Selloff. Here’s What the Street Thinks.]

Eric Stein, co-director of global income at money manager Eaton Vance Management, said China is giving the markets a bigger role in deciding the value of the yuan, as part of the effort to groom the currency as global reserve currency. Less intervention in the currency markets means over a medium-term time frame, this probably reduces the need for China to recycle dollars into Treasury bonds, he said.

“It’s tough to say how this will affect the Treasury bond market on a day-to-day basis, but one of the major changes for the bond market looking ahead will be less Chinese participation,” said Mr. Stein.

Few expect China to sell Treasury debt holdings in a significant way, a scenario that could send Treasury yields spiking, hurting not only the U.S. growth outlook and rattling global markets. Such a move would cause China’s large holdings of Treasury debt to plunge in value.