— Beaumont Health System has opened a new family practice clinic in the Renaissance Center, increasing primary care options available in Detroit.

Riverfront Family Medicine, located in the Renaissance Center, is the first Detroit family practice operated by Beaumont. The clinic provides primary care services for adults and children.

Riverfront Family Medicine will serve as a “patient-centered medical home” for area residents, and those who work in the Renaissance Center and in downtown Detroit. Under the federal Affordable Care Act, health care costs are meant to be reduced by centering each patient’s care with a primary care doctor who manages the patient’s case and provides basic health services, like preventive care and annual physicals.

Health care services available by appointment at the new clinic include same-day sick visits; preventive health care; chronic disease management for conditions such as diabetes, asthma and high blood pressure; and flu shots and other immunizations.

Beaumont Health System is part of Beaumont Health, formed earlier this year by Beaumont’s merger with Oakwood Healthcare and Botsford Health Care. The new doctor’s office offers Beaumont laboratory services for on-site blood draws; referrals to Beaumont specialists, as needed; and an electronic medical record linking all of a patient’s care throughout the Beaumont health system.

“By having a presence in the Renaissance Center, we can accommodate the needs of busy, working professionals, while providing convenient accessibility to Beaumont doctors and services,” Dr. David Wood, chief medical officer for Beaumont Health, said in a press release.

Beaumont representatives and downtown business leaders celebrated the center’s opening Monday with a ribbon-cutting ceremony. Riverfront Family Medicine is located at 500 Renaissance Center, Suite R560, River East Center, Level 1. It is open from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., Monday through Friday.

Riverfront Family Medicine is part of the Beaumont Medical Group, which employs about 600 primary care and specialty physicians in Southeast Michigan. The practice is headed by Andrew Kotsis, D.O., a board-certified family medicine physician whose areas of clinical interest include chronic and acute disease management and preventive medicine.

To make an appointment, call (313) 473-3800, or visit www.beaumont.edu/riverfront-family-medicine for more information. Free, validated parking is available for patients.

KBouffard@detroitnews.com

Read or Share this story: http://detne.ws/1tfpYvo