Wednesday, nurse practitioners in Pennsylvania won a small victory in their fight to be able to practice without being monitored by physicians, while doctors' groups continue to resist the change.

On May 18 the Senate Consumer Protection and Professional Licensure Committee voted to advance a bill, Seenat Bill 717, that aims to allow nurse practitioners to practice independently.

Under current state law, nurse practitioners must have collaborative agreements with two physicians. The agreements allow the nurse practitioners to practice alone.

The bill would alter the requirement. Nurse practitioners would have to collaborate with physicians for three years and 3,600 hours, but they would have full practice authority after that time is up.

The bill is now moving on to the Senate floor, though it could bounce back and forth between the Senate and the House of Representatives.

Advocates, nonetheless, were pleased.

“With this vote, Pennsylvania is one step closer to joining the growing number of states that enable nurse practitioners to serve seniors, rural communities, and all patients to the full extent of their education and training,” Lorraine Bock, president of the Pennsylvania Coalition of Nurse Practitioners, said.

Physicians oppose the change

Many physicians argue that giving nurse practitioners full practice authority would not improve patient care, because nurse practitioners have less training than physicians.

Critics of S.B. 717 feel that patient care is better when nurse practitioners practice under the guidance of physicians.

The Pennsylvania Medical Society, in fact, would prefer to see more collaboration between physicians and nurse practitioners. It believes that the current legislation would break up the current team practice of physicians and nurses working together.

“The Pennsylvania Medical Society is deeply disappointed in the Committee’s action,” said Dr. Scott Shapiro, president of the medical society and a practicing physician in Montgomery County. “By eliminating the collaborative ties that exist between nurse practitioners and physicians, S.B. 717 removes an important safeguard in patient care and fragments the health care team.”

For its part, the Hospital and Healthsystem Association of Pennsylvania, or HAP, argues in support of S.B. 717 that existing health care teams need to be revamped to keep up with the changes in health care.

“The 2010 Affordable Care Act is the largest overhaul to our nation’s health care system since the creation of Medicare and Medicaid in 1965,” HAP President and CEO Andy Carter said. “It has required a comprehensive rethinking of the way care is provided. This rethinking also must include the role of health care professionals in new, team-based models of care.”