Topics: Author Interviews, marine biology, Octopus, Video, Sustainability News

Octopuses, the eight-armed mysteries of the deep, are the smartest of invertebrates and, in the opinion of journalist Katherine Harmon Courage, among the most fascinating animals, period. There’s enough that we’re still trying to figure out about their larger-than-life personalities, uncanny intelligence and ability to disappear in plain sight to fill an entire book — as Courage has done in “Octopus!“. The book follows Courage as she delves into the wide world of octopus research — and cuisine — to try and figure out what it is about the sea creature that so captures the imagination.

“Everybody asks, once you’ve been working on a book for a while, ‘Well aren’t you tired of it?’” Courage told Salon. “And I’m like ‘No, I could never actually be tired of talking about octopuses or learning about them.'”

Courage spoke to Salon about her boundless enthusiasm for the cephalopods and some of the many things humans can learn from them, along with some mysteries that seem as if they may never be solved. This interview has been edited for length and clarity.

Here’s the question I’m sure you get all the time: Why the octopus?

My obsession really started a few years ago. There was a study that came out that showed them using coconut shell halves as tools, and there was video, so I blogged about it for Scientific American. I was a reporter at the time, and ever since then I’ve just been totally fascinated, because it’s just amazing. They’re these crazy invertebrates that are using tools somehow — they’re not social, so how are they figuring this out individually? It’s pretty remarkable.

You still blog about octopuses for Scientific American. What kind of responses do you get? Is there more interest than you would have thought?

Yes! I mean, I always kind of thought that they were really fascinating, and then once I started working on the book I was totally blown away — and still, even after having written a book I learn something new every day, and it’s incredibly amazing. But anyway, people just come out of the woodwork to say they’re so excited because they just love octopuses, it’s their favorite animal, they’ve loved them forever… it’s just really cool that everybody seems to have a secret fascination with or obsession with octopuses.

They seem so removed from us, and yet kind of easy to anthropomorphize…

I think that’s one of the big scientific lessons that we have to learn from them: that there’s this big intelligence there. They interact with us and look at us and kind of examine us — one researcher actually likened it to a dog. Your dog will look at you and engage with you in a way that most animals don’t, and octopuses will do the same, which is just really weird because we’re used to dogs that live and work with us, but octopuses are not social and they’ve been living in the ocean for hundreds of millions of years. So the question of why they can engage with us that way is really interesting.

Do people keep them as pets, or is it mostly just researchers who have discovered this kind of thing?

That’s a good question. Some people do keep them as pets. They’re not great pets, unfortunately, because they’re pretty sensitive to water conditions, and also because they don’t live very long. It’s the tragedy of the octopus, because they’re so smart and people do bond with them — even keepers and researchers. But most of the laboratory octopuses will only live for maybe a year or so.

That’s what everybody told me when I started researching the book, actually: ”Oh, you have to get a pet octopus!” I looked into it briefly and it just probably is not a good idea.

When you say they’re smart, is that just for invertebrates? Or is there a case to be made for them being one of the more intelligent animals?

I would say definitely the latter. I think they are one of the more intelligent animals on the planet, at least that we know about. Of course, they probably are the smartest invertebrates, at least by our definition. Researchers who study their intelligence will place them in with the birds — some birds can use tools and some aren’t as quick. Octopuses really hold their own against vertebrates.

But they’re not actually psychic, right?

As far as we know, but I don’t know if they’ve been testing them on that. They can do mazes and open bottles.

I guess it’s just another one of those mysteries.

They’re mysterious animals. Perhaps we’ll never know.

There’s some dissonance in the book between all these anecdotes about how smart they are, interspersed with descriptions of how delicious they are.

Yep!

Did you have any trouble reconciling that?

I have to say, I strategized. I tried to front-load my research with the culinary aspect, and then do the more in-depth biology and intelligence stuff later so I wouldn’t feel too guilty after learning it. I have to say, it’s been a while since I’ve eaten any octopus.

At the end of interviews, I would ask researchers who studied them, kind of cautiously, if they ever eat them. And, actually, most would say, “Yes, here’s my favorite recipe.” But that’s not all the researchers. A lot of them won’t even touch cephalopods, won’t have any calamari or anything.

It can make you wonder where their greatest value lies — as cuisine, or as something to be studied?

Right, exactly. And it’s interesting, when I was in Greece, looking at the cultural and culinary sides of things, and I would explain to people, “Oh, I’m writing a book about octopuses.” And it seemed so boring to them because they have octopuses hanging out all over the street drying. They’re like “Why would you want to write about that? It’s just food!” Even in New York, it’s still kind of an exotic dish, or people are intrigued by it, while here people have been catching and eating them their whole life and it’s kind of an essential, fundamental element of their cuisine.