When a small restaurant run by a husband-and-wife team becomes popular enough to warrant an expansion into adjacent space, it must be doing something right.

At Tables in Park Hill, the list of things that chef-owners Amy Vitale and Dustin Barrett excel at is a long one, starting with their seasonal menus. It’s one of those places where you can close your eyes, drop a finger on the list, and come up with a winner.

Two recent visits on a pair of frigid evenings found a kitchen operating in its winter wheelhouse, though I have eaten enough spring and summer dishes at this neighborhood spot to vouch for its way with warm-weather produce.

Tables seems equally assured in putting out small, shared plates and large entrées that double-dog dare you to make room for dessert. (Though do consider the carrot cake with mascarpone icing.)

On one visit, we were in a noshing mood.

That meant a starter of deviled eggs. Theirs departed from the traditional mustardy picnic style and were sparked by a cornichon relish and a ring of a puckery caperberry-parsley vinaigrette.

Another hit was a roasted beet salad. It was decked with Brussels sprouts leaves that, in a stunning turn of events, had not been crispy-fried with bacon. They were raw but tender, with the cabbage-like flavor shining through against a cream sauce of mustard and smoked garlic.

A flatbread bore a nice contrast of duck confit and tart goat cheese, speckled with roasted pecans and shaved mimolette. The latter is a French cow’s milk cheese that is similar to Edam but is seasoned with annatto, which gives it some nuttiness.

Another visit saw a longer walk through the dinner menu.

Mushroom soup was nicely textured — I have endured some gloppy versions of late — and bore a crostini with a smear of Meyer lemon spread. The combo sounded a tad counterintuitive, but it worked beautifully.

Sweetbreads — that sounds so much more appetizing than “thymus glands,” doesn’t it? — were sautéed with baby parsnips and bacon. They were crispy, with just enough give in the texture.

Two entrées stood out, a pork chop and a duck breast, although both left me second-guessing myself when a neighboring diner’s New York strip arrived, paired with a horseradish Yorkshire pudding with a mushroom-burgundy sauce.

The pork chop was beautifully cross-hatched on the grill. It was just a bit on the dry side, despite the waiter’s assurance that the kitchen would cook it medium rare. It came with a coarse-ground, porridge-y polenta with a dried cherry sauce.

The duck breast was crispy and gleamed under a spicy pepper jelly glaze. It was paired with a moist persimmon-herb bread pudding, perfect on a bone-cold night.

Barrett and Vitale have an eye for design detail, too. There is a rustic, homey quality to the room, belying the plain-Jane entrance on a commercial stretch of Kearney Street running between East 22nd and 23rd avenues.

The wooden floors gleam, and distressed wooden doors hang as art pieces on the walls.

Like the rest of the restaurant, the bar was expanded several months ago. This makes it a bit of a magnet for neighborhood residents seeking some of the excellent cocktails, such as the House Setting Sun, which does, in fact, have an orange glow. The wine list is well-edited, with plenty of by-the-glass options, and it trots the globe.

About the service: It is friendly and accommodating, and the folks at the host stand work hard to make everyone feel welcome. They’re total pros, and when rail service starts running from Union Station to DIA, you get the feeling they would make terrific station masters.

In short, Tables offers plenty of reasons to pull up a chair.

William Porter: 303-954-1877, wporter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/williamporterdp

TABLES

Contemporary American.

2267 Kearney St. 303-388-0299 tablesonkearney.com

*** Great

Atmosphere: Charming, cozy atmosphere that belies the storefront entrance.

Service: Efficient and knowledgeable, with friendly pros at the host stand

Beverages: Beer, wine, cocktails

Plates: Small and shared, $6-$15; entrées, $19-$30; desserts, $7

Hours: Tuesday-Saturday, 5-9:30 p.m.

Details: Street parking. Patio during the spring. Reservations a good idea.

Two visits

Our star system:

****: Exceptional

***: Great

**: Very Good

*: Good

Stars reflect the dining reviewer’s overall reaction to the restaurant’s food, service and atmosphere.