As the best women’s alpine racers in the world gather for three races this weekend in Aspen, two who call the Vail Valley home are facing questions that carry enormous historical implications for the sport in the United States:

What would it be like if teammates Lindsey Vonn and Mikaela Shiffrin are fighting neck and neck for the World Cup overall title going into the home stretch of the season?

Vonn, 31, has won the overall — the most coveted title in skiing — more times than any other American (four). Only two skiers have won more: Annemarie Moser Proell of Austria (six) and Marc Girardelli of Luxembourg (five).

Injuries prevented Vonn from challenging for it since she last won in 2012. The two women who won it since then — Tina Maze of Slovenia (2013) and Anna Fenninger of Austria (2014-15) aren’t racing this season. Maze is taking the year off and Fenninger blew out a knee last month.

It’s not far-fetched to envision Shiffrin, 20, making a strong bid this season or next. She dominated slalom the past three seasons, and her giant slalom has improved steadily. She will race super-G this season for the first time, bringing in the possibility of scoring points in that discipline and in super combined.

“I think I’m on the radar,” Shiffrin said last week during a training camp at Copper Mountain. “It is in the back of my mind, honestly. If I ski really well in GS and slalom this year, and I get some World Cup points in super-G, I think the overall is within my reach. But it’s definitely a lofty goal, especially with Lindsey. Fenninger is injured, Maze is not skiing this year; they (would be) the other two favorites for the overall. Obviously Lindsey is a huge favorite.”

They have different strengths. Vonn claims most of her points in downhill and super-G (the “speed” events). Shiffrin will get most of hers in the slalom and GS (the “technical” events) and won’t even enter downhill races. But if both are scoring in three events, it could get very interesting.

“It would be great for the sport and great for skiing in the United States,” Vonn said. “It’s definitely different because we really don’t overlap that much. I’m going to be doing GS this year, and Mikaela’s probably doing a couple super-G’s.”

Vonn used to duel annually for the overall with Maria Riesch of Germany, who has since retired. While not teammates, they were friends who regularly spent the Christmas holidays together. When Vonn won the overall four times in five years (2008-12), Riesch claimed the one Vonn missed (2011), and Riesch was either second (2009-10) or third (2008, 2012) the years Vonn won.

“It might be less dramatic than Maria and I, because we were racing every single race together,” Vonn said, “but I still think it would be phenomenal for the sport if Mikaela and I were going head to head in the running for the overall title.”

What would it be like at a team dinner after one has a good race, the other a bad one? What would breakfast be like the next morning?

“I’m excited to find out,” Shiffrin said. “If we were to go head to head, she’s not going to give it to me and I sure as heck am not going to give it to her. I think it’s going to be one of those things that’s like lifting each other up.

“I mean, maybe there will be some cattiness, and that will be fine too. Play the rivalries. I was talking to Tina Maze and she was like, ‘Play that. People want to see that. They want to see the rivalry. Play the game, why not? It’s fun. It will give you some motivation too.’ Lindsey, she is my rival. But she’s also my teammate and I definitely respect her.”

John Meyer: jmeyer@denverpost.com or @johnmeyer

Women’s World Cup

Why is the World Cup overall the most coveted title in ski racing?

Ski racers generally regard World Cup titles as more meaningful than Olympic and world championships medals. Racers accumulate points for top-30 finishes throughout the season, determining titles in each discipline (downhill, slalom, etc.) and the overall (all events). A medal winner is the best on a given day, but those who claim World Cup titles demonstrate supremacy across a season that begins in October and ends in March. Thus the overall winner is considered the world’s best racer.

American overall winners:

Lindsey Vonn, four (2008-10, 2012)

Phil Mahre, three (1981-83)

Bode Miller, two (2005, 2008)

Tamara McKinney, one (1983)

Schedule in Aspen

Friday: Giant slalom,

10 a.m. and 1 p.m.

Saturday: Slalom,

10:15 a.m. and 1:15 p.m.

Sunday: Slalom,

10 a.m. and 1 p.m.