Ken Chilton is an assistant professor of public administration. (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights A narrow focus on affordable housing, while ignoring other factors, is a prescription for failure.

White residents are concentrating around the urban core. African-Americans are concentrating in suburban area.

Displacement is real and the consequences have direct economic impacts for all Nashvillians.

Re: "Develop comprehensive housing policy for all of Nashville," by Jim Fraser, March 21.

This recent op-ed about housing policy places responsibility for the negative impact of Nashville’s growth on the Chamber of Commerce and other planning authorities. It calls for comprehensive housing policies to guide development and action focused on affordable housing. We agree that housing affordability is a challenge in Nashville, but we also believe a siloed approach to community development issues is insufficient.

Strategic planning takes time and requires input from multiple constituencies. During the Nashville Next strategic planning process, for example, urban growth continued to displace low-income residents. A narrow focus on affordable housing, while ignoring the context of growth and the imperative of economic development, is a prescription for failure.

We recently presented the results of our research on Nashville’s gentrification at the 2016 Urban Affairs Association conference. The study analyzes changes in Nashville neighborhoods between 2010 and 2014. Specifically, we looked at neighborhood-level changes in the African-American population and white population, median household income, educational attainment and mortgage dollars allocated in Davidson County. We found statistically significant changes occurring in urban and suburban neighborhoods that show lower-income African-Americans are being displaced.

Gentrification researchers refer to areas where displacement occurs as “sending zones.” These are communities where more affluent residents choose to buy or rent. In contrast, “receiving zones” are those communities where displaced residents tend to relocate. As our hot spot analysis shows, white residents are concentrating in and around Nashville’s urban core. Conversely, African-American residents are concentrating in suburban receiving zones.

Antioch and its adjacent neighborhoods are already struggling to accommodate diverse populations of immigrants, and the flow of displaced lower-income residents only complicates the process. The addition of more impoverished residents into communities with pockets of concentrated poverty has implications beyond affordable housing.

Cara Robinson is an assistant professor of urban studies. (Photo: Submitted)

We know that displacement can increase conflict as a result of competition for scarce resources. Concentrated poverty is highly correlated with poor educational outcomes. These problems have negative economic consequences for the region as tens of millions of dollars are spent on violence reduction, job training, education initiatives and criminal justice. Property owners in affected neighborhoods suffer lower property values and a diminished quality of life.

Nashville’s gentrification is fueled by speculation. Since 2008, investors have sought higher returns in property markets because of stock market uncertainty and low interest rates. In 2013, Nashville was ranked as the eighth best city for house flippers, with a 35 percent return on investment. Institutional investors from Atlanta, Chicago and elsewhere are making heavy bets on Nashville properties. They operate outside the daily political and planning infrastructure of Nashville. To them, Nashville is a market where return on investment trumps local quality of life.

Kyujin Jung is an assistant professor of public administration. (Photo: Submitted)

We believe affordable housing strategies alone are not sufficient to address the challenge. A more robust comprehensive community plan that merges affordability into a larger narrative associated with quality of life is needed to link urban growth with housing affordability, public safety, education and economic opportunity. While growth results in many positive outcomes it also contributes to longer commutes, inadequate infrastructure and populations disconnected to economic opportunities.

The data are clear. Displacement is real and the consequences have direct economic impacts for all Nashvillians. Rather than arguing about who should be at the table in developing housing policy, we should focus on developing broad coalitions of interests that place housing policy in a larger community development framework.

The authors are faculty members at Tennessee State University. Michael Harris is a dean and professor in the school of public service. Ken Chilton is an assistant professor of public administration. Cara Robinson is an assistant professor of urban studies. Kyujin Jung is an assistant professor of public administration.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1N2jDDc