To the editor:

“Gov. Dayton’s executive powers do not extend to mandating union elections. Considering that child care providers are independent small business owners, they are not even subject to collective bargaining arrangements.” (Trey Kovacs, the Competitive Enterprise Institute)

In spite of this, the MN Bureau of Mediation Services sent ballots out February 8 only to independent childcare providers who accept the Child Care Assistance Program. Those who do not are not eligible to vote but the results will impact all providers!

“To unionize a class of workers, Minnesota’s Labor Relations Act calls for a majority of workers to vote for union representation.” However, “In the vote to unionize child care providers, the majority of workers are excluded from voting.” (Kovacs)

Out of 11,000 child care providers, fewer than 4,300 are eligible to vote. The executive order is unclear as to whether 6,000-plus child care providers ineligible to vote will be forced to pay their “fair share” dues to the unions.

Dayton’s Executive Order describes child care providers as “invaluable services to working parents and guardians… particularly well-suited to meet families’ needs, by providing flexible hours and schedules…yet, “Union contracts do not allow for flexibility. Families have ever-changing schedules that will conflict with union contracts. A likely outcome: an increase of unfair labor practices. Unfair labor practices will lead to increased litigation, escalating child care costs.” (Kovacs)

Governor Dayton’s executive order will not provide affordable child care. Unions have forced dues payment, loss of worker rights, and restricted entry into markets. It will reduce the number of providers and potential entrepreneurs. “Maintaining worker rights and freedom to choose will afford Minnesotan’s ample quality child care. Unfortunately, Gov. Dayton’s choice will deny widespread access to affordable child care in Minnesota in order to line the pockets of Big Labor.”

Lenore Felix, Cold Spring