Name: Glen Robertson.

Age and occupation: 57 years old, president of Robertson Bonded Warehouse, Inc.

What makes you suited for this position?

38 years experience of building, growing, and operating several small businesses coupled with 25 years of public service. I have made payrolls, negotiated with the world’s largest ag chemical manufactures and have turned failing businesses around into profitable successes. I have served on two school boards, two city councils, numerous boards and commissions and I am currently serving in my second term as the mayor of Lubbock. As mayor I have led the effort to reduce the city of Lubbock’s debt by $60 million and have been successful in reducing base fees and hidden taxes on utility bills.

What are the two most important issues facing this district?

Crippling tax policies and over-reaching regulations. Our current tax policy hurts our ag producers, energy producers, small businesses and every citizen. These policies have forced manufacturing and mills offshore, costing our district jobs and and economic expansion. Over-reaching regulations by agencies like the EPA and OSHA are costing our small businesses millions and are also forcing all producers to outsource more jobs and manufacturing offshore. Our small businesses in crisis mode because of bad trade policies with corrupt foreign governments, entitlement programs that have decimated the workforce, and tax policies that do not incentivize investments and job growth.

What will be your focuses in the next budget session?

One my my focuses on dealing with the next budget session will be to return to passing appropriation bills on their own merit. These bills need to work through the process, starting in committees, voted on by Congress and finally working through reconciliation. We can no longer afford to have giant omnibus bills that combine 12 or more appropriation bills into one up or down vote. Congress needs to have the courage to use gap funding bills and exercise its Constitutional right to use the “power of the purse.” My main priority will be to make sure that every budget is a zero-based budget and that we no longer add to the growing $19 trillion deficit.

How big a threat is ISIS to the U.S. and how do you propose handling it?

ISIS is a real threat to the United States and is not contained. We must immediately cut all trade with Middle East countries that support Islamic terrorism. We need to put economic and political pressure on these countries with additional sanctions and insist that they no longer support terrorist groups such as ISIS. We must stand with Israel, our only true ally in the Middle East and take any and all military measures need to eradicate ISIS. We must enforce our immigration and visa laws and cannot afford to import Islamic terrorist into our country.

Would you vote to repeal Obamacare? Why?

I would vote to repeal Obamacare, but only after a free market-based plan has been developed to replace it. The recent vote to repeal was only symbolic and political as no other solution was offered. We need to treat Obamacare and tax policies the same by developing well thought out strategies and solutions before repealing. These solutions need to address the failings of health care pre-Obamacare and drive cost down, improve the quality of health care and ensure that we are not taxing the American citizens to care for illegal immigrants and those that are able but unwilling to work. When we discuss repealing Obamacare, we must also be prepared to replace it with a better solution and not just create another health care crisis.

Are any subjects or interest of yours not being covered in the forums or in the media?

I am very concerned that we are not discussing the $19 trillion debt that is increasing at a rate of more that $1 trillion per year. Or the $100 trillion in unfunded liabilities that we are not prepared to pay. Also, crippling tax policies that encourage companies to outsource off shore, restrict small businesses from re-investing in their companies and creating jobs. We must start discussing ways to wean ourselves off of entitlement programs that do not incentivize people to better themselves and become more independent instead of an ever growing dependency on government handouts.

What can a representative of this district do to help struggling cotton farmers?

We need to start addressing the core problems with agriculture and all other small business. The three main underlying problems are bad trade policies with corrupt foreign governments, crippling tax policies and over-reaching regulations. Our producers are forced to try and compete against foreign producers that are not only subsidized, but it many cases are government-owned entities. We need to remove ourselves from the World Trade Organization and negotiate individual treaties and trade agreements that put our producers first. We must replace our current tax policies with policies that help producers grow and flourish and we have to stop the ever growing administrative agencies like the EPA and OSHA from legislating job killing regulations.

Please discuss the ways in which you separate yourself from your opponents.

I am the only candidate in this race with a proven track record of lowering debt, reducing wasteful government spending and making tough decisions at the public level. I am the only candidate that has a public voting record and 25 years of experience in public service. I have the proven ability to work toward solutions with other elected officials who do not share my views and achieve results in spite of our differences. I also have proven that I will always put the citizens’ best interest ahead of special interest groups or the rich and powerful elite. I am also the only candidate that is self funding over 85 percent of my campaign and will be able to serve owing no one. We must remember that super pacs or special interest money comes with an expectation of a return on investment.

Yes/No:

Vote to re-elect Paul Ryan as Speaker? Undecided.

Voted for the 2016 omnibus spending bill? No.

In favor of more farming subsidies? Temporarily.

Vote to eliminate the U.S. Department of Education? Yes.

In favor of a wall between the U.S. and Mexico? No.