Oatmeal toppings bar scaled down, to mere 119 items

When one spends an entire morning scooping oatmeal for others to eat, as Lafayette 15-year-old Moniphon Xiong did Saturday at the city's 19th annual Oatmeal Festival, one learns a thing or two about the art of the perfect bowl.

"You definitely learn how to, like, not drip," she explained. "You have to be mixing it, and people don't like oatmeal if it's too watery. You have to make sure it's consistently mixed and that it's looking creamy."

This is the sort of critical oatmeal thinking that distinguishes Lafayette, and elevates it from just another city that casually enjoys oats to the true nucleus of the American oat universe.

It's a year-round thing, to be sure, but at the Lafayette Quaker Oatmeal Festival, the unique oat enthusiasm goes on full display.

Parker Sullivan, 5, with his grandmother Ruth Sarvadi, looks down the line of nearly 100 toppings for his bowl of oatmeal during the Lafayette Quaker Oatmeal Festival at Pioneer Elementary School on Saturday. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

"We're the only oatmeal festival in the whole United States," said Vicki Trumbo, executive director of the Lafayette Chamber of Commerce. "People think, 'Uh, why would I stand in line to eat oatmeal?' But it's this whole atmosphere. It's just quirky enough that it's hard to explain to people who aren't here."

Indeed, it is an ineffable oatfulness that must be seen, smelled and sampled, to be understood. Today, more than 3,000 humans and 3,600 pounds of oats packed into an elementary gymnasium to soak in the oatey festival air, and to engage with a world-class oatmeal toppings bar that grows more impressive each year.

The bar has 119 different items, ranging from classics such as brown sugar and walnuts to more controversial, new-age toppings, including jelly beans, jalapeños and cheddar cheese.

Advertisement

This year, the bar was actually nine toppings smaller than it was at its peak, in 2014.

"We cut back on some of the candy," said Pat Vero, of the Lafayette Chamber. "Like, instead of having spice drops and gum drops and sugar-free drops, we just have one kind of drop now."

The only new addition to this year's bar was hot sauce, which Vero said local oating leaders had long pushed for. She also hinted at scallions and soy sauce as possible new faces on next year's toppings roster.

A participant loads his bowl of oatmeal full of toppings during the Lafayette Quaker Oatmeal Festival at Pioneer Elementary School on Saturday. (David R. Jennings / Daily Camera)

Lafayette resident David Criswell said he relished the variety. On Saturday, he munched down a bowl topped with Craisins, M&M's, brown sugar and trail mix.

"It was excellent," he said. "Nice to have the M&M's in there. That was a nice finish."

As for his city's reputation as a Mecca, of sorts, within the oat world, Criswell said, "I don't read too much into it, but I don't mind a good breakfast with some oatmeal and pancakes. I'll come out for that any day of the week."

Criswell's commitment to a life of oating was difficult to gauge. But when fellow attendee Brandi Gallegos, of Thornton, says she'd show out for oatmeal any day, she means it.

"We eat oatmeal every morning," she said. "It's easy to get up for."

Gallegos has even begun indoctrinating her three small children into the way of the oat.

"My kids will eat it without any sugar on it," boasted the purist.

That zeal for the 'meal, immediately evident in the eyes of Gallegos and so many other oaters on hand Saturday, kept scoopers like Xiong motivated in the face of a seemingly unending and surprisingly arduous task.

"You gain muscle from scooping. It really works out your arms," Xiong said. "But you're looking at people who are smiling because they're getting oatmeal, so you're smiling because you're giving them oatmeal and making them happy. It's a win-win."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness