Bruno Maisonnier, chief executive of Aldebaran Robotics, with his company’s robot, Pepper, at Softbank headquarters in Tokyo. Eric Pfanner/The Wall Street Journal

In Japan, robots play important roles in factories, at street festivals, in movies and comic books, and even in themed restaurants where humans impersonate machines instead of the reverse.

With robots all around, why did Softbank Corp., the Japanese telecommunications company, turn to a French startup to create a robot that Softbank hopes Japanese consumers will welcome into their homes? Softbank this week introduced the humanoid machine, called Pepper, at a news conference in Tokyo, billing it as the first robot that can sense people’s feelings.

“For me, the robot is like Jiminy Cricket,” said Bruno Maisonnier, chief executive of Paris-based Aldebaran Robotics, referring to Pinocchio’s sidekick in the Disney film of that name. “The star is not the robot. The star is the person,” he said in an interview Friday.

“Nobody in Japan is thinking like this,” Mr. Maisonnier said. “There are all these left-brain robots.”

Softbank chief executive Masayoshi Son put it similarly at the Thursday news conference, saying he had been moved as a young boy by the main character of the animated television show “Astro Boy,” who was unable to feel emotions.

Mr. Maisonnier said Pepper — which sidles up to humans and tries to engage them in conversation –could play a variety of roles, from nurse to babysitter to portable entertainment provider. Had Pepper been available in 2003, when a heat wave killed thousands of elderly people in France, he said, the robot could have saved lives by reminding them to drink water or by calling ambulances when they collapsed.

Softbank plans to begin selling Pepper next year in Japan, which has a rapidly aging population, at a price of Y198,000 ($1,950).

A number of other Japanese companies, including NEC, Sony and Hitachi Ltd., have developed robots with humanoid features or functions, but so far none has caught on in a big way with consumers.

In 2005, Mitsubishi Heavy Industries introduced Wakamaru, which bears a resemblance to Pepper — both have human-like heads and arms, and move around on a broad base like that of a chess piece. But Wakamaru was discontinued after a few years.

In a speech in May at the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development in Paris, Prime Minister Shinzo Abe described plans to modernize the Japanese economy by investing in robotics.

“We will create a new industrial revolution through the use of robots,” he said. “I will swiftly formulate a master plan for this and incorporate it into my growth strategy.”

During a visit to Japan in April, U.S. President Barack Obama exchanged soccer passes with Asimo, a robot developed by Honda Motor, declaring later that the experience was “a little scary.”

“The first thing is, people have to like the robots,” Mr. Maisonnier said. “I want my grandmother to love the robot in her home. She has to be able to control him, to interact.”

Mr. Maisonnier said he became interested in robotics after reading science fiction novels, and learned about electronics from mail-order courses. He quit his career as a banker to found Aldebaran in 2005.

Mr. Son visited Aldebaran in 2011 after expressing an interest in buying a small stake in the company, Mr. Maisonnier said. The two hit it off, sharing a vision of emotional robots. Softbank acquired the company two years ago for about $100 million.

“He ended up staying eight hours,” Mr. Maisonnier said. “At the end of the afternoon he made his decision.”

That kind of impetuousness has been a hallmark of Mr. Son’s career at Softbank, where he has assembled a vast collection of startups and other tech investments under the company’s umbrella. Now investors are watching to see whether he will make an offer for T-Mobile US., the fourth-largest U.S. mobile phone network, which he wants to combine with Sprint, the third-largest, which Softbank already controls.

Neither Mr. Son nor Mr. Maisonnier shed any light on when such a bid might come, but Mr. Maisonnier said the Softbank boss hasn’t lost his stomach for bold moves.

“If you do reasonable things, you can only make small steps,” Mr. Maisonnier said. “If you go beyond reasonable, you can do big things. It’s my way of thinking and it’s his way of thinking.”