Marty Durrant, co-owner of Marty & Dan's Inc., which sells used cars, removes snow from a car Friday in Greeley. (Jim Rydbom / The Greeley Tribune)

Denver — A Christmas snowstorm brought over 2 feet of snow to the mountains of southwestern Colorado through Friday.

Snow was expected to keep falling in the mountains and the Eastern Plains until the evening.

Wolf Creek ski resort says it got 28 inches. Accumulations of 16 inches were reported both at Beaver Creek and Grand Mesa, while Eldorado Springs near Boulder got nearly 15 inches of snow. Denver got 3.4 inches of snow on Christmas, with some additional dusting on Friday.

Despite light snow, flights at Denver International Airport were delayed by an average of an hour because of de-icing and the extra holiday traffic. About 163,000 passengers were expected to pass through the airport, nearly 20,000 more than on an average day.

Conditions on Interstate 70 were so bad in the morning that the chain law for passenger vehicles was in effect for about four hours between Golden and Idaho Springs for the first time this winter season, Colorado Department of Transportation spokeswoman Amy Ford said. While the law is in effect, drivers must have an eighth of an inch of tread on their tires or use chains for added traction.

The law has been in existence for years but CDOT is trying to raise awareness about it now to help cut down on accidents due to bald tires, which can back up traffic on I-70 during ski season. To test tires, CDOT recommends drivers take the "George Washington test" by putting a quarter in their tire's tread, head first. If the tip of Washington's head or more is covered, their tires meet the law's requirements, Ford said.

Advertisement

So far, drivers aren't being targeted for breaking the law, but if they get involved in an accident, they could get a citation with a fine around $200.

By early next week, another band of snow is expected to move into Colorado, along with single-digit high temperatures across much of the state.