Alfa Romeo

Alfa’s main range is now a two-model line-up. The MiTo can now be had with the fun and frugal TwinAir two-cylinder engine, while the Giulietta five-door is available with manual or TCT twin-clutch gearboxes. Alfa Romeo is soon to add the sleek 4C mid-engined sports car to its range. The 4C uses a TCT gearbox too, mated to a 240 bhp 1750 turbo petrol engine for 0-62 mph in 4.5 seconds and a 155 mph top speed.

Range: Mito, Giulietta, 4C

One to watch: 4C revives Alfa’s sporting credentials.

Audi

Audi’s relentless launch programme shows no signs of abating, and the company has recently added high-performance versions of its A3, A4, A5 Coupé and Cabriolet, A6 and A7 models. The S3 goes in at the top end of the hot hatch market, while the RS4, RS5, RS6 and RS7 all use rapid-fire V8 engines to offer storming performance.

Elsewhere, Audi has been busy extending the A3 range with the Sportback model that offers five doors and a little extra rear seat space. There is also the A3 saloon for those seeking an alternative to Mercedes’ CLA compact four-door coupé.

Audi’s first diesel-powered S model has also arrived in the shape of the 309 bhp SQ5 that uses a 3.0 V6 twin turbo diesel. It serves up 0-62 mph in 5.1 seconds and 155 mph, yet can also provide 41.5 mpg and 179 g/km CO2 emissions.

Another quick SUV addition to the range will be the RS Q3, which uses a 306 bhp version of the TT RS’s 2.5-litre turbo five-cylinder engine for 0-62 mph in 5.5 seconds.

Range: A1, A3, S3, RS3, A4, A4 Avant, S4, RS4, A5, A5 Cabriolet, A5 Sportback, S 5, RS5, A6, A6 Avant, A6 Allroad, S6, RS6, A7 Sportback, S7, RS7, A8, S8, Q3, Q5, SQ5, Q7, R8, R8 Spyder, TT, TT Roadster.

One to watch: A3 saloon promises a big slice of style allied to the usual A3 qualities.

Citroën

Citroën has become one of the main MPV makers and its new C4 Picasso, and the soon-to-follow C4 Grand Picasso, carry on this momentum in fine style. They have sleek exterior styling and cabins that now offer even more cunning seat folding options and versatility. They also come with very efficient new diesel engine options.

Just as stylish but more compact and style-driven is the new DS3 Cabrio, which has a full-length folding canvas roof rather than a completely convertible roof. This design retains much of the DS3’s decent driving manners while offering fresh air thrills and five seats.

Range: C-Zero, C1, C3, C3 Picasso, DS3, DS3 Cabrio, DS4, C4, C4 Picasso, C4 Grand Picasso, C5, C5 Tourer, DS5, Dispatch Combi, Berlingo Multispace, Nemo Multispace.

One to watch: C4 Picasso is set to lead its class in practicality and sales.

Chevrolet

The Trax adds some compact SUV cred to Chevrolet’s range and is every bit as appealing as its Vauxhall Mokka cousin. It offers a decently nimble drive, high-set driving position and plenty of kit for the cash.

The Cruze, Spark and Aveo carry on as the mainstays of the Chevy range, while the Captiva can deliver the goods both on the road and off. The Orlando adds some welcome extra value and style to the traditional people-carrier market. Ticking the environmental box is the clever electric range-extender Volt, while it wouldn’t be Chevrolet without mentioning some genuine American muscle in the shape of the Camero.

Range: Spark, Aveo, Cruze, Trax, Captiva, Orlando, Volt, Camero.

One to watch: The Trax is ideally placed to capitalise on the growing popularity of compact SUVs.

Chrysler

Chrysler’s range offers the Ypsilon compact hatch and Delta family hatch pairing. Designed to help boost sales in mainstream markets, the cars’ distinctive looks and use of Fiat Group frugal engines do much to help the cause in their highly-competitive respective markets. Last but not least, for many the company will always be famous for its Grand Voyager people carrier. This remains a staple of the range, now complete with a refreshed interior.

The 300C provides an alternative to the likes of the BMW 5 Series and Mercedes E-Class, while the Grand Voyager remains as one of the very few full-size seven-seat MPVs now on sale.

Range: 300C, Grand Voyager, Ypsilon, Delta.

One to watch: More sophisticated 300C is an intriguing alternative to the mainstream executive saloons.

BMW

We’re used to innovation from BMW, but its new i3 is a radical addition for the German brand and takes it into the electric vehicle field. The battery-powered i3 has a range of up to 100 miles or you can order a range-extender version to cover up to 180 miles with help from a 650cc twin-cylinder petrol engine to charge the battery.

BMW is banking on the i3’s premium appeal and its own reputation for making great-handling cars to draw in buyers who might otherwise dismiss an electric car. Also breaking with tradition is the 4 Series, which is a replacement for the previous 3 Series Coupé but is now more of a stand-alone model. It shares much of its looks and engines with the 3 Series saloon, but the 4 Series has a more sporty set-up for keen drivers.

Another variation on the 3 Series theme is the GT, which has a hatchback rear and longer wheelbase to give more cabin space. The GT also has boot space to rival the 3 Series Touring’s. BMW has also refreshed the Z4 range with a mild facelift and the addition of a sDrive18i model that has a 156 bhp version of the existing 2.0-litre four-cylinder engine and is good to drive.

An updated 5 Series is around the corner, with improved fuel economy and lower emissions the key points for business customers who make up the bulk of 5 Series sales.

Range: 1 Series, 1 Series Coupé, 1 Series Convertible, 3 Series, 3 Series Coupé, 3 Series Convertible, 3 Series Touring, 3 Series GT, 4 Series, 5 Series, 5 Series Touring, 5 Series Gran Turismo, 6 Series Convertible, 6 Series GranCoupé, 7 Series, M3 Coupé, M5, M5 Touring, M6, M6 Convertible, X1, X3, X5, X6, X6 M, Z4.

One to watch: 4 Series coupé is great to drive and will soon spawn convertible and M models.

Aston Martin

Aston Martin has been busy in recent months, culminating in a new engine partnership with Mercedes’ AMG division. Before we see the results of this, Aston has also added the V12 Vantage S to the line-up that is the company’s fastest-accelerating production model, with the exception of the limited edition and now-sold-out One-77. The V12 Vantage S sees off 0-62 mph in 3.9 seconds and has a 205 mph top speed.

The rest of the Vantage range was updated earlier in 2013, while the DB9 received a more powerful V12 motor. Aston also refreshed the Rapide and added the S to its name to reflect its new nose and uprated V12 power unit.

Another new model derivation is the Vanquish Volante that adds fresh-air appeal to the brutal power of its coupé sister. This Volante will be the first Aston drop-top to feature full carbon fibre bodywork, helping it from rest to 62mph in just 4.1 seconds.

Range: Vantage, DB9, Rapide S, Vanquish, Vanquish Volante, Cygnet.

One to watch: V12 Vantage S is now Aston’s fastest-ever production model.

Bentley

For a company steeped in tradition, Bentley has not held back when launching new models recently. The W12-engined Flying Spur is the latest and its styling is more conservative than the flagship Mulsanne’s, but a 616 bhp engine and 0-62 mph in 4.6 seconds is far from shy and retiring.

The rest of the range remains settled, with the Continental and Mulsanne models continuing to give Bentley customers plenty of plush fittings coupled to strong performance from V8 and W12 engines. If you want more go, the Speed models dish it up in abundance.

Range: Continental GT, Continental GTC, Mulsanne, Flying Spur.

One to watch: New Flying Spur gives buyers a real alternative to a Rolls-Royce Ghost.

Dacia

Dacia has quickly established itself as a serious player in the UK market, thanks to its keen pricing, no-nonsense approach to selling and, most import-antly, some good cars. The Duster is the headline act, but the Sandero and pseudo-SUV Stepway model are also worthy of consideration.

There is also the new Logan MCV small estate, which is effectively an estate version of the Sandero that has a large boot and space for five passengers. As well as its generous room in a compact body, the Logan’s big draw is its low price. It has a choice of 0.9-litre turbo petrol or 1.5-litre turbo diesel engines.

Range: Sandero, Sandero Stepway, Duster, Logan MCV.

One to watch: Logan MCV is as practical as it is affordable.

Ford

The Fiesta has been the focus of much of Ford’s efforts recently, with revised looks inside and out and the addition of Ford’s clever new 1.0-litre Ecoboost petrol engine. There is also a new 1.5-litre turbodiesel with low emissions and high economy.

Ford has also added the superb Fiesta ST hot hatch to the range that puts its competitors in the shade, and that’s before you factor in the warranty-compliant Mountune performance upgrade.

The second-generation Kuga is very good to drive, while the new EcoSport small SUV and Tourneo Connect MPV will broaden Ford’s range even further. We will also see an electric Focus arriving soon with plug-in recharging.

Range: B-Max, C-Max, Fiesta, Focus, Focus Estate, Galaxy, Ka, Kuga, Mondeo, Mondeo Estate, S-Max, Ranger.

One to watch: Fiesta ST is huge fun and goes straight to the top of its class.

Hyundai

Hyundai has been enjoying a time of consolidation after a frantic period of revisions to the i20 and i30, as well as the new Santa Fe large SUV.

The i40 in saloon and estate forms carries on impressing as a serious rival to the big players in the family car sector, while the i10 remains an appealing choice for small car buyers. Also keeping its place in the order is the ix35, while the i800 offers masses of space and the Veloster is a quirky take on the sports coupé.

Range: i10, i20, ix20, i30, i30 Tourer, ix35, i40 Saloon, i40 Tourer, Santa Fe, i800, Veloster.

One to watch: i30 is every bit as good as Ford Focus or Opel Astra.

Kia

Kia has finally dipped its toe into the hot hatch sector with the arrival of the Pro_cee’d GT. It’s not meant as an out-and-out rival to the Ford Focus ST or Renault Megane RS, but more of a warm hatch. With 0-62mph in 7.4 seconds thanks to a 201 bhp turbo-charged 1.6-litre petrol engine, the GT feels swift enough and it handles with composed agility.

Elsewhere, the rest of the Cee’d range is as good as ever and the smaller Rio is mature beyond its years. Build quality is excellent, it looks great and it gives a big-car feel over and above its price. Slightly larger is the Venga mini-MPV, with a spacious interior especially given the modest price tag. The Sportage SUV is now available with a new range-topping high-power diesel in conjunction with plenty of luxury touches. Kia’s flagship SUV, the Sorento, boasts improved exterior styling and sharper on-road performance.

Range: Optima, Carens, Cee’d, Cee’d SW, Pro_Cee’d, Pro_cee’d GT, Picanto, Rio, Sedona, Sorento, Soul, Sportage, Venga.

One to watch: Pro_cee’d GT is a temptingly able and affordable hot hatch.

Mazda

Mazda’s sleek new 6 saloon and estate models show the Japanese firm knows how to mix practicality with style. It also combines strong performance with excellent economy and emissions thanks to the firm’s SkyActiv technology.

The CX-5 compact SUV showcases SkyActiv technology. With a focus on high-efficiency petrol and diesel engines it’s also genuinely good to drive, with a slick gearbox and neat handling.

The popular 3 hatchback is going strong following its 2012 facelift. A tidier design inside and out, improved aerodynamics and tweaked mechanicals reduce fuel consumption and sharpen the driving experience.

The Mazda 5 has brought extra style and practicality to the MPV sector, as it has a distinctive exterior design with the bonus of twin sliding rear doors.

The latest 1.6-litre diesel engine also offers highly-impressive economy and emissions for a car in this area of the market.

The iconic MX-5 is the roadster of choice for just about anyone who’s driven one, and is available with folding hard- and soft-tops as well as a choice of engines and a manual or automatic transmission. A limited edition run of 500 Sport Graphite MX-5s maintains interest in this evergreen model.

Range: 2, 3, 5, 6, MX-5, CX-5.

One to watch: 6 offers sleek looks combined with superbly-efficient engines.

Mercedes-Benz

Mercedes is nothing if not prolific at launching new models. Hot on the heels of the refreshed E-Class saloon and estate comes the CLA compact saloon based on the A-Class. It’s a good looker and comes over as a scaled-down CLS, and it’s also available in the high-performance CLA 45 AMG version.

This AMG model is closely related to the new A 45 AMG, which is one of the hottest hatches around thanks to a turbocharged 2.0-litre engine with 360bhp. It sees the A 45 from 0-62mph in 4.6 seconds and on to 155mph.

Following the lead of the E-Class saloon and estate, Mercedes has also revised the Coupé and Cabriolet models with new lights, grille and improved economy and emissions.

The SLS supercar has been subject to improvements with the new GT model replacing the original. It has 20bhp more to make it a tad quicker off the mark and at the top end, but more importantly the 6.2-litre V8 engine sounds just as incredible as ever.

If you prefer refinement, Mercedes has launched an all-new S-Class, which could justifiably lay claim to being the most sophisticated, technology-laden car in the world. It also happens to be great to drive and more affordable than rivals from Bentley and Rolls-Royce.

Elsewhere, SUVs remain import-ant to Mercedes with its R, ML, GL and long-running G Class models all offering large SUV buyers something different. Coupés are another Merc forte thanks to the C Coupé, CL and four-door CLS, while open tops are taken care of with the SLK and SL that offer folding metal roofs for added versatility.

At a more affordable level, the B and C Class models provide classy, comfortable transport with Mercedes’ usual build quality as standard. If you need to carry more people, there is the Viano that can seat up to eight people in safety and comfort.

Range: A, B, C, CLA, CL, CLS, E, G, GL, M, R, S, SL, SLK, SLS, Viano.

One to watch: CLA compact four-door coupé could prove a big hit.

Fiat

The Fiat Panda 4x4 has become an iconic pint-sized SUV, and to capitalise on this reputation Fiat has added the 500L Trekking. Based on the 500L, the Trekking is front-wheel-drive only but with mud andsnow tyres and traction plus it can tackle slippery lanes with ease.

With the 500 now making up a large part of the Fiat range and the Panda accounting for another significant portion, it’s still worth remembering the Punto, Bravo, Qubo and Doblo are there for those who want a Fiat without the retro looks.

Range: 500, 500C, 500L, 500L Trekking, Bravo, Doblo, Punto, Panda, Panda 4x4, Qubo.

One to watch: Panda 4x4 is as useful as a Swiss Army knife.

Honda

The Honda Civic is the focus of the Japanese firm’s attentions with the addition of the Civic Tourer estate. It will be a keen rival for the new Volks-wagen Golf Estate and Toyota Auris Estate, especially with Honda’s excellent new 1.6-litre turbodiesel engine. It will also be the first Honda to use the company’s Adaptive Damping System that offers comfort, normal and sport settings.

The recently-launched CR-V is proving very popular with buyers, while the Jazz and Civic are both hard to fault in their respective sectors. As ever, the Accord, Insight and CR-Z are solid performers for Honda.

Range: Accord, Accord Tourer, Civic, Civic Tourer, CR-V, CR-Z, Jazz, Insight.

One to watch: Civic Tourer promises a keen drive with new suspension system.

Infiniti

The Infiniti Q50 cannot come quickly enough for the company as it should finally bring it into the mainstream of executive saloon sales. It uses a 2.2-litre turbo diesel engine 167 bhp and 115 g/km CO2 emissions to take on the BMW 320d and Audi A4 TDIe. There’s also a high performance hybrid model with 359bhp.

Infiniti’s G series range continues to offer saloon, coupé and convertible options. The M saloon recently received a number of updates for 2013, adding to its already impressive kit list and value for money. A fast and economical hybrid version is available at the top of the range.

Another car recently refreshed is the FX large SUV model, which included subtle visual and mechanical updates. Smaller models, such as EX sports utility vehicle, ensure that there’s a car for every budget.

Range: Q50, EX, FX, G Convertible, G Coupé, G Saloon, M Saloon.

One to watch: Q50 could be Infiniti’s breakthrough model.

Jaguar

Unless you’ve been living on the International Space Station, you cannot have missed the launch of the Jaguar F-type, the much-heralded eventual successor to the E-type. It comes in fast, faster and flippin’ fastest versions and all have looks set to stun.

Also on a performance note, the XFR-S gains a 542bhp version of the XFR’s 5.0-litre V8 engine. The limited-edition XKR-S GT uses the same engine to propel it from 0-62mph in just 3.9 seconds and on to 186mph. Only 10 GTs will be sold in the UK.

Jaguar’s core XF and XJ models continue to sell well, with the recently- launched XF Sportbrake estate providing another choice for those considering a BMW 5 Series Touring or Audi A6 Avant.

Range: XF Saloon, XF Sportbrake, XJ, XK, XK Convertible, F-Type.

One to watch: F-type has arrived and lives up to the hype.

Jeep

Jeep’s reputation hinges on its cars’ ability to go anywhere and in any conditions, so the arrival of an updated Grand Cherokee is a crucial moment for the American brand. The revised Grand Cherokee is easily spotted by its bi-xenon headlights and stylised LED daytime running lights. Improvements to cabin materials and driver’s seat comfort are welcome, but more notable is a new eight-speed automatic gearbox that works well with the 3.0 V6 turbodiesel engine.

The 468 bhp Jeep Grand Cherokee SRT offers a pacey alternative to the likes of the BMW X6 M and Mercedes ML 63 AMG, but the cabin lacks its German rivals’ appeal. We’ll also see new Compass and Cherokee models in showrooms soon with sharper looks and better driving manners. For ultimate off-road work, the Wrangler remains the stalwart’s choice.

Range: Compass, Cherokee, Grand Cherokee, Wrangler.

One to watch: Luxurious Grand Cherokee offers the best of both worlds.

Lexus

An all-new IS is what Lexus has been waiting for to take on Audi, BMW and Mercedes. It shuns the market standard of a diesel engine, Lexus preferring the IS300h Hybrid with 223 bhp, 65.7 mpg and emissions of 99g/km. The other IS on offer is the IS250 with 2.5-litre V6 petrol engine.

Keen to make a bigger impact in Europe, Lexus has taken a bold new direction with the latest GS, making it much sharper-looking and better dynamically. Familiar hybrid power remains, as does conventional petrol propulsion along with a new overtly-sporty trim option.

Useful updates for the flagship LS saloon have resulted in an even more polished performer. More comfort and more luxury are givens, but the more aggressively-styled LS also boasts better driving dynamics. Keeping SUV fans happy is the familiar petrol-electric hybrid RX450h, while the compact CT200h offers a luxurious and efficient entry to Lexus ownership.

Range: CT, IS, GS, LS, RX.

One to watch: IS hybrid offers a different route to usual small diesel execs. Part II will appear next month.