I’m a huge Troy Tulowitzki fan.

There, I said it, right upfront, so there is no mistaking where I’m coming from with this column.

As a baseball fan, I love watching him play shortstop. Seeing Tulo glide to to his right, field the ball and make that leaping throw to first is one of the prettiest plays in baseball. I admire his toughness and competitive fire. When he’s healthy, he’s one of the top 10 players in the majors.

As a Rockies beat writer, I can count on Tulo to be available, candid and passionate.

I bring this up because of a number of e-mails I received after my recent story on new Rockies outfielder Drew Stubbs. In a nutshell, those disgruntled Rockies fans were upset because Tulo spoke his mind.

For the record, when I asked Tulo about the Rockies’ acquisition of Stubbs, this is what he said: “I have high hopes for Drew. For me, he’s got to come to our team and try to be the starting center fielder. That’s my opinion.

“I know they have talked about CarGo (Carlos Gonzalez) being our center fielder, but for me, I think we are a better team if Drew can grab that position and run with it. That way, we can leave Carlos in left.”

One fan’s e-mail read: “Why can’t Tulo just keep his mouth shut and play? He should concentrate on getting healthy and not worry about where CarGo plays. Just because Tulo is a friend of Stubbs doesn’t mean Stubbs will be any good. … Just another swing and miss by the Rockies.”

For the record, I knew that Stubbs and Tulo have known each other for years, so I called Tulo to see what he thought about the trade. He didn’t have to call me back on the day before Christmas, but he did. He didn’t have to be honest with me, but he was. As a reporter, I appreciate that.

Listen, I get the frustration of Rockies fans. They have continued to support the team despite two straight last-place finishes in the National League West. Until the Rockies start winning, and until the front office proves it has a viable plan, the fans’ outrage is completely reasonable and justified.

What I don’t quite understand is the anger directed at Tulowitzki. I’ve had fans tell me that he’s not fan friendly — not like Michael Cuddyer or Todd Helton. Others point to Tulo’s frequent injuries.

OK, Tulo is intense, and he’s not very warm or cuddly. Could he stand to to sign a few more autographs? Could he engage the fans a little more? Sure, but I don’t think Tulo’s unfriendly, and I really think he appreciates the fans. He’s just not great at showing it.

And, yes, injuries have tarnished his star. He’s played in more than 143 games just once in the past six years. But nobody, save for maybe Cuddyer, arrives at the ballpark earlier or stays later. Last season, every day, Tulo followed a strict strength-and-stretching routine to keep his legs in shape for the grinding season. He cares passionately about staying on the field.

During our postseason sit-down with Dick Monfort, the Rockies owner gave Tulo a backhanded compliment.

“Tulo has always been one of these guys who said, ‘We’ve got to have more pitching, we’ve got to have this, we’ve got to have that,’ ” Monfort said. “But I saw a guy that had the greatest change … over the last two years. This guy is getting more engaged, more engaged with the younger guys. Before, all he cared about was Tulo. ‘I went 0-for-3, we won the game, but I went 0-for-3.’ I think the guy is maturing.”

I don’t completely agree with Monfort. I do think Tulo has matured, but I don’t believe that the “old Tulo” only cared about Tulo. What I think he’s always cared about was winning. That’s why he’s prodded the Rockies management for more pitching and better players.

If I’m a fan of a baseball team that’s never won a division title in 21 years, I applaud the player who’s not afraid to show his frustration and speak his mind from time to time.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp



Visit denverpost.com each weekday near noontime for a serving of dish concerning Colorado’s sporting landscape from a Denver Post sports writer. Care for another helping? Scan the Lunch Special menu.