U.S. Attorney for New Hampshire John Kacavas in his Concord office. (Bob Lapree/Union Leader)





After leading the prosecution of some of New Hampshire's most heinous criminals, John Kacavas' professional life now takes place far outside the glare of the media spotlight. Not that Kacavas - who stepped down as U.S. Attorney for New Hampshire in April - sees his new role, as the chief legal counsel for Dartmouth-Hitchcock Medical Center, as such a departure from his old one..."For 25 years, I have been a lawyer, half as a prosecutor, half as a defense lawyer. Through it all, the goal has been justice - criminal justice, social justice and economic justice," he said. "When you look at Dartmouth-Hitchcock, it was very clear to me that this institution is about health care justice."..Kacavas continued: "When I talk about justice in the health care system, patient safety is number one. Nothing else comes close. If we're not addressing that, we're ignoring reality."As it happened, patient safety was at the heart of one of Kacavas' most significant cases as the state's top prosecutor: that of David Kwiatkowski, the so-called "serial infector" who, while working as as radiologic technician, infected dozens of patients with hepatitis C at Exeter Hospital and other hospitals around the country...In a criminal practice known as diversion, Kwiatkowski would inject himself with Fentanyl and other drugs intended for patients, typically replacing the drug in the syringe with saline.Newsweek magazine recently published a lengthy article based on jailhouse interviews with Kwiatkowski, who pleaded guilty in late 2013 and was sentenced to 39 years in prison. In the article, Kwiatkowski suggests that diversion is widespread among hospital workers, and that he was allowed to move from one hospital to the next despite repeatedly being dismissed for suspected drug use...Kacavas, who read the Newsweek article, said he believed that Kwiatkowski's account was partially self-serving. "While I agree that drug diversion is prevalent in the health care industry, I think his 'it-was-everywhere' tone was a little bit him trying to exculpate himself, saying everybody's doing it," he said...Other than that, Kacavas said: "David Kwiatkowski is a memory."Kacavas is more focused these days on the changing dynamics in the health care industry, brought about in large part by the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare. He hailed the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on June 25 in King v. Burwell, which upheld federal subsides for insurance coverage under the program, a decision that could've affected more than 30,000 state residents..."This isn't a panacea by any stretch," Kacavas said, referring to the health care law. "I think everyone would agree the ACA needs work, but to affirm this three-legged stool that is the ACA is an important step in the right direction."..Kacavas was nominated by President Barack Obama to become U.S. Attorney for New Hampshire in 2009; in the 1990s, he was a prosecutor in the state Attorney General's Office.However, Kacavas has also had forays into politics. In the early 2000s, he served on the school board in Manchester, as a state representative, and he ran (unsuccessfully) for an Executive Council seat in 2002...Might Kacavas consider running for office again?"Never say never," he said. "But I'm not contemplating that at this point."..