For nearly two full terms, President Obama has made it abundantly clear that furthering the cause of his urban base — perhaps the most vital component of the coalition that swept him to power — is near the top of his lengthy and ambitious agenda.

The list of advances made during the Obama administration — some complete, and some still in progress — is impressive. The president’s crowning achievement, the Affordable Care Act, has drastically increased access to health care among low-income and urban populations.

President Obama’s dogged push for stricter gun laws has not abated even in the face of political odds that border on insurmountable. He has fought tirelessly to advance gun-control legislation in hopes of reducing violence both in our cities and throughout the nation.

And in the face of yet another deadly shooting, this time in Charleston, SC, the renewed call for action on this critical issue came quickly from a president who seemed to recognize the unfortunate reality that even his almost limitless political capital can do little to break the logjam in Congress.

The White House’s My Brother’s Keeper initiative, meanwhile, has helped to close the opportunity gap that young men of color have faced for generations. By partnering with cities, businesses and foundations, this important program is making great strides toward its goal of providing boys and young men with the tools that they need to go to college, find a job and reach the middle class.

But as the president and his team strive to finish strong, it’s vital that they also keep a close eye on the big picture regarding their agenda’s impact on urban communities and avoid any policy shifts that could undo the significant progress that’s been made to date.

For a case in point, look no further than the Environmental Protection Agency’s pending proposal to tighten standards and controls for ground-level ozone.

This move, which would revise a standard set most recently in 2008, threatens to place significant and even disproportionate strain on the nation’s medium and large cities by penalizing them for failing to meet a standard that most urban areas have no hope of meeting any time soon.

The EPA’s proposal will set the new standard somewhere between 65 and 70 parts per billion — down from the current threshold of 75 parts per billion. Cities and counties around the nation have worked hard in recent years to improve their air quality and have made significant progress in doing so, but most are still very much in the process of implementing the 2008 standard and still have a long way to go to meet it.

St. Louis, for example, currently sits at 82 parts per billion. New York City and its surrounding areas are at 81 parts per billion. Philadelphia is near 85 parts per billion.

Tightening the standard yet again — and imposing additional economic sanctions on those communities that can’t meet it — makes it harder for our cities and the businesses within their borders to continue to create opportunity, grow and expand.

Nonattainment means reduced federal highway funding, higher energy costs, more impediments for businesses small and large and more — none of which help to strengthen the progress made to date.

Balancing clean air and a growing economy is of vital importance, and fortunately, the president’s policies are doing just that nearly across the board. Indeed, when he leaves office, President Obama will without question be remembered as having done more to improve our environment than any other president in our history.

Tighter ozone standards, however, will do little to improve his clean-air legacy above and beyond the policies already in place, and will do much to dampen progress underway in our nation’s cities.

This White House has earned the praise it received for its devotion to bettering the prospects for our urban base. Let us hope that the last chapter in the Obama presidency is defined by a continued devotion to creating opportunity, and an awareness of those policies that may in fact work in opposition to that goal.

Edolphus Towns served in the United States House of Representatives from 1983 to 2013 representing communities in Brooklyn.