Comedy

Fans walked out on stand-up comedian Carl Barron, claiming they were misled and used as extras on his debut film. Photo: Jim Lee

Disgruntled fans have walked out on the stand-up comedian Carl Barron after claiming they had been misled and used as extras on Barron's debut feature film.

Barron's Facebook page featured criticisms from some fans who said they had paid $75 for tickets to the Friday night show not knowing that after intermission they were to be turned into extras for his film Manny Lewis.

Manny Lewis is about a lonely comedian looking for love, and is directed and co-written by Anthony Mir. Barron stars alongside Leeanna Walsman. Filming finishes Friday, and the movie is to be released on Australia Day.

Barron's manager Artie Laing said he was disappointed some fans felt misled and he would try to speak to Barron and others in the next few days and ''work something out''.

Advertisement

The Friday night show had been correctly advertised on the Ticketek website as a special one-off evening with Barron and was subtitled, ''How would you like to be part of Carl's new forthcoming Movie?''

''I don't want people feeling like we don't care, because we do,'' Laing said. ''Carl cares most about his audience.''

The evening was to feature 40 minutes of stand-up, a support act and a Q & A session, and then the shooting of movie scenes. Laing said Barron's performance had gone for 50 minutes inclusive of the support act. There was a ''lot of sitting around'' between takes as cameras tried to set up, Laing conceded, but he'd have hoped the fans would have stayed to help Barron make his film.

But, it seems, the movie details had not been picked up by some attendees.

''I'm seriously p'd off having paid full price for 2 tickets tonight and been given half a show,'' posted Janette Wright, who says she has written to Barron's management asking for a refund. ''People were walking out in droves. Very poor form and I reckon he lost quite a few fans tonight.''

Said Lauren Elder: ''Worst part is they disguised it as a show when they just wanted extras for the show then had the audacity to charge us money and waste our Friday night!''

Laing said: ''We are very disappointed there has been a misunderstanding.''