"God Bless the great State of Indiana," Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, shouted to a packed house at the Boone County Fairgrounds Saturday.

The senator offered his plan for a Cruz presidency in a bid for Hoosier votes and the Republican presidential nomination.

"If I'm elected president, we will repeal every word of Obamacare," Cruz shouted to cheers from the crowd.

The senator said the upcoming election centers on the three issues: jobs, freedom and security, telling voters believes he's the best candidate to go against Hillary Clinton in November.

"Donald Trump is not the best candidate to go head to head with Hillary Clinton. If Donald is our nominee, Hillary wins and she wins by double digits," said Cruz.

It was the same message Cruz offered to voters he met at a diner in Plainfield earlier in the day.

"It is a landslide for Hillary, if Donald Trump is the nominee. If I'm the nominee, we beat Hillary Clinton," Cruz said.

Cruz accused Trump of pretending to be something he's not, a Washington outsider and challenged Trump to a debate in Indiana before the May 3 primary.

"It's been 44 days since we had a debate. The Democrats have had a debate. Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders at least respect the men and women of this country to give them the debates, to subject them to scrutiny," said Cruz.

"I'm going to make an invitation, Indiana is voting in a week and a half, I think the people of Indiana deserve a debate between me and Donald Trump here in Indiana," Cruz added.

Debate or not, many of the voters who came out to hear the Texas Senator speak, said they had already made up their minds and were supporting Cruz.

"He knows the constitution inside and out and that's what this country needs is someone who defends the constitution," said Jan Reiva from Warsaw.

"I feel like he's a legitimate conservative," said Andy Engle.

"If you go back and look at his ratings, the things that he's done, how he's stood up to the Republican establishment, he's consistent. I can't say the same for Donald Trump. It's like night and day" Engle added of the two candidates.

Voters said they were aware, that for the next several days leading up to the primary, all eyes would be on Indiana and what they would have to say via their votes on May 3rd.

Sen. Cruz called Indiana a battleground, saying the state has a megaphone with its voice about to be heard on the national stage.