Land of Lincoln Health has made up with the University of Chicago, but the both sides are saying little about renewed relations.

The Tribune first reported in January that Land of Lincoln, a struggling Chicago-based insurance startup, would no longer include the University of Chicago's hospital and physicians in its provider network as of March 1. The unexpected breakup came after the two sides couldn't agree to terms on reimbursement rates.

Late last month, however, Land of Lincoln informed insurance brokers that the academic medical center will remain in the insurer's network through 2016 without interruption. A company spokesman confirmed the change.

"It has always been Land of Lincoln Health's full intention to continue offering coverage for the University of Chicago," said Dennis O'Sullivan, a Land of Lincoln spokesman, in a statement. "As an insurer born from the provider community, we are proud we were able to work together with the University of Chicago to ensure our members have continuous coverage for 2016."

O'Sullivan declined further comment on the change of heart, other than to say negotiations are ongoing between providers and insurers.

A statement provided by a spokeswoman for the medical center also did not shed light on why the parties got back together. The university said that "several hundred" patients are enrolled in Land of Lincoln health plans.

The rekindled partnership is a positive sign for Land of Lincoln members, who have been frustrated by customer service issues since the insurer opened for business in 2014. Insurers provide less coverage for out-of-network doctors, resulting in substantially higher out-of-pocket costs for patients.

While payment disputes between providers and health plans are common, this one raised more questions about the future of Land of Lincoln. The insurer was funded under the Affordable Care Act, President Barack Obama's signature health law.

About half of the 23 carriers created under the law, known as Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans, or "co-ops," have collapsed. The nonprofit health plans were envisioned as a way to provide more competition, greater consumer choice and better coverage in states typically dominated by large commercial insurance companies like Blue Cross plans.

But the quick death of some and the shaky financial health of the survivors has stranded consumers and intensified opposition to the law. As previously reported by the Tribune, Land of Lincoln is taking substantial measures to control costs and increase revenue, including freezing 2016 enrollment and raising premiums.

The company reported an underwriting loss of $90.8 million last year on revenue of $147.4 million. Land of Lincoln rapidly expanded in 2015, as membership rose from less than 4,000 at the end of 2014 to more than 50,000 a year later. But the loss of significant federal funds that were meant to ease the underwriting risk in the first few years of the Affordable Care Act has hurt Land of Lincoln and other co-ops.

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev