City horses

Castle Hayne, N.C.: Y’all up in N.Y.C. don’t know how good those carriage horses have it. All across the country, horses are being abandoned, neglected and sent to slaughter. The rescues just can’t keep up. The Horse Protection Society here in North Carolina states that there are thousands of unwanted horses in our state alone, and I know it is much worse out West. A well cared-for horse with a good job that earns money to keep it in oats and hay is a lucky horse, and it sounds like the New York City carriage horses get a whole lot more. Any of their poor country cousins would trade places with them, of that I am sure. Carla Cuomo

A dog's life for carriage horses

Odessa, Fla.: To Voicer Dorothy Arenella: I own a riding academy in Florida. Horses like to work, and it sounds like New York City carriage horses have a sweet set-up. Five weeks of vacation and guaranteed retirement? Too bad I’m the wrong species, or I’d be signing up. Andrea Whiting

Let workhorses work

McComb, Miss.: I own agility-trained dogs and I empathize with the carriage drivers. People who don’t compete in agility think we force our dogs onto the dog walks or through dark tunnels, when nothing could be further from the truth. One of my dogs literally lived for agility. He was happiest running a course. He got his last title at almost 12 years of age. I retired him after that, and he died seven months later. Sometimes our dogs — and our horses — thrive on work. People who don’t see the carriage horses’ day-to-day lives should not make decisions about what is best for them in terms of work and health. Kimberly Egan

Spare us the gridlock

Staten Island: Memo to the United Nations: While we all understand your collective mission of promoting peace throughout the world, is it possible for you to hold future General Assembly meetings in New Hampshire or North Dakota, so that a major city doesn’t become a parking lot for days on end? I have spent more time commuting these past few days than I have spent sitting at my desk and working. Just a suggestion. Gwenn Long

Seize the opportunity

Ozone Park: A month ago, it looked like the U.S. would bomb Syria. Now, diplomacy is offering a way forward without bombing. That’s great news. The U.S. shouldn’t just be engaging with Russia and Syria. Iran is a key player in the conflict, and they’ve been reaching out to the U.S. to reopen diplomatic channels. Engaging with Iran could help bring about a peaceful solution in Syria — as well as preventing Iran from developing nuclear weapons. But Congress could sabotage this groundbreaking opportunity. I hope Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand and Chuck Schumer and Rep. Hakeem Jeffries will oppose new sanctions on Iran at this critical moment. Erin Yarrobino

Foreign thinking

Fairfield, Conn.: So we are giving Syria $350 million to help those in need. At the same time, I read we are cutting back on food stamps to those in need in our own country. Thank you, Washington politicians. Now I know who you don’t work for. Sal Busciolano

Food for thought

Manhattan: The House Republicans sliced money from the food stamps program to decrease the amount of our national debt. If sacrifices have to be made, they opine, let food stamp recipients do without. These are poor adults and children, or the elderly with very low incomes, who need the stamps to put food on their tables. One must assume that the House Republicans who passed the bill will want to serve as examples and sacrifice no less than what they expect from the poor. They surely will give up a chunk of the sizable salaries that taxpayers dole out for them, won’t they? Cecile Low

Sick transit

Bronx: Whoever becomes the next mayor needs to look into the problems with the MTA. Construction on the streets and the train tracks continues to cause huge delays. For the past two weeks on Sedgwick Ave. in the Bronx, the Bx 3 buses have been taking a different detour every day. One morning, passengers were kicked off three stops before the final stop without explanation. The Bx 40 and Bx 42 and Bx 15 are also running three at a time. If you miss one bunch, you have to wait at least 20 minutes for the next batch. I have called the MTA to report this problem, but nothing has been done. Something also needs to be done to repay riders promptly who lose money on defective MetroCards. Three weeks ago, my card wasn’t working and an employee told me the MTA had “shut it off.” I had just bought the $30 card two days before. I was told to mail it in and I would receive reimbursement within nine days. I have not received a response yet. Susan Johnson

Thanks but no thanks

Brooklyn: If Obamacare is not good enough for the traitor known as Nancy Pelosi and her aides and their ilk, why is it good enough for me? That’s the strongest indication that this won’t work for us peasants. Lisa DeSantis

The people have spoken

Freeport, L.I.: The Daily News’ assertion that the American people have implicitly endorsed Obamacare due to the President’s reelection is ridiculous (“Cruz out of control,” editorial, Sept. 26). Obama was reelected by a slim majority, hardly a mandate. The GOP-controlled House, a truly representative body elected by the American people, voted 230 to 189 to defund Obamacare. Hardly an endorsement. Mark Green

Bitter medicine

Bronx: When the President laughs, jokes, mocks those opposed to his health-care law and tells half-truths, all I see is a talented snake-oil salesman who doesn’t have a clue what in his product but wants you to buy it anyway. Robert Neglia

A likely story

Bronx: If Judy Rapfogel really didn’t know that her husband stole more than $1 million from the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty (“Shel aide — I knew nothing,” Sept. 26), then she’s incompetent and obviously unqualified for the $165,460 she earns as Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver’s chief of staff. Perhaps her inefficiency was the cause of so many blunders originating in the speaker’s office. On the other hand, if she did know, then she should be prosecuted, along with her husband, as an accessory to the crime. Gerald Lebowitz

Playing hooky

Brooklyn: Shame on Eva Moskowitz for using children as pawns in promoting her charter school program (“Got no class,” Sept. 24). There should be an investigation of her decision to suspend school for more than 50,000 youngsters for political purposes, as well as of her grossly excessive $475,000 salary. Michael Weiss

Facts, shmacts

Williston Park, L.I.: To Voicer Robby Laughlin, who took Richard Cohen to task for misinformation in his Sept. 24 column, “Guns: The scourge of our time”: I just hate anyone who does his homework. Now, possibly, Mr. Cohen does also. Bill Viggiano

Where the buck stops

Hicksville, L.I.: Re the Daily News’ “Keep ’em or dump ’em” poll following the Yankees’ elimination from the playoffs: I have one question for the editors who approved the roster: Why is Yankees manager Joe Girardi omitted from this poll? Was it accidental? Was it intentional? Tom Fleming

Heir heads

Manhattan: The Mariano Rivera bobbleheads may have been late to Yankee Stadium, but bobbleheads were there all along in the form of the Steinbrenner brothers. Unlike their dad, they were too cheap to sign their starting right-fielder, Nick Swisher, and starting catcher Russell Martin. This egregious blunder undermined the Yankees’ season destroyed any vision of the playoffs. Poor George must be spinning in his grave. Douglas Corwin

Unfitting memorial

Franklin Square, L.I.: How sad that the producers of the Emmys would honor someone who was in the business for all of 15 minutes, who committed suicide and who was a junkie, to boot. Most people watching had no idea who Cory Monteith was. Ask those same people who Larry Hagman was, and the response would be unanimous. We all loved to hate J.R. The “Who Shot J.R.?” cliffhanger gained worldwide popularity and forever changed television. Over 41 million viewers watched in 1980, making it one of the most-watched TV episodes of all time — and that is what the Emmys should be all about. Andrea P. Iafrate