Campbell Brown, the journalist-turned-education-reformer, has been in the news a lot lately. Her Partnership for Educational Justice recently filed suit in New York, challenging the city’s teacher tenure laws. The organization is chaired by David Boies, who represented Al Gore in the contested presidential election of 2000 and recently argued against California’s ban on gay marriage. Brown and Boies have pledged to file several other suits around the country, focused on upending the status quo in education.

Opponents have already cried foul, questioning Brown’s credentials and the motives of her funders. But what Brown brings to the table is not only an ability to fight in the court of law but to win in the court of public opinion. That explains why her advocacy has attracted such vitriol by opponents – they see it as a real threat. For education reformers, the work is encouraging, since she has the potential to galvanize public support.

[MORE: Cartoons about Congress]

Here’s why Brown, the former CNN anchor, is so important:

1) Education reformers have tended to focus too much on trying to persuade lawmakers of the merits of our ideas and not enough on winning the hearts and minds of the voters. This approach to advocacy may work if the issue is not controversial, but it is not a sustainable strategy when the idea challenges the status quo and requires sustained change management. Brown’s plainspoken approach to one of the key problems in our education system helps get the public to focus on teacher tenure reform.

2) Brown’s fight for teacher tenure reform is not just designed to challenge the antiquated practice; it’s a tactic aimed at challenging education reform’s greatest foe: the teachers unions. She is not just interested in tenure reform – she’s fighting on behalf of parents who don’t have a voice or the means to select better schools.

[SEE: Political Cartoons]

3) Using the courtroom as a venue to fight for change is not the norm in education reform circles, but for most major movements it has been a key element of their strategy – think the NAACP, the American Civil Liberties Union and the American Association of University Women. Because education is a state and local issue, most reformers have shied away from making big investments in the courtroom, since it’s difficult to envision a transformative case that could be taken all the way to the Supreme Court. But Brown’s focus on the courts may be able to deliver the kind of big-bang legal victory that paves the way for comprehensive education reform.

Whether Brown is successful in her New York suit or future legal battles remains to be seen, but education reformers are energized by having a communications-savvy advocate who shows no fear in taking on the entrenched education establishment.