Gov. Scott's $1 billion tax cut plan in jeopardy

The House rolled out a tax cut proposal this week that has almost $1 billion in reductions like Scott has requested, but it omits the Republican governor's biggest idea: elimination of corporate income taxes on manufacturers and retail businesses. [Source: Bradenton Herald]

Legislative Roundup:

» Florida House moves to create regulatory framework for Uber,Lyft

» House, Senate release education budget proposals

» Florida Senate signs off on DEP secretary

» Open-carry gun proposal passes heads to Florida House

Your turn: Do you support or oppose the open-carry bill? (quick poll)

» Florida Senate approves changes to 'stand your ground' law; fate in House unclear

» Health care cost transparency bill passes Senate budget panel

Florida's public records laws need reforming to stop misuse

Florida’s taxpayers are being taken advantage of by profiteering individuals abusing the state’s public records laws for personal and financial gain and by public records requests that serve no legitimate public interest other than harassing public agencies. This misuse of the Public Records Act costs taxpayers money and makes government less efficient, according to a new report by Florida TaxWatch.

Kalashnikov cranking up AK-47 factory in Florida

Kalashnikov USA has been approved by the city of Pompano Beach to assemble guns there. The company started making the guns in Pennsylvania last year, but is shifting manufacturing to Florida. Kalashnikov hasn't said why they are moving or how big the Pompano Beach operation will be. More from Money and UPI.

'Super Bowl' of golf business underway in Florida

More than 40,000 golf professionals and fans are gathered in Orlando, Florida, for the annual PGA Merchandise show. The biggest companies present their latest and greatest gear and technology, alongside some of the most promising start-ups in the industry. [Source: CNBC]

As Obamacare deadline approaches, Florida leads nation in enrollment for health plans

More than 1.6 million Floridians have signed up for an Affordable Care Act plan since open enrollment began on Nov. 1. The deadline for consumers to sign up for a 2016 plan is Sunday. [Source: Miami Herald]

ALSO AROUND FLORIDA:

› Jacksonville Urban League offers expanded Entrepreneur Services program

The Jacksonville Urban League is expanding its services to help entrepreneurs in the city. The new Entrepreneur Program provides free professional counseling, financing and credit education along with technical assistance to small business operators through June 30.

› Ripley's makes a run at traveling exhibits

An exhibit saluting baseball in unusual ways is on deck for Ripley Entertainment Inc. The Orlando-based entertainment company has borrowed from its vault and museums to create "Ripley's Believe It or Not! Oddball."

› USF St. Pete announces another large gift for its business college

A $1 million gift will give business students at the University of South Florida St. Petersburg a chance to vie for new scholarships, the university announced Thursday.

› High-tech manufacturer launches in southern Manatee County

A manufacturer focused in the aerospace, industrial equipment, marine and general machining markets is setting up shop in southern Manatee County.

Go to page 2 for more stories ...

1 2 NEXT »

In case you missed it: