I may be overselling it a bit with that headline. The truth is that it's written in the cloying style of chick lit journalism, complete with references to Bridget Jones' Diary; but that's more likely to make an impact with the New York Times' reading base anyway. In between all the unfunny observational humor, there are some dangerous nuggets.

The Anthem Blue Cross representative who answered my call told me that there was a silver lining in the cancellation of my individual P.P.O. policy and the $5,400 annual increase that I would have to pay for the Affordable Care Act-compliant option: now if I have Stage 4 cancer or need a sex-change operation, I’d be covered regardless of pre-existing conditions. Never mind that the new provider network would eliminate coverage for my and my son’s long-term doctors and hospitals.

You win some, you lose some.

You have to pay $5,400 more and lose access to your son's doctors so that crazy people can get their genitals rewired trying to pretend they're now a whole other gender.

(And yes, once the trannies find this op-ed, they'll be sending angry letters demanding that the New York Times apologize for running an op-ed making bigoted jokes about their identity. And they'll probably get their way.)

“Obamacare or Kafkacare?” I posted on Facebook as soon as I hung up with Anthem. I vented about the call and wrote that the president should be protecting the middle class, not making our lives substantially harder. ... my respondents implied — in posts that, to my annoyance, kept getting more “likes” — that it was beyond uncool to be whining about myself when the less fortunate would finally have insurance. “The nation has been better off,” wrote one friend. “Over 33 million people who did not have insurance are now going to get it.” That’s all fine and good for “the nation,” but what about my $5,400 rate hike (after-tax dollars, I wanted to add, but dared not in this group of previously closeted Mother Teresas)? Another friend wrote, “Yes, I’m paying an extra 200 a month, but I’m okay with doing that so that others who need it can have health care.” I was shocked. Who knew my friends were such humanitarians? Has Obamacare made it un-P.C. to be concerned by a serious burden on my family’s well-being?

Well of course it has.

You're not supposed to complain about the impact of liberal policies on the Middle Class. Only the "Reich Wing". And you're supposed to pretend that everything would be fine if it weren't for the Koch Brothers.

The heated reactions even moved offline. Frustrated, I observed to one friend who was covered through her work that when an issue didn’t affect people directly, they became “theoretically generous.” Ask them to donate several thousand dollars so that the less fortunate can have medical insurance — which is exactly what President Obama is asking me to do — and I’ll bet they’d change their tune about “ending inequality” and “creating fairness” and “doing what’s good for the country.”

It worked for Lori, who seems to have gotten mugged by ObamaCare. And while she's no conservative, she is looking for sympathy about the mugging and not getting it.

Because it was one of those politically correct muggings for the Greater Good.

Along with the smug insureds, President Obama doesn’t care much about the relatively small percentage of us with canceled coverage and no viable replacement. He keeps apologizing while maintaining that it’s for the good of the country, a vast improvement “over all.” And the “over all” might agree. But the self-employed middle class is being sacrificed at the altar of politically correct rhetoric, with nobody helping to ensure our health, fiscal or otherwise, because it’s trendy to cheer for the underdog. Embracing the noble cause is all very well — as long as yours isn’t the “fortunate” family that loses its access to comprehensive, affordable health care while the rest of the nation gets it.

Except the rest of the nation isn't getting it.

Lori is right that the self-employed middle class is getting screwed. But then it's always getting screwed by liberalism which pushes institutional power and the 'big' factor over the self-employed and the middle class.

But ObamaCare isn't really a sacrifice on behalf of the uninsured. The uninsured are also being sacrificed. Aside from a small number of people who couldn't get affordable insurance due to pre-existing conditions, the only people who benefit are the ones in charge of carrying it out... but who aren't subject to it.

Welcome to Liberal Utopia where sacrificing for the greater good means almost everyone is worse off, but blames everyone else because they think that they're sacrificing for someone else.