The Urban Renewal Authority's plan to revamp the Central Market has been dealt another blow after the government said a land premium would have to be paid for the site.

Sources close to the authority now fear it will be forced to give up the revitalisation project because of the government's demand, which would greatly increase its potential loss on the development. The premium the government will charge is unlikely to be a nominal sum, they say.

The HK$500 million project, dubbed Urban Floating Oasis, aims to transform the 75-year-old Bauhaus structure into a complex of arts and culture venues with affordable eating places by 2017. It will feature a public open space of at least 1,000 square metres in the city's business district.

The project has met numerous obstacles since it was announced in 2009. It has been stalled by two judicial reviews and the authority had to make several revisions to its design to get approval from the Buildings Department, which required the conversion to comply with its rules on sustainable design and fire safety.

A spokeswoman for the authority said the Lands Department was now asking it to pay a land premium.

"It's already a loss-making project. Asking us to pay a premium at market price is like forcing us to give up the project," a URA board member said on condition of anonymity. Even without the premium, the project was already expected to suffer a loss of about a billion dollars, he added.

Almost half the floor area was designated for commercial use, but the authority wanted the market to house affordable dining options for the public rather than a shopping mall selling expensive luxury goods, he said.

The news came as authority chairman Victor So Hing-woh reiterated concerns about the authority's financial sustainability, after it suffered a HK$3 billion loss running a demand-led redevelopment scheme.

At least four board members told the Post they were opposed to the authority having to pay a premium at full market rate.

"Commercial space rented in Central costs about HK$100 per sq ft, but the market is not that high-end," said another member who declined to be named. "The government might as well take back the site and sell it for office buildings."

Another board member, who also declined to be named, said giving up the project would be "unwise" as it would draw huge public opposition.

Board member and lawmaker Wong Kwok-kin urged the government to collect only a nominal sum rather than a premium at market price. "We are not running a business. It's a conservation project," he said.

The authority's spokesman said it was waiting for the Lands Department to propose the premium amount. A Lands Department spokeswoman declined to comment on whether it would be a nominal fee.

Under the Central Market's new design, as advised by Japanese architect Arata Isozaki, the four-storey Bauhaus structure will feature an additional basement and an eye-catching floating structure on its roof. It is understood that the revamped structure and reinforcements would cost about HK$600 million, excluding landscaping.

The revamp is part of the Central conservation plan proposed by former development chief Carrie Lam Cheng Yuet-ngor, now chief secretary, in 2009. It is meant to address public demand to preserve the grade-three historic building. The site has been vacated for 11 years since 2003.