Buy Photo Huff’s Grocery in Burwood, which was built in 1911, is on the National Register of Historic Places. (Photo: Jamie Page / The Tennessean )Buy Photo

Huff’s Grocery has been around about as long as anyone in Williamson County can remember. And rest assured, the tradition will continue despite the family’s recent loss of its beloved patriarch.

After 72 years as the face of the iconic general store, the May 23 passing of Kenneth E. “Ken” Huff — known to friends and customers as “Pops” — sent shock waves of sorrow throughout the county.

It even prompted a legislative proclamation, presented July 2 by state Sen. Jack Johnson and Rep. Jeremy Durham to the family in honor of Ken Huff and his lasting contribution to the community.

But his legend will live on through his son, Charlie Huff, who will continue running the store after 36 years of working there since he was a teen.

“It would make Pop proud,” Charlie Huff said, standing behind the counter. “We will strive to be half as good as he was. He believed in treating people right. When you have done that, the rest takes care of itself.”

“Pop” kept the store open more than 14 hours a day, seven days a week for most of his years, working right up to his 86th birthday last year, when his health began to fail. He still continued going into the store a few hours a day. The store remains open 12 hours a day, six days a week.

“That would be a piece of cake to him,” Charlie Huff said. “He was a tireless worker. He loved this store and the customers. My daddy could probably outwork anybody.”

Ken Huff’s obituary called him “a mighty oak,” a decorated Korean War veteran and former deputy sheriff under his brother Mutt Huff.

When customers ask Charlie, “are you Mr. Huff now?” he’s quick to tell them he’s not.

“He tells them, ‘I’m just Charlie, I can’t fill those shoes.’ ” said his wife, Robin Huff, who works at the store when she’s not at her full-time job.

But the store’s bread and butter, making sandwiches and selling convenience items, continues like clockwork. Charlie reminisces about how when he was a kid, the store sold a variety of clothes, shoes, area rugs, animal feed and a great deal more hardware.

But they still don’t sell beer or lottery tickets, even though the store served as the set of a state lottery television commercial in late 2012. And the lack of such ubiquitous items has never seemed to hurt business.

In fact, though it’s the only available stop for gasoline in that area for many miles off State Route 840. The store’s lack of a restroom also has never dissuaded customers from stopping.

A sign at the front door reminds visitors of just how unique the place is, reading: “No bathroom. Built in 1911. This 103-year-old building has never had one.”

True to its roots

Williamson County Mayor Rogers Anderson said Huff’s Grocery was sometimes a stop on a tour of the county when courting out-of-town commercial business recruits. When a representative of one of them asked Anderson if there was a place to wash his hands, he said, “Did you not see the sign?”

“People come here from all over the state,” Robin Huff said. “And now that 840 is open, people come through from other states. They stop for gas and they’re surprised when they see it’s this old country store and they say they want to stop in again on their way back through.”

The store, which was put on the National Register of Historic Places 25 years ago, was, indeed, built in 1911, by the Akin Brothers, whose original store was across the street.

In 1937, they sold the business to Ken’s parents, R.G. and Hattie Huff, known to everyone who knew them as “Pop and Ma Huff.” By 1942, at age 15, Ken began working there. He rarely missed a day, with the exception of a few surgeries, Charlie said.

County Commissioner Judy Hayes lives down the road from Huff’s. It’s the kind of place where she can call ahead if she’s going to be coming by later, after closing time, and find a gallon of milk left on the front porch for her to pick up and pay for later on her ticket of credit. That’s the way it has been her whole life.

It’s where her family bought groceries, clothing and supplies. When they needed a 50-pound bag of flour, Hayes’ mother took her to pick out the one she wanted because the fabric would eventually be used to make her a dress.

“I can’t imagine Burwood without Huff’s store; Burwood is Huff’s store, as are the people who are their customers,” Hayes said. “When this was a tobacco-growing neighborhood, it was the lifeblood of the community. It still is the fabric of our community, and the whole nation.”

Reach Jamie Page at 615-771-5460 and on Twitter @JamiePage101.

IF YOU GO

Huff’s Grocery is located at 5452 Carters Creek Pike, near exit 23 of S.R. 840, in the Burwood community about five miles west of Thompson’s Station.

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/williamson/2014/07/04/huffs-grocery-legacy-continues-third-generation/12189261/