ENFIELD — Failure to keep enough money in the town's employee health insurance fund over the last three years has officials considering an alternate way to handle town and school employee health insurance.

In the 2013-14, the town spent approximately $1.7 million more in employee health care costs than it had put into a health insurance reserve fund; in 2014-15, the town spent about $3.4 million more than was funded and currently has spent about $1.5 million more than was allocated for this fiscal year. As of January, the town has about $117,000 left in the reserve fund to help pay for claims made by town and school employees, Town Manager Lee Erdmann said in an interview Monday.

The town will now decide to either raise taxes or change health insurance programs.

Currently, the town handles town and school employee health insurance through a self-insurance program. Through self-insurance, the town "takes the risk," Erdmann said, and partly-funds claims made by employees. The town's insurance provider, Cigna, handles some administrative work, Erdmann said.

"Our problem is, we've gone three years without setting appropriate rates so the fund balance has been going down instead of staying steady or going up," Erdmann said.

The town, according to budget documents, switched from a full-insurance program to a self-insurance program in 2008-09. Currently, the town has 423 full-time employees and 160 part-time employees, excluding seasonal employees, officials said. Of the combined 583 town employees, 372 employees opt for health insurance through the town. Currently, the school district has 734 employees eligible for health insurance, officials said Tuesday, and 531 of those employees have opted for insurance through the town. In addition, 70 retired teachers are included in the plan.

Erdmann said the town's former manager Matthew W. Coppler had said to expect an approximate 15 percent increase in health insurance costs this year. Coppler left Enfield in September to take a job as city manager in Lincoln Park, Mich. He did not respond to requests for comment Tuesday.

After further research last fall, and a recommendation from a health insurance consultant, Erdmann said the town will have to see at least a 22 percent increase to cover expected claims for 2016-17 and start to replenish that fund. The other option, Erdmann said, is to consider a full-insurance program.

The self-insurance account is funded by the town and board of education, through taxes, and through an employee share, Erdmann said. "We just haven't put enough into the fund to cover the costs over the last three years."

Erdmann said most of the towns the size of Enfield in Connecticut use self-insurance.

A fully-funded program could be more costly for the town long-term, Erdmann said. If Enfield moves to a fully-insured program, the insurance rates would be set by an insurance provider — and could come in low for the first year of a contract and increase significantly years down the road. A fully-insured program includes costs that the town would not have to pay if it stays self-insured, such as a state premium tax and fees and taxes required under the Affordable Care Act, Erdmann said.

"The benefit of fully insured is you know what your cost is," Erdmann said. "The disadvantage of fully-insured is that in the long run it costs more money."

In January, a group of town and school officials began discussion on the issue. The group is considering proposals to be fully insured and is expected to make a recommendation to the town council and school board. .

Last week, Erdmann during his 2016-17 budget presentation to the town council said that his proposed budget allocates about $5.6 million, a $740,000 increase, to the health and medical insurance line item. He said the $740,000 increase would be enough to bolster the fund because the 2016-17 budget also reduces the number of town employees by 11.

"We goofed, management goofed," Erdmann said. "It'll be taken care of one way or another."