By Pat McDonogh, The Courier-JournalA new Wal-Mart is being built in Shepherdsville. The company will be hiring up to 300 employees before its spring opening. An exterior of the new WalMart being built in Shepherdsville. The company will be hiring up to 300 employees before its spring opening. Jan. 6, 2015. (Photo: By Pat McDonogh, The Courier-Jou)

The Metro Board of Zoning Adjustment will hear arguments Monday afternoon on the design of a proposed Wal-Mart superstore at Broadway and 18th Street.

The hearing will begin around 1 p.m. at the Old Jail Building, Sixth and Liberty streets. The hearing has been rescheduled after being snowed out on Feb. 16.

The zoning hearing is expected to be the last major hurdle for construction of the store to get under way.

West End pastors affiliated with the Justice Resource Center — whose members strongly support the Wal-Mart and the several hundred jobs it would bring — plan a prayer vigil at noon at Jefferson Square near the hearing location.

RELATED: Find other stories about the proposed Wal-Mart here

The board will consider Wal-Mart's request for needed waivers from the local development code to build the store where it says it must go for maximum efficiency. The store would be set back about 600 feet back from Broadway, instead of right next to busy thoroughfare, as the code suggests.

The zoning board file contains numerous recently submitted letters, many of them from preservation interests, opposing the variance to allow a design that they tend to view as a store fit for the suburbs — not for an urban setting. Many of the letters are from people who don't oppose Wal-Mart, but just want adherence to the development code.

On the other hand, petitions signed by more than 4,000 people were turned in supporting the store, in pretty much any shape.

Wal-Mart has given a long list of written justifications in support of the variance:

•Allowing the building to exceed the code's 25-foot setback will not adversely affect the public health, safety or welfare, because the former Philip Morris buildings on the property — long since razed — were set back significantly farther than that.

•The variance will not alter the essential character of the surrounding area, which contains a mix of uses and of site designs that follow no real pattern.

•The Wal-Mart project, as designed, will allow for retail development on a scale that is not otherwise available in the city's urban core.

•The variance will not cause a hazard or nuisance to the public.

•The variance will not allow "an unreasonable circumvention of the requirements of the land development code, because the comprehensive plan encourages flexible and creative site design."

Wal-Mart also contends that the store represents "a significant investment in the redevelopment of an older and declining neighborhood" and that the store, set back from the street, will provide room for delivery trucks to maneuver.

Wal-Mart cleared what may have been the biggest hurdle in late January, when at the end of a four-hour meeting another zoning-related panel, the Louisville Metro Planning Commission, approved several waivers from the development standards.

Lawyer Steve Porter, representing the preservation interests and Wal-Mart opponents, said that many of the arguments before the zoning board Monday will be largely the same ones made before the Planning Commission last month. He acknowledged that the issues haven't changed but, he said, "this is a different group of people" hearing the arguments.

Despite a strong suggestion by the planning commissioners to modify the design to remove some of the parking in front of the store, Wal-Mart officials said they would live or die with the design as submitted, contending that it was the only layout that optimized operations.

Wal-Mart officials noted that many changes had been made in the store design — many of them to comply with city planner recommendations, including trees, drainage controls, facade and exterior material modifications — since an original plan early last year.

The pending plan is for a one-level "big box" superstore, with 154,000 square feet of space. That would include a grocery, a deli, an optometrist, a pharmacy with a drive-through, and the garden center.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Btt478