By Kathleen Sloan, The Hawk Eye, Burlington, Iowa McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Oct. 16 -- WEST BURLINGTON -- In a rare move, West Burlington Mayor Hans Trousil said he would exercise his power to veto the city council's decision to keep Sagacity Insurance as the city's health insurance broker.

The West Burlington City Council passed the motion at a special meeting Oct. 8 .

Trousil had 14 days to put his veto in writing, but it was not necessary because city council members voted Wednesday night to hire True North Insurance and Financial Strategies of Cedar Rapids .

The city has a mayor-council form of government. While the mayor has no vote, he does have veto power. The mayor can veto a resolution or ordinance or other formal action by the council within 14 days of the decision in writing, giving an explanation for the veto.

The city council may override a veto within 30 days with a two-thirds majority vote, which, in West Burlington's case, is four of the five council members.

At the special meeting Oct. 8 , Trousil, City Administrator Dan Gifford , Councilwoman Therese Lees , Councilman Doug Ervine and the city-employee health insurance committee said they wanted to hire True North.

True North has more experience with administering policies for city-employee groups with fewer than 50 members, which have a different set of rules than larger groups under the Affordable Care Act, Gifford said. It also has more employees and therefore can give more attention to city employees, he said, which has been an issue with Sagacity.

Councilmen Rod Crowner and Rick Raleigh and Councilwoman Kara Steward wanted to retain Sagacity. Crowner said he wanted to keep the business local, and Steward said the root of employee complaints were beyond the company's control.

Gifford said Steve Preader worked for Employee Benefits System but formed Sagacity last year after its parent company, Two Rivers Insurance , was accused of overbilling by Wellmark , which still is under investigation by the Iowa insurance commissioner.

Gifford consulted with the city's attorney, Patrick O'Connell of Lynch Dallas P.C. , who advised "a do-over" on the vote. O'Connell advised contracts for services need to be passed by resolution, Trousil said, not mere motion.

Therefore, on the Wednesday agenda were two resolutions, one for hiring Sagacity and another for hiring True North as the insurance broker for the city.

Ervine said the brokerage fee is paid by the health care provider, so the city resolution mentions no fee arrangement with the broker.

Preader attended Wednesday's meeting and reminded the council he has worked with the city for eight years, first at EAB and then Sagacity. The roll-out of ACA still is undergoing changes, he said, which he estimated at more than 2,000 pieces of legislation.

He said he negotiated services and claims for employees, and sometimes, the answers and results were not to their liking, but he did his job.

Preader argued his company brings similar manpower and experience to the job as the larger and older firm, True North.

"We have a sub-agent in Des Moines with 100 employees. That is a resource we bring to the client," he said.

"We are local. My future endeavors, where I will build, is based on where I'm doing business. I'm doing business with the city," Preader said.

No True North representative attended the meeting.

The resolution in favor of Sagacity failed, and the resolution in favor of True North passed.

Crowner was not in attendance.

Crowner, Steward and Raleigh voted in favor of Sagacity at the Oct. 8 meeting and Ervine and Lees voted against.

Only Raleigh changed his vote Wednesday.

Steward was the sole vote among the four in favor of Sagacity and against hiring True North.

She said she understood the city workers wanted True North but believed they were persuaded by the Iowa League of Cities' endorsement. True North bought an insurance company the league endorsed, then gave a blanket endorsement to the new owner, she said.

"It's not because they did anything special to deserve it," she said.

Steward also wanted to keep the business local and said, "I think he's ( Steve Preader ) done a fine job for us over the last eight years."

Raleigh said he spoke with city employees extensively since the Oct. 8 meeting and thought it was his duty to vote as they wanted him to vote.

He told them, "If you change, you have to realize it might stay the same, or it might get worse, so don't come back on me if it does."

___

(c)2014 The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa)

Visit The Hawk Eye (Burlington, Iowa) at www.thehawkeye.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 760

[jetpack-related-posts]