Schenley Plaza rally underscores that 'black lives matter'

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

The message was clear, concise, and chanted loud from Schenely Plaza Saturday evening.

“Black lives matter.”

A rally for justice held at 6 p.m. drew around 120 supporters calling for an end to police brutality.

“If they are not held accountable, the death toll will continue to rise,” said Julia Johnson, a 22-year-old from East Liberty.

The event was put together in the spirit of solidarity with protests in Baltimore, where the death of Freddie Gray, a black man in police custody, led to peaceful protests, then violent riots, and the indictment of six police officers.

Pittsburgh's event was held in conjunction with similar ones across the country, as advertised by the ANSWER Coalition, a nationwide network whose acronym stands for “Act Now to Stop War & End Racism.” Word spread through social media. Similar events were held at campuses, city halls and public spaces in Minneapolis, Los Angeles, Chicago, Boston and Portland.

Here at Schenley Plaza, Johnson was one of more than a dozen speakers and performers at the rally.

The crowd was a mix of races and ages who held many of the same printed posters: “STOP Racist Police Treatment,” “Fists Up, Fight Back,” and “It Is Right to Rebel.” At the corner of Schenley Drive, four motorcycle cops stood on guard, within earshot of the chants and calls for justice for Freddie Gray and others.

Outside the tent, students sat on the grass in the warm spring air, and some walking by stopped to listen. Early on, 10-year-old Trevon Bibbs, stage name Young Schola, energized the crowd with a rap, beginning with the sentiment that he no longer wanted to live in a war zone.

“No justice, no peace, let's end the violence in the streets,” he said, and the crowd joined in.

His mother Heather Garczyniski brought Trevon from Erie, in part on advice from a music mentor who encourages the boy to spread his message. “We came here in solidarity,” she said. Garcyniski said one night earlier this year, her son woke up in the middle of the night to the sound of gunshots.

“I worry about the world he's growing up in,” she said.

David Hopkins came to the rally from Robinson, along with his daughter who attended with friends. A Baltimore native, he said he was proud of her when she asked to attend.

“It was a good opportunity to be a part of some demonstration locally since we couldn't be with our family and friends in Baltimore,” said Hopkins, wearing an Orioles cap and Baltimore T-shirt. “It's an opportunity to contribute.”

The rallies, he said, were “hope in the wake of hopelessness,” noting the involvement of younger generations.

“You see a lot of the violent demonstrations and the riots and outcries of hopelessness,” he said. “The peaceful demonstrations are outcries of hope, and I think the confluence of the two ultimately leads to some level of change.”

Melissa Daniels is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 412-380-8511 or mdaniels@tribweb.com.