BY LINDA BENTLEY | FEBRUARY 19, 2014

Social Security Administration complicit in cover up?

GREENBELT, Md. – Back in January, Dr. Orly Taitz, Esq. (r) filed a second amended complaint in U.S. District Court for the District of Maryland against Carolyn Colvin, in her official capacity as Acting Director of the Social Security Administration (SSA).



The complaint stems from Taitz’s April 26, 2013 Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) request for copies of form SS-5, application for a Social Security number, for Harry (Harrison) Bounel and two other individuals.



The SSA has an obligation to respond to FOIA requests within 20 business days.



When she received no response after waiting 60 days, Taitz filed the complaint.



After Taitz filed the legal action, Colvin responded by stating the SSA has no records for Bounel.



Colvin included in her response an affidavit signed by Senior FOIA Officer Dawn Wiggins stating the SSA has no records for Bounel.



Taitz subsequently filed a motion for summary judgment, asserting Colvin and Wiggins were defrauding the court and provided the court with a Nov. 16, 2012 letter signed by Wiggins, indicating the SSA has records for Bounel, but wouldn’t release them due to privacy considerations and stating disclosure would be a clearly unwarranted invasion of privacy.



Taitz noted Bounel, who was born in 1890, falls under the SSA’s 120 year rule, which states the SSA must release records without proof of death or a death certificate for “extremely aged individuals” who were born 120 or more years ago.



The 120-year rule was adopted in 2010 and made public in 2011.



The SSA, after claiming in November 2012 it has records, but, citing 5USC §552(b)(6), could not release them due to privacy concerns, has since changed its tune by claiming it has no records.



Taitz provided the court with a copy of the 1940 Census from Bronx, N.Y. showing Bounel was 50 years old in 1940 and, therefore, in 2013 when the request was made, he was 122-123 years old.



The reason this is all relevant is the Social Security Number being used by President Obama, ending in 4425, was issued in Connecticut, where Obama never lived, and was issued while Obama was attending school in Honolulu.



During an investigation performed by Susan Daniels, an Ohio private investigator, that same SSN used by Obama since 1986, came up as associated with a person born in 1890.



Further investigation by licensed investigators Albert Hendershot, Neil Sankey and Daniels brought Bounel into the picture showing two individuals were using the same SSN xxx-xx-4425, Harrison J. Bounel and Barack Obama.



It has already been confirmed by Sheriff Joe Arpaio’s Cold Case Posse and document experts that the long-form birth certificate posted on the While House website on April 27, 2012 was a computer generated forgery as was Obama’s purported Selective Service registration.



Subsequent checks through E-Verify and the SSN Verification System, two agencies set up by the federal government to check for the unlawful use of SSNs, which are often stolen or otherwise unlawfully used by illegal aliens and identity thieves, returned a notice of mismatch when Obama’s name and SSN were entered.



It was later learned that Obama was unable to sign up for the Affordable Care Act using the website because the system was unable to verify Obama’s identity.



Taitz claims the SSA, by and through its employees, engaged in obfuscation of records and obstruction of justice.



According to Taitz, and asserted in her complaint, “Wiggins repeatedly wrongfully withheld aforementioned application in order to cover up the fact that Barack Obama has committed massive fraud and has stolen the franchise of the U.S. President using a stolen Social Security number and fabricated IDs.



Taitz accuses Wiggins and possibly Colvin of acting in concert with a number of other individuals in a RICO (Racketeer Influenced Corrupt Organization) conspiracy to defraud the United States of America in order to aid and abet Obama, aka: Barry (Barack) Soebarkah, Barry (Barack) Soetoro and Barry (Barack) Obama in stealing the 2008 and 2012 presidential elections, stealing the franchise of the U.S. presidency, cover up and obstruction of justice in cover up of stolen and fabricated IDs used by Obama.



Taitz is asking the court release the records responsive to her FOIA request as well as an order from the court to allow her and forensic document experts to examine the original SS-5 for Bounel and the ability to compare it to other SS-5s created around the same time.



On Jan. 30, Colvin filed a motion to dismiss or, in the alternative, a motion for summary judgment.



On Feb. 3, Taitz received a letter from the clerk of the court to advise her of the motions and providing Taitz with 17 days, from the date of the letter to respond.