This article is a collaboration between MedPage Today® and:

Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

CHICAGO -- A remote set of eyes watching over patients in the intensive care unit via telemedicine tools didn't shorten stays or reduce risks, a single-center study suggested.

No effects were statistically significant, but the signals consistently went in the wrong direction, Ajit Dhakal, MD, of Northside Medical Center in Youngstown, Ohio, and colleagues reported here at the CHEST meeting.

The mortality rate went from 78 to 90 per 1,000 over a period from the year before to the year after implementation of the electronic ICU (P=0.2826).

The mean length of stay was 3 days before and 3.2 afterward (P=0.3654). The incidence rate of falls also went from none to 0.81 (P=0.4838).

The number of code blues rose from 39 to 54 over the period, while the number of treated patients stayed stable (P=0.3671).

Although results from some prior studies have also come up short, a 2011 meta-analysis did support a 20% reduction in ICU mortality and shortening of stay in the ICU by 1.26 days on average with eICU monitoring.

Shorter ICU stays are the key because that's what will impress administrators, commented Mira Loh-Trivedi, PharmD, of the ICU at Franciscan Alliance St. Margaret Health in Hammond, Ind.

"Everyone is trying to get leaner to survive all the healthcare issues," she said in an interview. "These kind of technologies can stretch the current staff, but they themselves are expensive so you have to have a defensible endpoint [for] investing in that kind of technology."

The setting may make all the difference, Dhakal suggested in the poster presentation.

Remote monitoring is "an awesome tool for a resource-scarce situation," he concluded. "For a teaching hospital, not so much."

The eICU has been suggested as a tool to bridge the gap in outcomes for centers without intensivists, whereas Dhakal's community teaching hospital had them onsite, he pointed out.

The researchers acknowledged that the lack of benefits could have been hidden by the relatively small sample size and wide standard deviation in both groups.

There were real questions about the eICU methods as well, cautioned Craig Lilly, MD, director of the University of Massachusetts Memorial eICU program in Worcester.

"It wasn't entirely clear to me that [the authors] was using the same organized software that everyone else is using," he told MedPage Today, adding that the stated remote monitoring location "is not really a tele-ICU vendor or a known site, so that's a little odd."

Also, data on discharge characteristics were missing, such as how the proportion of patients transferred to other hospitals changed, because that's key for the financial viability of eICU adoption in a smaller community center, Lilly added.

"This kind of analysis doesn't really help us to actually know what we need to know," he said.

The study compared 1,310 patients admitted with two adult ICUs of a 375-bed hospital in the year prior to introduction of an eICU system in June 2007, and 1,227 patients treated the following year.

The intervention involved intensivists and critical care nurses using the early warning software, video monitoring, physician note and order writing application, and computer-based support tool for 24-7 off-site monitoring and management.

Lilly's group has done a 56-ICU study with 18,000 patients, which should be large enough to look at mortality and length of stay along with an individual center's implementation characteristics. Lilly said the results should be out soon.

The researchers reported no conflicts of interest. Lilly and Loh-Trivedi reported no conflicts of interest.