House Republicans are in a budget bind.

In a meeting of the entire GOP conference Friday morning, Speaker Paul Ryan laid out three approval options for how the group can move forward: a budget that goes back to sequestration spending levels (far below the bipartisan spending level agreed to last year); a budget that increases spending for defense only; or a budget that sets long-term GOP priorities but sticks to the $30 billion spending increases for Fiscal 2017 signed into law last year.

Republicans are divided into familiar factions over the three options and a path forward is unclear. According to a source in the room, Ryan used graphs and charts to lay out the options, stressing that the House doesn’t need to approve a budget and that the sky won’t fall if the appropriations process isn’t completed. But he and members across the spectrum of the GOP conference have called for a return to “regular order” in the House, and completing a budget would be the first step in that process.

There are other benefits to the House passing a budget, namely reconciliation, an arcane budgetary process that allows certain legislation to pass the Senate without being subject to a 60-vote filibuster. Republicans used that tactic earlier this year to force President Obama to veto a repeal of the Affordable Care Act. With a budget this year, repealing Obamacare could again be on the table using reconciliation, and if a Republican is elected president, it would be likely their swiftest route to repealing the law in 2017.

Yet many conservatives, including members of the House Freedom Caucus, have stressed in recent weeks that they have major concerns over the debt and deficit and prefer to draft a budget reflecting lower spending priorities. When the budget deal negotiated by former Speaker John Boehner to raise spending by $80 billion over two years passed last fall, the majority of Republicans voted against it. Conservatives argue that they shouldn’t be expected to now support a number in the budget that they voted against just a few months ago.

“This idea that whatever the number is we’ve got to follow it, we have never done that, are you kidding me?” Rep. Jim Jordan, the chairman of the Freedom Caucus, said Thursday. “So that’s why we keep coming back to a pretty common-sense thing: Write a Republican budget that reflects the security threats that we face, does the right thing for defense, but also understands the debt situation that we have."

Rep. Dave Brat, a Freedom Caucus member who sits on the Budget Committee, said he could be persuaded to vote for the higher number, but only if there were written agreements to make major cuts in entitlement spending to make up the difference. He argued that with entitlement spending in the trillions of dollars, offsetting $30 billion shouldn’t be a Herculean task.

“If we can’t find $30 billion it’s an embarrassment, it’s a mathematical embarrassment,” Brat told RCP.

Conversely, moderates and other conference members who have often clashed with the Freedom Caucus argue that a deal was reached and the spending levels that were signed into law should be honored. California Rep. Devin Nunes said that either option that doesn’t stick to the approved spending level would result in a failed appropriations process and require an omnibus spending bill (an approach that is universally reviled) or a continuing resolution that maintains current spending.

“You can spend a lot of time here doing appropriations bills in the House and they make you feel good, but at the end of the day, it’s not going to go into law, it’s not going to have an impact at all,” Nunes said. He added his preference that the conference work toward accomplishments that “matter versus waste the whole year."

Ryan’s current position is one Boehner consistently found himself in – hoping to move forward on funding the government while dealing with conservatives frustrated by the proposals and able to prevent a majority of Republicans from agreeing. But both sides do agree that the process and the relationships between leadership and conservatives are vastly improved this time around.

For one thing, Ryan has considerably better relations with the Freedom Caucus than Boehner did. A majority of them voted for his speakership and they have praised both his policy vision for Republicans and the changes he has made regarding process. Ryan meets weekly with members across the ideological spectrum, and Jordan and Rep. Mick Mulvaney, another Freedom Caucus leader, are regular attendees.

Ryan also met with a group of Freedom Caucus members over beer in his office last week for several hours to discuss the budget and has held meetings with members of the Budget Committee and other Republicans. He’s mostly been listening to where lawmakers stand rather than trying to push members in one direction or another. Ryan has called it a “family conversation” and stressed that it’s early in the budget discussions since the deadline to pass one – should the House redo the Boehner-negotiated agreement -- isn’t until mid-April. He’s also emphasized that he’s not the “dictator” or “micromanager” of the House, and said during the meeting Friday morning that he wouldn’t jam a decision down members’ throats.

“I want to get [the appropriations process] back up and running,” the Wisconsin congressman said Thursday at his weekly press conference. “But our members are going to make this decision together.”

Conservatives have noticed and praised the outreach.

“I think the outreach has been very good by Speaker Ryan and the rest of leadership,” Rep. Raul Labrador, a Freedom Caucus leader, said Thursday. “[Budget Chairman] Tom Price, I think, has been a champion coming to us and discussing the issue with us. So a lot of kudos to them for reaching out.”

But Labrador stressed that conservatives are firm in their position on the spending levels, arguing that while Republican budgets consistently balance after 10 years, they are “still kicking the can down the road.”

Even if there isn’t a meeting of the minds on the budget – and the one approved last fall remains in place -- there isn’t much worry that the fractured nature of the Boehner era will return. Labrador gave a one word response when asked if he had any concerns about that: “No.”

Asked to elaborate, the Idaho lawmaker said, “I think that Paul Ryan is an adult and I think he understands that we’re going to have our position, he’s going to have his position, and if we don’t agree on this issue, we may agree on some other issue in the future."

Rep. Cynthia Lummis, another Freedom Caucus member, agreed that conservatives and leadership would be able to stay on the same page overall if not on the budget, arguing that Ryan’s past work pushing fiscal conservatism created a certain amount of trust.

“I am betting the farm on Paul Ryan and any minor disagreements are not going to alter my confidence in betting the farm” on him, Lummis told RCP.

The path forward is unclear, and Friday’s meeting was mostly an opening salvo as Republicans try to determine a solution. It’s also uncertain whether there’s enough opposition to the current spending level to pass a budget, but if the Freedom Caucus voted unanimously, it could prevent one from passing. An 80 percent vote from the group is needed to draft an official position and while there hasn’t yet been a vote on a budget position, Jordan said the group is “looking at that very strongly.”

Price, the budget chairman, said his plan remains to mark up and pass the budget out of his committee by the end of the month. With a full week off for Presidents’ Day, Republicans will have some time back in their districts to weigh their options.