Police arrested a 29-year-old man on suspicion of third-degree assault, harassment and false imprisonment after he allegedly assaulted his 64-year-old mother, after officers were dispatched to a report of a disturbance on the 2000 block of Estes Lane.

A Longmont resident reported Friday that her bicycle had been stolen from her residence on the 900 block of Grandview Meadows Drive. The case is closed, for the time being, because of a lack of information about a possible suspect.

Police said they're attempting to identify the driver of a vehicle believed to have been involved in a Friday hit-and-run property damage collision on the 2200 block of Main Street. The suspect vehicle has been located.

Police got a report Friday that someone illegally entered a vehicle on the 1700 block of Antero Drive. The case is closed, for now, because of a lack of information about a possible suspect or suspects.

Police are investigating a Friday report about a possible domestic violence-related stalking and harassment that occurred on North Main Street.

Police issued a summons Friday to a 21-year-old woman suspected of shoplifting clothing and jewelry from a store on the 1200 block of South Hover Street.

Police arrested a 28-year-old woman wanted on a warrant for failure to appear in court on a theft charge, after officers were dispatched early Friday morning to the 500 block of Baker Street on a report of a disturbance there.

Advertisement

A Longmont resident of the 2900 block of Bryn Mawr Place on Friday reported a theft from her residence by a known suspect. The case has been referred to detectives for follow-up.

A theft victim reported Friday that he'd found an item, stolen from him earlier, ina pawn shop on the 300 block of Main Street. The item was taken into police custody, but police said the victim did not want prosecution of the theft pursued.

Police arrested a 51-year-old man Friday night on outstanding warrants in connection with a forgery case after officers were dispatched to the 2300 block of Main Street to investigate a report of a disturbance there.