A period of not reviewing eligibility may have helped drive the largest increase in KanCare enrollment since 2011, according to a report from the Kansas Health Institute.

Almost 24,000 more Kansans were covered by Medicaid or the Children’s Health Insurance Program in 2014 compared with the year earlier, according to a report from KHI. About 422,562 people were enrolled, on average, in any month in 2014. KHI used the monthly averages to avoid double-counting people who may have been eligible at different times throughout the year.

Scott Brunner, senior policy analyst with KHI, said the state’s decision to suspend monthly reviews while it implemented the Kansas Eligibility and Enforcement System may have been a factor in higher enrollments. KEES is designed to automatically track who is eligible for various types of public assistance and flag families whose income has risen too high, but it didn’t roll out until this year. That meant eligibility wasn’t reviewed monthly, to ease state employees’ workloads implementing KEES and parts of the health care law, he said.

“That may have held the numbers artificially higher than they would have been,” he said.

Sara Belfry, spokeswoman for the Kansas Department of Health and Environment, said the delay had nothing to do with KEES, but the department had to switch to a new policy as a provision of the health care law. She said the department attributed higher-than-usual enrollment growth to the “woodwork” effect of people who didn’t realize they were eligible for Medicaid applying because of increased news coverage and discussion of the program.

The actual enrollment was slightly above what experts projected. An analysis done by a private firm for the state predicted enrollment would increase by 20,563 in 2014 and rise for the next two years. About 41,538 people are expected to sign up in 2016. The projection didn’t include a specific number for 2015, Belfry said. Enrollment varies from month to month in Medicaid programs, but the annual average has increased for the past six years. About 308,821 people were enrolled in Medicaid or CHIP in any given month in 2009. Most of the surge came in 2011, when enrollment increased by 47,049, or 14.4 percent, on average compared with 2010.

The 2014 numbers were up 6.0 percent compared with the year before, which was lower than the national average increase of 8.3 percent. The national average includes states that elected to expand Medicaid eligibility to people making up to 133 percent of the federal poverty line, however, which may explain the difference. More than half of the increase in 2014 was among families that were automatically eligible because they received cash assistance. Brunner also noted a significant increase among families eligible for a four-month extension after they no longer were eligible for Medicaid. The change coincided with the Legislature reducing lifetime cash assistance eligibility from 60 months to 48 months, possibly pushing more people into the extended program, he said. The limit was reduced again, to 36 months, this year.

“There are patterns of growth in (eligible) populations we don’t normally see,” Brunner said.

The number of people eligible because of disabilities, children enrolled in CHIP and low-income seniors enrolled in both Medicare and Medicaid didn’t change substantially from 2013 to 2014.

Brunner attributed the low level of growth in CHIP to a policy under health care reform shifting eligible children from CHIP to Medicaid. The benefits are the same for families, and medical providers will receive the same reimbursement because both problems are administered by the same managed care organizations, he said.

“It’s seamless to everybody except folks at the state who have to keep track of where kids fall in terms of their eligibility,” he said.