Weston school Superintendent Colleen Palmer’s education budget request for the 2014-15 fiscal year is $47,698,813, $2,123,395 more than the current year, representing a 4.66% increase.

Salaries, employee benefits, and special education costs are the key factors driving the proposed budget hike, Dr. Palmer told the Board of Education at a recent budget workshop.

Salaries/benefits

The most significant increase in the school budget request is salary/wage increases and the rising cost of employee benefits.

Salaries account for 61.01% of the total school budget. Wages for teachers, administration, and other staff are expected to rise 3.26%, $756,798 more than the current fiscal year.

The district currently employs 381 individual staff members within three unions — the Weston Teachers’ Association, Weston Administrators’ Association, and American Federation of State, County, and Municipal Employees — as well as 22 unaffiliated employees.

About 95% of the wage increases are contractually obligated or state-mandated, according to Dr. Palmer.

Employee benefits account for 19.94% of the school budget. There is a 34.52% hike in employee benefits proposed, $790,948 more than the current fiscal year.

Health care costs are the main driver for the increase in benefits, according to the superintendent.

In the current fiscal year, the district was able to save approximately $500,000 by changing the entire workforce’s insurance carrier from Cigna to Aetna.

However, in 2013, medical claims exceeded projections by approximately $600,000, and the district’s insurance adviser estimates the costs of medical claims will increase 10% in 2015 based on industry standards and the district’s claims history, according to Dr. Palmer.

Another impact on employee benefits is the anticipated effect of the Affordable Care Act, which will require the district to offer health insurance to all employees who work 30 hours or more per week.

Part-time employees, such as substitute teachers, who often work 30-hour weeks, are not currently provided with health insurance by the district.

There is also a projected $45,755 increase in the district’s contribution to the Municipal Employees Retirement System (MERS) for employee benefits.

Special education

Another key budget factor is a proposed $619,083 increase in the current $6.3-million special education line.

The hike is based on increased costs and a decrease in grant funds, according to Dr. Palmer. She said special education costs have increased more than 20% over the past five years, a trend common to many school districts.

The special education program in Weston serves students from ages 3 to 21, and includes students with autism and those who are medically fragile. Some students require education services outside the district, and the district must pay for those services.

Special education costs can be volatile during the course of the school year because the number of students and their needs can change.

The 2014-15 special education budget was calculated taking into account an expected shortfall in the current fiscal year. Last month, Dr. Palmer told the finance board the district is anticipating a $230,000 shortfall, primarily due to unanticipated costs associated with special education.

In addition, external revenue grants for special education have decreased while costs have increased, according to Dr. Palmer.

Other factors

Other factors contributing to the 4.66% proposed budget increase are costs associated with school enrollment, contracted services, and materials and equipment.

For the current fiscal year, the district had anticipated a decrease in enrollment, and had cut several teaching positions. Instead, there was an increase in enrollment of five students. As a result, the district added one unanticipated elementary teacher in the current fiscal year.

In the 2014-15 fiscal year, the schools are estimating an enrollment decrease of 14 students. However, because the projection is spread out across the schools, minimal changes are proposed to staffing levels.

The district plans to cut the equivalent of two full-time teachers but is also adding the equivalent of 1.7 full-time teachers to the budget because those positions are no longer being funded through grants. So there will be no significant savings in the budget due to staffing cuts.

Purchased (contracted) services with outside vendors for such things as the school lunch programs, bus transportation, and cleaning services, account for 13.38% of the school budget.

Purchased services are expected to increase by $124,248, including a $46,933 increase in transportation costs, a $13,407 increase in cleaning services, and a 3% increase in other contracted services.

The superintendent noted that while the district has managed to realize more than $3 million in savings in the past few years due to streamlining operations, re-bidding health insurance, and consolidating non-educational work, there are no new mitigating expenses to be saved in the upcoming fiscal year or “game changing” efficiencies to be had.

Lowest in DRG

In the past five years, Weston has had the lowest compounded education budget percentage increase compared to other towns in its District Reference Group (DRG).

Weston is part of DRG-A, a classification of school districts in the state with similar income and education levels, and federal mandates. Other schools in DRG-A are Darien, Easton, New Canaan, Redding, Region 9 (Joel Barlow High School), Ridgefield, Westport, and Wilton.

For the fiscal years 2010-14, Weston has had a 3.63% compounded rate of increase, the lowest in the DRG. Easton is next at 5.29%, followed by Ridgefield at 9.03%, Redding at 9.53%, Region 9 at 10.73%, Westport at 10.80%, Wilton at 10.92%, New Canaan at 12.89%, and Darien at 25.37%.

Dr. Palmer said the district’s goal is to budget only for essential needs in order to realize its educational goals.

There are two more education budget workshop sessions scheduled before the school board votes on its final budget request.

A budget workshop earlier this week was postponed because of the snowstorm and is now scheduled for Thursday, Jan. 23, at 7 p.m. in the library at Weston Middle School.

A final budget workshop is scheduled for Saturday, Jan. 25, at 10 a.m., also in the middle school library.

The school board is expected to vote on the budget at a meeting scheduled for Monday, Jan. 27, at 6 p.m. at the middle school library.

CORRECTION: This story was corrected to reflect that the school salary increase for the 2014-15 proposed budget is 3.26% higher than the current fiscal year, not as was originally stated.