Topics: campus racism, Education, Racism, student protests, Life News, News

Today students who dare to voice complaints about racism on campus are more often than not slapped with a number of easy-to-use, prefabricated labels that take the place of actually seriously addressing the issues being raised. They are called “coddled,” “politically correct,” “spoiled,” and at the same time “terrifying” to “even” liberal professors. Students are collectively stigmatized with these labels and also considered whiney narcissists.

Now a new study by FiveThirtyEightPolitics, “Here Are the Demands From Students Protesting Racism at 51 Colleges,” has sorted through the list of issues collected on the website “The Demands.” It found that at the top of the list of the 13 most common demands were:

Increase diversity of professors (38)

Require diversity training (35)

At the bottom:

Revise speech code (7)

Remove officials (6)

Thus, instead of students censoring, chastising, silencing those whose pronouncements they find “threatening their safety,” we find a set of proposals to bring the university more into line with an increasingly diverse demographic. It’s worth noting as well that many faculty and some administrators are in favor of these top two demands, and in fact what students are asking for in many cases are simply enhancements to already existing programs. And contrary to the now common depiction of students as driven solely by passion and emotion, another major request was for better data collection. So where is the problem? Why are these demands unreasonable? If the issue of censorship has been grossly inflated, what is so troubling about the real core of the demands?

One of the most laudable functions of higher education is to facilitate upward mobility and increase inclusion of underrepresented minority populations — to, indeed, democratize society. Lamentably, this function has been mostly ignored, downplayed or deferred when it comes to race.

In his book “Creating a Class: College Admissions and the Education of Elites,” professor of education and sociology Mitchell Stevens explains how colleges and universities have been sites of what he calls “social reproduction,” that is, the perpetuation of privilege. To understand this phenomenon he studied college admissions. What he discovered was a place of “privileged families and the impressive organizational machinery they have developed to pass their comfortable social positions on to their children.” Consider that in the case before the Supreme Court, Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin, one of Fisher’s key complaints is not that she was not admitted to the University of Texas, but that she was not admitted to its most prestigious campus, where she would be part of a much more useful and powerful social network. The issue, then, is access not just to education, but also, and maybe more importantly, to power. What students are demanding now is an education that will be both more aligned with our contemporary, increasingly diverse world, and an education that will distribute more evenly the power education allots. To some this is discomfiting.