Among the 20% of Medicare patients who are hospitalized each year, almost half require care after being discharged from the hospital to assist them in their recovery from serious illnesses. These “post-acute” services — home health, skilled nursing, inpatient rehabilitation, and long-term hospital care — are essential. However, under current Medicare policies, their providers have neither produced consistent value nor had the flexibility to meet the changing needs of our patients. Medicare spending on post-acute care has doubled over the last decade, growing twice as fast as physician and hospital spending without clear evidence of improved patient outcomes. Eliminating geographic variation in post-acute care would reduce total Medicare variation by 73%.

In response, President Obama called for changes to Medicare post-acute payment in his 2014 budget. House and Senate committees have scheduled hearings to consider the President’s proposals, and bipartisan Congressional leadership has asked for public comment. As physicians who work on post-acute care improvement for Partners HealthCare, we present four strategies for rehabilitating quality and value in post-acute care.

1. Medicare must continue to develop accountability-driven payment models.

We are excited that new accountability-driven reimbursement models created by the Affordable Care Act such as accountable care organizations (ACOs) and bundled payments reward health systems for providing efficient and effective post-acute care. Partners participates as a Pioneer ACO, and in our first year successfully slowed our rate of cost growth by more than 2.4% as compared to the national benchmark. Participation in the Pioneer ACO has catalyzed multiple efforts to evaluate and invest in post-acute care. Such investments include readmission-reduction and care-transitions initiatives, best-practices and data-sharing collaborations with skilled nursing facilities, and new home-care programs such as telemonitoring, rapid-response home-nursing visits, and home-based palliative-care consultation.

We are optimistic that ACOs and bundled payments will both produce savings and improve quality in the post-acute sector. However, considerable technical challenges remain, particularly for bundled payments. These include determining the proper duration of the bundled episode, target payment rates, and risk-adjustment methodologies.

2. Congress must reform Medicare’s fee-for-service payment systems.

Accountability-driven models such as ACOs and bundled payments are built upon and do not replace the existing fee-for-service payment structure, and significant numbers of providers remain outside these models and continue to bill solely through fee for service. As such, improving fee-for-service payment remains essential, and efforts to do so should be centered on improving value-based purchasing programs and reforming the systems for reimbursing skilled nursing facilities and home health services.

Value-based-purchasing initiatives tie fee-for-service payments to performance on certain quality metrics. In the case of hospitals, many of these metrics are dependent upon care delivered outside hospital walls, such as 30-day readmission rates. This has given hospitals a stake in care delivery both inside and outside of their control and pushed many hospitals for the first time to become invested in post-acute care. Many of these initiatives suffer from design flaws, and providers and Medicare must continue to work together to improve the measure parameters. However, for all their imperfections, these initiatives have turned hospitals into engaged stakeholders in the post-acute space and should be continued to be developed and improved.

Such evolutionary changes are not sufficient for skilled nursing facilities and home health, whose payment systems need to be fundamentally redesigned. Medicare pays skilled nursing facilities “per diem,” encouraging excessive lengths of stay. Local and national health-systems data reveals that the length of stay in nursing homes of patients covered by Medicare Advantage plans, which have greater flexibility in payment than traditional Medicare, are 20% to 50% shorter, on average, than that of Medicare fee-for-service patients.

One promising alternative is a risk-adjusted prospective payment per stay in a skilled nursing facility, similar to the system for hospitals, inpatient rehabilitation facilities, and long-term-care hospitals. Based on statistical modeling, we project that a case-based prospective-payment system could be rolled out across fee-for-service Medicare without disrupting provider revenue cycles, would facilitate improvements in patient outcomes, and could save Medicare over $4 billion annually.

The payment system for home care also must be revamped. Currently, home health agencies are paid based on 60-day episodes, which do not match patients’ diverse needs. (Many need just a single home visit while others require many months of intensive ongoing home-based services.) A payment system that flexibly matches reimbursement with care needs, rather than being limited to a time-delineated episode, would provide greater value as well as spur the adoption of innovative home health services such as brief transitional-care visit(s) for home- and non-home-bound patients, intensive care “bursts” (e.g., daily home visits for a defined period), and telemonitoring services.

3. Providers and payers must invest in comparative effectiveness research, quality measurement, and data access.

During the transfer from acute to post-acute care, clinicians must select the right level of care for their patients (e.g., a skilled nursing facility versus a home health service); identify high-quality, post-acute providers; and ensure a smooth care transition.

More comparative effectiveness research is needed to help clinicians make evidence-based decisions about the most appropriate level of post-acute care and deployment of care-transitions programs. In the absence of evidence-based guidelines, well-meaning, risk-averse physicians will err on the side of prescribing post-acute care that’s more intensive than necessary even if there is little evidence that it actually improves outcomes such as readmissions.

Further, existing tools for assessing the quality of post-acute care are not robust enough for clinicians and patients to make informed choices at discharge. To fill this gap, we at Partners are developing our own dashboard of quality metrics for skilled nursing facilities in collaboration with local skilled nursing facilities and other Eastern Massachusetts ACOs. We appreciate the support of many partners in advancing this work, and similar efforts are being replicated in health systems across the country. These health system efforts should be complemented by greater research investments at the federal level.

In addition, Medicare Advantage plans have had greater flexibility (PDF) to develop novel post-acute reimbursement schemes and innovative care-transitions programs than traditional fee-for-service Medicare. Such efforts appear to have reduced hospital readmission rates 13% to 20% compared to traditional Medicare. While balancing the obvious competitive concerns, Medicare should consider opportunities to examine and share Medicare Advantage data and experience to accelerate learning.

4. Medicare must reduce the regulatory burden to enable flexible clinical decision-making.

Clinicians need the flexibility to offer the right level of post-acute care to patients at the time they need it. However, Medicare’s eligibility and administrative rules create logistical headaches and placement restrictions that are both costly and hinder patient recovery. For example, patients must be hospitalized for three days to qualify for care in a skilled nursing facility (the “three-day rule”), limiting discharge options and unnecessarily extending hospital stays. Other regulations include the “25% rule” for long-term hospitals, the “60% rule” for inpatient rehabilitation facilities, and so forth.

These restrictions are meant to limit inappropriate utilization but seem frustratingly arbitrary to providers and patients alike. To balance these concerns, Medicare should waive post-acute eligibility requirements when providers accept accountability for quality and value (e.g., through ACOs). Indeed, Medicare recently began allowing Pioneer ACOs to apply for a waiver of the three-day rule. This is a step in the right direction.

The Way Forward

By providing essential medical and rehabilitation services to patients recovering from acute hospital stays, providers of post-acute care are ideally positioned to improve patient outcomes while reducing health care costs. However, the post-acute-care sector has not achieved its full potential. It can deliver high-quality services but is not always rewarded for doing so; could reduce Medicare spending but has driven cost growth; and gives doctors multiple options for discharge but has restrictive eligibility requirements. Medicare must allow for greater quality, accountability, and flexibility, which will empower health systems to deliver the post-acute care that patients need and deserve.

This piece was adapted from written testimony prepared for a U.S. Senate Committee hearing, which has been postponed indefinitely. Click here to view the full testimony.

Follow the Leading Health Care Innovation insight center on Twitter @HBRhealth. E-mail us at healtheditors@hbr.org, and sign up to receive updates here.