BOSTON - When Gov. Charlie Baker proposed his budget for fiscal year 2016 this week, he planned to wring the biggest amount of savings from slowing projected growth in state Medicaid.

Costs to MassHealth have been rising rapidly, driven by high health care costs, expansions due to the Affordable Care Act, and last year, problems with a state Health Connector website that pushed people onto temporary Medicaid plans.

If no changes were made to MassHealth, Baker administration officials predicted that its budget would grow by 16 percent next year, from $14.5 billion to $16.9 billion.

"This is simply unsustainable, and left unchanged, it threatens the commonwealth's ability to support other human service programs, local aid, education, environmental programs, recreation, you name it. Virtually everything else state government does," Baker, a Republican, said during a press conference.

Instead, Baker is proposing increasing the MassHealth budget to $15.3 billion, an increase of 5.6 percent from this year.

So what exactly is Baker doing?

The biggest change is not a cost savings, but a way to shift costs from 2016 to 2017. The Baker plan would take $456 million in payments that are supposed to be paid toward the end of fiscal year 2016 and pay them in 2017.

In a briefing with Secretary of Health and Human Services Marylou Sudders and other top health administration officials, officials said this practice of delaying Medicaid payments has happened in every administration since 2004, when Mitt Romney was governor. In the 2016 budget, $340 million of the so-called "cash management" was inherited from Democratic Gov. Deval Patrick's administration, while Baker's administration pushed another $116 million in costs from year to year.

Baker spokesman Tim Buckley said the administration hopes to limit the practice in future years. "The administration will continue to develop structural reforms to right-size the state budget while pursuing policies to promote economic growth, reducing the need for additional cash management," Buckley said.

The other big part of the savings comes from "redetermination." Baker anticipates saving $400 million in Medicaid costs - of which $210 million comes from the state budget and the rest from federal money - by requiring everyone enrolled in Medicaid to prove they are still eligible.

The federal government requires that this process be done annually. But because the state's Health Connector website, which was launched in October 2013 to conform with the Affordable Care Act, was a technological failure and unable to determine who was eligible for subsidized insurance, there were 1.2 million people who were automatically reenrolled in Medicaid without anyone rechecking their eligibility.

Now, with the state having revamped its software, each of those people will get letters from the state, the first of which were sent out in February, asking them to reconfirm their eligibility for MassHealth. If after two letters and 60 days, a person does not respond, they will lose coverage. The coverage can be reinstated at any time.

Administration officials were unable to provide an estimate of how many people they think are on MassHealth plans but are ineligible because they moved, received coverage elsewhere, had a change in income or for any other reason.

A mix of other strategies amounts to around $95 million in savings.

Baker's proposal does not change eligibility standards.

The only benefit it eliminates is coverage for chiropractic services, which is estimated to save $300,000 in state money.

To combat opioid abuse, the state is copying a program already in place in Blue Cross Blue Shield plans requiring providers to write prescriptions for opioids for 14 days at a time, rather than 30 or 60 days.

The administration is looking at ways to maximize federal reimbursements. It is allowing MassHealth to buy medical equipment in bulk.

The budget generally would not reduce the rates paid to providers, but holds them at 2015 levels. Nursing home rates were scheduled to be adjusted up next year, and the adjustment will not happen. The state will reimburse senior care organizations, managed care organizations that contract with the state to care for seniors in their communities, based on new, lower actuarially set rates.

The budget does include some MassHealth expansions - a required expansion of benefits for behavioral analysis services for 10,000 children with autism; funding for a full year for adult dental benefits that were restored during 2015; and paid sick days for personal care attendants, as required by a 2014 ballot referendum.

Tara Gregorio, vice president of government relations at the Massachusetts Senior Care Association, warned that the budget will lead to continued stagnation for low-wage workers who staff nursing homes. Around 70 percent of nursing home patients are paid for by Medicaid, and Gregorio said Massachusetts is already the fourth worst state in the country when it comes to funding nursing homes. "Our ability to invest in our staff and wages in particular and benefits and career ladders largely depend on government funding," Gregorio said.

Patrick cut $24 million from nursing homes through budget cuts he made before leaving office, and Baker's budget extends that level of funding through 2016. The Legislature also last year voted to base nursing home reimbursement rates on 2007 costs, an increase from 2005 costs. State law requires the government to continue to raise those rates, but Baker's budget proposal would freeze them.

Gregorio said the average wage for a certified nurse aide is just over $13 an hour. She said the freeze would come "at a time when we are respectfully urging the state, the governor and the legislature to invest in nursing home care."

Baker's plan drew both praise and concern from health care analysts and advocates.

Josh Archambault, director of health care policy for the conservative-leaning Pioneer Institute, said he agrees that Baker needs to address the growth in Medicaid spending. "The program has just continued on a very unsustainable path...Pac-Maning spending on other priorities - education, public safety, transportation," Archambault said, noting that Medicaid is the largest single line item in the state budget.

Archambault called it "policy malfeasance" that Medicaid has not redetermined eligibility for some people for two years. "Taxpayers have just been paying for people that probably shouldn't be there," he said.

But Archambault said he is unhappy with Baker's deferring payments to future years, though he appreciates that Baker acknowledged the practice and that it is nothing new.

"I am very concerned about the practice of kicking the can down the road for paying bills next year," Archambault said. "It's a bad precedent they continue to follow."

Amy Whitcomb Slemmer, executive director at Health Care for All, a health care advocacy group that contracted with the state under Patrick to help people sign up for health insurance, said she appreciates that the administration is maintaining benefits for MassHealth members.

She is "cautiously optimistic" about the redetermination, though she wants to make sure it is done in a way that is "consumer friendly" and ensures that people who are eligible for MassHealth maintain coverage and people who are not eligible are able to transition to other plans. Health Care for All will staff a helpline and run community trainings to help people fill out applications.

"We don't want to lose any of the coverage gains we've made," Whitcomb Slemmer said.

While this year's budget does not make huge changes, Baker officials plan to use the coming year to talk to insurers, doctors, hospitals, advocates and others about ways to restructure MassHealth more permanently. Sudders has said she anticipates looking at reforms in other states, such as New York, and moving away from a fee-for-service model toward payment models where providers are paid a specific amount to keep a population of patients healthy. On Thursday, Sudders said the state could also look at options for increasing Medicaid copays.

The discussions are likely to lead to intensive lobbying by health care providers, insurers and advocates.

Whitcomb Slemmer said her group would welcome restructuring that leads to better outcomes for MassHealth members. "We will vigorously oppose increased cost-sharing and requirements for MassHealth members to shoulder more of the burden," Whitcomb Slemmer said. She argued that increasing copays could result in people delaying getting health care.