Blue Cross lays off 22 IT workers as it moves to further reduce costs

Another 22 employees have been laid off — this time in the enterprise information technology department — by Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan, Crain’s has learned.

Since last November, a total of 47 employees and at least three contractors have been laid off as part of the Michigan Blues’ strategic business transformation plan to reduce administrative costs by $300 million, or 10 percent of total costs, by 2018.

Some 25 employees were laid off earlier this year in the company’s health care value division. Blue Cross and its related subsidiaries employed 7,921 workers last year.

More layoffs or reductions from attrition are expected over the next several months as division department heads complete employee needs assessments and expense reduction reviews, Blue Cross officials have confirmed.

"Continued automation of some IT functions and replacement of declining technologies were factors that ultimately affected these positions," Andy Hetzel, vice president of corporate communications, said in an email statement to Crain's. "Additionally, our efforts to improve our IT processes are resulting in work that is lower value, redundant and unnecessary being eliminated or consolidated within our IT work teams."

Off the 22 employees, 19 were located in Detroit, two in South Lyon and one in Southfield, Hetzel said. They are eligible to apply for open positions and were assigned to recruiters in human resources, he said.

Earlier this month, Blue Cross said it lost $68 million in net income on its overall operations in 2015 — its first loss in at least five years.

But its health insurance business lines lost much more. For 2015, Blue Cross lost $344.3 million, a 216 percent increase from net income gain of $295 million in 2014, according to a report filed with the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services.

Documents Crain's has obtained show Blue Cross’ plan to reduce rising administrative costs — costs up to 30 percent higher than national insurers and other competing plans in Michigan, according to one Blue Cross report.

Sources tell Crain’s there are multiple factors forcing the Blues to cut costs. They include right-sizing the workforce after a huge expansion to prepare for changes and new customers from the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.

Related Links