This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... president Obama has finally announced his pick for the Supreme Court and the city of Washington has once again plunged into the kind of high-profile sharply partisan politics that characterize so much ... of activity in Washington these days Mr Obama picked Merrick Garland a judge on the U S Court of Appeals in Washington ... in the Senate Republican leaders say they won't consider the nomination they say the next president should make the pain ... the Dutch Justice could fundamentally alter ... the direction ... of the Supreme Court ... Mr Obama spoke directly to the partisan struggle here this is precisely the time ... what we should play it straight ... and treat the process of appointing a Supreme Court justice with the seriousness and care it deserves ... because our Supreme Court ... really is unique ... but it's a little late in the nation's political life to argue that the Supreme Court should be above politics the court has been asked to weigh in on so many partisan issues that is to become part of politics not about politics the Affordable Care Act and gay marriage are just too with the heated issues in recent years have gone before the court this has change public perceptions of the court in the nineteen eighties nineteen nineties more than half of adults surveyed in Gallup polls said they have high confidence in the court ... more recently in two thousand fourteen only thirty percent said ... they have high confidence in the court moreover the use of the court had become highly partisan ... when we asked the people that positive ... or negative feelings about the court Republican views were sharply negative Democratic used sharply Positive this poll taken right in the aftermath of the ruling that legalized gay marriage nationally Mr Obama said that the Senate had an obligation to act on his nomination the consequence of not acting he said it would be that officials could not discharge their constitutional duties in the future and that people would lose faith in the court for many Americans that they ... already know ...