In a radio interview Sunday, former Bill Clinton strategist turned Republican adviser Dick Morris warned Hillary Clinton is “totally Nixonian and paranoid.”

Speaking on “Aaron Klein Investigative Radio” on New York’s AM 970 The Answer, Morris cautioned the IRS scandal under President Obama will seem like child’s play “next to what Hillary would do.”

“I would never turn my back on Hillary for a minute,” Morris warned.

“Hillary is totally Nixonian and paranoid,” Morris told Klein. “Just to give you an idea, this women hired a fleet of detectives to track down all of the women her husband was involved with, not to stop him but to make sure they didn’t talk.”

Asked whether he sees Clinton as just as “radical” as Obama on domestic policy, Morris replied: “I think she’d be a little different.”

Morris said that on healthcare “she’d of course be as radical. It was her plan that he passed.”

“I think, though, that in terms of fundamentally, I don’t think she’d be as biased against the American economy. But it doesn’t make a difference. There are other things she’d do more.”

“The IRS scandal is a piker next to what Hillary would do,” added Morris.

What do YOU think? Sound off on Clinton machine’s reputation for ruthlessness in today’s WND poll!

Morris pointed to the case of Raymond McGovern, a retired CIA officer turned political activist who served the agency from 1963 to 1990. In the 1980s, McGovern chaired the White House’s National Intelligence Estimates and prepared the President’s Daily Brief.

McGovern was arrested during a Hillary Clinton speech on Feb. 16, 2011, at George Washington University after he stood silently with his back turned to protest U.S. military action overseas during the then-Secretary of State’s address.

According to reports, McGovern protested passively but university cops put him in a headlock and dragged him out of the auditorium by force with arrest photos showing some bruising. There were accusations the university police were being directed by Clinton’s security detail.

Morris said “Hillary put him on a seven-month investigation into his loyalty and then got him on the BOLO list, which is … watch out with this guy, approach with caution.”

He continued, “It screwed up his life for a year. He didn’t even know he was on it (the list). But every place he’d go he would encounter the effects of it. So he went to a citizens group, they sued with an FOI (Freedom of Information request). They found out he was on this watch list and they got him removed by judicial order.”

“And all this guy did to offend Mrs. Clinton was to stand up and turn his back on her during the speech. I would never turn my back on Hillary for a minute.”

Morris referenced the title of his latest book, “POWER GRAB: Obama’s Dangerous Plan for a One Party Nation,” to attack Clinton.

“Hillary, while she disagrees with certain aspects of Obama’s program, she’s more of a hawk and I believe she shares more of a she has more of a belief in the free enterprise system, when it comes to power grab and the permanent majority, Hillary is way ahead of Obama.”

Morris was a political adviser to the Clinton White House and served as campaign manager for Bill Clinton’s successful 1996 presidential re-election bid. He was seen as the architect of Clinton’s landslide victory.

Clinton’s then communications director George Stephanopoulos said of Morris, “Over the course of the first nine months of 1995, no single person had more power over the president.”