Buy Photo The Matzah Ball Soup at Noshville will cure what ails you. (Photo: Jae S. Lee / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

It might be the greatest name mash-up in Nashville restaurant history.

Noshville.

This collision of cultures, New York Jewish Deli greets Southern meat-and-three, could only come from a multi-generational Jewish Nashvillian like Tom Loventhal.

Now, he's closing the original footprint at 1918 Broadway. For the last 19 years, it's been the most significant power breakfast spot for Music Row and beyond.

We knew this was coming. Loventhal said so when he sold the property to developers.

I think the reaction has been so broad because it's happening months earlier than planned. We now have a date. It's real.

While Loventhal cites a quagmire of Affordable Care Act insurance regulations about to kick in on Jan.1, I have concerns that this spells a permanent end to Noshville on Broadway. Loventhal still leaves a whisper of a hint that he might reopen in the new multi-use space that's coming, or maybe someplace else in Midtown, but given the time frame, and his apparent frame of mind, I don't hold much hope.

It's another sad drowning in the tide of growth, but this feels partially self-inflicted, given that he sold the building out from underneath himself.

Few will ever argue that Noshville was on a level with the great delis of New York, but Noshville was always greater than the sum of its lox and matzah. It was about the servers that slid your plates with a side of guff, and the community that gathered in the booths to see and be seen. Someone once asked me if Ben Folds really worked there, such was his wear on the mustard-colored formica.

Noshville was Music Row's clubhouse, a crowded mess of black silk and bleach-white teeth when the other two coasts showed up to do business. It was a cast of characters who knew you and knew when to bother you. Not just for music types, though, Noshville was the obligatory stop on the way downtown for the bank and courthouse suits, too.

I know this isn't the death knell for the Noshville concept, with remaining locations at the airport and in Green Hills, but it's still a loss when it's Sunday morning and you're coming down.

Reach Jim Myers at 615-259-8367 and on Twitter @ReadJimMyers.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XZhzvi