Buy Photo Roosevelt Middle School student ZaKoria Walker and teacher Marisa Ewing chat during an eighth-grade science class on Feb.12 in Appleton. (Photo: Wm. Glasheen/Post-Crescent Media)Buy Photo

We're guessing that if you heard your kid's school got a "C" grade — or worse — you'd be searching for a new place to send them for an education.

So you might be surprised to learn that most of the schools in the Fox Cities would get a "C" if the Legislature passes a school accountability bill that includes assigning letter grades.

The majority of Fox Cities schools "meet expectations," which obviously has a much different connotation than a "C."

We don't know about you, but we're pretty proud of our schools here, and we hate to think of what could happen if a state-issued school report card cast them in a different light than they deserve.

Parents and taxpayers deserve all they information they can get on how our children are educated and how efficiently our state and local tax dollars are being spent by the school districts.

And in that vein, we'd suggest that all Wisconsinites deserve a thorough and accurate assessment of our schools — without a catchy gimmick like a letter grade.

The report cards measure the effectiveness of Wisconsin's public schools based on achievement, student growth, closing achievement gaps and post-secondary readiness.

So yeah, they're important. They shouldn't be treated so lightly by our lawmakers that they get a quick-glance rating system. We'd urge them to work on a solution that builds schools and kids up instead of slapping a grade on them.

The bigger issue is that the school report cards leave a lot to be desired. We don't want to unfairly oversimplify things, but the schools with higher poverty rates tend to score more poorly than schools with a higher tax base.

To us, that means the formula needs to be tweaked to get a better measure of what's really happening with instruction.

So there's a lot to work on, and in an ideal world parents, teachers, administrators, taxpayers and lawmakers will work together to improve our schools and create a nuanced rating system that makes sense.

Wisconsin taxpayers can handle lots of details and process that information to come to our own conclusions.

We learned great analytical skills in Wisconsin schools, after all.

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1Cb2mAc