Tesla Zooms Skyward While SpaceX Reaches Orbit

Stocks dropped early today, then recovered to near-breakeven by the closing bell. The Federal Reserve Beige Book and a potential budget deal in Washington helped stop the slide.

Look for quiet trading Thursday ahead of the very important November employment report Friday morning. The consensus estimate is for 180,000 new jobs and a 7.2% unemployment rate.

Two Elon Musk companies are in the headlines this week. Today we’ll see why, flip through the Federal Reserve’s latest anecdotes and review some of my reader e-mail.

***

Shares in Tesla Motors (TSLA) zoomed 16.5% higher Tuesday and held most of the gain in today’s session. The stock closed at $138.95 this afternoon.

Tesla CEO/founder Elon Musk spent the last few weeks batting down stories that design flaws could make his company’s electric sports cars burst into flames. This week’s rally came after German regulators said their probe found no defects. A U.S. investigation is still pending.

Even before the German news, James DiGeorgia had already explained why Tesla cars are safer than conventional vehicles. He is bullish on TSLA stock — and makes a compelling argument why Apple (AAPL) should take over Tesla and its advanced battery technology.

With or without Apple, Tesla is definitely an action-filled stock. This chart shows how it performed (blue line) against the S&P 500 (flat red line) in the last 12 months.

The S&P 500 is having a great year — but TSLA still left it in the dust.

Tesla’s cars seem safe enough. What about its stock? Tomorrow Geoff Garbacz will open his technical toolbox and tell you if TSLA passes inspection.

Watch your e-mail or visit the Uncommon Wisdom Daily home page Thursday morning to see what he says.

***

Elon Musk is a busy man this week. One of his other companies, privately owned SpaceX, successfully delivered a communications satellite into orbit late Tuesday.

Click the image for a launch video. (The flames you will see are completely intentional.)

The SpaceX Falcon 9 rocket took off from Cape Canaveral, Fla., at 5:41 p.m. Eastern time. It was the company’s first time to use NASA’s facilities at the Cape. Dozens more are scheduled with both commercial and government payloads.

As I wrote in To the Moon, Alice! (Make That Mars), Musk has big plans for SpaceX. I don’t know if he will make it to Mars, but I think he will seriously try.

A global space race is heating up. Just a day before the SpaceX launch, China sent its "Jade Rabbit" lunar rover toward the moon. A day earlier India launched a Mars probe.

Think about how much has changed in less than 50 years. When the U.S. launched Apollo missions in the 1960s, people in China and India couldn’t even watch on TV.

Now they are sending their own vehicles into outer space and it is simply routine news. What will the world yawn at 50 years from now?

***

The Federal Reserve Board released its quarterly Beige Book today. This report contains general economic impressions from each regional Fed bank. Last quarter they saw "modest to moderate" growth.

The Beige Book isn’t scientific data. People pay attention mainly because it gives a little glimpse into the Fed’s thought process. Analysts factor it into their forecast for future monetary policy.

You can read the full report at the Fed’s website. Here are some quick bullet points from the introduction.

"Manufacturers in many Districts expressed optimism about near-term growth prospects."

"Demand for professional business services experienced stable to moderate growth, especially in computer technologies."

"Freight volume showed signs of strengthening."

"Looking forward to the holiday shopping season, retailers reported being hopeful, but cautious."

"Sales of new motor vehicles were reported as moderate to strong across much of the United States."

"Tourism increased in most reporting Districts, although the federal government shutdown had a negative impact in some areas."

"Residential real estate activity improved across many Districts, with multifamily construction experiencing moderate to strong growth."

"Activity in nonresidential real estate was stable or improved slightly across many Districts.

"Agricultural conditions were generally favorable."

"Mining activity was mixed, while natural gas production increased."

"Banking conditions were largely stable, with some improvement seen in loan demand."

Does this tell you anything? It tells me the Fed doesn’t know what to think. They say manufacturers expressed optimism, freight volume showed signs of strengthening, and mining activity was mixed.

Better yet, retailers are "hopeful, but cautious." That’s like saying the bath water is "hot, but cold." It makes no sense.

Let’s see if the Fed is any clearer on the all-important job issue.

"Hiring showed a modest increase or was unchanged."

"Difficulty with finding qualified workers, especially for high-skilled positions … "

"Upward pressure on wages and overall price inflation were contained."

"Contacts in many Districts voiced concern about future cost increases attributable to the Affordable Care Act and other types of federal regulation."

They see "modest" hiring but "difficulty" finding "qualified workers." This isn’t what I would call optimistic.

Anyone care to translate the Fed’s doubletalk?

***

Readers sent many interesting thoughts about my Puerto Rico default article.

Reader Cesar A. says: "The demise in Puerto Rico is an insult to not only to fellow Boricuas, but to all hardworking Americans that are watching and wondering if Puerto Rico is now the test grounds for the eventual financial collapse of the USA and its territories across the globe …"

Click this link to see what other readers have to say.

***

As for the reader who called me an "Obama apologist," at least a few of you disagree …

Reader Wayne R. says: "As a psychologist, let me tell you that there is no way of knowing whether the president believed his own words. Since none of us have access to the evidence necessary to support a yes or no conclusion, our opinion will be largely a function of whether we approve the new health care law. "I appreciate your comments on Obamacare because they clearly are based on a rational response to the issues, rather than an emotional, irrational commitment to negativism."

Brad: Thanks for the kind words! My goal is to follow the facts wherever they lead. Sometimes I don’t like the results, but facts are stubborn.

***

Here is a reader with an opposing view …

Reader Frank E. says: "(Obamacare) will prove to be the single most evil law ever passed in America."

Brad: Thanks for the candor, Frank. I get why people are frustrated. Obamacare’s problems touch everyone in some way. I’m not ready to call it "the single most evil law ever passed," as Frank does, but maybe I’m wrong.

You can read Frank’s letter in its entirety and see other reader responses on our Uncommon Wisdom Daily blog. Click here to check them out.

***

Some news to end the day…

Trading volume was above-average today, but the major benchmarks still closed almost unchanged.

The Dow Jones Industrial Average and S&P 500 ended slightly in the red, while the Nasdaq Composite rose a hair.

If the stock market can end 2013 at today’s level, it will be the best calendar year since 2003.

Congressional budget negotiators are reportedly close to a deal that will end the broad-based "sequester" spending cuts.

The deal restores defense spending, avoids tax increases and raises fee revenue from airline tickets. More important, it promises to avoid another government shutdown in January.

Carl Icahn is tweeting Apple again. The corporate raider said he will push for a non-binding shareholder vote to increase the share buyback program.

Good luck and happy investing,

Brad Hoppmann

Publisher

Uncommon Wisdom Daily