Sonya Jongsma Knauss (No. B-5408) runs in the 2014 Chicago Marathon. Credit: Milwaukee Journal Sentinel

I moved to Milwaukee in the heyday of Mayor John Norquist's New Urbanism, when Vince Bushell was "mayor of Riverwest," and when Y2K fears were beginning to surface. We had a small apartment in Oak Creek. With a 1-year-old daughter, a husband in a doctoral program at Marquette University and one car, I soon found that some suburbs weren't very walk- or bike-friendly.

So we chose the city.

Within three months, we moved to Milwaukee and started exploring its neighborhoods. We rented on the East Side, then moved to Riverwest when we needed space for a family of four, and Harambee when we were a family of five, then six.

We discovered the ups and downs of city life. Live music? Available almost any night of the week. Groceries? We helped found the food co-op a block from our home. Drug house run by naïve university students who had no idea about the crime they'd bring to our neighborhood? We banded together with neighbors to document everything and worked with police to shut it down. Recreation? The Oak Leaf Trail, city streets, high school track and the lakefront offered great places to run, bike or take the kids for a walk.

We grew to know and love and advocate for the city, learned to navigate the bus system, found fun and free events for kids.

It was in Milwaukee that I started to run again. From age 13 to 22, running was like the blood that ran through my veins, and then came grad school and babies. When I finally started again, I used running to explore the city. I took in the hustle of the streets, the rush of the river, the lush green of the trees lining the waterways and hanging over the old streets north of downtown.

I started racing, racking up a streak at the Riverwest Beer Run (two miles, fourbeer stops!), and one year I even won a bet and a 12-pack from my neighbor for beating my previous time by more than a minute. In the inaugural year of the Hank Aaron 5K Trail Run, I won a free entry to the Lakefront Marathon, which sounded like such a ridiculous distance that I gave it to my co-worker Tim Cigelske.

Cigelske, social media director at Marquette University, recently ran his seventh marathon (the Lakefront, again) and also manages the Milwaukee chapter of City Running Tours, which gives people a chance to experience the feel of new neighborhoods up close while doing an activity they love. He says, "It makes me feel like a tourist in my own town and gives me a new appreciation for Milwaukee."

I get that. Through the training and the racing, my sense of place and love for the city grew as I noticed details I never would have otherwise. Milwaukee is full of neighborhoods with families, businesses and interesting histories. If you look closely, you'll find many underappreciated treasures.

That's part of the idea behind the Milwaukee Running Festival, a weekend of events Oct. 31-Nov. 1 that includes Milwaukee's first urban marathon — one that will take place completely within the city of Milwaukee. Modeled after marathons such as those in Chicago, Boston and Philadelphia, the Milwaukee Running Festival aims to provide a delightful view of the city's neighborhoods and showcase what's good about the city of Milwaukee.

Even though we moved away from Milwaukee five years ago, I couldn't pass up the opportunity to run in the inaugural Milwaukee Running Festival marathon, which nicely packages two things I love all in one weekend.

And I'm writing to encourage you to join me. Help bring a true big-city marathon to Milwaukee, one that will grow each year and become known as a can't-miss marathon for locals and marathon tourists alike.

Of course, if you haven't been training for 26.2, it's a little late to prepare. But there's a half-marathon, a 5K and a one-mile run as well, and if you put a team together with one person running each one, you can enter the Grand Slam Challenge. (If you're looking for a marathoner to add to your team, let me know!)

The community aspect of this event gives it broad appeal. Race organizers involved community groups as they planned the course, and the route winds through many neighborhoods. Neighborhood associations such as Story Hill, Brewers Hill, Brady Street, Walkers Point and Washington Heights are part of an effort to make the event fun for everyone.

Standing at the start line of the Chicago Marathon last year, I wondered what I would learn about the city that day. Each neighborhood we passed through had its own character, personality and throngs of spectators cheering, holding signs, ringing cowbells and creating an unforgettable experience for tens of thousands of runners.

I imagine it'll be a little like that in Milwaukee, although it takes a while to build that kind of crowd energy and spectator support. I hope if you live near the race course, you'll consider staking out a place along the route, with whatever libations you need to get you through, and cheering on those strange creatures who think that running 26.2 miles is some version of "fun."

Sonya Jongsma Knauss is a former member of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel Editorial Board. She lives with her family in Sioux Center, Iowa, where she is the director of marketing and public relations at Dordt College.

Milwaukee Running Festival

The festival, including an all-city marathon, will be Oct. 31-Nov. 1. For details, go to:

www.milwaukeerunningfestival.com