Topics: From the Wires, News

BOSTON (AP) — Frigid cold nipped at New England after the region’s fourth winter storm in a month blew through, piling another foot of snow on top of 6-foot-high mounds in Boston, and forecasters said another winter blast might hit midweek.

New Englanders were talking in superlatives — harshest, most relentless — with a winter that has tested their mettle. Forecasters warned Sunday of exceptionally cold air, perhaps the coldest in years. Strong winds were expected to continue into Monday, reducing visibility, creating drifts and complicating an ongoing cleanup effort.

“It’s historic,” Frank Libby said as he walked down a deserted street in Boston’s Back Bay neighborhood. “I think we’re in uncharted territory. People just don’t know how to deal with the logistics of it.”

___

A DEEP FREEZE

A bone-chilling blast of cold blew into New England as the last snowflakes fell Sunday.

“The big story is subzero air temperatures with wind chills as low as 20 to 40 below zero,” Matthew Belk of the National Weather Service said, adding that exposed skin could start to develop frostbite in “a matter of minutes.”

“The big thing is to dress in layers and don’t go outside if you don’t have to,” he said.

The Arctic cold front already had frozen the upper Midwest, with temperatures in Michigan plunging to minus-27 in the Upper Peninsula.

Allan Tufankjian of Scituate, Massachusetts, said it’s discouraging every time he looks at the forecast.

“If I saw one day that was above freezing, I’d be very happy,” he said. “I looked seven days ahead and every single day, the highest temperature I could see is 26 degrees.”

___

PLANNING AN ESCAPE

The Klose family — Clint, Sue and daughters Caitlin and Kiersten — attacked a mountain of snow in front of their Concord, New Hampshire, house Sunday morning. Just last week, Clint Klose booked a trip for the girls and him to Orlando, Florida.

“You just need a break!” he said. “We need some Vitamin D that we’ve been deprived of.”

Klose said the family wouldn’t forget this winter.

“I would say it’s been the harshest winter in the shortest amount of time,” he said. “In the past five weeks, it’s just been a slamming event and a slamming event and a slamming event one after the other.”

___

SNOW TOTALS

Some areas of New England reported nearly 2 feet of snow from the storm including Acushnet, Massachusetts, with 22 inches, and Salisbury with 20.5 inches. Boston recorded 13 inches of new snow. At the easternmost tip of Maine, Lubechad had 2 feet. With many intersections already clogged by soaring snow banks, forces mobilized before the storm to remove piles of snow.