By of the

Madison — Some of the 92,000 people losing their state BadgerCare Plus health insurance on Jan. 1 may find themselves in a lurch because of difficulties signing up for Obamacare through a federal website.

Under a plan by Gov. Scott Walker, those 92,000 people on Jan. 1 will lose their state BadgerCare Plus coverage. They are supposed to sign up for health care through the new insurance exchange set up this month as part of the Affordable Care Act, which is widely known as Obamacare.

The exchange is aimed at giving people a way to find affordable insurance through the private sector. Subsidies are available for people who meet income guidelines.

But the exchanges in states around the country that debuted Oct. 1 have been plagued with problems. Federal authorities have said they're working to fix the systems as quickly as they can.

The problems with exchanges have exacerbated fears in Wisconsin that some of those losing BadgerCare coverage won't line up new insurance in time.

For now, a crush of people have been attempting to sign up for insurance through the exchange with little success. Just before the exchange went live, state officials estimated 700,000 in Wisconsin would use it to seek insurance.

That figure includes the uninsured, people who will be losing BadgerCare coverage and those who buy insurance as individuals and not through a workplace.

Jon Peacock, research director for the Wisconsin Council on Children and Families, said state legislators should change the law so they can delay by a couple of months when the 92,000 people are moved from BadgerCare to private plans. That would immediately lower the number of people trying to sign up for insurance on the exchange and give state officials more time to ensure people are properly transitioned from BadgerCare to the private plans.

"The fundamental problem that was foreseeable from the beginning is that there would be too many people all trying to use the marketplace at the same time," Peacock said.

Lawmakers included language in the state budget that would have allowed them to delay the BadgerCare changes under certain situations. But both the Department of Health Services and the Legislative Fiscal Bureau have concluded none of those conditions applies and the changes must take effect Jan. 1.

The state Department of Health Services in September alerted BadgerCare recipients who are likely to be affected that they could soon lose their benefits. That early notice will give people time to make sure they stay on the program if their income has dropped or there is another reason they should not be dropped from BadgerCare, said department spokeswoman Stephanie Smiley.

State to make calls

The state soon will begin calling those who were sent the letters to make sure they received them and understand them.

The actual notification that they are being dropped will be sent in late November, and people will have to sign up for insurance on the exchanges by Dec. 15 if they want their coverage to begin by Jan. 1.

Those who miss the Dec. 15 deadline can sign up later, but their coverage won't begin until Feb. 1 or later. They will have through March to get coverage through the exchange.

Peacock applauded the Department of Health Services for giving an early warning to people who are likely to lose their BadgerCare benefits. If the exchange had worked efficiently when it opened, that would have helped prevent problems, he said.

"But that situation is complicated by the fact the federal computers aren't able to handle the load right now," he said.

In the budget approved this summer, Walker and his fellow Republicans in the Legislature rejected additional federal money under Obamacare to expand BadgerCare to more people. Rejecting the money cost the state $119 million over two years.

Democrats have blasted Republicans for that decision, while Walker has said he thought accepting the federal money was too risky because the federal government might switch gears and stop providing as much aid in the future.

BadgerCare changes

At the same time, Walker is making BadgerCare available to a new population — adults without dependent children who are below the federal poverty line. That change requires the approval of the federal government, but state officials have said they are confident they will receive it.

For now, BadgerCare coverage is available to adults with children under 19 in households with incomes up to twice the poverty threshold, or $47,100 for a family of four.

Walker and GOP legislators tightened eligibility requirements for the program, making it available to those at the poverty line or below it. The 92,000 people on the program making more than that will now have to buy their insurance through the exchange.

Obamacare was envisioned to cover people making up to 138% of the poverty level using programs such as BadgerCare.

The changes in state health programs will not affect children, pregnant women or adults who are disabled or elderly.

Twitter: twitter.com/patrickdmarley