Knowledge In The Brain bookends, $200, were made by designer Karim Rashid, using his own head as the model. It's available at Lon's Little Shop in Boulder. (Courtesy photo)

A perfect, simple, sleek black umbrella, made by Muji, $25. (Courtesy photo)

On the web You can find Lon's Little Shop at 2037 13th St., Boulder, and lonlittleshop.com.

If you've got it, don't flaunt it.

That's one way Boulder does wealth. That grungy dude on his bike wearing ratty fleece is quite possibly a ten-millionaire.

This movement is slowly spreading — although the cowboys driving Ford F-950s decked with steel testicles in Greeley still haven't read the message (but then, they're begging to be their own state, or was it planet?).

The trend has materialized in the form of a teeny, tiny little shop in downtown, just off Pearl Street: Lon's Little Shop.

Lon's is proud of its minimalism, a small selection and a limited supply of hard-to-find goodies. All in 300 wee square feet.

Not exactly the Costco-esque mentality that traditionally prevails in Go'merica.

In fact, this kind of "curiosity boutique" is rare in this country, but growing in popularity, says owner Lon McGowen, of Boulder. You can find a few in L.A., Seattle and Brooklyn, but it's more like something you'd stumble across in Hong Kong, he says.

"It's like a museum store that's more approachable," McGowen says. "It's not Fab.com, but that idea has spurred a lot of design-conscious shoppers in the U.S. who love purely the aesthetic of a product."

At Lon's, you can find everything from odd geometric-influenced head-shaped bookends, to delicate bowls that look like broken eggs filled with air plants, to the most perfect, sleek and classic black umbrellas.

But you'll find only a few of each thing.

It's anti-bling. A bit of a middle finger to consumerism and excess (albeit in retail form). In March, Lon's is releasing its own Lon Little Speaker, a 2-by-2-inch mobile bluetooth speaker — with a spotlight on quality, not size.

A broken egg bowl with hassle-free air plant, $15. (Courtesy photo)

McGowen expects Boulder to eat it right up. He's shocked by the success of his shop, and he laughs when he says it must have the greatest ratio of sales-per-square-foot in the area.

Maybe it's a stretch toward simplicity, or even humility. Or maybe it's just perfectionism. After all, McGowen describes himself as a "neurotically particular" shopper.

"I've always appreciated constraints, both in design and in business," McGowen says.

"A constraint of size in a shop like this is good because it forces the perfection of curation. That's what this whole shop is about."

Contact Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/@Aimeemay.