Topics: 2016 Elections, 2016 presidential election, Editor's Picks, Feminism, Gloria Steinem, Hillary Clinton, Madeleine Albright, Elections News, Life News, Politics News

This campaign season has been pretty bleak on the gender front, from Marco Rubio’s assurance that he understands rape victims’ “terrible situation,” but would require them to carry any resulting child regardless, to Trump’s “blood out of her … wherever” comment heard ‘round the world. Even so, this moment stood out as a new low for women, particularly millennial women. At a rally for Hillary Clinton in Manchester, New Hampshire, Madeleine Albright scolded young women for betraying their elders. “We can tell our story of how we climbed the ladder, and a lot of you younger women think it’s done,” she said, referring to the fight for women’s equality. “It’s not done. There’s a special place in hell for women who don’t help each other!” Clinton, standing next to her, doubled over in what looked like genuine, if shocked, laughter before recovering, taking a long drink of water and slowly shaking her head.The night before Albright’s comment, the inimitable Gloria Steinem appeared on “Real Time With Bill Maher,” and gave her own assessment of millennial women. Maher asked the legendary feminist why young women don’t support Clinton in greater numbers. “Women radicalize as they get older,” Steinem said, as “they lose power.” She went on, “When you’re young, you’re thinking, ‘Where are the boys? The boys are with Bernie.’” The studio audience, which had been cheering and clapping to this point, was silent. Maher nearly choked. “Oh. Now if I said that, ‘They’re for Bernie because that’s where the boys are,’ you’d swat me.”

I wish he was right, but I don’t believe that she would. As a Ph.D. candidate who studies the recent history of rights, and as a millennial woman in the midst of my own late-20s feminist awakening, I was unsettled by how glibly Steinem and Albright dismissed the possibility that young women who support Sanders could have any legitimate political reasons for doing so. Their comments reveal a failure to see that, for many millennial women—from poor single mothers to degree-holders saddled with student loan debt—economic issues may loom larger in their minds and lives than more traditional “women’s” issues. At the UN’s Fourth World Conference on Women, in 1995, Clinton gave a speech famously titled “women’s rights are human rights”; it is just as true that economic issues are women’s issues.

History is catching up with Steinem and Albright’s generation of feminists. The feminist movement has, since its inception, willfully elided issues of race and class in its zeal to advance a clear-cut feminist agenda. In the late 1960s, radical feminists defined themselves against what they saw as the anti-feminism of the left, consciously privileging gender over other issues in a response to a leftist preoccupation with class and race.

They may have gotten away with this into the 1990s, when wages were increasing and the argument could be made that propping up women as such was good for all women, regardless of racial or economic difference. But since then we have seen the erosion of social protections, welfare in particular, the very programs the last President Clinton helped to erode. The financial crash of 2008 was a defining moment of many millennials’ lives, women and men alike, arriving just as they were entering college or the professional world and profoundly redrawing the map of their future. In failing to understand why young women would support Sanders for economic reasons rather than Clinton for gendered ones, Steinem and Albright reveal that they missed the part of recent history where capitalism failed people, young people and women in particular, whose Great Recession reality hardly matches their parents’ and grandparents’ upwardly mobile hopes. And they seem to have missed the part of their own history, where the system they fought so hard to allow women to participate in–the same system that Clinton, with her financial ties to Wall Street, and Albright, former board member on the New York Stock Exchange, do participate in–not only failed to deliver liberation and equality, but actually blew up in their faces.