So, today on his radio program, Rush Limbaugh started going on about how, because of Obamacare, Federal Employees will get to have 10,000 abortions a day on your dime, or whatever. This is an easily disprovable pile of bullshit that’s been repeated all over the loonyverse by people apparently too lazy to Google.

In case you don’t recall, due to the Hyde Amendment-related language attached to it by Stupak, the Affordable Care Act is prohibited from funding abortions. Federal Employees will be allowed to purchase their own additional insurance for this purpose. As is tradition. It’s not very hard to figure that out.

HOWEVER.

This is wrong. Look, I get that people who are opposed to abortion don’t want their tax money going to fund abortions. Or don’t want their insurance money going to provide abortions. But guess what? I didn’t want my money going towards the Iraq war. I don’t want my money funding old man boners. I don’t want my money going to bullshit “farm subsidies” that fund huge corporations. I don’t want my money going to fund the paychecks of Congress during a shutdown, while veterans get the short end of the stick on their benefits. I don’t want to pay for Steve King’s trip to Russia. There are a lot of things I am not particularly fond of my money going towards.

However, there are not boxes on my tax form that I can check off saying what I would prefer my tax money to go to. If I don’t have that choice, then why should they? Are conservatives the only people paying taxes? Are they the only people who pay for health insurance? No. Should I demand that my insurer not cover Viagra because I don’t plan on banging any elderly men in the near future?

Insurance, as with taxes, is a system we all pay in to. Not just conservatives. That is our money too. This is essentially the equivalent of all of us going out to sushi with the intent to split the bill, and them insisting that we all have to get Uni and pay for them to eat it whether we like it or not, and then calling us selfish when we ask if we could have like, one tempura shrimp roll.

This, like every other issue tied to abortion, is a class issue. The people affected the most by it are the poor. Rich women can afford insurance that covers it, they can pay for it themselves. Just like how when abortion was illegal in most states, rich women could travel where it was safe and legal and have one there. The Hyde Amendment has been incredibly dangerous because it clearly and pointedly targets poor women.

Not to mention the fact that if a woman can’t afford to have an abortion, how the hell do you expect her to have a child? It is not advantageous in our society to cut a woman’s life short, to ruin her chances of success later on, by saddling her with a child she does not want.

Perhaps you don’t think your money should go to cover someone else’s “mistake.” Well then, why don’t you just walk on down to the ER, yell at someone in traction and tell them they should have looked both ways when crossing the street? I don’t happen to care for guns, should I insist that insurers not cover a guy who accidentally blew his face off? He made the decision to not handle his gun safely, why should I have to contribute to his recovery? He was really just asking for it.

Why? Because half of the purpose of insurance in the first place is to cover “mistakes,” and to prevent them from happening in the first place. If everyone was perfect and holy in every way, our insurance costs would be extremely low. Sadly, they are not.

Abortion, like many other things one might need insurance for, is the result of a mistake. And not just the woman’s—someone had to put that baby there. You may not like that solution, but that doesn’t mean you should get to make that choice for everybody. If abortion were covered by the ACA, it would give millions of women the option of continuing their education, or their careers, or hey, just not having their body torn apart if they happen to not be up for that. It’s not a problem Rush Limbaugh is ever going to have to worry about, and for that, he’s lucky.