WASHINGTON (CBSDC/AP) – Polling indicates that President Barack Obama’s approval rating decreased from 52 percentage points to 41 percentage points during the course of 2013.

Between March and April of the past year, his approval rating went up from 48 percent to 49 percent. During every other month of the year, however, an overall decline was observed by researchers at Gallup.

“It is common for presidents to have an extended period of decline in approval at the start of a presidency. It’s the reality check after the honeymoon, and Obama also experienced this,” a release on their findings states. “It is also common to see extended downturns in approval following a major job approval rally such as George H.W. Bush experienced after the 1991 Gulf War, and George W. Bush experienced after 9/11.”

The release continued, “It has been less common to see sustained periods of significant decline during the normal course of a presidency, such as what Obama experienced this year, his fifth in office.”

His attempts at more stringent gun control legislation and the budget sequestration reportedly took their toll on his numbers earlier on in 2013. The botched rollout of the Affordable Care Act, Obama’s signature health care legislation, and the government shutdown are said to have contributed to his decline in popularity later in the year.

Those involved in the polling feel that these issues and others may continue to have a negative effect on Obama’s approval ratings.

They noted, “As long as these issues linger, particularly without major progress felt on the economy, Obama’s job rating could continue to languish in 2014 and beyond.”

For the past two weeks, Obama and his family have been enjoying the longest vacation to Hawaiian islands of his presidency. He and daughters Malia and Sasha returned to the White House on Sunday after the trip, which spanned Christmas and New Year’s.

Obama has spent most of his vacation playing golf and staying in a rented home in the sleepy suburb of Kailua on Oahu’s eastern coast.

Michelle Obama stayed behind to spend time with friends ahead of her upcoming 50th birthday party. The White House says the extra time in the islands is part of Mrs. Obama’s birthday gift from the president.

The first lady turns 50 on Jan. 17. The White House did not say when she planned to return to Washington.

(TM and © Copyright 2013 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2013 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)