Senate hopeful swipes at Bennet





The first of a flock of Republican candidates for the U.S. Senate to visit Grand Junction asked supporters on Saturday to join in a “revolution” to oust the incumbent, Democrat Michael Bennet, in November.

State Sen. Tim Neville, a Republican from Littleton, hit several conservative GOP talking points while speaking to about 30 activists at Citrola’s Italian Grill, calling for a change in philosophy in government, lashing out at Planned Parenthood and calling for a smaller government.

The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Neville said, needs to be “gutted and retooled,” and the cost of regulation, which he said amounted to $15,000 per family per year, slashed.

EPA involvement in the Animas River spill last summer demonstrated that the agency is getting little done to improve the environment, Neville said.

“Government has gotten so big that it’s telling you what you can wear, what kind of car you can drive, what kind of fuel you can put in it,” Neville said. “The answer is smaller government, and Michael Bennet and Barack Obama are not going to do that.”

During his time in the state Senate, he’s been “a thorn in the side of liberal Democrats, and liberal Republicans, too,” Neville said.

Neville said that he would sponsor right-to-work legislation in the Senate, as well as a life-at-conception act.

Planned Parenthood “kills the unborn and sells their body parts,” he said, calling for “an end to this madness.”

The “Obamacare debacle” needs to be corrected, he said, likening the Affordable Care Act to the Department of Veterans Affairs, which he said is failing to meet the needs of veterans.

Border enforcement needs to be strengthened while welfare benefits should be denied to those who enter the country illegally, Neville said.

Neville was accompanied by one of his sons, state Rep. Patrick Neville, R-Castle Rock, who said his father took him to the funerals of his Columbine High School classmates who died in the April 20, 1999, shootings so he could “find meaning in that horrific tragedy.”

Tim Neville is one of nearly a dozen Republican candidates seeking to face Bennet. Others include Ryan Frazier, a former Aurora city councilman and previous candidate for Congress, businessman Robert Blaha, state Rep. Jon Keyser of Morrison, Jefferson County Commissioner Don Rosier and El Paso County Commissioner Darryl Glenn.