Top 10 Stories Of 2013: Obamacare Changed Health Insurance Market As Debate Flared

The new exchange, Access Health CT, is the state's online marketplace where customers can shop for medical coverage. It is the only place where a Connecticut resident who earns up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level can get a subsidy to offset a part of the cost of insurance.

Connecticut is one of 14 states to create their own online health exchange; 36 states deferred to the federal government site, HealthCare.gov. A number of technological glitches plagued the federal site, particularly during the first two months.

Kevin Counihan, CEO of Access Health CT, has said on several occasions that implementing a new federal initiative would come with several bumps along the way.

During a summer 2013 meeting, Access Health CT estimated it would get between 100,000 and 120,000 people signing up for coverage in the first year. Enrollment continues into March.

Before the start of enrollment on Oct. 1, Connecticut had an uninsured population estimated to be 344,000 people, according to Access Health CT.

Connecticut's exchange has been held up as an example of a system that has worked well while the federal website suffers from withering criticism. Access Health CT did have technical challenges early on that resulted in misinformation about deductibles and co-insurance on some website screens during October. The exchange put warnings on the website, called customers, and sent out 2,408 letters to clarify if people bought policies they intended to buy, considering the misinformation that might have confused them.

From Oct. 1 through Oct. 16, Republicans in the House of Representatives and the White House were at an impasse over funding the sweeping health care law, which Congress passed in 2010. House Republicans sought to delay or de-fund aspects of the Affordable Care Act.

All told, federal employees were furloughed for a combined 6.6 million days of work — with about 850,000 workers furloughed at one point. The shutdown lowered fourth-quarter Gross Domestic Product growth by 0.2 percent to 0.6 percent, or between $2 billion and $6 billion in lost output, according to the federal Office of Management and Budget.

Supporters of the Affordable Care Act say that it allows people to buy insurance regardless of their health status or pre-existing medical condition. Supporters also say the law makes health insurance more affordable for women, people in their 50s and early 60s who are not yet eligible for Medicare, and anyone who earns up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level, which is $45,960 for an individual or $94,200 for a family of four.

Critics say the law mandates coverage in the individual market that is more than many people want to buy, which was the reason insurers notified some untold number of people to inform them they could not keep their current policies — directly conflicting with President Obama's assurances to the contrary. Critics also point out that the law makes insurance more expensive because of mandated coverage, and it raises prices for young people and men. Critics have taken aim at the federal cost of implementing the law and the individual mandate, which requires people to have some type of coverage.