RANCHO MIRAGE, CA, April 14, 2014 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- New Life Agency's Fertility Pharmacy Care Card® continues to make waves in the assisted reproduction community since it was introduced in 2010, providing extreme savings on medications to IVF patients and egg donor patients.

Today the world's leading IVF insurance solutions provider announces the expansion of the program to include in the New Life Preferred Provider Network, participating Walgreens Pharmacy Centers of Excellence in three Houston, Texas locations, and in Minnesota, Minneapolis, Missouri, Manchester and Miami, Florida.

The New Life Preferred Provider Network continues to proudly service all of the following locations: Frisco, Texas; Palo Alto, California; Margate, Florida; Chicago, Illinois; and Summit, New Jersey.

The Fertility Pharmacy Card® is offered through New Life Preferred Providers and offered directly to patients through IVFinsurance.com, easing one of the greatest expenses IVF patients face when undergoing infertility treatment. The program provides a $100 discount for each $1000 purchase of stimulation medication and, once enrolled, patients receive a $25 Walgreens gift card* to be used at any Walgreens retail location, following the first medication order and delivery.

Now the New Life Preferred Provider Network of IVF centers and physicians not only benefit from the same discounts as their patients, they also share the ease of ordering their Fertility Pharmacy Care Cards online. A password-protected portal for Providers makes it easier than ever to report insurance, enroll patients and donors to receive discounts, and pay immediately online with the new credit card and invoicing feature. In addition, discounts can be purchased as a "gift card" for infertility patients by the IVF center.

In its ongoing efforts to reduce the costs of IVF therapy, New Life is also reaching out to pharmaceutical companies who would like to provide added value to patients through the Fertility Pharmacy Care Card®. Along with their continuing partnership with Actavis, Inc., and Ferring Pharmaceutical, Inc., both pharmaceutical companies have stepped up to the plate and are forwarding huge savings on their individual offerings for hormone replacements for IVF pregnancies via the Fertility Pharmacy Care Card®:

· Watson - $50 savings on Crinone® (progesterone gel). Crinone® 8% (progesterone gel) savings cannot be used with any other discount coupon.

· Ferring - $50 savings each month on ENDOMETRIN® (progesterone) Vaginal Insert One use per month. Minimum prescription of 21 inserts required.

"Our Team at New Life never forgets who we are helping," said Trish Taylor, New Life President and Founder. "Whether it be for infertile folks or the GLBT community, our goal has always been to provide impeccable service and insurance that is there when you need it, at a cost that is as affordable as possible."

One New Life Pharmacy Care Card® holder had this to say about the difference the innovative program has made in her quest to build a family:

"Thank you all so much for helping me become a member of your program! Your name alone "new life" gives me so much hope, for you have been such a blessing to us today. I know that God is paving the way for us spiritually, financially, and emotionally this second time around (we lost our twins in cycle 1 due to a miscarriage at 18 weeks). Thank you all again for your efforts during this process and helping us save the little that we can...every cent counts towards our "new life"!"

Regards,

Andrea L.

To find out more about New Life Agency's groundbreaking array of Assisted Reproduction Insurance® products and programs, visit www.NewLifeAgency.com and for Life Insurance www.NewLifeInsurance.com or call 877-952-LIFE (5433).

About New Life Agency, Inc.

New Life Agency has provided Assisted Reproduction Insurance® for maternity, in vitro fertilization complications, intended parents, surrogates, egg donors and professional liability exclusively to the assisted reproduction medical industry since 1998. New Life has helped parents welcome over 2,000 babies into their families, and paid more than $30 million in benefits. New Life Agencyis a fully licensed Surplus Lines Company in most every State across the Nation as a Lloyd's of London Coverholder and underwriter offering insurance products secured and "A" rated superior security by A.M. Best, financial size XV (excess of two billion dollars). New Life Agency has a Member Services division that is a licensed full-service health claims Administrator/TPA providing benefit administration services for employer groups and customer care and claims handling services exclusively to New Life Agency, Inc. This division is dedicated to service providing world-class customer care in claims management and administration. New Life is located at 41-750 Rancho Las Palmas Drive, Suite F-1 in Rancho Mirage, CA. For more information: 877-952-5433 (LIFE) or www.NewLifeAgency.com and Life Insurance at www.NewLifeInsurance.com and the Fertility Pharmacy Care Card at IVFinsurance.com and the Affordable Care Act Exchange at NewLifeAgencyExchange.com

*State law restrictions mandate Walgreens gift card offer invalid if prescription drugs are shipped to, shipped from, or picked up in AR, ND, NY, NY or Puerto Rico.

Chris Martello Cord Media Company Phone 760-834-8599 email: