New BFFs for life – Mitt Romney and Zach Braff – after flying together to Sundance

“Garden State” actor Zach Braff got much more than he wished for as he boarded a flight from New York’s John F. Kennedy Airport to Salt Lake City Friday.

The liberal actor, who was en route to the Sundance Film Festival in Park City, Utah, to promote his latest movie (and Kickstarter project) “Wish You Were Here,” noticed shortly before boarding that a former presidential candidate was lurking in the airport, likely bound for the same flight.

Mitt Romney just walked by me at JFK after I randomly tweeted him. Let's try this again: @PaulMcCartney — Zach Braff (@zachbraff) January 24, 2014

And, sure enough, former Massachusetts Gov. Mitt Romney was indeed about to board Braff’s flight to Salt Lake City.

I feel like the odds of me and @MittRomney being on the same flight to Salt Lake City are good. I shall report back. — Zach Braff (@zachbraff) January 24, 2014

Incidentally enough, Braff had tweeted his whereabouts and that he was headed to Utah for Sundance shortly before seeing the former presidential candidate. But, in a weird bit of coincidence – the actor included Romney’s Twitter handle in his tweet as if he wished deep down that the politician would be on his flight even before he knew it was a reality.

Headed back to Utah. @MittRomney #Sundance2014 — Zach Braff (@zachbraff) January 24, 2014

To give the story an even happier ending, the two ended up sitting together in first-class on the flight, thus having several hours of air time to bond and become besties for life (and chat about “The Hunger Games” trilogy, of course.)

Seat Mates: pic.twitter.com/kq4WfzVZNM — Zach Braff (@zachbraff) January 25, 2014

.@zachbraff may the odds be ever in your favor. pic.twitter.com/7YzQwIeHaA — Mitt Romney (@MittRomney) January 25, 2014

Romney had been in New York City to talk about the documentary “Mitt” on the “TODAY” show Friday. “Mitt,” which chronicles his two failed presidential campaigns, just had its cinematic debut at Sundance. It is now available on Netflix as well.



While Braff and Romney now have a story for the ages in their midst, Braff did later send a tweet to his favorite politician – President Barack Obama – just to make sure he wasn’t too jealous about the precious time he spent with Obama’s one-time political rival.