Andrew Regan’s feet were set. His hands rested on knees as he crouched a few feet behind his quarterback, and his eyes stared up field as he pictured his attack.

“Set, hut! Hut!”

Regan leaped up and sprinted toward his quarterback, taking the handoff then clutching the football at his side. He bolted to the right, dropping one, two, three defenders.

All clear. Regan jogged into the end zone, not a defender in his path, as the crowd roared and the coaches trailed with their arms raised in celebration.

Touchdown.

Regan pointed to the sky to tell everyone who didn’t already know that he was No. 1. Former Broncos offensive lineman Chris Kuper, a man six times the size of Regan, scooped him up and hoisted him on his broad shoulders. Together they paraded back to the line of scrimmage.

Regan, a participant in the Dare to Play Football Camp, was a superstar. He was one of many Saturday, as former Broncos great Ed McCaffrey and the Global Down Syndrome Foundation hosted their sixth annual Dare to Play Football Camp.

Run simultaneously with the Broncos cheerleaders’ Dare to Dream Cheer Camp at Valor Christian High, Dare to Play Football teaches campers older than eight with Down Syndrome the basics of touch football and provides them one-on-one attention from Valor Christian football players, as well some current and former Broncos.

“Football is a great sport. I’ve loved playing it my whole life,” McCaffrey said. “It’s really about having fun with your friends and coming together to be part of something that’s bigger than yourself. It’s a great experience for our campers to be able to do that, to be able to learn about hard work and teamwork and overcoming adversity. It’s about creating an opportunity for our campers and for their families, and also spreading awareness about Down Syndrome.”

This year, current Broncos Ben Garland and Danny Trevathan teamed with former Broncos Kuper and Joel Dreessen to serve as celebrity coaches. They were joined by nearly 30 Valor players, who were paired with a Down Syndrome camper to lift them up in celebration of their touchdowns and tackles, and to pick them back up in their teary moments of frustration.

“It’s the smiles on the campers’ faces when they catch a ball or make a tackle or score a touchdown,” McCaffrey said as he reflected on his favorite moments. “When they pick their teammate up who has fallen down, when they show compassion and joy and enthusiasm, it’s just the look that you see from them — a look you see from people when they experience something they haven’t been able to do before. And also the looks on their families’ faces. You’ll see a lot of teary-eyed parents.”

Together, the coaches and the many volunteers, allowed the campers to be the stars they so often idolize at Sports Authority Field on Sundays.

Skydivers flew in from above to kick off the festivities. The campers sprinted out of the tunnel, ripping through a Dare to Play banner and drawing a roar of applause from the crowd. The announcer introduced the players, one by one, as they took their position on the field. The coaches waved. The cheerleaders showed off their new moves. The cameras flashed. The fans cheered. And the post-touchdown dances were unforgettable.

For about three hours, Broncos players were mere bystanders to the real celebrities on the field.

“This is my first year and I’m blown away by it,” Dreessen said. “Ed McCaffrey was one of my heroes growing up, too. I always wanted to be just like McCaffrey. So to see him have his hand in something that gives back like this, it gives me more reason to really like it.”

For Regan, it was so much more. His ear-to-ear grin that never seemed to fade was proof.