Some tea party leaders, however, say the protest has probably gone as far as it can go. Tea partiers still want ACA gutted

You go through a whole government shutdown so you can kill Obamacare dead, and all you get is a little more due diligence before people can get their subsidies?

Tea party groups are furious over the prospect that Congress is drifting toward a government funding-debt ceiling deal that might just take the usual one or two tepid dings out of President Barack Obama’s signature health care law, just like Congress has in previous fights.

Story Continued Below

The whole point of urging Republicans to use the continuing resolution and debt ceiling bills as leverage, in their view, was to force a real shutdown of Obamacare, not just settle for one or two minor concessions. But in the deal that appeared to be coming together in the Senate Monday, only two Obamacare provisions were on the table: a measure to verify the incomes of everyone who applies for subsidies, and a one-year delay of a tax to help insurers that cover a lot of sick people.

( Understanding Obamacare: POLITICO's guide to the Affordable Care Act)

If Obamacare was a piñata, that would be like walking away after you’ve lightly whacked the tail a couple of times. Tea party groups were hoping to keep smashing it until it broke.

“This fight is a fight worth having so that millions of Americans can get relief from Obamacare,” said Jenny Beth Martin, national coordinator of the Tea Party Patriots. “This fight is not worth having on issues that are smaller than that.”

The tea party universe is not monolithic, and as Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and other Senate Republicans seem to be willing to settle for minor Obamacare concessions, some groups say it’s time to take what they can get and live to fight another day.

But the tea party faithful who are urging House Republicans to fight on are passionate and include groups like Martin’s Tea Party Patriots, one of the leading tea party groups, and FreedomWorks, which has organized Obamacare protests since Congress was first debating it in 2009. They’re both urging House Republicans to stand firm against any Senate deal if it doesn’t slow down Obamacare in a fundamental way, like delaying the individual mandate for a year.

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

“We’ve pushed very, very, very hard, and we’re doing that because we understand that this law is having very real effects on millions of Americans right now,” said Martin. “If they walk away from the current situation without securing any real, meaningful relief from Obamacare, we’re going to be very upset with them.”

Adam Brandon, executive vice president of FreedomWorks, said the Senate talks were one of the main topics of conversation at a meeting of the group’s activists in Atlanta this weekend.

“The grassroots are tired of these little technical tweaks. They want to start over,” said Brandon. He said any deal that doesn’t include, at a minimum, a delay of the individual mandate will have a hard time passing the House, because “the House guys are feeling the pressure.”

Brandon said the activists were especially cynical about an earlier Senate proposal to delay the law’s tax on medical devices, saying it would have been yet another example of interest groups with skilled lobbyists getting a break from Obamacare while regular people can’t. But that proposal appeared to have dropped out of the emerging Senate deal by Monday night.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

Even some tea party leaders, however, say the Obamacare protest has probably gone as far as it can go — since it has failed, so far, to peel away any of the red-state Senate Democrats the anti-Obamacare forces needed on their side.

“I would take progress, knowing that we can fix some of the problems,” said Sal Russo, co-founder and chief strategist of the Tea Party Express. “I mean, we’re not going to be happy, but most of the tea party people, we fought the good fight.”

Russo’s background is different from other tea party leaders — he’s a veteran Republican strategist who has worked on campaigns dating back to Ronald Reagan’s days in California politics. Russo said he had always called for Republicans to use the spending bill as the vehicle for broader Obamacare changes because he thought they could get a few red-state Senate Democrats to side with them — like Mark Begich of Alaska, Mary Landrieu of Louisiana, Mark Pryor of Arkansas, and Kay Hagan of North Carolina, all of whom are up for re-election next year.

( Also on POLITICO: Sarah Palin: Barack Obama flirts with impeachment)

That effort has clearly failed, Russo said, and even though everything depends on the final details of a Senate deal, “that might be as far as we can get, given that we didn’t move those Senate votes that we have to move.”

Other groups are fully aware that the shutdown and debt limit crises have taken the focus away from their efforts to highlight Obamacare’s problems. So they’ll be happy to get past the crises and turn the spotlight back to the health care law, especially now that the law’s centerpiece is a federal health insurance website that breaks down all the time.

“We think overturning Obamacare is a long-term, grind-it-out effort, and we’re committed to doing that,” said Tim Phillips, president of Americans for Prosperity. When comedians like Jon Stewart are mocking the “incompetence” of the Obamacare website, Phillips said, “you’ve got a problem, and it’s been overshadowed. Let’s get back to shining a light on that.”