DAYTONA BEACH, Fla. — My crew guys lied to me. They told me after we crashed our primary car Thursday night that the backup is just as good.

Wrong.

The backup car is without a shadow of a doubt better than the one we ran the other night. I even hate to call it a backup because of how good it felt.

Because of rain Friday, we weren’t able to practice with the new car, and when I got to the garage Saturday morning for practice, it started to rain again. We were facing a distinct possibility of going into Sunday’s Daytona 500 without putting 1 mile on our Furniture Row/Denver Mattress Chevrolet.

But after a one-hour delay, the rain stopped and we finally got to shake out the new car. We ran approximately 15 laps, and my excitement level is pretty high right now. In the end, everything went as planned, so the guys did a good job again.

It’s hard to hold back my excitement right now because of how fast and how well the car handled in the draft. Shortly after practice, I was getting the right vibes from Todd (Berrier, crew chief) and the guys. If they’re confident in something, then there is no reason why I shouldn’t be.

We’re all in an upbeat mood heading into the 500. It would have been a little worrisome if we had to go into the race without any practice.

There seems to be a lot of talk about starting the Daytona 500 from the rear of the field. Well, for those who don’t follow racing that closely, a starting position at a restrictor-plate race (Daytona and Talladega) doesn’t carry the importance it does at other venues.

We’re not the only team that had issues and sent to the rear of the field. Some of the other drivers are Jimmie Johnson, Tony Stewart, Kevin Harvick, Clint Bowyer, David Ragan, Danica Patrick and Bobby Labonte.

My preparation for the 500 will be routine. Nothing special. I will watch the Nationwide race to see how much I can learn for the 500 and then will have a nice dinner and get a good night’s sleep.

We are as prepared as we can be and anxiously awaiting to kick off the 2014 NASCAR Sprint Cup season.

Furniture Row Racing’s Martin Truex Jr. is keeping a daily diary for The Post through Sunday’s Daytona 500.