MANCHESTER, Ky. – It's Sunday afternoon and Democratic chairmen from across eastern Kentucky wait patiently for Dale Emmons, a top Democratic strategist advising Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes, to work through his presentation on mobilizing voters in the final weeks of the Senate campaign. Polls show a close race, but Grimes has failed to break away in the final months of the campaign. The county officials seem uneasy, but nod along as Emmons passes around a glossy advertisement featuring Grimes in a coal mine. Then, it's time for questions.

“How do you get these people to understand?” one county chairman asks. He'd been on the front lines on behalf of the Grimes campaign in eastern Kentucky. He knows the voters, and what he is up against. The talking points he'd been reciting about how Grimes was endorsed by the coal miners union weren't working to quell concerns among voters.

“They look at you like you are nuts," he says.

Penny Robinson, the Democratic chairwoman for Clay County, raises her hand and volunteers another idea. Republicans have pilloried Grimes on the issue of health care, attempting to tie her closely to President Barack Obama's signature reform law that remains widely unpopular with voters, despite the fact that Grimes never voted for the law.

Diana Soliwon for USN&WR

“The only thing is that you hear Obamacare, Obamacare, but in this area, everybody is on Obamacare,” Robinson says. “We need to say ‘Are you on Obamacare? OK, then you are reaping the benefits.’”

A year ago, Republicans predicted the Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010, would doom Democrats in the 2014 election. The media chronicled weeks of website glitches. Republicans on Capitol Hill seized on the opportunity to blame Obamacare for any insurance, uncertainty from rising premiums to canceled plans.

"Every American is going to see higher prices for health care," Boehner warned during a March press conference. "The worst is yet to come."

Yet months later, the negative headlines are gone. The fever has broken. Obamacare has faded into the campaign background, rather than remaining an all-consuming issue. And as uninsured Americans continue to enroll for coverage, taking advantage of the tax breaks and more-inclusive plans, the number of Republican attack ads against Obamacare have dwindled. A Bloomberg analysis in August found in the Senate race in North Carolina, the percentage of health care-centric attack ads dropped from 54 percent in the spring to 27 percent by midsummer. In polls, more Americans support fixes to the law than an all-out repeal.

Nonetheless, more Americans think the law has hurt them than helped them.

But Robinson, the Democratic county chairwoman, sees an opportunity for Grimes to take advantage of Kentucky's Obamacare experience. Gov. Steve Beshear's embrace of the Medicaid expansion provided for under the law has led to a dramatic reduction in the state's uninsured rate, which went from 20.4 percent to 11.9 percent between 2013 and midyear 2014. Many of those who now have greater access to doctors and coverage as a result of the expansion live in the eastern pocket of the state where Grimes is struggling to get traction among the largely conservative, rural population.

"If I were running a statewide race, I would drop Obama, and I would talk about the affordable health care act," says Cale Turner, the Democratic chairman of the Owsley County Democrats. "That law has been a blessing."

The idea isn't an untested one. Sen. Mark Pryor, an incumbent Arkansas Democrat, launched television ads supporting the law. Pryor, like Grimes, is in a tight race in a state where the president remains wildly unpopular, but a public-private partnership built as part of the Affordable Care Act has drastically dropped the uninsured rate.

Still, Grimes has resisted embracing the controversial law. She could still benefit by touting the popular aspects of the Affordable Care Act, such as guaranteed coverage for those with pre-existing conditions or the ability for young people up to the age of 26 to remain on their parents' plans. And, since she bears no responsibility for passing the law, she's also free to denigrate other requirements, such as the tax penalties for those who do not buy insurance, without taking a rap for being hypocritical. But on most occasions, she opts not to bring up the law at all.

“I would not go into hiding on that issue. You know it is going to come up whether you voted for it or not,” says Doug Thornell, a Democratic strategist and former top national party spokesman who worked on health care messaging. “A lot of people in Kentucky benefiting from the Medicaid expansion are folks who might be voting for Mitch McConnell.”

Click for a larger image.

The number of residents uninsured under 65 in 2014, according to the Commonwealth of Kentucky.

Courtesy Al Cross/Commonwealth of Kentucky

Throughout her race, Grimes has needed to do more than run an exceptional campaign to unseat McConnell, a 30-year Senate veteran known for defending his seat at any cost. Many observers noted that, as a young, attractive woman with a family history steeped in local politics and a willingness to deliver a barb, she seemed like a great match-up against McConnell. But as the current polling proves, the inexperienced Grimes needs to do more than just avoid major political stumbles to beat the Senate's top Republican. She needed a trump card, an "it" quality or a bold campaign move, pundits said. And while Grimes is energized on the stump with an arsenal of one-liners, she has been knocked for her robotic delivery of campaign talking points, both on the campaign trail and in exchanges with reporters.

Some say flipping the narrative on health care might be her best – and last – opportunity to pull off an upset.

Eastern Kentucky, like many rural communities, is a case of political and circumstantial contradiction. On the one hand, eastern Kentucky is poor. The people who live there are stuck, trying to recover from the decline of the coal industry that once boomed in the region. In most areas, more than 30 percent of residents rely on food stamps and there are counties where unemployment soars as high as 12 percent. The most recent unemployment rate in September showed the national average was 5.9 percent. And things have been bad for a while – eastern Kentucky was the backdrop for President Lyndon Johnson's War on Poverty launch.

Yet, despite the region’s reliance on social programs, a favorite budget-cut target for Republicans, this is Mitch McConnell country. Voters support the incumbent even as he has voted against extending unemployment benefits and raising the minimum wage. Democrats still hold a slight registration advantage in many of the eastern Kentucky counties – a legacy held over from the days when powerful coal unions controlled the region. But in national elections, Republicans have long-dominated. In 2012, Mitt Romney won upward of 70 percent of the vote in most eastern Kentucky counties.

When Grimes is asked about the Affordable Care Act on the campaign trail, she focuses on fixing it. Acutely aware of how it has become a symbol for federal government overreach, she hones in on the burden it is for business owners and touts the need to protect people from being forced off of their own health care plans.

Still, she is not about to criticize the state's own health care exchange. While she says she would "fix" the law if elected to the Senate, she told The Associated Press in May she would not change the benefits given to Kentuckians.

"I am not and will not be for taking away insurance that 400,000 Kentuckians just recently got access to," she had said.



Click for a larger image.

The number of residents uninsured under 65 in 2012, according to the Commonwealth of Kentucky.

Courtesy Al Cross/Commonwealth of Kentucky

Further evidence that Grimes could benefit from embracing health care as an issue came earlier this year when McConnell said he wanted to repeal Obamacare but keep Kynect, a statewide health insurance exchange prescribed under the federal law. The state marketplace helps consumers compare coverage and prices among private insurance companies and has been embraced by those who have successfully used it. When asked what would happen to Kynect if Obamacare was gone, McConnell said the two issues were "unconnected." One of the state's editorial boards took him to task.

"Repeal the federal law, which McConnell calls 'Obamacare,' and the state exchange would collapse," the Lexington Herald-Leader's editorial board wrote in May.

"It's no wonder that polls show many Kentuckians don't know that Kynect is a direct product of President Barack Obama's landmark law," the board's op-ed continued. "How can average people be expected to understand if the Senate's Republican leader still hasn't figured it out, or at least is pretending there is no connection?"

Al Cross, a Kentucky political expert and journalism professor at the University of Kentucky, says both campaigns have strategically avoided exploiting health care in the race because it is unclear exactly who would benefit, which is why if Grimes were to take up the mantle it would indeed be a political gamble.

Cross says it's absurd that McConnell has tried to campaign against Obamacare, while not campaigning against Kynect, but Cross says he's not convinced embracing the law could save Grimes either.

Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell laughs while being introduced during a two-day bus tour of eastern Kentucky on Aug. 7. Win McNamee/Getty Images

"It's an article of faith in the East that Obama is the devil against the coal industry," Cross says. "You cannot campaign against an article of faith."

Yet, one Democrat is proving it's possible to at least try to turn the tables on the perception of Obamacare.

In Arkansas, Pryor's support for the Affordable Care Act is aimed at boosting voter turnout in the African-American community, a constituency Grimes does not have in eastern Kentucky.

Without mentioning the Affordable Care Act by name, Pryor attempted to play up the positive pieces of the law just as Obama's 2012 presidential campaign did. And in a deeply personal ad, Pryor spoke about his own struggle to keep his insurance and beat cancer.

“No one should be fighting an insurance company while you are fighting for your life,” Pryor said as he sat beside his father, former Sen. David Pryor, in the ad. “That’s why I helped pass a law that prevents insurance companies from canceling your policy if you get sick or deny coverage for pre-existing conditions.”

Pryor’s risk was calculated. Like Kentucky, Arkansas has a high poverty rate. It's a place where Obama’s name is poison at the polls. Yet, the state’s seen a whopping 10-point drop in the uninsured rate, the biggest in the nation; Kentucky comes in second. While nearly one-quarter of Arkansans were without insurance in 2013, an August Gallup survey shows only 12.4 percent are without coverage now.



The coverage expansion mostly came from a unique compromise forged at the state level by outgoing Democratic Gov. Mike Beebe. While Arkansas’ Republican-controlled legislature wasn’t about to approve the massive expansion of Medicaid available through Obamacare, Beebe worked to find a middle ground. He eventually earned support from three-quarters of lawmakers – the state constitutionally required number –for a hybrid Medicaid expansion plan he dubbed a “private option.” The plan uses Obamacare funds available for Medicaid expansion to buy private insurance coverage for poor Arkansans, rather than enrolling them in the oft-maligned federal program.

“Pragmatic- and business-minded Republicans and Democrats worked together with the realization that they can dislike, disfavor the Affordable Care Act," Beebe tells U.S. News. “But as long as it’s the law of the land, we don’t want to be hurting our own people, our own hospitals, our own businesses and sending our tax money to other states and leaving our people out.”

As a result of Arkansas' popular bipartisan health care, Pryor's Republican opponent, Rep. Tom Cotton, finds himself in a similar bind as Kentucky's McConnell. While Cotton continues to rail against Obamacare, he has been careful not to disavow the state’s own plan.

Photos: Top 10 Senate Races EXPAND GALLERY Photo Gallery x of x Full Screen NORTH CAROLINA. Republican state Rep. Thom Tillis, left, is running against incumbent Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, who pundits say relied on the black vote and Obama's popularity for her first-term win in 2009. Since 2011, Tillis has served as North Carolina's House speaker and has attracted endorsements from Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. Brad Coville/The Wilson Times/AP; Gerry Broome/AP - Pool x of x Full Screen KANSAS. Three-term Republican Sen. Pat Roberts, 78, could represent an "old Washington" ideology voters are fatigued by and create an opening for independent candidate Greg Orman, right. Orman, 45, is a wild card for Republicans both in Kansas and in vying for the Senate majority, as he has said he will caucus with whichever party represents the majority. Charlie Riedel/AP x of x Full Screen COLORADO. Republican Rep. Cory Gardner, left, is looking to unseat one-term incumbent Sen. Mark Udall after successfully ousting Democratic Rep. Betsy Markey from her seat in 2010. Udall, the son of former Rep. Morris Udall, and Gardner have sparred over energy in a state aptly positioned to benefit from or be harmed by that and climate change policy. Chris Schneider, Brennan Linsley/AP x of x Full Screen GEORGIA. Republican businessman David Perdue and Democrat Michelle Nunn, the former CEO of Points of Light, are competing for retiring Republican Saxby Chambliss' seat. Experts say Nunn may have a tough time drawing in 2012 levels of the African-American vote, upsetting the party's plans to stage a surprise victory. Perdue is the former CEO of Reebok and Dollar General. Woody Marshall/The Macon Telegraph/AP; David Tulis/AP x of x Full Screen LOUISIANA. Three-term incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Democrat, has fiercely fought for coastline and oil spill regulations and is the daughter of former New Orleans Mayor Moon Landrieu. Republicans believe Rep. Bill Cassidy can unseat her during the non-presidential election year, when Democratic voters are less likely to turn out to vote. Melinda Deslatte,Susan Walsh/AP x of x Full Screen ARKANSAS. Republican Rep. Tom Cotton, left, a former Army captain and Harvard Law graduate, is challenging incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat, who took office in 2003 and won re-election with no GOP opposition in 2008. Danny Johnston/AP; AP x of x Full Screen IOWA. Left, Republican state Sen. Joni Ernst, an Iraq war veteran, hopes to take advantage of the state's shifting ideology and overcome Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley, seen here telling a story about his old work boots at a fundraiser. The two are battling for Tom Harkin's seat, who is retiring after keeping it Democratic for five terms. Justin Hayworth/AP; Scott Morgan/AP x of x Full Screen ALASKA. Republican Dan Sullivan, right, will attempt to unseat incumbent Sen. Mark Begich, the former Democratic mayor of Anchorage. Begich won his seat by defeating the longest serving Republican member of Senate, Ted Stevens, in 2008. Sullivan served as an adviser and assistant secretary to President George W. Bush and most recently as the commissioner for Alaska's department of natural resources. Ron Sachs/Picture Alliance/dpa/AP; Mark Thiessen/AP x of x Full Screen MICHIGAN. Former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, and Democratic Rep. Gary Peters are running to replace six-term Sen. Carl Levin, who is retiring. Peters recently earned an endorsement from New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and is the favorite in polls. Carlos Osorio/AP x of x Full Screen NEW HAMPSHIRE. Scott Brown is the Republican's best shot at swinging the state back in their favor. The former Massachusetts senator, who lost to Sen. Elizabeth Warren in 2012, challenges incumbent Democrat Sen. Jeanne Shaheen. Shaheen was the first woman elected governor of New Hampshire and the first in U.S. history to also be elected senator. Jim Cole/AP x of x Photo Gallery x of x NORTH CAROLINA. Republican state Rep. Thom Tillis, left, is running against incumbent Democratic Sen. Kay Hagan, who pundits say relied on the black vote and Obama's popularity for her first-term win in 2009. Since 2011, Tillis has served as North Carolina's House speaker and has attracted endorsements from Jeb Bush and Mitt Romney. Brad Coville/The Wilson Times/AP; Gerry Broome/AP - Pool x of x KANSAS. Three-term Republican Sen. Pat Roberts, 78, could represent an "old Washington" ideology voters are fatigued by and create an opening for independent candidate Greg Orman, right. Orman, 45, is a wild card for Republicans both in Kansas and in vying for the Senate majority, as he has said he will caucus with whichever party represents the majority. Charlie Riedel/AP x of x COLORADO. Republican Rep. Cory Gardner, left, is looking to unseat one-term incumbent Sen. Mark Udall after successfully ousting Democratic Rep. Betsy Markey from her seat in 2010. Udall, the son of former Rep. Morris Udall, and Gardner have sparred over energy in a state aptly positioned to benefit from or be harmed by that and climate change policy. Chris Schneider, Brennan Linsley/AP x of x GEORGIA. Republican businessman David Perdue and Democrat Michelle Nunn, the former CEO of Points of Light, are competing for retiring Republican Saxby Chambliss' seat. Experts say Nunn may have a tough time drawing in 2012 levels of the African-American vote, upsetting the party's plans to stage a surprise victory. Perdue is the former CEO of Reebok and Dollar General. Woody Marshall/The Macon Telegraph/AP; David Tulis/AP x of x LOUISIANA. Three-term incumbent Sen. Mary Landrieu, a Democrat, has fiercely fought for coastline and oil spill regulations and is the daughter of former New Orleans Mayor Moon Landrieu. Republicans believe Rep. Bill Cassidy can unseat her during the non-presidential election year, when Democratic voters are less likely to turn out to vote. Melinda Deslatte,Susan Walsh/AP x of x ARKANSAS. Republican Rep. Tom Cotton, left, a former Army captain and Harvard Law graduate, is challenging incumbent Sen. Mark Pryor, a Democrat, who took office in 2003 and won re-election with no GOP opposition in 2008. Danny Johnston/AP; AP x of x IOWA. Left, Republican state Sen. Joni Ernst, an Iraq war veteran, hopes to take advantage of the state's shifting ideology and overcome Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley, seen here telling a story about his old work boots at a fundraiser. The two are battling for Tom Harkin's seat, who is retiring after keeping it Democratic for five terms. Justin Hayworth/AP; Scott Morgan/AP x of x ALASKA. Republican Dan Sullivan, right, will attempt to unseat incumbent Sen. Mark Begich, the former Democratic mayor of Anchorage. Begich won his seat by defeating the longest serving Republican member of Senate, Ted Stevens, in 2008. Sullivan served as an adviser and assistant secretary to President George W. Bush and most recently as the commissioner for Alaska's department of natural resources. Ron Sachs/Picture Alliance/dpa/AP; Mark Thiessen/AP x of x MICHIGAN. Former Michigan Secretary of State Terri Lynn Land, a Republican, and Democratic Rep. Gary Peters are running to replace six-term Sen. Carl Levin, who is retiring. Peters recently earned an endorsement from New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg and is the favorite in polls. Carlos Osorio/AP x of x NEW HAMPSHIRE. Scott Brown is the Republican's best shot at swinging the state back in their favor. The former Massachusetts senator, who lost to Sen. Elizabeth Warren in 2012, challenges incumbent Democrat Sen. Jeanne Shaheen. Shaheen was the first woman elected governor of New Hampshire and the first in U.S. history to also be elected senator. Jim Cole/AP x of x ×

While Obamacare is still unpopular among the majority of Arkansas voters, a USA Today/Suffolk University poll actually found voters who prioritized health care as their number one election issue trusted Pryor more than Cotton, 50 percent to 39 percent.

“There is a disconnect both politically and rhetorically and in the minds of voters,” Beebe says. “Cotton doesn’t say anything about the private option. He doesn’t denigrate what a majority of the Republicans and all of the Democrats did in the legislature. He doesn’t attack any of that for the obvious reasons.”

For Grimes, there's been one potentially powerful clue dropped recently on whether or not she will take the Obamacare plunge: the words of one of the nation's top political minds and one of the savviest campaigners in the game.