Combine harvests rice in Louisiana at the end of last year’s growing season. (Photo: Submitted photo)

The Louisiana Rice Council and the Louisiana Rice Growers Association, Louisiana's two largest grower organizations, have scheduled their annual joint membership meeting for Feb. 10 in Jennings.

Rice is an important agricultural product in St. Landry Parish, second only to soybeans, and Parish’s County Agent Vince Deshotel urges local rice producers to attend.

“Prices on rice have fallen. They are lower than they have been in recent years. Any marketing information our rice producers can get is important,” Deshotel said.

This year’s meeting will be held at a new location, the Grande Marais Center, and will open with a trade show and reception at 4 p.m. followed by the program at 5:45. Dinner will be served.

“This meeting provides an annual report to rice farmers on programs funded by the Louisiana rice promotion check-off as well as timely information on other important issues,” said Eric Unkel, a rice farmer from Allen Parish and LARC president. “I encourage all rice industry stakeholders to attend.”

The featured speaker will be Kevin Norton, state conservationist with the U.S. Department of Agriculture's Natural Resources Conservation Service, who will discuss conservation opportunities for rice farmers through Farm Bill programs.

USA Rice Federation staff will report on the Federation’s activities and promotional achievements. Louisiana Department of Agriculture and Forestry Commissioner Mike Strain will address issues of concern to the Louisiana rice industry.

“This is the largest gathering of rice farmers in the state each year,” said Jeffery Sylvester, an Evangeline Parish rice farmer and LARGA president. “It’s what makes this event the perfect place to display rice-related equipment, technology, products and services and show support for the Louisiana rice industry.”

USA Rice also will participate in the Central Louisiana Rice Growers Association Annual Membership meeting that begins at 11 a.m. Feb. 11 at the Dean Lee Experiment station in Alexandria and the Northeast Louisiana Rice Growers Association Rice Forum that begins at 9 a.m. Feb. 12 at the Delhi Civic Center in Delhi.

For information on the meetings, including sponsorship and exhibit opportunities, contact Randy Jemison at 337-738-7009.

WANT TO GO?

Rice Producers Meeting

4 p.m. Feb. 10

Grande Marais Center

919 N. Lake Arthur Ave., Jennings

Call 337-738-7009 for more information

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/01/19/rice-farmers-set-state-meeting/22016995/