MILWAUKEE — A glimpse into the future looked bright indeed for the Rockies on Friday night with rookie left-hander Tyler Matzek on the Miller Park mound. Unfortunately, the present remains a nightmare as the Rockies continue to find new and confounding ways to lose.

The Brewers walked off with a 3-2 victory on a ninth-inning single by Ryan Braun off reliever Matt Belisle that scored Mark Reynolds, who had advanced to third base on a passed ball charged to catcher Michael Mc- Kenry earlier in the inning.

Colorado manager Walt Weiss had the option of having Belisle intentionally walk the dangerous Braun and pitch to Jonathan Lucroy. Weiss instead chose Braun, who promptly whistled Belisle’s first-pitch, 92 mph fastball into center field for the game-winner.

“It was one of those pick-your-poison situations,” Weiss said. “I wanted to give (Belisle) a couple of pitches to see where we were at. I wasn’t going to let (Braun) hit in a good hitter’s count.

“I will always take responsibility for that one. It’s not a great situation to be in, facing Braun or facing Lucroy, who is second in the league in hitting (at .330).”

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies 2, Milwaukee Brewers 3 – June 27, 2014

That decision came after Josh Rutledge tied the game 2-2 in the top of the inning with a solo homer to left field off Milwaukee super closer Francisco Rodriguez. That’s no easy feat. K-Rod had blown just two saves in 28 attempts coming in. Rutledge went 3-for-4 and came up a triple short of the cycle.

The Rockies lost for the 10th time in 11 games, despite getting six terrific innings from Matzek.

“We didn’t win, so this is going to sting a little bit more,” he said.

All of Matzek’s good came undone when reliever Adam Ottavino hit Braun with the bases loaded to give the Brewers a 2-1 lead in the seventh.

Colorado’s bullpen — burdened by a 4.56 ERA that’s easily the worst in the National League — simply couldn’t finish the job Matzek started. Right-hander Nick Masset arrived on the scene in the seventh and promptly gave up a double to Khris Davis and a walk to Reynolds. Jean Segura moved them into scoring position with a sacrifice bunt.

Lefty Rex Brothers relieved Masset and struck out Martin Maldonado, but then walked Rickie Weeks to load the bases. All of that led to Ottavino plunking Braun.

Matzek, getting ahead of hitters and showing exceptional command, needed just 83 pitches (52 strikes) to steer through his six innings. He allowed a single run on five hits, walked zero and struck out three.

“He was really good against an all-right-handed lineup that is very good,” Weiss said. “It’s very encouraging. Tyler is showing up very well. He’s a guy who can help us moving forward here.”

After the Brewers scored in the bottom of the sixth, the Rockies tied the game 1-1 in the seventh off Milwaukee starter Kyle Lohse with a leadoff double by Corey Dickerson, a bloop single by Ryan Wheeler and a safety squeeze bunt down the first-base line by pinch-hitter Brandon Barnes to score Dickerson from third.

Colorado’s offense couldn’t generate much support for Matzek, going 2-for-9 with runners in scoring position.

One highlight: Troy Tulowitzki’s double in the third inning was the 400th extra-base hit of his career.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Rockies’ Jhoulys Chacin (1-6, 4.84 ERA) at Brewers’ Matt Garza (4-5, 4.01)

2:10 p.m. Saturday, ROOT; 850 AM

Wins are just one measure of a starting pitcher’s worth. But in the case of Chacin, it’s a telling number. After 10 starts this year, he has only one victory and the Rockies are 2-8 in his starts. Chacin, who has a very good sinker when he commands it, has been leaving the ball up and over the plate — and that has hurt him. He has given up seven home runs already, in 57 ⅔ innings. Last year, when he went 14-10 and posted a 3.47 ERA, he served up only 11 homers in 197 ⅓ innings.

Sunday: Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (7-6, 4.78 ERA) at Brewers’ Yovani Gallardo (5-4, 3.23), 12:10 p.m., ROOT

Monday: Rockies’ Yohan Flande (0-0, 7.20) at Nationals’ Jordan Zimmermann (5-4, 2.95), 5:05 p.m., ROOT

Tuesday: Rockies’ Christian Friedrich (0-2, 8.10) at Nationals’ Stephen Strasburg (6-6, 3.70), 5:05 p.m., ROOT