WASHINGTON -- A cold week in the nation's capital concluded with the Republican-controlled House of Representatives suing the Obama administration over its implementation of the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

House Sues Obama Over ACA's Insurer Subsidies, Mandate Delay

The Republican-controlled House of Representatives sued the Obama administration in federal court Friday, alleging that delays in enforcing the Affordable Care Act's (ACA) employer mandate and the ACA's subsidies to insurers were both unconstitutional.

"Time after time, the president has chosen to ignore the will of the American people and rewrite federal law on his own without a vote of Congress," House Speaker John Boehner (R-Ohio) said in a statement. "That's not the way our system of government was designed to work. ... The House has an obligation to stand up for the Constitution, and that is exactly why we are pursuing this course of action."

The lawsuit, filed in the U.S. District Court for the District of Columbia, alleges that the payments being made to insurers to offset the subsidies paid to patients to make insurance more affordable are unconstitutional because Congress has not appropriated money for those payments.

The suit also alleges that the administration's postponing the enactment of the law's employer mandate is unconstitutional because doing so effectively amends the law itself, something that only Congress has the power to do.

Pricey Generics Draw Senate Scrutiny

The sharp increase in generic drug costs over the last 18 months is the focus of a federal investigation and a new bill that came before a Senate subcommittee Thursday. In October, members of Congress sent letters to 14 drug manufacturers demanding an explanation for the rising prices.

"More than one out of four Americans do not fill their prescriptions because they cannot afford the cost," said Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), chairman of the Senate Subcommittee on Primary Health and Aging, in his opening remarks.

Sanders and Rep. Elijah Cummings (D-Md.), ranking member of the House Committee on Oversight and Government Reform, introduced a bill that would require generic drug companies to provide rebates to Medicaid if the price of their products increases faster than the rate of inflation. Brand name drugs are already held to this standard, but generics are not.

"Congress should fix this loophole immediately," Sanders said.

FDA Okays Abuse-Deterrent Hydrocodone

The FDA has approved a second hydrocodone-only opioid painkiller, this time with abuse-deterrent properties, the agency announced Thursday.

Purdue Pharma's extended-release hydrocodone tablet (Hysingla) will contain labeling that the drug meets abuse-deterrent properties consistent with the FDA's draft guidance on the topic.

The FDA said the pill is difficult to crush, break, or dissolve, and when it's placed in water it forms a viscous hydrogel that is not readily drawn into a syringe. Nevertheless, the agency and Purdue acknowledged that it can still be abused in various ways.

It's the fourth opioid to be granted abuse-deterrent status. Purdue's reformulated OxyContin was first, followed by its oxycodone-naloxone combination Targiniq. Pfizer's morphine-naltrexone pill Embeda was the third.

The abuse-deterrent approvals come at a time when the FDA is still determining what qualifies a drug as resistant to abuse. The agency held a 2-day meeting at the end of October to hash out those issues, which were set in motion by the release of its draft guidance in January 2013, but few conclusions were drawn.

Senate to VA: Save Our Suicidal Veterans

On Wednesday, the Committee on Veterans Affairs questioned directors of mental health and suicide prevention services at the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) about efforts to improve the quality and timeliness of mental health care.

During the hearing, senators criticized the VA for long wait times, limited access to mental health resources, and poor tracking of returning soldiers, particularly those diagnosed with a mental health condition.

Ranking committee member Sen. Richard Burr, (R-N.C.) said VA officials had earlier told the Senate of the VA's efforts to provide evidence-based care, but Burr said a review of VA outcomes raised serious questions about the validity of such care.

The Senate is considering a bill called the Clay Hunt Suicide Prevention for American Veterans Act. Burr, along with Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.) and Sen. Richard Blumenthal, (D-Conn.) thinks this bill offers a solution.

Modeled after previous legislation introduced by Sen. Timothy Walz, (D-Minn.) in July, it would require the VA to review its mental health and suicide prevention programs, weeding out those that are ineffective. It would also direct the VA to focus on transitioning veterans returning from the battlefield to civilian life and attempt to entice more psychiatrists to work at the VA.

Next Week

Congress is in recess next week for the Thanksgiving holiday.

On Monday and Tuesday, the FDA's Anesthetic and Analgesic Drug Products Advisory Committee will meet to discuss the risk of serious neurologic adverse reactions associated with epidural steroid injections administered to reduce inflammation.

D.C. Week is taking its own holiday break; our next edition will appear on Dec. 6. Happy Thanksgiving!