The executive producers of “Ron and Laura Take Back America” announce today that their film will have the honor of being the opening film at the Idyllwild International Festival of Cinema. The award-winning feature will play January 6, 2015 at 8:00pm at the historic Rustic Theatre, followed by the Opening Night Gala of the festival. The film screens again as part of the festival’s weekend programming, Friday January 9th at 6:00pm, also at the Rustic Theatre, followed by the highly-anticipated digitally remastered Beatle’s film “A Hard Day’s Night.”

“Ron and Laura Take Back America” is a mockumentary satire that follows in the footsteps of such films of Christopher Guest as “Best in Show” and “Waiting for Guffman”. Written and directed by its co-stars, the comedy team of Mel England (“Little Big Top”) and Janice Markham (“Grandma Sylvia’s Funeral”), the film also stars Golden Globe® Best Actress Nominee Irene Bedard (“Into the West”), Jim J. Bullock (“The New Hollywood Squares”), and features a celebrity cameo by Academy Award® Best Actress Nominee Sally Kirkland. The film is executive produced by Sue Vaccaro (Tony® winning producer for “Clybourne Park”).

“We are honored that our “Ron and Laura” was chosen as the opening film of the IIFC”, says Vaccaro. She adds, "With 7 awards and nominations under our belt from the festival circuit, we hope to be the highlight of the festival.”

The film is indeed on a festival winning streak, having won four awards at the Indie Fest USA International Film Festival in September, including “Best Comedy,” “Best of Festival," “Best Director” (England & Markham) and “Best Actress” (Markham). Earlier in 2014, the film also won “Best Comedy” at the New York City International Film Festival, and earned nominations for “Best US Narrative Feature” and “Best Actor” (England).

"Ron and Laura Take Back America” follows the exploits of a conservative suburban couple who decide to take their country back from Obamacare, Immigration Reform, Gay Marriage... and Hollywood Health Food Nuts! A modern day "All in the Family," the film is a funny, sometimes poignant, look at a family divided by the contemporary political issues of our time. When Ron and Laura decide to film their protests, the “culture wars” land right in their own back yard -- they find out their son is gay, and they lose their health insurance! “Ron and Laura Take Back America” draws its humor from sometimes painful realities, and sometimes, just plain silly wacky comedy!

One of the film’s stars and producers, Irene Bedard, known to audiences worldwide as the voice of Disney’s “Pocahontas” as well as playing ground-breaking roles in over forty films, has relished her involvement with the IIFC. Bedard is also the director of Idyllwild’s Native Film Studies Program, in its first year at the festival. She states, “I am very grateful to festival director Stephen Savage for creating the Native Studies Program. He always takes bold chances in programming.” She adds, “Case in point, "Ron and Laura Take Back America" is a film that not only is unique and daring as a political satire - but it’s also hilarious!”

About Idyllwild International Festival of Cinema

The Idyllwild International Festival of Cinema (IIFC) is an annual, competitive, independent film and arts festival held every January in Idyllwild, California. Founded in 2009, it's been called "the greatest little film festival on earth" by IndieFilm.com and described "like a mini Sundance" by The Hollywood Reporter. The festival runs January 6th through January 9, 2015 at various venues in Idylllwild, California, including the historic Rustic Theatre. For more information go to www.idyllwildcinemafest.com.

About “Ron and Laura Take Back America”

“Ron and Laura Take Back America” is a mockumentary satire about a suburban couple who decide to take their country back from Obamacare, Gay Marriage, and Hollywood Health Food Nuts! The feature film is a joint production of Vox Box Entertainment and Magical Iguana Productions, in association with Vaccaro Motion Pictures, and is executive produced by Janice Markham (“Grandma Sylvia’s Funeal”), Mel England (“Best Day Ever”) and Sue Vaccaro (Tony winner for “Clybourne Park”). The film is also produced by Jill Rothman (“Little Tin Man”) and Jay Hopkins (“School of Their Own”) and Neal Rubinstein (Broadway’s “On the Town”).

Showtimes for “Ron and Laura Take Back America” at the Idyllwild International Festival of Cinema:

Tuesday, January 6, 2015 @8:00pm

Friday, January 10th @6:00pm

The Rustic Theatre

54290 N Circle Dr, Idyllwild, CA 92549

For tickets go to www.idyllwildcinemafest.com/purchase-tickets