Family caregivers provide important medical care at home. Some lack adequate training and find the care they are expected to provide overwhelming. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

UPDATED: The Assembly passed the CARE Act on June 1. Now it's up to the governor to sign the legislation.

Hospitalizations are getting shorter, with patients often sent home with detailed medical instructions to complete their treatment. Family members, and sometimes friends, are tapped as caregivers. But there's no built-in training for caregivers when a loved one leaves a hospital or other medical facility and heads home with a stack of prescriptions and a set of care instructions.

AARP chapters in various states have advocated for legislation that would ensure caregivers are offered training for the tasks ahead. The CARE Act would aid quality of life for those who are sick, and ease the stress for those who are caring for them. Plus, it could save money, because fewer patients would have to be readmitted and need costly extended care.

Complex chronic care

The Caregiver Advise, Record, Enable, or CARE Act has been passed in several states, including Oklahoma, New Jersey and Virginia. The push for the state laws came from a study, "Home Alone: Family Caregivers Providing Complex Chronic Care," undertaken by AARP Public Policy Institute and the United Hospital Fund.

The 2012 caregiver study found that the tasks performed by caregivers went way beyond cleaning and cooking. People are sent home from medical facilities needing help with IV therapy administration, wound care and other medical duties that once were peformed by trained hospital staff. With an aging population like we have in the Lower Hudson Valley, more families will be tapped to fulfill such challenging care. The AARP study found three-quarters of caregivers studied were managing medication, including administering intravenous treatment. Many said they wanted more training for tasks like wound care.

New York's CARE Act ensures that a hospital or care facility would:

• Record the name of the family caregiver when a loved one is admitted into a hospital.

• Notify the family caregiver if the loved one is to be discharged to another facility or home.

• Prepare the family caregiver to perform such medical tasks as handling medication, injections, wound care and other tasks.

Cut costly readmissions

Thorough caregiver training is in the best interest of a hospital, because readmissions can be costly. Under the Affordable Care Act, hospitals with high readmission rates are penalized with cuts in Medicare reimbursements.

Many hospitals already ensure their patients' family members receive adequate training. Dr. Gordon Liebergall, a retired eye doctor, said his patients received great support and training when he was affiliated with Good Samaritan Hospital in Suffern. But not all facilities, he said, provide such care, and "there's things that slip through even at quality hospitals."

Calling Medicare readmission penalties "a real crusher for the hospital," Liebergall said the CARE Act helps medical facilities, as well as families.

The CARE Act would add a few check boxes to the admissions paperwork. But it would provide a safety net for families, better quality-of-life for the patient and a better service model for hospitals. Amid this mess of a legislative session, the Senate and Assembly were able to pass the CARE Act; Gov. Andrew Cuomo should sign the bill and provide a real service to New Yorkers.

more

To view the CARE Act, go to nysenate.gov, and click on Legislation and add the bill number – S676 or A01323 – in the Open Legislation window.

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1I13udF