A Flat Rock medical practice with 1,500 active patients will close at the end of the month, leaving behind vacant clinical space and an opportunity for both new tenants and partnerships at The Free Clinics.

Patients at Pardee’s Flat Rock Family Health Center were notified of the closure in a letter dated Aug. 30, which falls within the minimum 30-day notice period required of medical practices by the North Carolina Medical Board.

The decision to close the medical practice came down to efficiency and the sometimes harsh reality of the health care landscape, according to Kris Peters, vice president of strategy and development for Pardee Hospital.

“We’re looking at a lot of practice operations, and if they are inefficient for us, we want to reallocate those resources in the community,” Peters said, noting, “In larger group practices, there’s a much greater opportunity for patients to see a provider or have cross-coverage if their physician is out of the office on vacation or doing continued education.”

Though the practice will be closing Tuesday, Sept.30, its doctors — Dr. Steve Crane and Dr. Elizabeth Harding — will continue to see patients in the Hendersonville area.

Crane will be joining the WNC Family Medical Center. Harding will remain employed by Pardee and practice at Hendersonville Family Health Center.

The Flat Rock Family Health Center rented 1,700 square feet of clinical space from The Free Clinics during its five years. The Free Clinics provides health care services at no cost to individuals who are ineligible for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act or other government programs such as Medicaid and Medicare.

“We see this building as a community health care resource. The community built this building, and we wanted to use it as a health care resource to bridge gaps in Henderson County,” said Judith Long, executive director of The Free Clinics in Hendersonville. “There has been some confusion about what this closing means for us.”

With Flat Rock Family Health Center leaving at the end of the month, Long said The Free Clinics can expect to see its tenant’s rent revenue, which is about $55,000 annually, depart as well.

“We do have a budgetary hit of the loss of that rental income,” Long said. “But we are alive and well, and open for business. We’re still here and we’re actually very busy.”

Long estimated The Free Clinics has seen a 9 or 10 percent increase in services and demand in the past year.

“We’ve really tried to use this facility to meet the health care needs in creative and dynamic ways for this community,” she said. “We’re open to new possibilities.”

Going forward, Long said the organization may turn its attention to partnerships rooted in wellness and prevention services.

“We’re looking at how we can bring this health care culture of screening and prevention, which has become part of our mindset for the last 2-3 years,” Long said. “We’re looking at how we might bring the same tools you or I would get from our health insurance company or physician to the population that, quite frankly, procrastinates care the most because of fear and fear of costs. In some ways, that makes them the most fragile.”

Though Long said The Free Clinics is currently in talks with two or three potential partners, nothing is final, including whether the space will be shared by multiple collaborations.

“We don’t know exactly how it’s going to evolve,” she said of the clinical space. “The door is open, but nothing has walked through yet, and the door’s not even really open yet because Flat Rock is still here until Sept. 30.”

Reach Byrd at caitlin.byrd@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7881.