Esty: Congress is about public service

It is a strange time and place to be discussing heroin: 8:30 on a sunny spring Thursday morning, in the white marble expanse of Waterbury's City Hall.

The elegantly restored building looks a little out of place in the gritty little downtown, as if it has been teleported, with all its pilasters and balustrades, from the nation's capital -- after all, its architect, Cass Gilbert, also designed the U.S. Supreme Court building.

U.S. Rep. Elizabeth Esty has not teleported, but she has come from Washington, and she looks right at home.

She is doing what she does. She has researched the tar out of the subject -- literally, in this case -- and now she is back in her district, listening, speaking crisply, listening some more. She has taken the lead in convening this "community discussion."

While pols, staffers, bureaucrats and journalists make up the majority of the 50 or so present, others have come for reasons of their own: families and loved ones held hostage to the drug.

Esty is a first-term congresswoman from Connecticut's 5th District with the minority party in the House, which gives her precious few opportunities for legislating, but in the gridlocked 113th Congress, there's not much legislating going on anyway. "Most of my work is here in the district," she says, and it's work that doesn't depend on bipartisan consensus.

So this day, part of what Congress calls "recess" but for Esty is anything but, has started early.

Panelists including the mayors of Waterbury and Torrington, state health officials, caregivers and police, hold forth on the alarming resurgence of heroin, often fueled by prescription opioid abuse.

Afterward, the crowd begins to disperse -- but there is Esty, deep in discussion with a woman, slight, brunette, perhaps a few years older than Esty's 54.

It is evident that this is not small talk. They are shoulder-to-shoulder in tiny folding chairs, and Esty is listening hard, her eyes never leaving the woman's face, inches from her own.

As the conversation continues, Esty resolutely ignores a hovering staffer.

This day is packed with events in Danbury -- a free-clinic tour, a senior-center visit, a tour and speech at key defense contractor, and a class visit at Western Connecticut State University. So her staff is worried about schedule slippage. Fortunately, this is not their first rodeo.

"She always does this," district director Stephanie Podewell confides. "So we program in buffer time to keep her on schedule." As the conversation continues, Waterbury Mayor Neil O'Leary answers a question about working with Esty, and, unsurprisingly, he is complimentary to his fellow Democrat. But equally positive is Elinor Carbone, Republican mayor of Torrington.

"Representative Esty has reached out on a variety of issues," she says, adding it's not about who gets the credit, it's about solutions. "We have worked very well together," Carbone says quietly.

Later, Esty recaps the conversation with the woman who signed the event guest register simply "Mother." The woman's daughter, a student at a New York art college, was given a prescription pain-killer after a medical procedure. Now, she's a full-blown heroin addict in treatment, trying to get her life back. "Mother" wants Esty to know how important the work on this issue is.

Would this constituent have felt as comfortable sharing her story with a congress-man?

Esty shrugs. "You are who you are, and in politics, if you stay who you are, you do better," she says. "I'm a mom. That probably hinders sometimes, and helps sometimes. To some people, that makes me more approachable."

One-on-one discussions

The event is typical of Esty's time in the district. Speechifying and public appearances often evolve into discussing individual issues, one on one.

When she does speak to groups, she reminds them no problem is too small to bring to her attention. Her staffers expedite passports, track down VA and Social Security benefits, and help people with the Affordable Care Act. They advocate in dozens of ways for constituents trapped in the labyrinth of the federal bureaucracy.

Veterans are a particular focus. Esty said she has about 45,000 in her district.

She is appalled by the Veterans Affairs Administration's backlog of benefit claims, and by veterans' 10 percent unemployment rate.

"It's a really large percentage of our constituent case load," she said. "But we have to reach out to them. They are not well-equipped to ask for support. They are by nature givers of help, not getters." About a month ago, she interceded to get Simsbury veteran Terence Keefe the medals he earned for his service in Vietnam. "It was more than I expected," Keefe said of Esty's efforts.

Last year, Esty was successful in getting an amendment to the military funding bill to require military decorations to be mailed within 60 days of verifying a veteran's service record.

A couple of hours later, she is in the Danbury Senior Center, introducing an attorney from the Federal Trade Commission, who warns of the dangers of phishing and other Internet and telephone scams.

"Do you all know what identity theft is?" the staffer asks. Most of the heads nod. "How many of you have been victims of identity theft?" A dozen hands go up -- including Esty's (a store where she shops tossed out credit-card receipts, resulting in widespread theft).

Esty shifts to the lunchroom, where she discusses Social Security benefits with a retired postal worker. He had earlier employment during which he paid into Social Security. Now, he's trying to figure out what benefits, if any, he may be eligible for. Esty motions to a staffer, who comes over and begins to gather details.

"We'll check out his case thoroughly," Esty says later. "We'll help him. But it's going to be a difficult one."

Not afraid to cross the aisle

Esty's obsession with running a great service station does not mean she's giving up on the legislative part of her job. In fact, the two intersect. "Most of what I've proposed in Congress grew out of issues raised with me back here in Connecticut," she said.

She recently introduced a bill that would make an immediate impact in her district. It would reauthorize a tax credit for remediating "brownfields" -- polluted commercial sites.

The tax credit fell victim to budget wars in 2012. Now, she said, it's needed more than ever in Connecticut communities.

Citing examples in New Milford and Waterbury, she said, "If we can get these big pieces of property back into constructive use, they will grow the towns' tax base and create jobs." Esty wanted a Republican as an original co-sponsor, so she reached out to Chris Gibson, her New York colleague just across the state line from her district.

"That's how I think I can be effective," she said. "I could have taken a more partisan approach, but the bill would have had less chance."

She realized early on that she would need to make alliances with the majority, and she's taken heat from the left for it -- and for voting with Republicans on some measures to tweak the Affordable Care Act. But it's also earned her respect across the aisle, and makes her a more difficult target for Republicans back home.

Rep. Lamar Smith, R-Texas, the powerful chairman of the Science, Space and Technology committee, offered rare praise about a freshman from the opposing party. "It's been a pleasure" to work with Esty, he said, calling her "an active and productive" committee member.

`What you need is consistency'

In the afternoon, Esty is a guest at DRS Consolidated Controls Inc., a Danbury firm that makes control systems for nuclear-powered vessels and nuclear power plants. First stop is a boardroom visit with company executives that starts somewhat stiffly, with the DRS people eyeballing Esty from around a conference table.

Presiding is Rich Reynolds, DRS vice president and general manager. As Reynolds tells Esty about the challenges of a company that is 95 percent reliant on defense work, she immediately responds.

"What you need is consistency," she said, observing that budget upheavals like the sequester must be devastating when trying to hire and retain a skilled workforce. She promises to take that message back to Washington.

Reynolds' eyes widen, heads nod around the table, and you can see barriers coming down.

"That's exactly what we need," Reynolds says. "About 90 percent of the company's employees are engineers," and to have to lay off specially trained, skilled employees and then need them a few months later is an enormous problem.

After she tours the plant and speaks briefly to the assembled workers -- she remembers the service-station plug -- Esty and Reynolds chat like old pals. Mission accomplished on both sides.

The challenge ahead

In November, Esty will face a well-heeled, business-oriented candidate in Mark Greenberg, who has been a primary candidate for the 5th District seat twice before and this time has the GOP field to himself. Of additional concern to Esty strategists is the midterm cycle, which promises to be difficult for Democrats nationwide, and the fact that Gov. Dannel P. Malloy, who has consistently faced approval ratings in the 40s, will be heading the state ticket.

What's her strategy in such challenging circumstances?

What you see is what you get. Esty will keep being who she is -- mom, Yale-educated lawyer, community activist -- and keep trying to help as many constituents as she can.

"If you don't like public service," she says with characteristic bluntness, "Don't run for office."