As a New Year brims with possibilities, many of us are focused on getting healthier and happier. What about your career? Could you be healthier and happier if you changed your career in 2014? How do you know if now’s the time to make your move?

Changing a career—not just moving to a new job—is a decision that likely requires a bit of thought and preparation. For most of us, it’s not just about trying something new. Many of us have families to support and other financial obligations that can be a challenge to making a career change.

Here are a few tips that you may want to consider as you decide whether 2014 is the year to change careers.

Know what you want. If you want to change careers but aren’t sure what career you want to go into, now may not be the best time to jump ship. You’ll need to narrow down a career change that makes sense. It should encompass what you want to do and how feasible it is to get there. Clearly, if I wanted to be a novelist, that might not be so feasible—I have bills to pay and no platform as a fiction writer. It would take time to build up to that. I would likely have to publish a few books on the side before the deals started rolling in. If you have a career goal set, it’s time to map out what it will take to get there.

Think logistically—and strategically. A sales person who wants to become a teacher may only need to take a few courses and start applying for teaching jobs to make a career change. If you have to undertake courses or training to change careers, you’ll need to make a timeline. Perhaps you want to save up a certain amount of money before you change careers—that can take time too. Think about the steps you need to take to change careers. Jot them down and start thinking in terms of a timeline. You may wind up starting the process to change careers this year, but the actual change may not happen for years to come if you have a few years of school to complete first.

Be practical. You may be in the perfect spot to launch a new career right now, and you may be able to make that shift tomorrow. But you’ll need to be practical even if the shift seems simple. Many people who want to change careers go into self-employment, and that comes with its own challenges: You don’t just start business with a powerful roster of clients or work assignments—you need to build up to that. So you will likely need some financial support before or while you transition to your new career. Can you build up business on the side while you work your current job, then have some clients established by the time you take the plunge and go completely solo? That may be a more practical way to ease into your new career and keep money coming in—not having some financial backing during a change can set it up to fail. Having money come in while you start a new professional endeavor takes that stress off—because you’ll likely have enough on your plate as an entrepreneur.

Know your field. Conduct a little market research to see how practical your career change will be, especially if you’re a start-up or solopreneur. If the market seems receptive, that’s going to help drive your business—but if it’s overcrowded or competitive, you’ll need to come up with some strategies to overcome those challenges.

Remember the details. Whether you start your own business or move into a new job field, make sure to do some research into how Affordable Care Act changes may affect you. It may be easier to become self-employed knowing you can sign up for health insurance directly instead of needing an employer to provide it.

Be mindful of those around you. Your career change may have you excited beyond belief, but others may not be as receptive. Those with families to support know all-too-well that they have to consider their spouse or children with a career change because it likely affects financial income. Your change may also impact those around you because of the travel involved, or the time it takes. Express your desires clearly and talk about the potential transition with people who may be affected.

Kristen Fischer is a journalist and copywriter living at the Jersey Shore. She is a Certified Professional Resume Writer (CPRW) who has published articles with Prevention, Health, New Jersey Monthly, Writer’s Digest, and SheKnows. Her latest book, When Talent Isn’t Enough: Business Basics for the Creatively Inclined (Career Press) is in stores now.