Jeff Cornell of the Housing Recovery Task Force, center, talks with Andy Joe, left, and Gregg Peterson, right, about Lyons' possible options for residential development during a Lyons' Housing Recovery Task Force open house Saturday at Rogers Hall. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

The Lyons dog park may be the town's best hope for a post-flood housing site, a town task force recommended Saturday.

"It's nice flat land, easy to access and we can find another suitable dog park location," said Jeff Cornell, chairman of the Lyons Housing Recovery Task Force. "This is a big parcel of land that's in town, that we can move on quickly."

That's because the 10-acre dog park is also land that doesn't have to be annexed into the town. To bring in a parcel of more than 5 acres requires a town vote.

The proposal — which has not yet been brought to the town board — also recommends three adjoining properties that would require annexation: the 5.3 acre Talmage property, the 6.88 acre Anderson property and about 10 acres due south of the dog park.

Wim Marsh fills out a survey during a Lyons' Housing Recovery Task Force open house Saturday at Rogers Hall. (Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call)

The four sites were among 14 that the task force studied in hopes of bringing the rest of Lyons' displaced population home. A recent study estimated that 145 households — about 310 people —had not been able to move back into town since the St. Vrain flood in September.

Half of those households are on the bottom rung economically, making less than 30 percent of Boulder County's average median income. For a single person, that $19,250 or less; for a family of four, it's a household income no higher than $27,500.

Thirty of the 145 households had already decided they weren't coming back to Lyons, Cornell said, and he feared more could follow if something wasn't done.

"There is nothing in town that they can afford anymore," he said. "If we don't find them some other options, we're going to lose them."

A steady crowd of residents streamed through an open house at Rodgers Hall to see the maps, hear the explanations, and discuss concerns. Some weren't convinced that the dog park area was the best call, especially since it would mean having the county remove conservation easements that had prevented unwanted development.

"It'll be strip malls and subdivisions," one person argued.

Others thought it should at least be discussed if it would make the community whole again.

"If building in there will allow those people to come home — absolutely," said Sharon Denton, a Lyons resident for more than 20 years. "We love our dog park. ... However, there's not a lot of land available that's out of the floodway."

Several of the sites considered would have required annexations or were in locations considered untouchable, like Bohn Park. Even the recommended properties — all in the southwest part of town or just beyond the town line there — were not without complications. The area south of the dog park, for instance, is not flat, would require careful work to keep from interfering with the view, and has the potential for a nearby ditch to flood.

The task force emphasized that nothing was final, that everything could still be discussed, and that the object was to fix the housing problem without decreasing Lyons's supply of parkland and open space, including the dog park.

"The dog park would be relocated eventually, almost certainly to a nicer area," one sign in the hall read. "Think squirrels instead of rattlesnakes."

Contact Times-Call staff writer Scott Rochat at 303-684-5220 or srochat@times-call.com