Don’t be surprised if the state oil and gas task force whose members were announced last week wind up proposing a law not very different from the compromise floated last summer by the governor.

Drilling regulations may be exceedingly complex, but there is a limited number of options if your goal is to craft a proposal acceptable to both industry and critics who threaten to go to the ballot in the absence of a deal.

For starters, you’ll have to give local communities more regulatory authority and flexibility in addressing citizen concerns.

But you’ll also need to bar those same communities from taking action that would either ban drilling outright or indirectly through foot-dragging or onerous hurdles.

Now, there are a several ways to accomplish these goals. The task force might give communities wide latitude on setbacks between drilling pads and occupied structures, or it might push for a mandated setback of a minimum distance — say, 1,000 feet or more.

Or it could adopt some combination of both approaches.

In announcing the final 19 members of the 21-member task force, Gov. John Hickenlooper described the effort as “one of the most important issues I’ve worked on in the 12 years I’ve been in public service.” That’s not an exaggeration. Oil and gas production is immensely important to this state and nation, and yet the intense backlash against drilling in the vicinity of populated areas cannot simply be dismissed. It often represents heartfelt frustration over the fact that an industrial activity has appeared on the fringes of housing developments.

Still, a compromise over setbacks and all of the other issues Hickenlooper cited in his executive order, from noise abatement to dust management, is possible. But it will require that all parties engage in good faith, remain open to solid data and anticipate getting some but not all of what they’d actually like to see in a final plan.

It won’t be easy reaching consensus given the wide spectrum of views represented on the task force — and unanimity may well be impossible. Even one of the co-chairs, La Plata County Commissioner Gwen Lachelt, has been associated with groups that seem to harbor a general hostility to drilling.

Fortunately, everyone doesn’t have to be on board for the task force to issue an official recommendation. A two-thirds majority is required.

Frankly, if the task force can’t muster a two-thirds vote on recommendations by Feb. 27, it won’t have tried very hard.