Buy Photo Signs block vehicular traffic over Glimmer Glass Bridge after the bridge was structurally damaged in August. (Photo: STAFF PHOTO/DAN RADEL )Buy Photo

The historic Glimmer Glass Bridge may be running out of time after a large truck weighing well in excess of the bridge’s three-ton weight limit fractured the bridge’s timber deck at three locations, Monmouth County officials said.

The county, which owns the bridge, may now have to completely replace it. In doing so, it may lose its place on the National Register of Historic Places.

“The nature of the damage combined with the age of the bridge eliminates the option of a quick fix,” said Freeholder Thomas A. Arnone, liaison to the County’s Department of Public Works and Engineering. “The ultimate plan is we’re going to submit for a brand new bridge.”

It could wind up costing between $20 to $30 million in state and federal Department of Transportation funds, Arnone said.

Approval could take three to five years because of all the hurdles at both the state and federal levels, in part because of the historic distinction. In the meantime the county is seeking $2 million from the state DOT to reinforce the bridge to open it in time for Memorial Day 2015.

The borough council has already taken a hard stance and passed a resolution in support of bridge replacement. They would like to see the bridge widened and able to handle 45 tons. At present fire trucks are not permitted to cross the bridge.

“My primary concern is for the safety of the people crossing the bridge and for the people who live on the other side of it,” Council President Michael Mangan said.

The borough approved a $902,000 bond ordinance on Tuesday to elevate Brielle Road on the Manasquan side of the bridge. The council said this is to allow residents who ordinarily use the bridge to leave the area when the streets flood to be able to travel in the opposite direction to reach one of two other bridges.

The bridge was damaged on Aug. 7. It has been closed to vehicular traffic since and opened only recently to allow for bicycle and pedestrian traffic. The bridge continues to open for boater traffic.

Arnone said local police have jurisdiction to enforce the three-ton limit on the bridge, which spans the Glimmer Glass tidal inlet connecting the borough’s of Manasquan and Brielle. Neither he or Manasquan Police Chief Elliot Correia have an identification on the truck that caused the damage.

“We don’t know. It’s our understanding that it was a box truck,” said Arnone.

The county had outsourced the bridge tenders and Manasquan resident Fran Drew believes that led to misuse of the bridge. “I think all of you know overweight trucks were going over that bridge weekly,” she told the borough council on Tuesday.

Drew was part of a group of residents who pushed to have the bridge placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 2008.

According to the county, the original bridge crossing the Glimmer Glass was built in 1898 as a fixed-span bridge. On August 13, 1939, the current cable-lift bascule span bridge opened and began accommodating both marine and vehicle traffic.

The bridge was refurbished in the 1950s and 1970s when the original components were replaced. The Glimmer Glass Bridge uses a rolling counterweight design to open.

“It’s the only bridge that operates with a bascule in the country,” said Arnone.

Dan Radel: 732-643-4072; dradel@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1rSB0vo