US President Barack Obama speaks about the Affordable Care Act, the new healthcare laws, alongside people who have already benefitted from the legislation, new registrants, small business owners and representatives from partner organizations, in the Rose Garden of the White House in Washington, DC, October 21, 2013. Obama on Monday defended his problem-plagued health reform plan, declaring at a White House event that, despite numerous glitches, the program is already helping many uninsured Americans. "Let me remind everybody that the Affordable Care Act is not just a website," Obama said, after the troubled online rollout of the plan. "It's much more...You may not know it, but you're already benefiting from these provisions in the law." AFP PHOTO / Saul LOEB (Photo credit should read SAUL LOEB/AFP/Getty Images)

3921606

Of the 13 people who flanked President Obama during his speech defending Obamacare in the Rose Garden Monday, just three had successfully registered for the new Obamacare exchanges.

A list of the people who joined Obama on stage provided by the White House included people who have or “will” benefit from Obamacare, small business owners, representatives from “partner organizations,” and new registrants.

The three people who were able to register included: Janice Baker, who introduced the president and as of last week was the only person to have successfully enrolled in health care coverage through Delaware’s state exchange; David Hall, an IT consultant who signed up for health care through the DC Health Link; and Zohre Abolfazli, who was able to register through healthcare.gov last night and still needs to shop for her “best plan.”

The Obama administration has not released official numbers on how many people actually have enrolled in Obamacare, and with the main Obamacare web portal plagued by glitches, some have speculated that the administration might not be able to meet its enrollment goals.

The full list, via the White House:

Janice Baker (Introducer), New ACA Registrant

Janice Baker, a small business owner, was the first woman to enroll in the Delaware exchange. She and her husband are the owners of the Heavenly Hound Hotel, a boarding and grooming kennel for Dogs in Selbyville, DE. They have owned and operated it for 24 years. Prior to enrolling through the new Marketplaces, Baker had been turned down for individual insurance three times due to a minor pre-existing condition. On her new insurance plan, Baker is saving $150 a month.

Ginger Gutting, CVS Pharmacy Supervisor

Ginger Gutting is a pharmacist and current pharmacy supervisor for CVS in the Northern Virginia area. Ginger overseas many stores in the Washington Metro area. In this role, she has seen the impact that ACA has had on her customers and store pharmacists. Ginger has been a CVS colleague and pharmacist since 2002 and is a registered pharmacist in the state of Virginia.

Walt Rowen, Small Business Owner

Walt Rowen is the owner of the Susquehanna Glass Company, a small business in Columbia, Pennsylvania started by Rowen’s grandfather in 1910. The company, which has grown to 35 full-time employees, has benefitted from the ACA’s Medical Loss Ratio provision which requires at least 80 percent of small groups’ premium dollars be spent on patient care instead of administrative costs. A few years ago Rowen was quoted a 130 percent increase to his premiums — this year his premiums increased by only 7 percent.

David Hall, New ACA Registrant

David Hall, a self-employed IT Consultant and Web Designer, signed up for health insurance through DC Health Link, the District of Columbia’s online health insurance marketplace, on October 1, 2013. Hall is an Air Force veteran who was discharged under “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell” in 2002.

Jessica Ugalde, ACA Beneficiary

Due to the immediate benefits of the ACA, Jessica Ugalde was able to stay on her mother’s health insurance after school and receive treatment for a serious illness. Ugalde’s mother was relieved her daughter could receive coverage and Jessica is very grateful to the ACA for this benefit.

Mike Brey, Small Business Owner

Mike Brey is the owner of Hobby Works, a small business that has expanded to five locations throughout Maryland and Virginia since it opened in 1992. While Brey’s business has been successful, he feels that his ability to keep his workers feeling secure by providing health insurance coverage has eroded over time. The company health plan once cost $100 per person, most of which was covered by the company. Over the years the premium has tripled and his employees have seen their costs increase five times as they pay more of the premium and face a higher deductible. Brey believes that the Affordable Care Act was the first thing in years that gave him hope that this spiral of escalating costs and depreciating quality of coverage might finally end. Brey has said that “as an employer in Maryland with fewer than 50 full-time- equivalent employees, I’ll be able to use our state’s exchange next year to purchase coverage. This is huge.”

Malik Hassan, Prospective ACA Beneficiary

Malik Hassan works at a restaurant in Philadelphia. Hassan, who does not receive coverage through his employer, is looking forward to enrolling for health coverage this fall. He recently used Healthcare.gov to process his application and is waiting for the options for potential plans in Philadelphia.

Ezra Salop, Small Business Owner & ACA Beneficiary

Ezra Salop, 25 years old, runs his own catering business in the Washington, DC area. Salop is currently receiving insurance coverage through his parents’ plan and is looking forward to enrolling on the ACA exchanges so he can continue growing his small business.

Karmel Allison, Prospective ACA Beneficiary

Karmel Allison was diagnosed with Type 1 Diabetes when she was nine years old. She has stayed on the same insurance ever since, despite constantly rising costs, for fear she would not be able to find a plan that would cover her due to her pre-existing condition. Allison recently began researching her options on CoveredCA and has publically described her experience as finally feeling equal to others, including her young and healthy husband, when it comes to access to coverage.

Zohre Abolfazli, New ACA Registrant

Zohre Abolfazli has owned a small business outside of Nashville, Tennessee for almost twenty-five years. Even though she has been able to maintain her health insurance over the years, it has been a challenge to find affordable, comprehensive health insurance in the individual market place. Last night, Abolfalzi was able to register throughHealthCare.gov and now plans to comparison shop for the best plan that meets her budget and needs.

Jasmine Jennings, ACA Beneficiary

Jasmine Jennings was diagnosed with thyroid cancer when she was in college. Due to the ACA, Jennings no longer has to worry about health insurance companies denying her coverage due to her preexisting condition. She is currently on her parents’ insurance plan, which has given her peace of mind as she settles into her career and finishes grad school. Without having to worry about how to pay for health insurance, Jennings has been able to accept a part-time curatorial fellowship and start a small business. She has said that “these educational and entrepreneurial experiences are enriching my life every day and without the ACA, I wouldn’t be able to do either.”

LaJuanna Russell, Small Business Owner

LaJuanna Russell is the owner of Business Management Associates, a consulting company in Alexandria, Virginia. Russell says she is proud to offer her employees health insurance but that it can be difficult for a small business. Russell believes that the ACA provides stability for her and her employees and is exploring what new coverage options will be available to her company under the exchanges.

Nathaniel Hojnacki, Prospective ACA Beneficiary

Nathaniel Hojnacki recently received his Master’s degree at Johns Hopkins University SAIS and is in an employment situation without benefits. Hojnacki recognizes the importance of coverage and is planning to enroll after he explores his coverage options on the DC exchange.

Follow Caroline on Twitter