First, a random question.

Do you think the Indiana Pacers put in a call to former Nuggets coach — and their former beloved assistant — Brian Shaw when they were brainstorming on adding embattled point guard Ty Lawson to their roster?

Probably not.

Just wondering.

This column is full of stuff on my mind. But it’ll center on the Nuggets.

First is an interesting theory brought up by Adam Mares of DenverStiffs.com during a “roundtable” discussion we had before a game last week. The table was actually round, so that’s as roundtable as it got.

Anyway …

He advanced the notion that the Nuggets should not do anything but fine-tune this summer and wait until next summer to make the big splash.

Off the top, I’d expect the Nuggets to revisit acquiring Blake Griffin or Kevin Love, players they’ve already tried to get into powder blue over the last couple of seasons. Getting one of them would qualify as a big splash. They really want to make a big splash sooner than later.

Major salary cap money will be here this summer and next, and the Nuggets are still in the business of mining for a star. I think they’ll try this year, and if they strike out, they’ll try next year too.

Next up, are the Nuggets are headed in the right direction? The record, 24-38 going into Sunday’s game against Dallas, is two games ahead of where they were 62 games into last season.

But the reality is even through the many gut-punch close losses they’ve endured all season, they are light-years better than last season. The biggest and most significant change is in the atmosphere.

Team president Josh Kroenke and general manager Tim Connelly carved out the most damaging elements in about seven months last year. By the time new coach Michael Malone hit the court for his first training camp, they had successfully changed the entire atmosphere.

On the court, the Nuggets have had their defensive struggles, to be sure, but they’ve also had defensive successes. Gary Harris is better. Emmanuel Mudiay has improved. Nikola Jokic came from nowhere to be nationally recognized as one of the NBA’s best rookies. Will Barton has had a breakout season. So, player development has been good. They play hard nearly every night, which has been a positive change. Inexperience has cost them on a number of occasions in losses, but that’s why they call it inexperience.

Next, what will happen with Jusuf Nurkic? Nurkic’s fans are nearly as incensed as he is at his lack of playing time. My advice? Relax. There isn’t a conspiracy against Nurkic’s growth. But there have been minor setbacks with the surgically repaired knee from time to time — limited practices and whatnot. And, yes, Nurkic has had to check his attitude a bit because it was not helping the situation. But this is not a situation where the player and coach are at each other’s throats.

Behind the scenes, Nurkic has been doing what he can to earn a chance to get back on the court. If he is in fact doing what they say he is doing, eventually they’ll have to reward at least his practice efforts by putting him back on the court — if for no other reason than to reinforce his work with a tangible result. That would keep them from losing Nurkic completely, which they truly don’t want to happen.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@ denverpost.com or @dempseypost

Spotlight on …

Kawhi Leonard, forward, Spurs

When: As the NBA marches toward the stretch run, the elite players across the league are stepping up to get their teams in the playoffs or better seeds in the playoff race. Kawhi Leonard, The Denver Post’s player of the week, is doing everything he can to help the Spurs keep pressure on Golden State in the race for the top seed in the West.

What’s up: In three games, all wins, last week, Leonard averaged 28.0 points, 8.3 rebounds, 3.0 assists, 1.7 steals and 1.0 blocks per game. Leonard shot 57.9 percent from the field and 50.0 percent from the 3-point line.

Background: Leonard shies away from the spotlight, but his play is quickly putting him into superstar status. That he hasn’t reached it yet is a testament to how hard he works not to put himself out there. Leonard’s best game was Friday night in a comeback win at New Orleans in which he scored 30 points, including six 3-pointers, and had 11 rebounds, two steals and two blocked shots.

Dempsey’s take: Leonard’s development into one of the deadliest scorers in the NBA is one of the most glossed-over success stories of any player in recent years. He shot 43.5 percent from the field and 27.5 percent from 3-point range in his last season at San Diego State before declaring for the NBA draft. Now? Five years later, he is shooting 51.5 percent from the field and 48.4 percent from 3-point range. It’s a remarkable transformation, and he has maintained his ability to be a defensive stopper as well.