Topics: Affordable Care Act, Barack Obama, congressional republicans, Donald Trump, Eric Cantor, Josh Kraushaar, Mitch McConnell, national journal, Obamacare, Republicans, Media News, Politics News

The Republican Party is falling apart, its many internal fissures being ripped wide by Donald Trump’s blend of gross nativism and authoritarian posturing. A number of conservatives and center-right columnists are busily trying to figure out why this is happening to their beloved party, and so far they’ve come up with one highly satisfying explanation: It’s all Barack Obama’s fault. The latest addition to this hot-take menagerie comes courtesy of National Journal’s Josh Kraushaar, who spies the stirrings of the Trump phenomenon in a tightly contested Senate race from eight years ago.

“Looking for a culprit to blame for all the polarization, gridlock, and bad feelings in Washington?” he writes. “Point to Sen. Al Franken. No, that’s not a joke.” Actually, it is a joke. A really bad and determinedly stupid joke that Kraushaar punishes the reader with until they realize 800 words later that the punch line is they’ve wasted fleeting and irrecoverable moments of their lives reading it.

The conceit behind Kraushaar’s column is that Franken’s narrow 2008 Senate victory in Minnesota provided Barack Obama with a 60-vote supermajority, which enabled him to pass the Affordable Care Act without Republican support, which then became the rallying cry for the Tea Party wave, which crashed into Washington and turned everyone crazy, and after a few more (unexplained) steps: presto magic, Donald Trump. If Franken hadn’t won, writes Kraushaar, then Obama would have been forced to win the vote of at least one Republican senator to pass healthcare reform, which would have made things better somehow:

Without a Democratic supermajority, Obama would have been forced to negotiate with Republicans (or, at least, former Sen. Olympia Snowe of Maine) and settle for the incremental health care legislation that his then-Chief of Staff Rahm Emanuel recommended. The GOP would still have been opposed to any Democratic health care reforms, but the antipathy would have been muted because a few Republicans would have supported the legislation. Instead of provoking a pitched partisan showdown that culminated with then-House Minority Leader John Boehner exclaiming that the Congress had “shatter[ed] the bonds of trust” with the American people, Obama could have tempered the wrath of the Republican opposition.

This is ahistorical wishful thinking presented as self-evident truth. Last year, Norm Ornstein wrote a useful corrective to the commonly accepted “reality” that the Affordable Care Act was “rammed through Congress” without compromise or input from Republicans. Democrats and the White House made repeated and insistent overtures to Republicans in the Senate looking for a way to bring the GOP into the healthcare negotiations. They made some headway – with Olympia Snowe especially – before the Senate Republican leadership cracked down and precluded the notion of Republican involvement in the healthcare legislation.

But let’s stipulate that one or two moderate Republican senators had broken ranks and sided with the Democrats – is it really reasonable to assume that the Tea Party fury would have “tempered”? It seems just as likely that the fury would have been augmented by a sense of betrayal, and those heretical Republicans would have been targeted by conservatives and faced enthusiastic primary challenges from the right. The idea seems to be that a sufficiently moderate piece of healthcare legislation would have left Republican voters upset but not angry, which overlooks the fact that the ACA is itself an act of policy moderation that was met with a buzzsaw of incoherent rage.