Paula Dockery (Photo: Paula Dockery)

What a wild and unpredictable presidential race — pretty ugly too.

Some voters disgusted with the 2016 candidates, the media or the political parties are tuning it out, others are getting depressed, and still others are getting engaged.

I’m both disgusted by it and obsessed with it.

There is a level of voter anger I have not seen in my lifetime. Many voters are directing that anger at “the establishment” — an overused term that’s come to mean whatever the user chooses. I’ve tried, unsuccessfully, to find out what people using it mean.

It seems to refer to whoever is in office, in power, or controlling the party, the policy or the money. There’s no attempt to differentiate among current officeholders based on their records or actions. Those unhappy with “the establishment” tend to lump them all together.

No, it’s not rational or well thought out — it’s a primal reaction to frustration and a feeling of helplessness. At least that’s what the political pundits say when pointing to the surprising and meteoric rise of Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders — two outsiders who want to fundamentally change politics in their parties. Ironically, neither really is of the party whose presidential nomination he is seeking.

Trump, a pragmatic businessman, has historically given campaign contributions to candidates of both parties and embraces issues that don’t fit neatly in Republican ideology. Supporters find it refreshing; opponents brand him a fake Republican.

But he’s tapped into their anger; he embraces their enemies as his and he channels their rage into a call to arms. Trump has become their hero, their pillar of hope and their fighter-in-chief. They’re convinced they—and the country—can’t win without him—contrary to general election polls.

Disgruntled Republicans—upset for different and sometimes conflicting reasons—are somehow uniting in his camp. He’s managed to attract an eclectic mix of supporters with diverse views and ideologies—independents, liberals, moderates, conservatives, tea partiers and some evangelicals.

It’s odd since other candidates are scrutinized more on their policy positions, voting record and ideological consistency while Trump is given a pass on his vacillating positions.

Of the 17 Republican candidates that entered the primary — touted as the best field ever — only three remain.

Trump, the frontrunner, is the outsider who’s been on the periphery of the political arena but never in it. A successful New York businessman and reality TV star, Trump is well known around the country. His self-proclaimed lack of political correctness immediately resonated with Republican voters who were weary and divided and searching for something to rally around.

In a strong, but distant second, is Ted Cruz, the ultra-conservative U.S. senator from Texas, who demagogues, divides, throws fellow Republicans under the bus, dishes out red meat better than a butcher and forces a government shutdown just to show how much he hates Obamacare.

Cruz, not likely to win a popularity contest among his congressional colleagues, is nonetheless getting the backing—at least temporarily—of the dreaded establishment in their frantic effort to stop Trump. How incredibly bizarre that he would seek and they would give that support.

At one point they struggled to determine who they disliked the least—Trump or Cruz. Looks like they settled on Cruz. They may come to regret that decision.

While they fear they can’t control either man, Cruz—not known to be a team player—is shrewd, calculating and has shown a willingness to blow things up rather than compromise. Trump, on the other hand, is the consummate dealmaker—ready to negotiate. Unbound by rigid ideology, he might be able to cross party lines and party factions for meaningful reforms. But his thin skin and incendiary rhetoric might prove to be obstacles too big for him to win or effectively govern.

Odd man out is Ohio Gov. John Kasich, who served in the U.S. Congress and chaired the House Budget Committee. He was the last budget chief to balance a federal budget. He did so in bipartisan fashion with President Bill Clinton. Kasich, popular in the purple state of Ohio—a must-win in the general election—is the only candidate who wins consistently in general election matchups with the Democratic front-runner, Hillary Clinton.

He stays above the fray in the debates and on the campaign trail and focuses on unity and working together. While not terribly exciting or flashy, he has a solid record. He’s the favorite of newspaper editorial boards, where he is racking up glowing endorsements.

Yet Republican primary voters aren’t interested.

What are they thinking? They’re not following the conventional logic—nominate the one most likely to win in November.

How this will end is anybody’s guess.

Paula Dockery is a syndicated columnist who served in the Florida Legislature for 16 years as a Republican from Lakeland. She can be reached at PBDockery@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1NfwMZK