Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, John Roberts, Language, Political messaging, Robert Bork, SCOTUS, Supreme Court, News, Politics News

Robert Bork’s failed confirmation battle in 1987 changed the way future Supreme Court nominees prepared for confirmation hearings, and the way they re­sponded to their inevitable grilling before skeptical senators. A good example of this was the 2005 confirmation hearing of Judge John Rob­erts, who had been nominated by President George W. Bush to be­come chief justice. Roberts, a conservative with an opaque record, sought to allay the fears of liberal senators who were concerned that another conservative justice might help overturn well-established precedents the Court had established in past decades.

“Judges and justices are servants of the law, not the other way around. Judges are like umpires,” Roberts reassured them in his open­ing statement. “Umpires don’t make the rules; they apply them. The role of an umpire and a judge is critical. They make sure everybody plays by the rules. But it is a limited role. Nobody ever went to a ball game to see the umpire.

“I have no agenda, but I do have a commitment,” Roberts contin­ued. “If I am confirmed, I will confront every case with an open mind. I will fully and fairly analyze the legal arguments that are presented. I will be open to the considered views of my colleagues on the bench. And I will decide every case based on the record, according to the rule of law, without fear or favor, to the best of my ability. And I will remember that it’s my job to call balls and strikes and not to pitch or bat.”

For a nominee seeking to soothe any worries that he might lead a radical philosophical shift on the Court, making a simple analogy be­tween judge and umpire was disarming. With an extraordinary econ­omy of words, it appealed to people’s positive associations with baseball and evoked many legitimate parallels. In baseball as in law, both sides in a given contest get to make their case, and do so through a process that plays out under the watchful eye of an impartial arbiter who ap­plies the relevant rules. And where do umpires direct their attention on every pitch? Right down the center, penalizing pitchers whose throws are too high, low, left, or right.

Subtly, the analogy also suggested other parallels that argued for his confirmation. More than any other American sport, baseball tips its hat to its own history and tradition. As such, it celebrates continuity over change. What could be more appropriate in a chief justice whose job it is to honor legal precedent? Just to make sure the senators got his point, Roberts had amplified the basic analogy in more than one way, specifically: “Nobody ever went to a ball game to see the umpire” and “it’s my job to call balls and strikes and not to pitch or bat.” Such state­ments reinforced the notion that observers could expect few surprises from him as a judge, let alone anything radical. He was, in short, a neutral arbiter, not a player in the contest itself.

The analogy was persuasive in another way, too. Just as an umpire could not be expected to call a game before it was played, a judicial nominee could not be expected to articulate anticipated judgments be­fore hearing the specifics of an actual case. To insist on such hypothet­ical judgments would be to demand that Roberts demonstrate prejudicial bias—exactly the opposite quality that one seeks in a judge. Would the analogy save him from such inevitable hypotheticals during cross-examination? No, but it helped inoculate him when he then de­flected such questions as inappropriate.

In a hearing that quickly devolved into long senatorial speeches, detailed discussions of specific cases, and the nuances of constitutional philosophy, the umpire analogy—short and easy to understand—was a catchy sound bite that played over and over in the media. Even Sena­tor Biden, who opposed Roberts’ confirmation, acknowledged the analogy’s effectiveness on the second day of the hearings. He called it a home run—all the passengers and conductors on his train ride home to Delaware had been buzzing about it, Biden said.

But when Biden finished with his friendly banter, he proceeded to explain why the umpire analogy wasn’t apt at all. As he noted, the strike zone is defined by a rule, and while an umpire has the authority to apply that rule, he or she does not have the authority to change the rule itself—or any rule of the game, for that matter.

By contrast, a Supreme Court justice can and does change rules if he or she can muster a majority vote from their colleagues on the bench. And in sustaining or overturning the status quo, the Court shapes the meaning of the laws that society must live by, and even the meaning of the Constitution itself. In fact, the legal precedents each court inevitably sets become very difficult to overturn and can affect millions of people for generations to come. From segregation to wire­tapping to rules governing money in public elections, the Supreme Court is not a passive arbiter in American democracy but rather a ma­jor player. “All of the things that we debate about here and the Court debates that deserve 5–4 decisions, they’re almost all on issues that are ennobling phrases in the Constitution, that the founders never set a strike zone for,” Biden said. “You get to go back and decide.”

Biden’s argument was correct but came too late. Despite the um­pire analogy’s fundamental flaw, Roberts’ assertion had already stuck in people’s minds. For millions of Americans and for thirteen senators on the eighteen-member committee who voted to recommend that Roberts be confirmed, an umpire was a judge, and a judge was an um­pire. And a few weeks later, just as the Major League Baseball play-offs were about to begin, the full Senate voted 78–22 to elevate Roberts to the Supreme Court as chief justice.

In this leadership role, Roberts has indeed led the court to change many rules of the game—from the way corporations can help finance political campaigns to expanding the limits of permissible search and seizure through secret national security courts. But what’s most rele­vant here is what his anodyne statement “Judges are like umpires” re­veals about analogy’s broader persuasive power. A closer look at the statement and how it meets the five criteria of effective analogies will show just how such analogies work so effectively.

1. Use the Familiar to Explain the Less Familiar

As noted, the first job of a persuasive analogy is to use something familiar to explain something less familiar. In the broadest sense, Roberts used a familiar figure in baseball—an umpire—to explain the job of a Supreme Court justice. In a culture unfamiliar with baseball, the analogy would not have worked; in America, as the baseball play-offs approached, it was a perfect call. The analogy was so basic that it didn’t even require listeners to know much about baseball. Almost anybody who has ever seen a game on TV would recognize the umpire standing behind home plate making judgment calls. Their word is fi­nal, too.

2. Highlight Similarities and Obscure Differences

The second job of a persuasive analogy is to highlight similarities and obscure differences. In any analogy, there are going to be similar­ities and differences between the objects of comparison. The key is determining which are most relevant. Roberts, a man of sharp intel­lect and deep legal experience, probably recognized the logical weak­ness at the core of his assertion that judges are like umpires: Umpires can’t change the rules, but Supreme Court justices can—and do. In fact, that is core to their job. To an attentive and astute listener, all of the similarities between judges and umpires do not trump the overrid­ing and disqualifying difference: A Supreme Court justice is a rule maker, and an umpire is not. But the way Roberts shone a spotlight on the similarities had many observers nodding “yes” before anyone real­ized the big difference he was simultaneously sidestepping, unmen­tioned, in the shadows of his argument. How did he do this?

Research suggests that in business negotiations, sellers tend to do better when they make the first offer. In this instance, Roberts is sell­ing an idea: “Judges are like umpires.” By asserting the equivalence between the two, he psychologically anchors this argument in the minds of listeners, and the burden of disproving it falls on those who doubt its accuracy.