My kindergartner taught me two important lessons this week. First, that an important component of value is longevity, and second, there's always a fun way around life's yucky tasks.

Like the school fundraiser.

You know the one.

You know it when you open the door, and there stands an adorable child nervously clutching a magazine featuring an $18 potato scrubber and a $25 bread braid, a freezer phenomenon that doesn't even exist beyond the pages of that dreaded magazine. Dreaded, because you don't want any of this stuff, but you can't say no or the Earth will open up and immediately swallow you into the bowels of hell.

It's for a good cause. The best cause. Our kids. The future. Don't you have a few dollars for the future?

Luckily, my daughter had a different idea. She was too nervous to go door-to-door (yes!), so instead, she set up a lemonade stand in front of our house. She raised $28 and bought herself two items from the magazine, thereby earning two sales, as well as a new vase and basket, earning money for the school and not harassing any neighbors (super-yes!).

The exchange rate of $28 to a 5-year-old is roughly $80 billion to an adult, so I was surprised she purchased two of the most expensive items in the book and not 10 packs of gummy bears.

Her logic: "Food only lasts until you swallow it, but something pretty lasts for all of my life."

I'm learning so much from my daughter in kindergarten.

It got me thinking about the value of things. So many factors contribute to an item's worth, but its "prettiness" (aesthetics) and cost-to-use ratio (longevity) play prominently into that. For me, other values include how the item was made, its story and its artistic expression or originality.

An item with all five is like finding a unicorn.

I found a unicorn. His name is John Allen Woodward (johnallenwoodward.com).

A close-up look as John Allen Woodward joins two pieces of silver together for a belt buckle (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

Woodward recently relocated his 23-year-old California business to Boulder County. He is one of the rare remaining makers of custom shoes, boots and other leather accessories. He makes everything from scratch, down to the gold and silver buckles and accents.

Woodward's high-end designs (we're talking $5,000 and up for a pair of boots) have been featured on TV and in magazines and worn by celebs, although he won't name names.

The story: Woodward had served as a police officer for 10 years when he decided to quit to pursue his right-brained passion: playing and writing music. He landed a small record deal and moved to Nashville, Tenn., where he worked on music for five years.

One night at a show, he met a famous boot-maker named Bo Riddle. (Seriously, google him. He has made boots for Alan Jackson and Wynonna Judd, to name a few.) Riddle was looking for a new apprentice. On a whim, Woodward took the job. After a week, he says, his path was permanently altered.

"What I found was I love to create things," Woodward says. "I love the magic of making, whether it's music or shoes. The magic is real magic. You have an idea that you pull out of space, and you gather a pile of raw materials on a bench and at the end of the day, that image becomes real."

How it's made: Custom boot-making is a challenging art, and it's a pretty narrow customer niche, too (at that price point).

"It is rare, and I think it's getting more rare," Woodward says.

He currently has only one apprentice, Kevin Leffler, although Woodward says he hopes to some day open an "academy of shoe-making and the leather arts" to teach more people the trade.

He says he regularly gets calls from people in Boulder interested in learning how.

"People aren't used to working with their hands. You have to love that challenge," he says. "Boulder is the perfect place. A lot of people are concerned with their quality of life and quality of work and want to do something they're really passionate about."

Woodward plans to open a retail shop in Boulder in the spring, although customers can currently visit his studio in Sugarloaf.

The originality and art: Woodward treats each project like a wearable piece of art, one that is a collaboration with the customer. You design the entire shoe (although he'll lend his expertise), down to the shape of the toe, the color, the heel style, the accents, the materials (alligator, ostrich, stingray).

"There's only one pair of shoes like that in the world," he says. "It's a work of art, and they had some hand in helping design it."

The aesthetics: Woodward's products are classic and timeless. He is known for using exotic materials, and he says he offers more alligator than anyone else in the world.

If he can't find the exact color a customer wants, he says he will dye it himself.

The longevity: The turn-around depends on what you order, but it can take up to six months to make a single pair of boots, Woodward says.

Because of the classic designs, he says he creates his shoes to last a lifetime.

So, even longer than a fundraiser basket and vase.

I wonder how many glasses of lemonade I'd have to sell to get me a pair.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay