HAMPTON TOWNSHIP, MI — Karen Pavlawk began searching for a new opportunity when she was laid off from her job as a dental hygienist in Bay City in 2009.

It led her to found Dental Hygiene Health Services with two other hygienists, Linda McLaren and Mary Lou Camen. Their goal was to offer dental hygiene services and dental referrals to low-income and uninsured area residents.

"We had the time to expand and start a business. We had empty nests, all of us, and we needed to fill our life with other avenues with other activities. That's a good success story for women over 50," Pavlawk said with a laugh.

The Hampton Township-based nonprofit today serves more than 50 patients per week in the Great Lakes Bay Region. Pavlawk is president of the organization.

The trio visits homeless shelters and other venues to clean teeth for those who can't afford regular dental care. The group is funded by Medicaid and cash payments, as well as grants, many of which are written by Pavlawk.

"We don't want to be in offices," Pavlawk said. "We want to be out serving people who are going through a very hard time in their life, financially and emotionally."

Pavlawk's work has earned her honorable mention in the 2014 Dick Hardy Community Improvement Award. The award given annually by The Bay City Times recognizes people making significant contributions to the community.

Pavlawk is a 1984 graduate of Delta College's dental hygiene program and lifelong resident of Bay County. Today, she said she enjoys helping others with her dental services company.

"I'm usually always helping people," she said. "I like to help other people, because it makes me feel better about myself."

On Aug. 11, 2011, Dental Health Hygiene Services held its first clinic, a free event at the Bay Area Women's Shelter. From there, they've expanded, working with the Good Samaritan Rescue Mission in Bay City and the Bay City Salvation Army, as well as schools, senior centers, day care centers and, most recently, senior living facilities.



Services, provided at a discount rate, include dental hygiene assessments for oral cancer, decay, and periodontal disease, as well as teeth cleaning, blood pressure assessments, dental education and more.

Both McLaren and Pavlawk stress their work isn't for long-term treatment; they're "prevention specialists" who work to find affordable and available dental care for their patients.



Pavlawk said some people are surprised to see dental hygienists serving patients without immediate dentist oversight. But Dental Hygiene Health Services is allowed under Public Act 161, Michigan legislation passed in 2005 to allow hygienists to provide dental preventative services to the underserved. She noted that the group is sponsored and supervised off-site by two area dentists.

Jenna Pavlawk, Karen's daughter and a preschool teacher at Washington Elementary School in Bay City who helped nominate her mother for the award, said she's been happy to watch her mother succeed.

"I was really proud of her – I knew she had it in her, because she's always been a volunteer since we were young," she said. "I know she spends a lot of time and nights thinking about (the business), and how to make the company better and how to reach as many people as possible."

In the future, Karen Pavlawk hopes to help the group expand.

"What we'd really like to do is really get out into desolate rural communities, which we do already," she said. "Many times, there's no traditional dentist's office for miles....there's a huge need for adults and children to have preventative dental care."