Disciples Ministry moves to rented space in downtown Loveland, plans to expand meal services

Foundations Church volunteers, from left, Natalie Hyde, Kemma Schmidt, Mason Saylor and Karien Du Preez help prepare and serve meals to the homeless at Disciples Ministry's new building at 759 N. Cleveland Ave. ( Matthew Gaston / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

With its own building, Disciples Ministry isn't limited to Tuesdays serving meals to the homeless at another site or the park.

The ministry that serves Loveland's homeless can expand the service to other days of the week, store larger quantities of food (which used to be stored at a ministry member's home) and offer more programming.

The ministry, which has the tagline, "Real Lives, Real Change," offers Bible studies and share groups and distributes food, clothing and other necessities.

"We want our own identity," said Roger Ruhlow, president of Disciples Ministry, based out of Foundations Church. "That's a vision that God's given to us. ... It's about having our identity about who we are. We're a Christian-based ministry working with broken people, reaching out to them and finding out their stories and how we can help them without enabling them."

If you go What: Disciples Ministry's open house. When: 4-7 p.m. Monday, Dec. 14. Where: New building, 759 N. Cleveland Ave. Cost: Hors d'oeuvres will be served, and there will be a silent auction. More info: Visit www.disciplesministry.co, email disciplesministrylvld@gmail.com or call 619-0579.

Since its founding in 2011, Disciples Ministry has served meals to the homeless at the 137 Homeless Connection, a day shelter and inclement weather night shelter in downtown Loveland. But in May, the ministry began serving the Tuesday meals at Fairgrounds Park — doable in the warmer months but not in the winter, Ruhlow said.

Advertisement

"It was time for us to move on," Ruhlow said. "They (137) helped us get to where we need to be."

The Move

In mid-November, the ministry moved into rented space at a 2,000-square-foot building at 759 N. Cleveland Ave. The building has a kitchen and dining area and a basement for additional dining that can seat 40, plus space for women's and men's counseling rooms and a bedroom for an on-site staff person.

"This building doesn't belong to us. It belongs to them," Ruhlow said. "God called us to serve and feed the less fortunate. This isn't about us. It's about what God's doing in our lives."

Disciples Ministry will present the new building to the public during an open house Dec. 14.

On its first day in the building on Nov. 10, the ministry served 27 meals and 30 the next week on Nov. 17 and another 41 meals on Thanksgiving Day. At the park, the ministry served an average of 30 to 50 meals, about the same number as at 137.

Originally, the members of the ministry paid for the meals out of pocket for about seven months, but then began a fundraiser of selling barbecue during the summer months and got sponsorships and donations. One of the members — there are 12 who volunteer currently — stored the food at his home, but with a permanent facility, the ministry can store more food in the pantry, including pallets of food offered on donation.

The ministry wants to expand the meal service to Saturdays and Sundays later this month and to Thursdays and possibly other days in 2016.

"They're very accepting, which is a big thing," said Kim Berly of Loveland, who started going to the meal service three years ago and now volunteers with the ministry. "You can feel the love, and you can feel you're not being judged in any way, shape or form."

Berly said she likes the new building and considers it to be a blessing.

"It's got a homey atmosphere, which is really nice," Berly said. "It's very welcoming."

Alan Horn of Loveland, who after being homeless for most of last year, now has a place to live and is working.

"I hit rock bottom, and they offered food and encouragement and guidance," Horn said. "They encouraged me to read the Bible and get right with the Lord."

Disciples Ministry wants to open a recovery home for homeless men to stay for six to 12 months while they find work and become self-sufficient, plus recovery homes for women and for families. To build up to that, the ministry hopes to have three to four people working on their sobriety live on site and volunteer for the ministry.

"If we can save one guy a year and he can get his life back together, it's worth it," said Ricky Romano, drug and alcohol counselor for Disciples Ministry.

Shelley Widhalm: , swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm