PHOENIX — Deciding they can’t say “no”’ to free money, a House panel voted unanimously Tuesday to once again provide health insurance to children of the working poor.

HB 2309 would lift the freeze imposed on enrollment in the Kids Care program. It covers children whose parents make too much to qualify for the Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System but may not earn enough to be able to afford private insurance, even with the subsidies available in the Affordable Care Act.

Dr. Elizabeth McKenna, a pediatrician, pointed out to members of the House Health Committee that Congress has agreed to pick up the full cost of the program through 2017. She said there’s no reason for the state to reject the money and leave children without coverage.

But the measure, which now goes to the House Appropriations Committee, faces an uncertain future amid concerns that the state will end up obligated — whether legally or politically — to pick up the cost once the federal government stops picking up the entire tab.

Gov. Doug Ducey did not ask lawmakers to restart Kids Care, suspended in 2010, in his State of the State message to lawmakers.

“We’re willing to look at any plan,” said press aide Daniel Scarpinato. “But we need to ensure that we’re not obligating (state) taxpayers to ongoing spending that the federal government is not going to support.”

The Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System, the state’s Medicaid program, currently covers all individuals whose income is below 138 percent of the federal poverty level. That’s $27,724 for a family of three.

About two-thirds of the pricetag is picked up by the federal government.

Kids Care, first implemented more than a decade ago, covers children in families up to 200 percent of the federal poverty level, or $40,180 for that family of three. It has traditionally been funded with a 3-1 match: Every dollar the state puts up generates $3 from Washington.

In 2010, however, with the state facing a deficit, Gov. Jan Brewer convinced lawmakers to freeze enrollment.

At that time there were close to 45,000 children in the program. Current enrollment is now just 730.

Rep. Regina Cobb, R-Kingman, who is championing the restoration, said there’s a “good chance” Congress will keep up the 100 percent funding beyond 2017.

But she assured colleagues that there’s no fiscal trap down the road. Cobb said Arizona is the only state in the country which does not have an active Kids Care program.

Cobb inserted language in the legislation to require the AHCCCS director to notify state budget officials by July 1, 2017 whether Congress is going to continue with full funding. At that point, it would be up to the state to decide whether to pony up the necessary dollars to keep the program in place.

McKenna, who said she is speaking on behalf of pediatricians around the state, said it’s important for children to have insurance.

“When children are uninsured, their families cannot bring them in when they’re sick,” she told lawmakers. “So a minor illness such as a cold or bronchitis becomes a major illness such as pneumonia, oftentimes requiring expensive emergency room evaluations and, many times, hospitalization.”

McKenna said if the parents don’t have insurance the hospitals end up swallowing the expenses.

Rep. Jay Lawrence, R-Scottsdale, pointed out that GOP presidential contenders have promised to repeal the Affordable Care Act. He said that could dry up funding as soon as next year.

But Kelly Whitener, a health policy expert at Georgetown University, pointed out that Kids Care actually is part of a 1997 federal law known as the State Health Insurance Program. She told Lawrence any move to undo “Obamacare” would not affect this program.

Dana Naimark, president of the Children’s Action Alliance, said restarting the program is about more than keeping kids healthy. She said it also affects education.

“If you’re not healthy, how can you learn?” Naimark said. “If your ear hurts, how can you pay attention?”

House Minority Leader Eric Meyer acknowledged that the program is not exactly free, with the cost being paid by federal tax dollars. But he said if Arizona doesn’t take its share, the dollars “get redistributed to other states to use.”