Bigger, bolder and happier all around, the 2016 Kia Sorento fills a lot of needs in the five to seven-passenger SUV midsize crossover market. Even better, the Sorento has been redesigned for 2016 with a number of competitors like the Ford Edge, Jeep Grand Cherokee, Toyota Highlander and Hyundai Santa Fe having to do a double take to keep up. Also of note is that while, in the past editions of this Kia, it was a bit bigger in the compact SUV category, now it’s a bit smaller in the mid-size crossover world.

Trims for the 2016 Kia Sorento include the L, LX, EX, SX and SX Limited. The L base trim has 17-inch alloy wheels, LED running lights, three drive settings, cruise control, a tilt-and-telescoping steering wheel and a 40/20/40-split second-row seats that conveniently fold, slide and recline. For technology, it’s a Bluetooth phone and audio connect with a CD player, satellite radio and jacks and USB/iPod interfaces.

For the LX, you add automatic headlights, sound-reducing windshield, roof rails, rearview camera, touchscreen that is 4.3 inches in size, the Uvo eServices and to add even more there is the Convenience package. This includes rear parking sensors, eight-way power driver seat, heated front seats, leather-wrapped steering wheel and auto-dimming mirror. There is also the option to add the third-row seats with this package too and on the EX trim, the Convenience Package is standard.

Also standard on the EX are the 18-inch wheels, dual-zone automatic climate control and leather upholstery. On this one, you can opt for a Premium package add-on with a hands-free power liftgate, keyless entry/ignition, power-folding mirrors, a blind-spot and rear cross-traffic warning system and you can go one step further with the Premium Package and add on the Touring Package. This addition will give you an additional panoramic sunroof, touchscreen interface that is eight inches and a rearview camera that offers a larger display as well as a 10 speaker sound system

On the SX, you get all the Premium and Touring goodies with additional auto-dimming rearview mirror, 19-inch wheels, LED taillights and a 10-way power driver seat with a fabric headliner.

The SX Limited includes 19-inch wheels that are chrome and you get upgraded leather upholstery. There are heated and air-conditioned front seats and even the second row is given heated seats with this trim option. There is a Technology Package add on with xenon headlights, electronic parking brake, adaptive cruise control and a lane-departure and forward collision warning.

Under the hood, the 2016 Kia Sorento L and LX has a 2.4-liter four-cylinder with 185 horsepower and 178 pound-feet of torque in a six-speed automatic and front-wheel drive. You can opt for an all-wheel drive with either of these trims and you can tow up to 2,000 pounds with either as well.

The EX and SX Limited will tow up to 3,500 pounds with a 2.0-liter turbocharged four-cylinder engine offering 240 horsepower and 260 pound feet of torque.

There is also the 3.3-liter V6 engine that cranks out 290 horsepower with 252 pound feet of torque and that comes standard on the SX or can be an option on the EX or SX Limited.

Safety features on the 2016 Kia Sorento include antilock brakes, traction and stability control, front side and front-and-second row side curtain airbags, and on the EX, SX and SX Limited, you also get the rearview camera and rear parking sensors that are standard as well as Uvo. On the EX you can opt for blind-spot and rear cross-traffic warning systems, which are standard on the SX and SX Limited. The SX Limited also has a lane-departure and forward collision warning as a standard feature.

Inside the 2016 Kia Sorento it’s a classy feel, soft to the touch with easy to use controls and plenty of standard inclusions for the money. You can get a two-tone color scheme inside and depending on the trim you choose you will find that the premium design and layout makes this Sorento stand out as a luxury option in this category.

As for space inside, there is 11 cubic feet behind the third row, but folding the third row down offers ample space or, for real hauling, there is plenty of room with the second row folded down too. Folks in the second row also get more legroom in the new design by about half an inch and an option to slide and recline the seat.

For driving impressions, you can really tell that the 2016 has made improvements with better suspension and steering and a tighter feeling ride. It’s also a quiet ride and whether you decide to try the Normal, Sport or Eco mode all handle on the road fine, the SX and SX Limited do have a different steering system and you will feel the difference during the drive.

With an impressive warranty package including a 10 year/100,000 mile power train warranty and five year 60,000 mile limited basic warranty and roadside assistance, the 2016 Kia Sorento is an impressive offering with a lot to boast about on and off the road.

Should You Need to Know: The L Kia Sorento and any trim with the midrange turbocharged engine can only seat up to five passengers and for the V6 configuration it’s only a seven passengers offering.

Miles Per Gallon: The 2016 Kia Sorento SXL AWD I drove got 19 miles per gallon in the city and 25 miles per gallon on the highway.

Cost: The 2016 Kia Sorento SXL AWD I drove had a price tag of $46.095.

For more auto tips and information, follow Rita @RitaCook13.