TAMPA — Royal Caribbean International’s newest vessel to home port at the Port of Tampa celebrated its inaugural voyage Saturday.

The Brilliance of the Seas is the ninth Royal Caribbean cruise ship to sail from Tampa in the past 13 years. Rhapsody of the Seas was the first in January 2002.

The 90,090-ton ship set sail Saturday afternoon with about 2,100 passengers on a seven-day Western Caribbean cruise with scheduled ports of call in Key West; Cozumel and Grand Cayman, Mexico; and Roatan, Honduras.

When the cruise liner returns to port next week, it will begin a series of four- and five-day cruises with ports of call in Cozumel and Costa Maya, Mexico.

The ship will be based in Tampa on a seasonal basis, sailing out of Cruise Terminal 3 at 815 Channelside Drive until May 1.

This mark’s the ship captain’s second stint in Tampa. Capt. Stig Nilsen served in the same capacity when Royal Caribbean’s Jewel of the Seas sailed out of Tampa.

Derrick and Tashawn Davis of Romulus, Mich., had been planning their first cruise for months.

They were unaware until Saturday that the Brilliance of the Seas was making its inaugural departure from the Port of Tampa.

The Davises, who have six children as a result of a blended family, said they also didn’t know the Brilliance of the Seas had undergone an extensive overhaul this year, completed just in time for the ship’s relocation to Tampa.

“We are special, baby!” Tashawn Davis said to her husband.

Russell and Lorraine Seabol of Palm Harbor, who are traveling with their next-door neighbors, are on their eighth cruise. They wanted to be a part of the Brilliance of the Seas’ debut voyage out of Tampa.

To celebrate the occasion, the Tampa Port Authority arranged a tour of the 12-story Radiance-class ship for authority board members and news reporters.

The vessel has a glass enclosed, nine-story central atrium with glass-paneled elevators facing the atrium and the sea. There are floor-to-ceiling windows throughout. The ship’s newest addition is a 48-seat movie theater installed during the ship’s makeover.

Royal Caribbean International plans to deploy a second ship in Tampa for Caribbean cruises next year.

A Tampa Port Authority official said that news marked a significant step toward the agency’s goal eventually to serve more than 1 million cruise ship passengers annually.

“That will be a major boost to our passenger volume, pushing us over the 1 million passenger mark for the first time,” said Wade Elliott, the port authority’s vice president of marketing and business development.

kknight@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7413