Central Floridians who rely on federal subsidies to help pay for their health insurance through Obamacare are worried that a U.S. Supreme Court ruling expected later this month could eliminate the financial help.

The federal government is operating health insurance marketplaces in more than two dozen states that did not to establish state-run exchanges. If the court strikes down the subsidies, more than 6 million people will be affected.

One million of them are in Florida, with 100,000 people in Central Florida, according to an analysis by Families USA, a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization.

This includes Patricia Weber, 22, gets $200 monthly in financial help and pays $69 a month in premiums. She's a full-time student at Valencia College and works part-time, and in the past year, she's had four surgeries, including a gallbladder removal.

"I don't know if it's my last surgery, so me keeping medical insurance is very important," said Weber.

Barbara Rampertab, 48, who recently moved from Connecticut to Clermont with her ailing parents, is also worried. She gets $103 in tax credits and pays $295 a month in premiums.

"It's so helpful to have it, even if it's $50, especially when you're looking for work," said Rampertab, who's drawing from her savings to pay for health insurance.

More than 93 percent of exchange enrollees in Florida get financial help and many may drop their insurance because they can no longer afford it, said Laura Brennaman, policy and research director of Florida CHAIN, a consumer health advocacy group. The average monthly premium for people with financial help is $88. Individuals would have to pay $384 without a subsidy, according to the federal government.

The lawsuit, brought by David M. King, 64, revolves around four words in the Affordable Care Act: "established by the state."

It claims that based on the law's wording, only people in states that have insurance through state-run marketplaces are eligible for financial help, and that it's unlawful for the government to provide financial help to individuals who get their insurance from the federal marketplaces.

But providers and analysts worry that if the subsidies are struck down, many will give up their newly acquired health insurance because they can no longer afford it, while the sickest will hold on to theirs, leading to increase in health insurance premiums.

In a New York Times interview, King, the plaintiff, said he was not worried about the case's outcomes, because as a Vietnam veteran, he has access to VA health care.

But local hospitals and clinics are anxiously awaiting the ruling, worried that if the law is struck down, the number of uninsured will spike.

"It would be a tremendous step backwards," said Marni Stahlman, president and CEO of the free clinic Shepherd's Hope. "Those patients not only are going to reappear here, but we're also going to see them in the emergency rooms again."

In a statement, Orlando Health officials said, "If the Supreme Court rules that the subsidies are not permissible in a state that has not created their own exchanges, like Florida, the likely outcome is that we'll see a rise in uninsured again getting back to levels similar to what they were before the federal program began."

Florida Hospital officials expressed similar concerns.

"Each day, we see firsthand that a person's health is best served when he or she has health insurance that allows access to primary and preventative care," the hospital system said in a statement. … "That is why Florida Hospital supports efforts that would permit Floridians to obtain affordable health care coverage."

Some hope that if the court strikes down the subsidies, Congress will step in and fix the law by adding a few words, clarifying that financial help is also available to those insured through the federal marketplace.

"We are cautiously optimistic that no matter what happens with the court ruling, the cooler minds in Washington, D.C., will prevail and will find a way of keeping the subsidies in place," said John Wesley "Wes" Fischer, founder and principal at The Health Insurance Store in Kissimmee.

"When we're not living between court case rulings, I'm really looking forward to the day when our legislators make the modifications to the existing ACA framework to make it more acceptable for all parties concerned," said Fischer.

nmiller@tribune.com or 407-420-5158.