Arthur Lloyd Adams, who was born in 1946 and died in 1968, had a home of record of Loveland. He is one of the men listed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall that has been submitted to the Faces Never Forgotten project. (Special to the Reporter-Herald / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Names of Larimer County Fallen Janna Hoehn is looking for several photos of fallen heroes from the Vietnam War who lived in Larimer County. The photos are to be used in a "Faces Never Forgotten" project for a museum near the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Wall in Washington, D.C. Visit the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund for details about the museum and education center and visit The Wall to search for veterans's names on the Vietnam Wall. Email photos to neverforgotten2014@gmail.com. The names from Larimer County whose photos are needed include: Everett R. Anderson 1917-1965 Fort Collins Donald W. Conn Jr. 1946-1966 Loveland Rockford W. Goddard 1946-1966 Fort Collins Peter Maciel Jr. 1946-1967 Fort Collins Rickey D. Mills 1952-1970 Fort Collins Donald K. Osborn 1948-1971 Loveland Blaine P. Smilie 1951-1970 Fort Collins Philip L. Whitney 1941-1968 Fort Collins Pete A. Valasquez 1942-1965 Loveland She is also looking for a photo of a serviceman that has a home of record of Pueblo, but possibly attended school in Loveland: Kenneth Johnston 1941-1965 Pueblo

Janna Hoehn started her project because she visited the Vietnam Veterans Memorial wall in Washington, D.C., and wanted a rubbing of one of the "missing in action" men on the wall.

Advertisement

She research that man, Gregory John Crossman, to find a photo of him.

That small project has led to a much larger project, where Hoehn, who now lives in Maui, Hawaii, is on a hunt for a photo of every man listed on the Vietnam wall.

Her search is part of a project by the Vietnam Veterans Memorial Fund called "Faces Never Forgotten," to put a face to every name etched on the wall.

The photos and information about the military men will be used as part of an Education Center, to be built adjacent to the wall, which will host not only the photos of the men, but also the thousands of mementos left at the wall in the last 30-plus years.

The museum will also share details about wars since 9-11, as memorials to those wars likely won't appear for many years.

Colorado is the 10th state where Hoehn is working, looking for a photo of every Colorado man who is listed on the Vietnam Veterans Memorial.

She is searching for 11 men from Larimer County that the project doesn't have photos of. They have found photos for the other fallen heroes in Larimer County.

After Hoehn had spent some time locating a photo of Crossman, she saw an ad about the Faces Never Forgotten project. She sent in the photo of Crossman, and was then asked if she'd be willing to help locate the 42 Maui fallen heroes listed on the wall.

In six months, she located every name.

"I thought it would be simple because Maui is so small. It was anything but simple. I worked on this 20 to 30 hours a week for six months. On Oct. 16, 2011 I got the last photo," Hoehn said. And Hoehn also has a business as a florist.

She found such pleasure in the research that she moved on to looking up the six men from her hometown of Hemet, Calif.

Then she moved on to the rest of California and other states.

"I enjoyed the process so much and meeting the families and seeing their reaction to being honored in this museum. It was heartwarming," she said.

She said that in 58 counties in California, 68 newspapers ran stories about what she was doing.

Photos poured in and she collected 900 photos. As there were 1,800 to find of about 6,000 lost men, she still has a ways to go.

She said that Everett R. Anderson of Fort Collins, was born in 1917 and will be the most difficult photo to find.

"He is one of the first from your area (that enlisted)," Hoehn said.

She hopes to hear from Anderson's niece, listed as "R Moore," who wrote a note to Anderson in 2008 on the online wall at http://thewall-usa.com/ that reads, "I am very proud and still, I miss your smile. Uncle — your service to this great country encouraged me to view the world through very different eyes. To question, to wonder, to ask, to do what I could, to change the views of those who could not understand why, why we were there, I wrote and asked, received answers, got involved and questioned then and today, what we wanted to achieve, to share, your history and views, of those days..."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 ext. 530, jbenes@reporter-herald.com, Twitter.com/jessicabenes.