A man cools himself in a cloudy pond on the outskirts of Jammu, India, on Wednesday. North India is enduring a heat wave with temperatures in some parts of Delhi reaching a 62-year high. Mukesh Gupta/Reuters …

A man lines the soccer field at the Arena Corinthians Stadium in São Paulo, on the eve of the opening match of the 2014 FIFA World Cup in Brazil. Francois-Xavier Marit/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

Rescuers help push a car trapped on a flooded road in Qinzhou City, south China's Guangxi Zhuang autonomous region. Heavy rainfalls hit parts of the region on Wednesday. Cao Zhongyuan/Xinhu/Zuma Press …

A man fishes for striped bass on the mud shores of the Stewiacke River in Stewiacke, Nova Scotia, Canada. Andrew Vaughan, The Canadian Press/Associated Press …

Courtney Tilley surveys storm damage at Pass Time Garage, a business she owns with her husband, David, in Clinton, Tenn. A fast-moving storm hit the eastern part of the state Tuesday night with damaging winds snapping trees, bringing down power lines and ripping off a few rooftops, but sparing residents any serious injuries. J. Miles Cary, Knoxville News Sentinel/Associated Press …

Residents in one of Barnaul, Siberia's flood-hit villages wait for floodwaters to recede. Yevgeny Kurskov/ITAR-TASS/Zuma Press …

Students clash with police during a rally to demand education reform in Santiago, Chile. Students have been protesting against what they say is profiteering in the state education system. Luis Vargas/Zuma Press …

A luxury house teeters on a cliff about 75 feet above Lake Whitney in Whitney, Texas. WFAA-TV reports that the house has been condemned and the owners evacuated about two weeks ago. WFAA/Associated Press …

A man joins licensed taxi drivers in front of the Olympic Stadium in Berlin during a Europe-wide protest of taxi-hailing apps. Taxi drivers are worried the apps will flood the market with unregulated private drivers. Thomas Peter/Reuters …

A student clashes with riot police in Santiago during a demonstration against the Chile government, demanding changes to the state education system. Fernando Rodriguez/Reuters …