Do Michigan and its surrounding Rust Belt environs provide an opportunity to Republicans? Read on in today's Ohio Politics Roundup.

That state up north ... Michigan hasn't backed a Republican for president since 1988. Detroit hasn't elected a Republican mayor since 1958. So why, suddenly, has it become a destination for Republicans looking to win the White House next year?

"With a Republican governor and majorities in both chambers of the statehouse, it - and its 16 electoral votes which are, for the moment at least, winner-take-all - remains an alluring prize for any presidential aspirant," writes Todd Spangler for the Detroit Free Press. "Perhaps as important as that," Spangler adds, "a Republican breakthrough in Michigan could signal the party's return in other Rust Belt states - Pennsylvania, Wisconsin - which have seemingly become impenetrable to the GOP message, or at least its presidential nominees, in recent years."

This applies to Ohio, too. It's one of the reasons why Republicans have chosen to hold their 2016 convention in Cleveland, another Rust Belt city in transition.

New Hampshire watch: A new Bloomberg Politics/St. Anselm College poll shows Jeb Bush with a slight lead in the nation's first presidential primary state. The former Florida governor is the first choice of 16 percent of voters, followed by U.S. Sen. Rand Paul of Kentucky at 13 percent and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker at 12 percent.

Far behind, at 2 percent, is Ohio Gov. John Kasich. Kasich doesn't fare any better when voters are asked for their second choice - he checks in at 2 percent there, too.

On the Democratic side, Hillary Clinton is the first choice of 56 percent of voters - a commanding lead.

Randy Cole Q&A: Stephanie Warsmith of the Akron Beacon Journal sits down with the top Kasich budget adviser-turned-Ohio Turnpike executive director.

"It's a little strange getting text messages in the middle of the night from the radio room about accidents and incidents," Cole says, "but most problems are really handled very quickly."

The challenges of Kasich's welfare-reform proposal: "Those who work most closely with the poor agree with Kasich that good-paying jobs are fundamental to building stable families," writes Catherine Candisky of the Columbus Dispatch. "But it won't be easy, it won't be quick, and it won't be cheap.

"County welfare agencies, whose overburdened caseworkers will handle much of the case management, are concerned about the governor's expectations, particularly after his recent threats to defund them if they don't deliver."

Kasich budget would defund women's health programs - including "coverage for family planning, breast and cervical cancer service and ... coverage for pregnant women," reports Robert Higgs of the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

The funding is no longer necessary because of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the Kasich administration says. But Kellie Copeland, a leading women's health advocate with NARAL Pro-Choice Ohio, tells Higgs she is concerned.

"Inadvertently what they're doing is if a woman gets pregnant and is not in the exchange, she would have to wait until an open-enrollment period," she says.

And about that small-business tax cut? Chrissie Thompson of the Cincinnati Enquirer talks to a TV repairman who's been pondering Kasich's tax proposal.

"Last year, he didn't pay anything in state income taxes because of deductions that offset his modest income. The year before that, he paid only $176. The savings from Kasich's tax cut wouldn't allow him to hire anyone. He'd rather see the state keep his income taxes the same and invest more money in education, he decided."

P.G. Sittenfeld's fundraising team: Ted Strickland is not the only one with Clinton and Obama connections to tap if he runs for U.S. Senate next year. Sittenfeld, the only announced Democrat in the race, raised money last week with help from several top operatives who have close ties to the White House and the Clinton orbit, writes NEOMG's Steve Koff. Among them: Bill Clinton's former press secretary, Mike McCurry, and Bill Burton, Obama's former deputy press secretary.

Happening today: Strickland and others will hold a media conference call at 9:30 a.m. to "announce a new [Center for American Progress] proposal aimed at revitalizing Appalachian coal communities," according to an advisory.

The call is scheduled days after the Ohio Republican Party, which is backing Sen. Rob Portman's re-election, hammered the former Ohio governor and the progressive think tank that now employs him for being unfriendly to the coal industry.

ICYMI - Portman delivers GOP's weekly address: "It's no secret that Washington is addicted to overspending, but, boy, the numbers are now simply staggering," Portman said in the radio address. "Every year of the Obama presidency, the federal government has spent hundreds of billions of dollars more than it takes in, and those massive yearly deficits, they add up."

Toledo's new mayor: "As City Council president, Paula Hicks-Hudson, 63, automatically ascended to the post of mayor upon the death Friday of Mayor D. Michael Collins," writes Tom Troy of the Toledo Blade.

"Though she is known to Lucas County's political insiders after nearly 30 years in local government, Ms. Hicks-Hudson's exposure to voters is limited. She ran citywide for municipal judge in 2005 as a Democrat, losing to Republican Timothy Kuhlman. In 2013, her council colleagues turned to her to succeed council President Joe McNamara when he stepped down to run for mayor. Now, and for at least the next 10 months, the public will get to know her as Toledo's mayor.

Fun fact of the day: At 62, Kasich would be the oldest Republican presidential candidate if he runs, as seen in this analysis by NBC's Dante Chinni.

Tips? Send them here. Or follow me on Twitter: @henryjgomez.