Kai, 2, plays in the toddler room at the Pat Schulz child-care facility. Where children are cared ultimately may have a lot to do with varying party policies on how to support parents raising young children.

Critics point out that this can act as an income supplement for often wealthier stay-at-home parents without child-care costs, that it can encourage people to seek out cheaper unlicensed care, and that supplements must be unrealistically large to make a dent.

One advantage is flexibility: those who delay their careers to care for their children get help defraying costs; those who take shift work and can arrange off-hours care can pay for it outside of a licensed daycare; poorer people who already qualify for subsidies or have relatives to help get a boost in paying for food and rent.

If the cost of raising children, especially as it relates to child care, is a burden on society, one possible approach is to give parents money.

There are essentially two different paths governments can take in dealing with the ongoing dilemma of high-priced, hard to find quality child care. Here are the pros and cons of each and where the parties stand.

“Our party understands that child-care decisions are best left in the hands of the real experts, Mom and Dad. That is why we introduced the UCCB in 2006 and expanded it in 2015.” — Stephen Harper, this summer

The government introduced monthly cheques for parents under its Universal Child Care Benefit program in 2006, and this year expanded them to $160 per month for each child under 6 and $60 per month for each child 6 to 17. All parents get the same (and taxable) benefit regardless of income or child-care arrangement. This is the Conservative child-care platform — the party proposes no changes.

NDP

“Let there be no doubt, we’ll keep the recent additions to the child-care benefit.” — Thomas Mulcair, in January

The NDP are critics of the Conservative cheque-mailing strategy, but have promised to keep it in place. in addition to their centrepiece direct child-care subsidy program.

Liberals

“Liberals understand that for most Canadians, balancing work and family responsibilities is a daily challenge. We believe that government has a responsibility to ensure that all families have a real and fair chance to succeed.” — Justin Trudeau, in mid-September

The Liberals propose combining the existing benefit with several other existing tax credits to create one new tax-free Child Care Benefit program. It would send larger cheques to lower- and middle-income parents (up to $533 per month per child) and less or none to wealthier parents.

For instance, parents with two children under 6 earning Toronto’s median family income of $56,381 would get $760 per month; a family earning $200,000 with one child under 6 and one teenager would receive nothing.

-

APPROACH 2

The other main approach to dealing with child care costs is to directly subsidize it, as we do public schools or health care.

This has the benefit of ensuring licensed child-care spots are actually created and available to parents — a key problem being shortage of spaces. As most prominently proposed by the NDP, based on Quebec’s existing system, it assures parents the benefit will cover most of the cost and remaining fees will be fixed.

The Quebec program has been shown to lead to greater workplace participation by women.

Some critics point out that this provides no benefit to those who prefer to stay home with their children and would probably provide no new benefit to lower-income families already receiving full subsidies.

Others say it may penalize those who work off-hours shifts common in jobs such as retail. Some economists have said that in practice a universal program is more likely to be used by white-collar workers, and therefore disproportionately benefits those who are already better off.

Here’s how each party approaches directly funding child care.

NDP

“Moms and dads have waited long enough. Affordable, quality child care is just an election away.” — Thomas Mulcair, in the NDP program pitch

The NDP proposes a program modelled on Quebec’s, to deliver 1 million licensed child-care spots at a maximum of $15 a day. The party estimates there are about 1.4 million children in Canada in need of care, only 505,000 of whom have licensed spots. It would take eight years to fully implement, though Mulcair has said it could be 60 per cent in place in four years.

Liberals

“Thomas Mulcair talks about child care needing an urgent solution, yet his program is back-loaded, will be delayed for years, and is significantly underfunded.” — Justin Trudeau, in September

The Liberals have not been as specific as the NDP, but have promised a new “National Early Learning and Child Care Framework” that would create new affordable child-care spaces.

Conservatives

“Thomas Mulcair would implement a one-size-fits-all, bureaucratic daycare scheme that ignores the preferences of individual families.” — Stephen Harper, this summer

The party has no proposal to directly create or fund child-care spaces.