Written By Emily Hull Posted: 08/15/2015, 12:00pm

Ever wanted to own a mustang? Not the car, an actual horse. Well now you can.

The Federal Bureau of Land Management’s latest adoption effort is in Lorton this weekend and is meant to help contain the burgeoning population of mustangs and burros in the western United States.

Friday, a dozen people adopted 20 wild horses and 24 burros from the Meadowood Recreation Area.

According to Inside NOVA:

The 1971 Wild-Free Roaming Horses and Burros Act gave the BLM the authority to manage wild horses and burros, by protecting the free-roaming animals and removing “excess animals from the range to control the size of herds,” BLM officials said. BLM estimates that, as of February 2013, they were managing at least 40,605 free-roaming wild horses and burros, and more than 48,000 wild horses and burros in short-term corrals or long-term pastures.

Since 1971, the BLM program has gotten 230,000 wild horses and burros adopted out. All adopters need to do is be over the age of 18, fill out an application and proof of a corral or shelter in which the animals can live. Adoption fees start at only $125.

The Washington Post reported:

For Kimberly Loveless, a horse lover and trainer from Fredericksburg, the difference between owning a wild horse and a domesticated horse is patience. Loveless has adopted five mustangs and is a volunteer for the program. Wild horses, which rarely have any human contact in nature, are generally terrified of people, she said, and it takes considerable time to gain their trust. But for Loveless, befriending a wild animal has been one of the most rewarding experiences of her life. “Just to see some of the horses when they’re wild — nobody’s brushed them, nobody’s trimmed their manes and nobody’s cleaned them up — if you can just kind of look past that and see what’s in their eyes and what’s in their faces, you know, and maybe find something special about one of them, it’s worth every bit of your time and effort,” Loveless said.

However, the program has received some opposition in the past. Animal rights activists maintain that these creatures should stay in their natural habitat, untouched by humans.

Anne Novak, executive director of Protect Mustangs, isn’t necessarily against adoption, but feels the government misrepresents the need to remove mustangs from their natural habitat, and she questions the agency’s head count of animals as well as its estimate of how many horses the land can support.

“If they were able to gather the number of horses that they adopt out annually, then there wouldn’t be this problem,” she said. “They need to reestablish a fair allocation of public land to the wild horses who legally have a right to it.”

Wild-Free Roaming Horses and Burros Act of 1971 protects these creatures from harm and capture, but also permits the government to remove “excess animals” if they are damaging an environment.

The adoption event continues today from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Meadowood Recreation Area.