Photo via Synaptive Medical

As part of the development of four new operating rooms, the University of Michigan Health System announced Monday that it will become one of the first hospitals in the country to integrate new neurosurgical imaging equipment called BrightMatter.

BrightMatter technology, a product of Synaptive Medical, is a "a highly detailed imaging and robotic positioning system with sensor-driven tools", and is expected to arrive in Ann Arbor in July, said Dr. Karin Muraszko, U-M's chair of neurosurgery.

[Also: More hospitals investing in robots to cut costs in the long run]

"We're creating the OR of the future, and defining the tools that will be a part of that," says U-M neurosurgeon Daniel Orringer, M.D. said in a statement.

The long, automated arm of the BrightMatter technology contains a scope and high-powered lighting that allows for highly detailed vision for surgeons. The arm is linked to sensors built into the surgeon's tools that will inform the surgeon of their location within the brain at all times. Used in tandem with images created during surgical pre-planning, BrightMatter's sensors alerts the doctor if they are near "critical anatomy" in the patient's brain, U-M Health System said.

The technology allows for smaller incisions, which cuts down on recovery time. Most importantly, U-M said, it enhances a surgeon's ability to avoid impacting important structures in the brain. BrightMatter is used to operate on brain tumors, aneurysms, vascular lesions and skull-based issues. The high-powers scope and light can also be utilized in minimally invasive spine surgery.

[Also: University of Michigan Health spends $160 million to upgrade lab testing]

The University of Michigan Department of Neurosurgery sees roughly patients with primary brain tumors a year.

"Multi-modality imaging makes surgery safer and faster, and improves the ability of the surgical team to work together for the best outcome," Muraszko said. "This type of technology can change our perspective to further refine and improve how we do surgery."

Twitter: @BethJSanborn