As young Americans grapple with an entitlement system poised for bankruptcy, Obamacare serves as another fund Millennials contribute substantially to. And according to The Weekly Standard’s Jim Swift, such programs are just like the “briefcase at the end of ‘Dumb and Dumber'” — full of IOUs.

Swift, an assistant editor at The Weekly Standard, talked about how entitlements — and their dwindling trust funds — affect Millennials during an appearance on Fox Business Network’s “The Independents” on Friday. Though young people are contributing to entitlement programs, Swift warned that most are vastly unaware of the state of such funds, from social security to Medicare.

“Most Millennials understand that these programs are not solvent, that they’re not hunky dory,” he said. “But what they don’t understand is that the trust fund is like the briefcase at the end of ‘Dumb and Dumber.'”

Experts warn that the social security trust fund will run out by 2033 — long before most Millennials will be eligible to receive the benefit. The Medicare hospital fund, however, is expected to diminish by 2026, an annual report from the federal government found.

Since social security was reformed 30 years ago, the program has been operating on auto pilot, adjusting for inflation and the cost of living.

Congress has taken little action to reform these entitlement programs, and with the Obamacare now thrown into the mix, Millennials are going to continue subsidizing things like healthcare for the elderly.

“It’s a present-day a** biter,” Lisa Kennedy Montgomery, host of “The Independents,” said.

And Swift concurred. But, he noted that watching the cost of premiums increase — as they have under the Affordable Care Act — may direct Millennials’ attention toward entitlements.

“They now, when they get off their parents’ insurance at age 26, have to go out and get their own, assuming they can get it through their employer,” Swift said. “And now they have to see how they pay for this on their own and this may be a later entry into adulthood.”

Under the Affordable Care Act, young people pay more for premiums to subsidize the cost of healthcare for the elderly. And their participation is crucial to the law’s success.

Watch Swift talk entitlements and Millennials below.