Northern Colorado Mustang Car Club presented the All American Car Show Saturday

Jim Carver, left, chats about his 1968 Mercury Cougar GT with Bryce Duncan, 8, Aidan Duncan, 12, and Gawain Duncan during the All American Car Show on Saturday at the Outlets at Loveland. ( Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Berthoud residents Bruce and Angel Peer had their nearly identical 1969 Ford Mustangs parked side by side Saturday at the Seventh-Annual All American Car Show.

The Peers own "twin" dark blue pony cars, one a fastback belonging to Bruce and the second a coupe that is Angel's.

"We thought it would be cool to have a husband-wife duo have virtually the same car but not exactly the same," Bruce said.

Bruce bought the coupe in 1978 when he was 16 and used it as his daily driver, restoring it a couple times during the time he's owned it. He bought the fastback in 1979 with his father that they rebuilt together.

"I had a liking for them," Bruce said about purchasing two cars of the same year and model. "I still have a liking for them."

The Peers joined dozens of car owners Saturday at the Outlets at Loveland as they showed off their American-made cars in the south side parking lot. They entered their cars, trucks and motorcycles by decade up to 1959 and older to compete for awards and to be the class winners in the four-hour show presented by the Northern Colorado Mustang Car Club.

Gene Boxford of Loveland showed his 1967 Mustang fastback, one of 175 painted a frost turquoise. He's owned the car since 1975 and has driven it 10,000 miles, so that the mileage now is only 41,000.

"It has been in the garage most of the time," Boxford said. "It's a show car really. I let people see what I have because they're pretty rare, the color and the fastback."

Advertisement

Parker resident Geoff Lanham brought along his 2004 Mustang Cobra, which he parked next to a 1998 Mustang Cobra owned by his father, Don Lanham.

"I think I got him hooked on it," Lanham said about his father wanting a Cobra, after restoring Pontiacs for years.

Lanham supercharged the engine of his Cobra, pouring money into the vehicle to make it run faster, he said.

"I didn't need to restore this one," he said.

Kiera Schra, 6, left, Keagan Schra, 6, Sedona Smith, 7, Hunter Smith, 8, and Christian Schra, 10, watch intently at the finish line as they race Hot Wheels cars at the American Legion Post 15 booth during the All American Car Show on Saturday at the Outlets Malls at Loveland. (Steve Stoner / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Randy Mirowski, Loveland Fire Rescue Authority chief, spent four years restoring his 1969 Camaro SS 427, which he painted fire red, a color that suits him considering his profession, he said.

"The fire chief ought to have fire red," Mirowski said.

Mirowski upgraded the Camaro's engine to a V8 and hired out the other repairs and upgrades, including the paint, body and interior work.

"We've pretty much gone through the car front to rear, bumper to bumper," Mirowski said. "I just think obviously the paint job is the thing that stands out most. I just love first-generation Camaros. They're so much fun to drive."

Bob Brown and his wife, Linda Littrell, of Littleton, changed out the power train, or the engine, transmission and rear end, of their 1946 Super Deluxe Convertible, still painted the original color of medium gray metallic.

"It was old and slow. We wanted something we could drive on the highway and go to shows like this," Brown said, adding that he and his wife go to an average of two to three car shows a week. "It takes so much time and detail and care, but you can actually watch it come together, and it's truly a beautiful thing."

The All American Car Show benefits the Hearts & Horses Therapeutic Riding Center and Operation Gratitude.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Shelley Widhalm at 970-669-5050 or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her at twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.