Candidate Interview: Charles Gaba for County Commission Dist. 12 (video)

(Crystal A. Proxmire, May 15, 2016)

Bloomfield Township, MI –Democrat Charles Gaba is running for County Commissioner for District 12, which includes Bloomfield Hills, Bloomfield Township and Birmingham. He is the only Democrat in the race. Incumbent Shelley Goodman Taube and Chuck Moss, who held the seat before her, are facing off in the Republican primary on Aug. 2. The winner of the primary will be on the ballot against Gaba Nov. 8.

When asked about the challenges of running in a traditionally Republican district, Gaba said “In a heavy Republican area obviously the fact that I’m a Democrat at all is a challenge. People don’t tend to like change. But at the same time I would point out that my opponent, whichever one it turns out to be, the two of them have been county commissioner, one or the other, for I think going on 18 years now. They’ve basically been swapping the job back and forth and I think given the state of what’s happened to the Republican Party nationally I think it might be a good year for some people in the area to take a closer look at what the party’s become, and consider an alternative.”

In his interview with oc115, Gaba talked about his experience working on a school bond after he opposed an earlier school consolidation plan, his nationally-recognized work tracking Affordable Care Act implementation, and the priorities of fixing the roads, increasing sidewalks and promoting green technologies.

Also check out our Elections Section or use the search bar at the top to find stories for your community.

All candidates are invited to do an interview and we are doing our best to connect. If you are a candidate that needs information, please email us at editor@oc115.com.

This post will be updated with the links to the interviews of other candidates as they become available.

The oc115 is a nonpartisan news source and interviews are done to help voters get to meet their candidates. We do not endorse any candidates, and statements made in candidate interviews are not fact-checked, though if we know of any errors we will include them in our story.

If you support independent journalism and local news coverage, please consider donating towards oc115 operating expenses at http://oaklandcounty115.com/reader-support/. Also help spread the word about oc115.com by sharing posts that you think are valuable, such as this one.

Learn more about this candidate’s campaign at: https://charlesgaba.com/about.