Topics: Europe, History, Terrorism, The Middle East, the paris attacks, News, Politics News

While embracing France, invoking the spirit of “Nous Sommes Tous Francais” (or “We are all French”), it’s also critically important to have deeper analytical discussions about unresolved issues pertaining to the inextricable bond between imperialist Europe and the Middle East.

It’s time for the world to stop circumventing the unequivocal truth that much of what has happened in Europe with the rising terror threat level and the bloody massacres in Paris — labeled soft target attacks — is rooted in European colonialism of the Middle East. We are not doing anyone justice by pretending these planned coordinated attacks transpired in a vacuum or are just isolated incidents with no basis in past histories.

Much of what has happened recently, whether in Paris, Raqqa, or Beirut, Lebanon, appears to be predicated on policies established by three important early 20th Century documents: a clandestine understanding known as The Sykes-Picot agreement of 1916; the Treaty of Sèvres signed in 1920; and the Treaty of Lausanne of 1923 that superseded The Treaty of Sèvres — which advocated and facilitated the dissolution of the Ottoman Empire. The Treaty of Lausanne presciently delineated focus areas with respect to Turkey, Syria, and Iraq — three current hot spots in the region — by grouping all three in Section III of the treaty. In an article for the Middle East Policy Council journal published in the Winter 2011 issue with the headline “The Troubles in Syria: Spawned by French Divide and Rule,” Dr. Ayse Tekdal Fildis makes an excellent argument that highlights the seed-planting role of European imperialist regimes:

Great Britain and France transformed what had been relatively quiet provinces of the Ottoman Empire into some of the least stable and internationally explosive states in the world. As a consequence, the First World War agreements are at the very heart of the current conflicts and politics in the Middle East. The partition lines in the Arab provinces of the Ottoman Empire originally laid down the terms of the secret Sykes-Picot Agreement in April-May 1916. The agreement gave Mesopotamia (Iraq), the Gulf and the regions bordering Palestine to Great Britain, and Syria and most of the eastern part of the region to France.

It becomes more and more obvious with each passing day that the governments and law enforcement entities of Europe have failed to address a number of issues: growing right wing xenophobic, anti-immigrant and anti-Islamic sentiments; how to solve colonial injustices in a postcolonial world; the home grown European Jihadi terrorism phenomenon; the handling of refugees in a humane, consistent and equitable fashion; and what appears to be a proliferation of under-the-radar and on the radar individuals who clearly think they have nothing to lose and are willing to destroy anything in sight and kill ruthlessly without blinking. Three of the seven individuals who carried out the attacks at Bataclan, the Stade de France and several restaurants were known French nationals. One of those men was a French national from the Courcouronnes section of Évry Ville Nouvelle who had also been on the radar for years and was classified as an extremist since 2010. The alleged mastermind of the Paris attacks, Abdelhamid Abaaoud, was a Belgian national — and Belgium is home to numerous terror cells, with Abaaoud having been connected to a militant cell headquartered in the Molenbeek section of Brussels. Abaaoud was killed November 18 after a battle with police that lasted between six and seven hours. Police pinpointed Abaaoud’s location after tapping the phone of a woman named Hasna Aitboulahcen, who also died during the shootout.

The day before the Paris attacks, Pentagon officials ascertained that Mohammed Emwazi, aka “Jihadi John,” the figure cloaked from head to toe in black who is thought to be the man standing next to beheading victims in ISIS videos, was most likely killed by drone strike in Raqqa, Syria last week. Emwazi, responsible for possibly at least seven beheadings, grew up in London and had possibly been on the MI5 radar as early as 2009.

All of this begs the question: Why are governments and intelligence agencies failing so miserably at stopping these terror threats? Repeating the same mistakes over and over seems to have opened the door to the proliferation of terror cells in London, Paris and Brussels, among other places. Emwazi, for example, grew up in London. Yet, in the wake of the Paris attacks, there has been much focus and speculation around a Syrian passport tracked through Leros, Greece, which has now, according to Agence-France Presse been determined to either be a fake or stolen.

Over-speculation and false information has created an extremely dangerous atmosphere and unnecessary burden on already over-burdened, dispirited Syrian refugees whose situation has been exacerbated over the years by a failure of international policy. This has made it easier for far right-wing nationalists like France’s Marine Le Pen to make inflammatory, hateful statements about immigrants. Le Pen, leader of the National Front party, often makes remarks that mirror the same kind of vacuous, anti-Islamic remarks made by right wing politicians and people like Bill Maher, all of whom prey on audiences suffering from America’s selective amnesia when it comes to history, xenophobic and ignorant anti-immigrant sentiments, and the position of the world outside the Middle East and North Africa which seems to embrace the idea of remaining willfully obtuse as far as the origins of the region’s conflict.