By Paula Span, New York Times News Service

Daily, breathless announcements arrive in my inbox, heralding technology products for older adults.

A “revolutionary” gait-training robot. An emergency response device said to predict falls. A combination home phone and tablet system that “transforms how older seniors connect with and are cared for by their loved ones.”

Daily, too, I hear tales of technology failing to do what older people or their worried families expect.

I hear about frail elders who remove their emergency pendants at bedtime, then fall in the dark when they walk to the bathroom. About a 90-year-old in Sacramento, California who stored his never-worn emergency pendant in his refrigerator. About a Cambridge, Massachusetts, daughter who has tried four or five telephones — not cellphones or smartphones, but ordinary landlines — in an ongoing effort to find one simple enough for her 95-year-old mother to reliably dial her number and have a conversation.

Which scenario represents the likelier future for senior-oriented technology? It depends on whom you ask.

Entrepreneurs are hard at work developing platforms, apps, sites and devices meant to help older adults manage their health, live independently and maintain family and social connections, all laudable goals.

Until a few years ago, “the whole tech world wasn’t sufficiently focused on this enormous opportunity,” said Stephen Johnston, a co-founder of Aging2.0, which connects technology companies with the senior care industry. “It’s changing quite rapidly.”

A couple of recent developments have intensified U.S. entrepreneurial interest, said Laurie Orlov, a business analyst who began the Aging in Place Technology Watch blog in 2008.

Last spring, a startup called Honor, which matches older adults with vetted home care workers, raised $20 million in venture capital from prominent Silicon Valley investors.

In addition, Medicare has begun to broaden the kinds of remote health monitoring — aka telehealth — that it will cover. Eventually, remote monitoring will be “the way people will stay out of emergency rooms and nursing homes,” Orlov predicted.

As a geriatrician at the University of California, San Francisco, Dr. Ken Covinsky often hears from Silicon Valley tinkerers with big ideas. But he has become something of a skeptic.

“It’s incredibly well meaning,” he said. “But there are assumptions that are at odds with the problems our patients and families are facing.”

Tech people seem enamored, for example, with the prospect of continually monitoring older people using sensors that transmit information on when they get up, leave the house or open the refrigerator. Aside from the question of whether elders appreciate such scrutiny, Covinsky suspects that an hour or two a day from a home care worker would do them more good.

“They don’t necessarily need someone to know when they open the fridge,” he said. “They need someone to make or deliver a good meal.”