There's a bit of sexism going on with the manufactured spat between President Barack Obama and Sen. Elizabeth Warren. And it's not because Obama called her "Elizabeth" and referred to her as a "politician." It's because those words were cast as some sort of gender-based attack on one of the senate's most prominent and impressive progressives, when it was, in fact, just a regular attack on a prominent senator who happens to be a woman.



[See: Editorial Cartoons on Barack Obama ]

In an interview with Yahoo! News, Obama was indeed unvarnished in his views of Warren's opposition to the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal the president is trying to accomplish. Warren is concerned about the impact the deal could have on American workers' jobs and salaries, while Obama sees a bigger benefit in expanded global trade. It's a classic standoff between the progressive wing of the party and the more establishment wing, and also a predictable conflict between a president who represents the whole country and a senator who must look out for the interests of a single state. Said Obama:



The truth of the matter is that Elizabeth is, you know, a politician like everybody else. And you know, she's got a voice that she wants to get out there. And I understand that. And on most issues, she and I deeply agree. On this one, though, her arguments don't stand the test of fact and scrutiny.



That's all it was. It wasn't a snide comment about her looks or personality or temperament. He didn't call her "shrill" or "emotional" or "aggressive" or any of the other words peoples use to describe women who dare to disagree with them or challenge a male-dominated power structure. He didn't even patronizingly remind people of her attractiveness, as Obama wrongly did when he called California Attorney General Kamala Harris, at a public, professional event, "by far the best-looking attorney general in the country." It's a political disagreement here, not a mud wrestling match.

But there's been some bizarre impression that Obama somehow insulted Warren as a woman by calling her by her first name and by calling her a politician. Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown says Obama was "disrespectful" of Warren. The National Organization for Women agreed, with president Terry O'Neill saying Obama was suggesting that "the little lady just doesn't know what she's talking about."



[READ: Obama Blasts Elizabeth Warren Over Trade Deal]