Florence defenders Lane Masar (14), Dillon Vanhoutan (23) and Trent Braun (34) tackle an Eagle during the Huskies' game against Faith Christian on Friday in Arvada. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Huskies junior Dillon Vanhoutan hits Eagles quarterback Adam Buchmann after Buchmann throws an incomplete pass during the Florence-Faith Christian game Friday in Arvada. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Arvada — Faith Christian's misdirection offense is tough to follow from the sidelines. And that's with everything happening in sight and without an offensive line blocking your vision.

With a helmet on and 200-plus-pound bodies in front of the multi-option trickery, following who has the ball is a daunting task.

The success the Faith Christian Eagles have with it is the reason they're one of the state's top teams every year, and until Friday, the top-ranked one this season.

The sixth-ranked Florence Huskies defense forced a turnover on downs when it stopped the Eagles offense one-half yard short of a game-tying touchdown — and game-winning extra point try — with one second left on the clock to hang on for a 13-7 win against the Eagles.

Huskies head coach Jeremy Nix said he'd have to watch the game film to be able to single out kids for their play Friday night, but he knew to keep a team like Faith Christian to seven points, the Huskies must have controlled the line of scrimmage.

"If you get caught up watching the backfield, you're going to get tricked by the backfield," Huskies defensive end Jared Bombardier said. "If you stay where you're supposed to be ... you'll get it."

For their misdirection, an Eagles player in motion would run full speed between the quarterback and tailback at the time of the snap. The quarterback would either fling it to the player in motion, toss it to the tailback going right or left, or keep for either an option play or a typical run. The two players without the ball carried out their fakes.

Defensive coordinator Tuffy Lawson preached to his unit that to stop the Eagles' success, they couldn't try to figure out who had the ball, instead each player must stay in their assigned spot and anticipate having to make a tackle.

"It's hard," Nix said when asked about defending the Eagles' rushing attack. "It's so easy to get your eyes in the backfield, and when you get tired it's even easier. ... The misdirection, they run it so well."

The Eagles racked up 222 yards of rushing offense. Daniel Langewisch led the way with a touchdown and 61 yards. Other threats were: Jake Sanders (47 yards), Elijah Durrett (43), Zach Schultz (42) and Adam Buchmann (31).

With 5:52 left in the fourth quarter, the Eagles took over on their own 23-yard line down 13-7. Eleven plays later they had worked to the Huskies' 5-yard line and had only faced one third down.

"They had a couple big plays outside," Huskies middle linebacker Cory Simolon said, "but when we had to toughen up, we toughened up."

Quarterback Buchmann threw the ball nine times in the game for 58 yards to keep the Huskies from stacking the box.

Bizarre sequence

Early in the fourth quarter with a 13-7 lead, the Huskies offensive unit looked like it might put the game out of reach. The team drove 42 yards on seven plays to work to the Eagles 23.

Then the wheels fell off ... and the motor dropped out.

First, the team was called for delay of game pushing it five yards back. On the ensuing first and 15, quarterback Alec Lucero was called for intentional grounding which meant a loss of downs and 10 yards marked from the spot of the foul. That brought a second and 28.

On the very next play, a personal foul was called on the Huskies in the backfield — a 15-yarder from the spot of the foul.

After the three damaging plays, it made a second and 52 from the Huskies' own 35-yard line. One minute before, the team had made a promising scoring opportunity for itself.

"Not too many of those. If you're going to have a bunch of penalties, you might as well do them in a row," Eagles coach Ralph Nance joked after the game.

It was the penalties that quarterback Alec Lucero said stopped the Huskies offense's "phenomenal" performance from scoring more points.

"We just kept killing ourselves," he said. "We'd be driving then holding or false start, or, you saw it, second and 52. How many times does that happen in football?"

NOTES: In a strange penalty call, the umpire dropped a flag about 30 seconds after a play ended on a third and nine incomplete pass by the Eagles. The official listened to pleas from multiple Eagles players. The two players' feet appeared to get tangled on the play, but the pass interference call made what would have been a fourth and nine turn into a first and 10 for Faith Christian. The Huskies forced a punt five plays later.

— The Huskies' two touchdowns came at the perfect times to keep the Eagles from gaining much momentum. Florence scored on its initial drive less than five minutes into the game, then about three minutes after the Eagles tied it in the third quarter. Both touchdowns were by fullback Lane Masar.

— The newest version of the Associated Press' media poll will be released Tuesday, and the Huskies will almost certainly be in the top five — and probably in the top three.