Local firefighters donned yellow protective suits and took turns dunking themselves in the icy water at Louisville's Harper Lake for a training session.

Rocky Mountain Fire District and Louisville Fire Protection District joined together this year for ice rescue training at the lake. Today was the final session, allowing all crews to complete the two-hour training. Volunteer firefighters also were invited.

Firefighters practiced rescuing each other using boogie boards and ropes, as well as working on self rescue skills in case they get into trouble during an ice rescue. Their protective suits are buoyant, with weights at the ankles to help them stay vertical in the water.

Pat Maynes, left, and Annalisa Laube pull in the victim from the shore during an exercise on Sunday. Rocky Mountain Fire District and Louisville Fire Protection District held their final ice rescue training of 2015 at Harper Lake. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

For the rescues, a firefighters would estimate how many lengths of 150-foot rope he or she would need, then grabbed a board and walked across the slippery ice to the victim. The rescuer dropped into the water, tied a rope to the victim and placed a boogie board underneath before calling out to a partner on the shore to start pulling.

The boogie boards, said Rocky Mountain Division Chief Michelle Kelly, help stabilize the victims and cushion them as they're pulled across the ice to shore.

Response times, including two minutes for firefighters to grab their gear at the station, range from four to 10 minutes after Rocky Mountain gets a call, she said.

"Ten minutes is a long time to be in that water," she said. "Hypothermia sets in really rapidly."

Kelly said both departments have a few lakes and many small ponds in their service area, including Baseline Reservoir and Harper Lake. The departments only handle surface water rescues. If the victim slips below the water, Boulder County dive teams are called in.

At Harper, Kelly said, firefighters recently used chainsaws to make holes in the ice for the training that have since widened as the temperature warmed up. While the ice is still a solid ring around the outside of the lake, it's melted in the middle and right next to the banks — making firefighters nervous to hear from neighbors that some adults are using the ice as a shortcut.

Griff Jones, Rocky Mountain's ice rescue coordinator, said the two departments haven't received any ice rescue calls yet this season, but expect them to start soon as the freeze and thaw temperatures of early spring make ice increasingly unstable.

"The ice is changing every day," he said. "No ice is safe."

Jones said his advice for someone who falls through the ice is to yell and get the attention of others to call 911 — and for those helping to try to keep the victim calm, but not get on the ice to help with a rescue.

"That's how you end up with two victims," he said.

Many of the ice rescue calls the fire departments get are for off-leash dogs that fall through.

If an animal falls through ice, Jones also advises calling 911 and leaving the rescue to the professionals. If the ice wasn't thick enough to support a pet, he said, it won't support a person.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa