Tea party hunts RINOs in Connecticut



























Photo: Contributed Photo, File Photo Image 1 of / 8 Caption Close Image 1 of 8 Connecticut Republican chairman Christopher Healy. Connecticut Republican chairman Christopher Healy. Photo: Contributed Photo, File Photo Image 2 of 8 Mark Greenberg Mark Greenberg Photo: Contributed Photo, File Photo Image 3 of 8 Bob MacGuffie Bob MacGuffie Photo: Contributed Photo Image 4 of 8 Bob MacGuffie protested in front of Congressman Jim Himes's Stamford, Conn. office protesting Himes's impending vote for Obamacare. Bob MacGuffie protested in front of Congressman Jim Himes's Stamford, Conn. office protesting Himes's impending vote for Obamacare. Photo: Contributed Photo Image 5 of 8 Members of the Southington, Conn. Tea Party holding a protest on Sept 17, 2013. Members of the Southington, Conn. Tea Party holding a protest on Sept 17, 2013. Photo: Contributed Photo Image 6 of 8 Members of the Tea Party and at the Iwo Jima Memorial in Newington on Oct 13, 2013. Members of the Tea Party and at the Iwo Jima Memorial in Newington on Oct 13, 2013. Photo: Contributed Photo Image 7 of 8 Trey Reynolds, of Stamford and Bob MacGuffie, of Fairfield, show their support for Republican Congressional candidate Dan Debicella before the 4th Congressional District Candidates' Debate sponsored by the League of Women Voters at Wilton High School on Sunday, Oct. 24, 2010. less Trey Reynolds, of Stamford and Bob MacGuffie, of Fairfield, show their support for Republican Congressional candidate Dan Debicella before the 4th Congressional District Candidates' Debate sponsored by the ... more Photo: Amy Mortensen, File Photo Image 8 of 8 Tea party hunts RINOs in Connecticut 1 / 8 Back to Gallery

They fancy themselves the big tent party.

But Republicans in Connecticut have increasingly become a magnet for party crashers affiliated with the tea party, a political movement scratching and clawing for relevance in a liberal state that can't quite bring itself to warm up to more traditional Yankee moderates.

Picketers from the tea party are a regular phenomenon at many GOP events, including a recent fund-raising dinner in Norwalk where 4th District congressional candidate Dan Debicella received a lifetime achievement award from the state party. They did not come bearing accolades for Debicella, who many in the tea party have tagged with the label of a RINO, a Republican In Name Only, for his positions on social issues and immigration.

You can find them on the campaign trail, too, and even embedded with the media at news conferences, at the ready with canned questions on gun control and video cameras rolling. But how much influence does this decentralized splinter group, one that doesn't track membership numbers, command in Connecticut?

"I think the tea party as a brand has run its course," said Ronald Wilcox, a Tea Party Patriots organizer from Newtown who ran unsuccessfully for state GOP chairman in June. "It's more of a philosophy. You either support conservative values or you don't."

The relationship between the Republican establishment and the tea party in Connecticut runs from lukewarm to cold, with many GOP stalwarts privately dismissive of the "Don't Tread on Me" flag-waving fringe.

From the perspective of some tea party leaders, the GOP is resigned to repeat its past failures in next year's mid-term elections if it goes forward with its presumptive candidates for state and federal office.

"There's really no fighters in there," said Bob MacGuffie, co-founder of the Fairfield-based political action committee Right Principles, a tea party-affiliated group. "You have liberals running the Republican Party."

In addition to Debicella, the tea party has dogged state Senate Minority Leader John McKinney since he announced he was running for governor in late June, holding up signs saying, "McKinney Must Go" on the trail.

McKinney was the chief GOP negotiator of a statewide crackdown on assault weapons and high-capacity gun magazines passed in response to the Sandy Hook Elementary School massacre.

Messages seeking comment were left for McKinney and Debicella by Hearst Connecticut Newspapers.

State GOP Chairman Jerry Labriola Jr. downplayed the friction between the establishment and the tea party.

"There's more that unites us than divides us as a party," Labriola said. "We will work to nominate a strong slate of fiscally responsible, pro-economic growth candidates to help turn the tide on the Democrats reign of economic terror in Connecticut. This will help to not only unite our base but give us broad appeal with unaffiliated voters and conservative Democrats to form a winning coalition in 2014."

When Tom Foley embarked last month in Bridgeport on the exploratory phase of a potential run for governor, reporters weren't the only ones peppering him with questions. So did Chris Ford, a tea party-affiliated blogger from Woodbury, who many Republicans simply know by his Internet handle, Palin Smith.

"What about the gun bill that he signed? What's your latest position on it?" Ford interjected, referring to the gun law signed by Gov. Dannel P. Malloy in April.

Foley characterized his position on the legislation as unambiguous, saying that had he been governor a much different bill addressing mental health and gun violence in the cities would have been passed.

In an interview with Hearst Connecticut Newspapers, Foley said he expects the tea party will raise Second Amendment issues in the upcoming GOP nominating contest.

"I think there are a lot of people that are upset with the other candidates having voted for the gun bill," Foley said.

Christopher Healy, who ran the state GOP before Labriola, said many people associated with the tea party are single-issue voters who get a bad rap.

"People use it as a pejorative," Healy said.

Since the rise of the tea party nationally in 2009, those interviewed by the newspaper said there has been a dynamic shift in the group's approach in Connecticut.

"You don't find us on the corner as much," Macuffie said. "People have burrowed into the system." MacGuffie said the tea party's efforts are paying dividends at the grassroots level, with members of the group elected to local school boards, town councils and Republican Town Committees.

Edward Dadakis, a Republican State Central Committee member from Greenwich, said the tea party would be wise to stick to its bread and butter.

"I think where the tea party can really shine and make a difference is focus on fiscal issues and leave social issues off the table," Dadakis said.

The tea party also needs to temper its expectations in a place like Connecticut, where Democrats have a stranglehold on the Legislature, governor's office and congressional delegation, Dadakis said. "I'd rather see a moderate Republican elected than a conservative Republican get defeated," Dadakis said, adding that the very candidates the tea party calls RINOs all have a track record of winning office.

One candidate who is gaining traction with the tea party is Litchfield businessman Mark Greenberg, a three-time GOP candidate in the 5th District.

"I share a lot of the same ideals as the tea party," Greenberg said.

Greenberg said that Elizabeth Esty, the Democratic freshman who represents the district, has already tried to connect him with the tea party in fundraising appeals.

"She's going to try to blacken me as one of those people who shut down the government and continue to do so," Greenberg said. "I think people are smarter than that."

Greenberg said that the principles of the tea party, such as fiscal restraint and protecting the borders, transcend party.

"I could make an argument that Elizabeth Esty is a tea party Democrat," Greenberg said. "To me, these are American ideals."

Within the leadership ranks of the state GOP, Republicans have been slow to embrace their conservative cousins. But after Wilcox lost the state chairmanship election to Labriola, party leaders tapped him as congressional coordinator for the state GOP.

"For me, since I've been affiliated with the tea party, I've been demonized," Wilcox said. "They know that I'm not a rebel-rouser or a fire bomber."

Wilcox called on his tea party compatriots to work constructively with Republicans.

"My message to the tea party is that if you don't like the candidates and you don't like the bills that are being passed, then the best way to combat that is to become part of the system so you have a voice," he said.

neil.vigdor@scni.com; 203-625-4436; http://twitter.com/gettinviggy