AUSTIN — Texas has shifted screening of some poor children’s applications for health coverage from a private contractor to state workers, smoothing internal processes before next month’s launch of a state health insurance marketplace under Obamacare.

The state’s umbrella social services agency says it transferred the work to merge two separate hotlines and end time-consuming swaps of files between state workers and vendor employees when poor families sign up their children for health insurance.

The Health and Human Services Commission has wanted such a consolidation for years. But the Oct. 1 opening of the federal health law’s online insurance marketplace spurred the state to act, spokeswoman Stephanie Goodman said Wednesday.

“We moved that work to state staff because we needed to move all our cases into one computer system so we’d only have to connect one system to the federal marketplace,” she said.

On Jan. 1, the federal law also will change eligibility rules for Medicaid and the Children’s Health Insurance Program — mostly in highly technical ways. That was another incentive to make the switch.

Maximus Inc. of Reston, Va., which has run the CHIP eligibility system in recent years, laid off 110 of the 144 employees affected. The rest were reassigned to call centers and other support services the company provides for the state, Goodman said.

Goodman said giving state employees the CHIP screening tasks for the first time doesn’t signal dissatisfaction with Maximus or lingering problems with the state’s partly privatized eligibility system. But an official of the Texas State Employees Union criticized the contractor’s performance.

Maximus’ workers often made mistakes in processing CHIP cases, said Myko Gedutiz, lead organizer for the union. It has called on the state to use savings on its three-year, $315.3 million contract with the company to hire more eligibility workers.

Leslie Wolfe, president of Maximus’ unit handling the Texas contract, disputed the union’s contention.

“We have met or exceeded the performance metrics of our contract,” Wolfe said. She noted that CHIP enrollment is at an all-time high of nearly 608,000 youngsters. She also said customer satisfaction is at record levels.

Goodman, the state spokeswoman, called the union’s criticism “completely baseless.”

She acknowledged, though, that Maximus employees shared responsibility with the state Department of Aging and Disability Services for a recent mix-up. Nearly 10,000 elderly and disabled Texans received by mistake a letter announcing they’d be shifted into a Medicaid managed care plan.

Follow Robert T. Garrett on Twitter at @RobertTGarrett.