Members of the Oregon Nurses Association. (Facebook: Oregon Nurses Association)

PORTLAND, Ore. (KOIN 6) — The 100-year-old Oregon Nurses Association has endorsed Oregon Senator Jeff Merkley over Oregon pediatric neurosurgeon Dr. Monica Wehby.

Jeff Merkley’s press secretary, Lindsey O’Brien, said Tuesday the endorsement hinged on both candidates’ positions on the Supreme Courts’ Hobby Lobby ruling on the Affordable Care Act, which gave employers the right deny employees health coverage for birth control based on religious beliefs.

Wehby stood in favor of the ruling, which passed in June, while Merkley opposed it.

Oregon Nurses Association Director Susan King said “as nurses, we understand how important it is to ensure everyone has access to the full range of health care services, and Jeff is the only candidate in this race fighting against efforts to limit patients’ health care options and take away access to essential health care services.”

Merkley’s wife, Mary Sorteberg, is an Oregon nurse.

Wehby, one of Oregon’s top pediatric medical professionals, opposed the Affordable Care Act from its inception in 2009 and has championed more competition for health insurance plans.

Monica Wehby’s Communications Director, Dean Petrone, called the endorsement “odd.”

“It’s an odd endorsement seeing that Jeff Merkley championed a law responsible for canceling the health plans of 150,000 Oregonians, raising patient costs, cutting benefits to seniors, and reducing access to quality, affordable healthcare,” he said.

Petrone also challenged Merkley’s support for Medicare.

Merkley, he said, “vot[ed] on three separate occasions against preventing cuts to Medicare Advantage and once for one of the biggest cuts in Medicare history.”

But, O’Brien said a Wehby-backed budget would force “extreme cuts” to Medicare, Social Security, and would jeopardize seniors’ retirement benefits. Petrone called those cuts “conjectural.”

What’s next?

Regardless, Oregon has one of the highest percentages of Medicare Advantage enrollees in the nation. As Cover Oregon enrollees transition to the Affordable Care Act, health and health policy remain central issues in the Oregon Senate debate.