The Lyons Old-time Square Dance at the Oskar Blues even room in Lyons on Feb. 7. ( Vince Dean / For the Times-Call )

Correction: An earlier version of this story included an incorrect date for the Lyons Old-time square dance.

For nearly six decades LaVern Johnson has twirled, marched and hopped around dance halls in both poofy petticoats and near-to-the-ankle prairie skirts.

She still picks one from her collection of about 30 outfits to wear to events hosted by The Red Rock Ramblers Summer Square Dance Club of Lyons, the organization she and her late husband launched in 1958.

But come winter, the Lyons native and community activist leaves her costumes and other modern western square dance customs behind to dance as a she did as a child at the Lyons Old-time Square Dance.

Once sponsored by the town of Lyons Department of Parks, Recreation & Cultural Events, the dance now is run independently by organizer Ellen Rosenberg.

When Johnson was a girl, folks took up square dancing the way settlers to the American West introduced it.

"It was a more 'go with the flow' dance that uses only about 20 steps," she said. "That is what they did in the old days, and that is why they call this an 'old-time' square dance."

Old-time Square Dance What: Lyons Old-time Square Dance When: 7 to 10 p.m. Saturday, March 7, and Saturday, April 11 Where: Oskar Blues event room, 303 Main St., Lyons Cost: Adults, $8; kids and seniors, $5; families, $20 More information: Email oldtimedances@musicinlyons.com or call 303-823-0816 or visit Lyons Old-time Square Dance on Facebook

Lessons in Longmont The Hix "N" Chix Square Dance Club also hosts dances and offers lessons at the Longmont Senior Center, 910 Longs Peak Ave. Families, couples and singles of all ages welcome. For more information, visit www.hix-n-chix.net/ or call Ann Weber, 303-485-9233.

Modern western square dancing practiced by her Red Rock Ramblers and popularized in the 1950s across the United States requires a dress code, a partner and lessons to learn between 65 and 100 calls, she continued.

It is so technical that participants prefer to dance to a predictable recording versus to the live band hired by "old-time" dances, Rosenberg said.

"Old-time square dancing is sort of at the other end of the spectrum from club square dancing. It's geared toward everybody. ... And just because it's a square dance doesn't mean you have to do squares all the time," she said of the dance hosted by Oskar Blues one Saturday night a month from January to April.

No experience necessary

At the February event, 83 dancers packed the floor to form squares.

But they also moved into circles, reels and waltzes.

They bumped hips and pressed palms. They stomped and shuffled as caller Patricia Danscen gave cues and The Black Water Ramblers played.

Nancy Thorwardson, 59, of Lyons, hustled back to the dance floor after recovering from hip replacement surgery and enjoyed watching the newcomers get the hang of it.

Dance caller Patricia Danscen directs dancers Feb. 7 at the Lyons Old-time Square Dance at the Oskar Blues even room in Lyons. (Vince Dean / For the Times-Call)

"The dances are all taught by the caller. You don't actually even need to know your right from your left, although that does help," she joked. "Some people just jog all the time."

A multigenerational draw

Such flexibility makes room for more generations, noted Lea Ann Zuellig, 46, of Fort Collins.

"There are just not a lot of places where you can bring a 2-year-old and a 90-year-old and everybody in between and have fun," she said.

While her husband played fiddle with the band, she danced with her 9-year-old fraternal twin daughters, Ella and Maddy Zuellig.

Ella took a break midway through the event to unpack why such an old-fashioned dance works for her.

"The hardest thing is learning how to dance with people outside of my family," she said. "But even if people are strangers, they still act like they are friends here. ... And it feels like I can mess up and I won't get a bad grade."

Sam Miller, 66, of Lyons, runs the sound system and suspects adults show up for the same reason.

"They are all kids," he said, smiling as dancers laughed over their fumbles and moved on. "Every one of them is a kid, or they wouldn't be here."

In 1992, Colorado's General Assembly designated square dancing as the state's official dance without specifying the style.

Johnson noted that though the two square dances in Lyons operate during different seasons and appeal to dancers of different skill levels, they both honor traditional music and dance.

"And the exercise and the camaraderie is the same," she said. "It's like one big family out there."

Pam Mellskog can be reached at p.mellskog@gmail.com or at 303-746-0942.