Construction worker Gemahl Maika was shot a number of times execution style outside his home.

A WOMAN accused of being an accessory to the murder of a Crown witness in one of NSW's biggest drug syndicate cases has been granted bail under the state’s new laws.

Christine Saliba, 34, faced Parramatta court yesterday via video link, charged with assisting in the murder of Gemahl Maika in 2011.

Saliba is among five people charged this week in relation to the death of Mr Maika, who was shot in the driveway of his Glen Alpine­ home.

A man is arrested this week in relation to the murder of Crown witness Gemahl Maika.

The 38-year-old Mr Maika was a key witness in an investigation into the multi-million-dollar “Golden Gun” drug syndicate, which is believed to have imported more than 700kg of cocaine into Australia. The case received its name because a gold-plated Magnum handgun was seized during the 2007 bust.

The prosecution will allege Saliba “incited, procured and counselled” her husband Luke Sparos and co-accused Maximillian Mazzilli in the lead-up to Mr Maika's murder.

Saliba, of Banksia, sat emotionless in the room as the prosecution argued she was a flight risk, a risk to the community and at risk of interfering with witnesses.

Detectives arrest a man this week in relation to the shooting death of Gemahl Maika. Picture: Police Media

But the defence told the court Saliba had ties to the community and needed to care for her young daughter.

Magistrate George Zdenkowski acknowledged there was an “unacceptable risk” in allowing Saliba to walk free on bail, but told the court the risks could be mitigated under the new bail act.

“I have no doubt that this is an extremely serious offence, the murder of a Crown witness,” he said. “There is an unacceptable risk of interfering with a witness.”

But Mr Zdenkowski told the court the measures put forward to mitigate the risks, including strict reporting conditions, were sufficient.

Saliba will have to report to a police station twice a day, surrender her passport and stick to a strict curfew.

However she will be allowed to leave home to get her daughter to and from school.

Bail was set at $50,000.

Her husband Sparos, charged with murder, ­appeared before Lithgow Local Court yesterday and did not apply for bail.

Accused hitman Mazzilli, 33, was refused bail in Parramatta Local Court.