Pope Francis may have put a more pastoral face to the teachings of the Catholic Church, but its doctrines are being reinforced as the United States Catholic Conference of Bishops meets today through Nov. 13 in Baltimore for its annual Fall General Assembly.

Bishops, including the Rev. Mitchell T. Rozanski, the former Baltimore auxiliary bishop installed recently in Springfield, will discuss issues that are seen as basic to Church teaching, as well as its advancement in a secular world. These include Church opposition to gay marriage, abortion and the use of contraception.

It is also believed the bishops, during their meeting, will select three or four representatives for the General Assembly of the Synod of Bishops on the Family. This meeting, scheduled next October in Rome, is a followup to the recent synod that made global headlines for the debate over the reception of homosexuals in the Church. The 2015 synod will review the recommendations from the September synod, and present them to Francis.

A television ad, from the bishops, after this Sunday's "Chalice of Salvation," the weekly Mass broadcast from the Springfield diocese's studios, featured Boston's Cardinal Sean O'Malley in a fast-moving sequence of images set to music. The presentation, with a smiling O'Malley in a waving pose characteristic of Francis, contrasted somewhat with what it was promoting -- a return, or, for some, a continuation, of traditional Catholic practices, like saying the daily rosary, and abstaining from meat on Fridays. There was no reference to martyr saints, whose lives were portrayed in films shown at Catholic youth centers in the 1950s, but evangelization was embedded in a reference to religious liberty. The bishops see the Church, in the United States, under legal attack, on a variety of issues.

The ad uses the word movement and directs viewers to the conference website, where, in recent years, the bishops have developed an initiative called, "Marriage, Unique for a Reason." The pages, which include videos, cover Church teachings on marriage, its opposition to same sex marriage and legal issues involved.

Both O'Malley and Archbishop William E. Lori, of Baltimore, have gone on record in their opposition to legislation in the U.S. Senate, the Protect Women's Health From Corporate Interference Act of 2014, written in response to the U.S. Supreme Court ruling in Burwell v. Hobby Lobby, that allows family-held businesses to opt out of contraceptive coverage for employees. In a July letter to the U.S. Senate, the two called the act "potentially attacking all existing federal protections of conscience and religious freedom regarding health coverage mandates." O'Malley chairs the bishops' committee on pro-life activities; Lori, the ad hoc committee on religious liberty. Lori is scheduled to make presentations at the Baltimore assembly on religious liberty, and on what are regarded as pro-life issues within the Church.

The bishops have been equally outspoken in their opposition to same-sex marriage. Archbishop Salvatore J. Cordileone, of San Francisco, who chairs the bishops' subcommittee for the promotion and defense of marriage, and who will speak on the topic at the fall assembly, called a recent circuit court of appeal's ruling on the upholding of same-sex marriage bans, in four states, an "acknowledgment of the reasonable arguments for preserving the true definition of marriage and the Court's respect for the self-determination of states on this issue."

The Catholic Church is involved in a number of court challenges to the Affordable Care Act. Should the Church prevail, its doctrines could have implications way beyond those in its pews, both in this country, and in countries, like Africa, where there are harsh laws against homosexuality, and where many women lack access to modern contraception. Catholic bishops there have been opposed to having international organizations that deal with issues of family planning.

At their assembly, the bishops will be addressed for the first time by their conference president, Archbishop Joseph E. Kurtz of Louisville, Kentucky, who was elected last year for a three-year-term. Kentucky is one of the states, where the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Sixth Circuit, upheld bans against same-sex marriage, and "the right of the people of a state to define marriage as they see it." Archbishop Carlo Maria Viganò, apostolic nuncio to the United States, who was recently in Springfield, for Rozanski's installation at St. Michael's Cathedral, will also address the bishops, and they will elect new members of their various committees. Worcester Bishop Robert McManus is said to be a candidate to chair the committee on doctrine. The assembly will discuss a number of liturgical issues, as well.

The bishops' hope to be supported in their focus by a possible visit by Pope Francis, in 2015, to Philadelphia, for the Vatican's World Meeting of Families, where the theme is "Love is Our Mission: The Family Fully Alive." There are 266 active bishops in the United States.