U.S. Rep. Brad Schneider, a first-term Democrat, and Republican challenger Bob Dold clashed Wednesday on how to reform Social Security and Medicare, two enormous entitlement programs with long-term funding problems.

Appearing before the Tribune's Editorial Board, Schneider repeatedly attacked Dold's voting record, accusing of him of consistently voting along party lines on issues such as the Affordable Care Act and the environment.

Dold, considered a moderate Republican, in turn criticized Schneider's effectiveness as a legislator and emphasized his own willingness to broker compromise on "the big problems" when he served a term in Congress before losing to Schneider two years ago.

For voters in the north suburbs' 10th District looking for clear differences between the candidates in a close race, a few emerged in some tense exchanges on how to fix entitlement programs.

While Dold called for action to make Social Security and Medicare more financially secure, Schneider warned against cutbacks that would fall heavily on those most in need.

Dold said Schneider was using the issue against him in campaign ads. "My opponent will be the first one out there saying Bob Dold wants to raise the … Social Security age," Dold said.

"Bob, because you said it, we're quoting your words!" Schneider said.

"I'm simply saying that you're trying to vilify someone for saying, 'What is a potential solution to try to solve the problem?'" Dold said.

"Raising the age of Social Security retirement is not the answer," Schneider said. "For so many jobs that are back-breaking jobs, physically burdensome jobs, we're raising the age already to 67. These people are going to struggle to get to that point."

Dold said raising the Social Security eligibility age could be done gradually and was just one possible solution that should be considered.

"What you're saying is you're willing to let it go bankrupt," Dold said to Schneider. "I'm not willing to let my children inherit a system, pay into a system and not be able to get it –"

"Bob, what you're doing is scaring people," Schneider interjected. "The system is not going bankrupt."

"What you're doing is scaring people," Dold fired back. "What we're trying to do is solve a problem."

Pressed by Editorial Board members to offer some alternative solutions, Schneider said one idea he could support is asking wealthy people to forgo Social Security benefits and in exchange providing a credit on any estate taxes due when they died.

"There's no windfall, there's no shortfall," Schneider said. "We've extended the solvency of Social Security."

Social Security trust funds are expected to run out of money in 2033, according to the 2014 annual report of the Social Security and Medicare Boards of Trustees. Medicare's Hospital Insurance Trust Fund is expected to be depleted in 2030, according to the same report.

Schneider said the passing of the Affordable Care Act was an important step toward preserving the Medicare system.

"Making sure that people have access to preventive medicine for the first time ever as a nation?" Schneider said. "That's a big deal."

Dold said the Affordable Care Act got some things right — such as ensuring health care for people with pre-existing conditions — but it needs significant reform.

"If we look at the Affordable Care Act, there's a lot of things we have to do to fix it. … It doesn't address cost or quality of health care," Dold said.