Minimum Wage Debate

Following New York and California's decisions to increase their state minimum wages to $15, ProCon.org, the nation's leading source for unbiased presentations on controversial topics, has published new nonpartisan research on the debate over raising the federal minimum wage.



The new website, available at http://minimum-wage.procon.org, presents sourced pro and con arguments, as well as an extensive illustrated history. Sources referenced include the Congressional Budget Office, OECD, numerous think tanks, and economists at institutions such as Cornell, UCLA, Johns Hopkins, Duke, Oxford, University of Chicago, and the Federal Reserve.



ProCon.org's minimum wage website shows position statements in response to the question "Should the federal minimum wage be increased?" from prominent individuals and organizations including: Barack Obama (pro), Ed Rensi, former CEO of McDonalds (con), National Employment Law Project (pro), US Chamber of Commerce (con), Mitt Romney (pro), and Donald Trump (con).



The minimum wage website also features a video gallery, state-by-state minimum wage levels, presidential candidate views on minimum wage, and Did You Know? facts including:



The first state minimum wage laws, introduced between 1912 and the early 1930s, only covered women and minors. The first to cover men was introduced in 1937 in Oklahoma.





The first federal minimum wage law was signed in 1938. Today it affects 2.5 million Americans, roughly 55% of whom are older than 25.





29 states and Washington, DC have set their minimum wages above the $7.25 per hour federal minimum.



Kamy Akhavan, President of ProCon.org, said: "The minimum wage debate has been an ongoing battle since the 1920s. Our 23 million readers were tired of hearing the same old partisan noise on this issue, so many of them asked us to get involved. ProCon.org gives people the best information on both sides of the debate, so they can think for themselves and make their own decisions."



The new website took several months and 400+ hours to create, and marks the organization's 55th issue explored. For more information visit the ProCon.org minimum wage website at http://minimum-wage.procon.org.