The healthcare sector remains one of the bigger focuses for investors, particularly in coming days as everyone anticipates the outcome of the Supreme Court’s ruling on a case that could affect the future of the Affordable Care Act. It comes just as the major health insurers are considering big tie-ups (Anthem buying Cigna, Humana possibly being sold to Aetna or Cigna) that has heightened interest in one of the few sectors that’s expected to show reasonably solid earnings growth, something we’ll get more clues about in coming weeks.

The health sector is anticipated to post year-over-year growth of 4.1 percent in the second quarter, better than most other sectors save consumer discretionary names, financials and the tiny telecom sector.

Both the equipment and services sector stocks and the pharma/biotech/insurance names are expected to see reasonably solid growth. The bigger concerns revolve around both the ACA ruling, which could short-circuit the insurance of more than six million people, and the prospects of more consolidation in an industry that’s not exactly known for its efficiency and strong customer service. The DOJ will end up looking at all of these proposed combinations for sure to figure it out – with Jonathan Lewis, antitrust lawyer at BakerHostetler in Washington, predicting a “long review process” for any mergers.

The prospect of a deal naturally produced a flurry of bets in the options market that Cigna, which rose to about $162 a share on Monday, rising to $185 or $190 by the middle of August, but an additional 1,900 contracts protecting against the stock falling below $150 by that time as well. Humana didn’t see as much in the way of options action but what activity there was trended to the more optimistic side.

Very few are betting against these stocks right now – short interest in Cigna, UnitedHealth, Aetna, Humana and Anthem is ridiculously low, with Anthem the most shorted stock with about 0.8 percent of its outstanding shares out on loan for short bets, per Markit’s data as of Friday, and all of them save Humana are within 5 percent of their 52-week highs. The sector barely missed being the 2014 leader, with its 23 percent gain trailing on only utilities, and so far this year it’s the only sector that’s managed to surpass a 10 percent gain. Valuation-wise, it makes it a bit expensive, as S&P healthcare stocks have a current price-to-earnings ratio of about 24.3.

The performance is even more stark when restricting that to just the managed care stocks (the five we’ve mentioned so much). They have a P/E at about 20, and this index of S&P Managed Health Care names has risen for seven consecutive years, gaining more than 30 percent in four of the last five years. It’s not strange to wonder about whether something might cause these to break, be it the Supremes, be it the DOJ, or even just a “sell the news” reaction as consolidation hits an endpoint.