LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Word & Brown General Agency of Nevada announced today it has entered into an agreement that will allow it to quote and enroll local businesses in the Nevada Health Co-Op, a not-for-profit healthcare coverage alternative created under the Affordable Care Act (ACA).

Headquartered in Las Vegas, the Co-Op offers a range of not-for-profit health plans to individuals, families and small employers on the Silver State Health Insurance Exchange. The Co-Op also offers new healthcare coverage options to those opting not to enroll in Nevada’s state exchange. It is sponsored by self-insurance groups with a long history of providing excellent and affordable member-focused healthcare in Southern Nevada and the Washoe County areas. The Co-Op is currently enrolling members statewide for 2014.

“The Co-Op is a great new option for Nevadans to consider as they look at all of the healthcare programs available to them in 2014,” said Darrell Smith, regional vice president of Word & Brown Nevada. “As always, we strongly suggest working through independent brokers who can fully explain the Co-Op, compare it with other options and help find the best health-benefits solution for a company or individual.”

Word & Brown is Nevada’s premier general agency and supports independent, licensed brokers to quote, analyze, present and enroll groups in health-benefits products. By contracting with Word & Brown and leveraging the existing relationships these brokers have with Nevada’s small and mid-size group market, the Nevada Health Co-Op is now better positioned to reach the commercial market and meet its enrollment goals.

“We’re confident that as more brokers come to know the Nevada Health Co-Op and start including it in their proposals, the Co-Op will earn its fair share of the commercial, off-exchange group market,” Smith said.

Nevada has one of the highest uninsured rates in the nation with 545,000 uninsured Nevadans. Under the ACA most of these residents will be required to have health insurance, and the Co-Op is being viewed as one viable route to achieving this.

For nearly 30 years, the Word & Brown General Agency has been recognized as an insurance industry and technology leader as well as a trusted resource for brokers selling individual and family health and ancillary insurance, Medicare coverage and group insurance solutions. The Word & Brown General Agency is part of The Word & Brown Companies, which provide insurance services nationwide through more than 50,000 brokers to hundreds of thousands of consumers and approximately 60,000 employers with nearly 6.5 million eligible employees.

About Nevada Health Co-Op

The Nevada Health Co-Op is a not-for-profit health insurance alternative created under the Affordable Care Act administered by Nevadans for Nevadans. “Simply Better” is the mission of the Co-Op. The not-for-profit is focused on creating a simple consumer-owned health plan that works easily for patients, doctors, employers and the community. Headquartered in the heart of Las Vegas, the Co-Op serves the Nevada community directly with great understanding of the needs of the people, particularly among diverse populations and small businesses struggling to access and provide healthcare coverage.

The Nevada Health Co-Op is now making appointments for enrollment. To learn more, please visit the Co-Op at www.nevadahealthcoop.org or call 702-823-COOP (2667).