AARP Foundation this year is again providing free tax assistance and preparation for taxpayers with low to moderate income through the Tax-Aide program.

In Michigan, more than 1,000 Tax-Aide volunteers help more than 70,000 people each year at over 150 sites across the state.

AARP Foundation Tax-Aide, in its 48th year, is the nation’s largest free tax assistance and preparation service, giving special attention to the older population. You do not need to be a member of AARP or a retiree to use this service.

“We could not provide this valuable service without our dedicated volunteers, who make an indelible mark on the communities they help,” said Thomas Kimble, State President of AARP Michigan.

Nationwide, AARP Foundation Tax-Aide’s 36,000 volunteers at more than 5,000 sites provided 2.6 million people with free tax help in 2014. Tax-Aide volunteers are trained and IRS-certified each year to ensure their knowledge of revisions to the U.S. tax code. Taxpayers who used AARP Foundation Tax-Aide received $1.3 billion in income tax refunds and more than $257 million in Earned Income Tax Credits (EITCs).

Last year in Michigan, 1,034 AARP Foundation Tax-Aide volunteers at 164 sites helped 70,712 people file their federal, state and local tax returns. Taxpayers served by the program received refunds totaling $26.5 million and nearly $3.8 million in Earned Income Tax Credits. The program is offered at local senior centers, libraries and other convenient locations.

Preparation of tax returns under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) rules will require additional documentation from taxpayers this year. The good news is that for taxpayers on Medicare or Medicare Advantage for the full year, no further information is required. Otherwise, taxpayers need to bring along their family’s health insurance coverage information including information about Marketplace/Exchange purchases, and health care exemptions.

For more information on documentation that is required or to locate an AARP Foundation Tax-Aide site near you, visit www.aarp.org/findtaxhelp or call 1-888-AARPNOW (1-888-227-7669). AARP Foundation Tax-Aide is offered in conjunction with the IRS.

For a closer look at the Tax-Aide program in Michigan, see the story on the AARP Michigan web page at: http://states.aarp.org/mi-taxaide/