Candidate Survey: U.S. House District 10

Editor’s Note: The Lincoln Times-News submitted a series of seven questions to candidates running for the Republican nomination for the U.S. House of Representatives District 10 seat: incumbent Rep. Patrick McHenry and challengers Jeff Gregory and Albert Wiley Jr. Their responses are listed below.

If you could introduce one piece of legislation, with absolute certainty that it would become law, what would it be?

Jeff Gregory: Repeal NAFTA, CAFTA and the Pacific Trade Agreement, so the North Carolina District 10 could bring back the good jobs that the traitors in Congress have given away with these unfair trade practices. I would also attach the impeachment of Barack Obama and the arrest of Hillary Clinton for national security breach and the murder of our heroes in Benghazi.

Patrick McHenry (incumbent): Something must be done to end the tragedy of abortion in this country. Every day innocent human lives are ended across the country and our political leaders refuse to do anything to stop it. Throughout my time in office I’ve always fought for and stood in defense of life and I will continue to do so in the future. I’m proud to have a 100 percent pro-life record and receive the support of leading pro-life groups including Susan B. Anthony List.

Last year, we saw the disgusting actions of Planned Parenthood exposed by undercover videos. This organization’s actions are horrific and we must ensure that no federal funding is used to continue their atrocities. Planned Parenthood conducts an abortion every two minutes on average and 94 percent of their pregnancy services are for abortions. Women in Western North Carolina are far better served by community health centers than Planned Parenthood clinics and I will do everything in my power to ensure that they do not have access to federal funds.

Albert Wiley Jr.: With the current Congress, I’m not absolutely certain of anything, but perhaps some environmental issue of international significance. For example: I understand that there is an area of garbage (mostly plastic goods), around the size of Texas, floating around in the Pacific Ocean. This garbage must be not only a maritime hazard, but also a health hazard and major threat to sea life (millions of fish and sea mammals who get entrapped in and die from eating it). Also, who knows what effect this island of garbage has on the thermodynamics of the reflection interface between solar radiation and the ocean surface on ocean temperature.

So, I would propose that the U.S. Department of State be required to take the lead and call for an international conference to try to study and deal with this mess — I think such legislation would pass.

What do you believe is the most important domestic issue the United States faces today?

Gregory: The attack against our Constitution and the Bible, as well as the $20-plus trillion debt.

McHenry: I agree with Admiral Mike Mullen, the former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, that the biggest threat is our $19 trillion in federal debt. The total debt load for each man, woman, and child in the United States comes out to just under $59,000 per person. And these numbers continue to grow. For the last seven years, we have seen President Obama propose budgets that never balance. Under President Obama’s watch, the federal debt has exploded, increasing 78 percent, or more than $8 trillion. The Congressional Budget Office estimates the debt held by the public has increased from just less than 40 percent of GDP in President George W. Bush’s last year in office to nearly 74 percent this year and that number is estimated to continue growing.

These debt loads are unsustainable and pose grave risks to future generations of Americans. Each year since Republicans retook control of the House in 2011, we have passed, with my support, budgets that balance within 10 years. It is this type of discipline that is necessary to get our fiscal house in order, but more must be done. We must address the true drivers of our debt: mandatory spending on entitlement programs. It is past time we make the hard choices to address our spending problem. We cannot continue to saddle our children and grandchildren with an unsustainable debt load that we currently lack any plan as to how we can pay it back.

Wiley: The economy, and its effect on jobs for U.S. citizens. There is uncertainty about the economic future and this uncertainty is due to a variety of things, such as our 2016 budget of $2 trillion and a deficit of about $500 billion, and yet, in the recent omnibus budget, Congress made no attempt to prevent this debt from being passed on to our children and grandchildren, which will compromise their security and freedom.

President Barack Obama has supported increased gun control measures. Do you believe that gun laws should stay the way they are, be tightened or loosened?

Gregory: Loosened. The Constitution makes it clear and perfectly stated…Amendment II. A well-regulated Militia, being necessary to the security of a free State, the right of the people to keep and bear arms, shall not be infringed. The current administration has overstepped its authority, and must absolutely be stopped.

McHenry: I have always been a strong supporter of the Second Amendment during my time in Congress and that will continue. I have an A rating from the National Rifle Association and have led the fight against actions by the Obama administration to further restrict our Constitutional right to bear arms. Last year, when the ATF attempted to unilaterally ban a legal type of ammunition, I introduced the Ammunition and Firearms Protection Act to stop them. This bill was included in recent appropriations legislation and is now law.

Throughout his time in office, President Obama has continuously gotten it wrong on gun control. His position, and that of most Congressional Democrats, is to reflexively attempt to limit our Second Amendment rights — most recently illustrated by his executive actions on gun control — any time there is a tragedy. In reality, our gun laws are not the problem, but rather his administration’s failure to properly enforce the laws on the books. More gun control is not the answer and as long as I have a vote in Congress, I will continue to do everything in my power to fight back against any efforts to restrict our Second Amendment rights.

Wiley: These laws should stay as they now are.

Director of National Intelligence James R. Clapper recently called Islamic State “the preeminent global threat.” Do you support an increase in U.S. military action against the group, and what form would that action take? Do you support “boots on the ground” in Syria, Iraq, Afghanistan and other countries where Islamic State holds territory?

Gregory: I believe the Islamic State is a terrorist organization and a threat to the United States. I support swift, strong military action to destroy the Islamic State (ISIS). We have superior technology that can detect the location of these threatening groups of terrorists. I am a veteran, and I believe ISIS must be destroyed before they expand any further. I think if Congress would allow the generals of our military forces full control, as well as fully back our military, our military has the ability to exterminate any enemy of the state. As a congressman, I will fully and faithfully back our military and their plan to destroy ISIS, even if it would mean boots on the ground. However, it would be my hope and prayer that, in their wisdom, boots on the ground would be the last resort. Nonetheless, if it is necessary for our military to be put into action, Congress and all of America should freely give our all to support our soldiers with everything they need to destroy any enemy that wants to destroy America.

McHenry: President Obama’s strategy of leading from behind on the global stage has been one of the preeminent failures of his time in office. From China and Russia to North Korea and Iran he has continuously misjudged the threats facing our nation, but nowhere is this more clear than with the growth of ISIS in Syria and Iraq. It began with his failure to enforce the red lines he established when it came to Syria’s use of chemical weapons and little has changed since. The president frequently likes to blame Congress for these failures, but it his he who has failed to bring forward a plan that will actually destroy ISIS. Time and again he has failed to heed the advice of his intelligence and military leaders who have advocated for more forceful action against ISIS. Even after the tragic attacks in Paris and San Bernardino, President Obama failed to change course on confronting ISIS, even though our current efforts continue to fail.

Wiley: When I ran for U.S. Senate in 2002, I was strongly opposed to the vote of Congress to enter a ground war with Iraq. I doubted Iraq had weapons of mass destruction and, from my many years in the Navy Reserve, knew that the U.S. military could be smart enough to deal with Iraq in other ways than “our boots on the ground.” In 2010 while, working briefly as a government contractor in a combat zone, I fully understood the comprehensive disaster of the Iraq war .

I now feel the same about the current ISIS situation — the US should be and can be smart enough to avoid ground troops — and, yet, accomplish the objective.

One of the primary goals of the administration of President Barack Obama is combating climate change. Do you believe that human behavior has an impact on the global climate? If so, what can the United States do to reduce pollution?

Gregory: I believe the Obama administration is using climate control as a tool or an avenue to control industry, or even destroy the American economy. I do not believe human behavior is the big culprit, even though Barack Obama claims it is. Obama’s administration has individuals such as Valarie Jarrett who wants the United States economy to be destroyed. This is only one of the many avenues they are using to undermine and devastate America.

McHenry: President Obama has forced his green agenda on the American people at the expense of cheap energy prices. Time and again he has stood with leftist climate activists and against the American people. Just recently we saw him go so far as to propose a $10 tax on barrels of oil, a tax that would be immediately passed on to American consumers leading to an estimated $0.25 increase of the cost for each gallon of gas. President Obama continuously delayed a decision of whether to build the Keystone pipeline, waiting until after his re-election to finally deny the project, even in the face of studies from his own State Department showing it did not pose a threat.

I’ve worked to expand America’s domestic energy production by pursuing an all of the above energy strategy, which will increase America’s energy independence and reduce costs for all Americans. I supported repeal of the outdated oil export ban, which will create millions of jobs in the energy sector. I’ve continuously fought overreach by President Obama’s EPA including voting to block the misguided Waters of the US rule, which will hurt American farmers and job creators.

Wiley: I don’t believe there is sufficient evidence at this time to prove human activity has any influence on climate change and further study is appropriate. We all know that some climate change is natural (i.e., we have seasons) and that huge volcanic and solar flare eruptions may also effect it.

I am much more worried about the prospect of one possible man-made effect on climate — the possibility of a “nuclear winter,” unless the world soon gets control of nuclear weapons proliferation.

A common theme among Republican candidates is a promise to repeal Obamacare. Do you believe this is the correct course of action and, if so, what type of program should be put in its place?

Gregory: Obamacare should be repealed. It is unconstitutional, and should never have been approved by the United States Supreme Court. U.S. Chief Justice John Roberts is to blame, as well as many others. Roberts was in the position to rule in the favor of the people, but instead took the coward’s way out. To replace Obamacare, we should put into place programs that allow insurance to be sold across states as a capitalist society. This will allow for competition to reduce prices for coverage. When we put action into place to bring back good paying, stable jobs, it will greatly help the healthcare environment. Everyone knows that true good paying and stable jobs come with excellent benefits such as good healthcare plans, which greatly adds to an employee’s health and dignity. When we put the right plans into place, it all works for the betterment of all Americans.

McHenry: I’ve been criticized for voting to repeal all or parts of Obamacare more than 50 times but I stand by each and every one of those votes. Obamacare is a complete disaster. It has drive up healthcare costs for my constituents. It has forced them to lose access to the doctors and healthcare plans they liked. And, most importantly, it has drastically reduced the quality of care. The law is broken and it must be repealed and replaced. In January of this year, Congressional Republicans proved that — with a new president — Obamacare can be repealed and Planned Parenthood’s federal funding cut.

Over the coming year, House Republicans will begin to outline what our Obamacare alternative would look like. It would put consumers in charge by allowing them to seek health insurance plans across state lines, thereby increasing choice and decreasing the price we pay. Real healthcare reform reduces costs and puts patients in charge, two things that Obamacare has fundamentally failed to do.

Wiley: Yes, I believe Obamacare should be repealed. It was a disaster from the beginning, as we might expect, whenever Congress passes a multi-thousand-page document, written by special interest lobbyists and bureaucrats and when no one in Congress was given any time to even read it .

It will take some time with some informed people in Congress debating all kinds of options — it is not a simple task, if we want to preserve the world -renowned quality of care in the U.S. and to create a compassionate and efficient system of a partnership between physicians and patients.

The Department of Homeland Security estimated, in 2012, that there were 11.4 million undocumented immigrants living in the U.S. Do you believe that illegal immigration is a serious problem and, if so, what should be done about it?

Gregory: Illegal immigration is a very serious problem. Anything labeled illegal is a serious problem. The rule of law must be followed by all in any civilized nation. To be a sovereign nation, a nation must have borders and defend and protect those borders to be able to protect its people. Congress has an obligation to uphold the rule of law, and to protect the people they represent. Not only are illegals being allowed to leisurely cross our borders, they are also bringing devastating diseases with them, and are placing an unbearable burden on the hardworking taxpayers of America. We must support our border patrols. We must fine individuals who hire and harbor illegal immigrants, because they are breaking the law. Imprisonment may be necessary. We can put sanctions on Mexico or any country that abuses Americans borders, encouraging its illegal crossing. We can deny flights to Mexican resorts. It may also become necessary to move the National Guard and reserve of our states to the border without any additional burden of costs to the people. This could be done by rotating states guards to the border during their two weeks per year training, rotating each month. America is at a crossroads and the American people must decide if we are a sovereign nation. We must elect the right representatives for all of the critically important issues facing America. If ever there was a time for God-fearing Americans to step forward and fight for their country, the time is now.

McHenry: America is a nation that was built on immigration, and people who sought a better life outside of their home countries. But the United States is also a country built on the principle of law, and without enforcement of our sovereign borders, illegal immigration poses a grave threat to the safety and security of our nation. The failure to enforce our immigration laws and properly police our border allows drug dealers and other criminals free reign on our southern border. President Obama has consistently failed to address this threat and has actually gone so far as to attempt to legalize millions of people whose first act on American soil was breaking our laws.

Throughout my time in Congress, I have led the fight against illegal immigration, including introducing the No Free Rides Act, which blocks illegal immigrants from accessing tax credits available to low-income Americans. In 2013, when the Senate attempted to jam through a comprehensive immigration bill, I immediately announced my opposition and joined my House colleagues in refusing to even consider it. Additionally, I’ve stood with the 26 states challenging in federal court President Obama’s unconstitutional executive amnesty. Thus far, these efforts have been successful, as the 5th Circuit Court of Appeals has blocked implementation of the president’s executive amnesty pending review at the Supreme Court.

Wiley: Apparently no one knows for sure how many illegals are now in the U.S. Some estimate over 30 million and, yes, this is absolutely a very serious problem. It is a threat to our national security, our economy, the opportunities for U.S. citizens to find work, our public health and more.

I have no new ideas at this moment, but would call for a temporary halt to all immigration, enforce all our existing laws (especially at the borders ) until we find more ways for long-term solutions. The U.S. has been for decades absolutely the most generous country in the world on legal immigration and in helping other countries around the world in so many ways, starting with the Marshall Plan. But, now Congress needs to focus primarily on preserving the sovereignty of our nation — and for providing for the security of and for domestic tranquility for U.S. citizens.

Image courtesy of LTN File