Colorado’s top regulators, who last week said an impartial panel cleared Sen. Mark Udall’s office in a dispute over Affordable Care Act cancellations, failed Friday to provide information about the panel’s makeup or its review.

The Department of Regulatory Agencies, through a Colorado Open Records Act request submitted by The Denver Post, was asked for names and job titles of individuals on the panel, as well as lists of people interviewed in the review. The department received a similar CORA request from The Colorado Observer, a conservative news outlet.

The regulatory agency, overseen by Gov. John Hickenlooper, did not provide the information. Instead, agency officials responded to the records request by providing several pages of e-mails between division of insurance staffers and Udall’s staff.

Some of those e-mails played a key role in earlier reports from The Post and several news outlets. Others did not include information about an investigative panel or suggest that an investigation was taking place.

The e-mails showed correspondence in mid-November between the division of insurance and Udall’s office. After media reports of the conflict earlier this month, state Rep. Amy Stephens, R-Monument, who is vying to unseat Udall, a Democrat, in his 2014 re-election bid, called for an investigation.

In stating that DORA had concluded its review on Jan. 14, the department’s executive director, Barbara Kelley, a Hickenlooper appointee, sent a letter to Stephens just days after her request for an investigation.

Kelley wrote that “upon learning of your letter through the media, a comprehensive fact-finding review was conducted.” Kelley added that the review by “a neutral and objective panel” from her office “interviewed a number of Division of Insurance staff, collected and reviewed e-mails and other correspondence” to make its findings.

But this week, Kelley wrote to The Post and other media: “For clarification purposes, the Department first conducted a fact-finding review, focused exclusively on DORA (which includes the division of insurance) staff and processes, actions and perceptions during and after the e-mail exchanges in early to mid-November, with Sen. Udall’s staff. Having found no evidence of any intimidation or coercion … there was no need to proceed with any further investigation.”

In the November e-mails that started the conflict, a director at the division of insurance, Jo Donlin, felt Udall’s staff was unjustly trashing its report that nearly 250,000 Colorado residents received insurance policy cancellations due to Obamacare. Udall’s office has stressed that because the majority of those individuals received renewal options, the figure was misleading to the public.

Kelley’s response to Stephens’ letter was direct: a “neutral and objective panel” found “no evidence of any intimidation and ‘the level of coercion by Sen. Udall and/or his staff’ was zero.”

A spokeswoman from DORA on Friday said only that the department “fully complied” with the CORA requests and did not respond to additional inquiries about the panel.

A spokesman for Hickenlooper directed all inquiries to DORA.

Udall’s spokesman said the senator’s office played no role in DORA’s review.

In the weeks since the issue came to the forefront, DORA staffers, including Division of Insurance Commissioner Marguerite Salazar, have lauded Udall’s office and said only “heated conversations” between the offices occurred.

Donlin has never spoken publicly about the conflict.

The initial reports of the CORA response created a firestorm on social media Friday with Republicans on the attack, assailing Kelley, Udall and Hickenlooper.

The “lack of honesty and accountability” is “astonishing,” Colorado GOP Party Chairman Ryan Call, said in a statement.

Kurtis Lee: 303-954-1655, klee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/kurtisalee

Read the letter: DORA’s response to an open records request. denverpost.com/extras