Phoebe Ministries of Allentown, one of Pennsylvania's largest senior-care companies, could expand into New Jersey.

That according to Phoebe Ministries president and CEO Scott Stevenson, who said the company is in discussions to potentially do “some development” in Jersey.

“I think what you will see from Phoebe is we will continue to expand our existing footprint in Pennsylvania and reach into other counties, but we may go multistate,” Stevenson, 54, of Oley told Lehigh Valley Business in an exclusive one-on-one interview.

With four senior-care campuses and other affordable housing properties, 112-year-old Phoebe Ministries already has a major footprint in the region, particularly in Berks County. The faith-based senior-living organization also has two pharmacies and offers rehabilitation and at-home services.

A Coopersburg native, Stevenson arrived at Phoebe in 2006 as chief financial officer, retaining that title when he was promoted to president and CEO in 2008.

“It's been a real blessing,” Stevenson says of his time at Phoebe. “I feel very thankful to be here.”

In his interview, Stevenson talked about Phoebe's “smart approach” to expansion, initiatives to help the organization's 1,250 employees to grow and ways to innovate services that will give quality of life to its seniors and to the communities that it serves.

Lehigh Valley Business: What were your passions growing up, and did they lead you into a career in the senior-living industry?

Scott Stevenson: I think my passions as a kid [were] family and friends. … I think my career moving into the senior living industry really came out of being in the military, where I worked in the health care field. And then, coming out of college with an accounting degree, I went to work at Chestnut Hill Hospital as an accountant there.

Subsequent to that, I worked for a long-term care organization and really came up through the financial kind of side of the house through health care, so both long term care and acute care. … So, I think really coming out of college and moving into the health care world is what really guided me into the senior living industry.

LVB: What are you most proud of during your tenure at Phoebe? Why?

Stevenson: A couple things. First, I will tell you I am very proud of the fact [that] upon coming in to the office of president and CEO, I started an initiative called Faith in Action and what that really is is a cultural initiative focused on organizational culture.

And I think it has just been wonderful for the organization. I really think it's impacted our culture positively. I think we've always had a strong culture. I think it's even better.

Really what I tried to do with that is we looked and brought people together from around the organization. … We brought together more than 25 people to participate in that and just wonderful things have come out of that.

One of them being our leadership development programming. We have a very focused leadership development program. I want folks in the organization to be able to be successful, to move within the organization. …

We have a lot of folks that view what they do as a vocation, and that's what I want people to think of their work as, a vocation. I want people to be able to move within the organization. …

We're really trying to reach folks at all levels of the organization and help them. It's really focused on them and them improving as leaders and helping them understand themselves as a leader.

It's expensive. But, it's worth it. It's worth it. It's the most effective leadership-development program I've really ever seen. …

Another thing I will tell you that I am very proud of is that we have been able to continue to grow from a strength perspective, financially and operationally, and position this ministry, which is 112 years old, to continue to move into the future. That has been a significant achievement, because it's been a challenging market.

LVB: How has the Affordable Care Act affected Phoebe Ministries?

Stevenson: The Affordable Care Act has had dramatic impact for us. We are a broad-scope provider, so we have continuing care retirement communities, we have a captive insurance company, we have a large pharmacy operation, but part of our offering is a large skilled-nursing component. So, that's where you see the most dramatic impact from the ACA.

We serve a large Medicare population. We serve a very large Medicaid population. So when you hear about cuts and reimbursement to those, it directly impacts us.

Just a couple of years ago, Medicare made a broad swipe, 11 percent reimbursement cut to skilled nursing-care facilities. So, they're basically saying “you need to do the same job you're doing but we are just going to pay you 11 percent less.” …

And then a year later there was another 2 percent [cut]. So we literally saw about a 13 percent cut in reimbursement there. Medicaid literally doesn't cover the cost of the care we provide, so when folks come in to us, as part of our mission, if folks exhaust their funds, we will not kick anybody out. We care for them for all their lives and will subsidize their care.

So part of the impact we've seen out of the ACA is those reductions, but also we've seen a dramatic increase in the amount of charity care we have to provide. We're very proud that we can do that, but it also creates a challenge as that continues to grow.

With our fiscal year 2008, our charity care levels were about $5.8 million. … With the close of fiscal year 2014, [we had] $12.5 million of charity care, so more than double over that time. We are getting ready to close down fiscal year 2015. I can guarantee you our charity levels are going to go higher than $12.5 million.

We're very proactive. We're very good at what we do. We understand the services we provide. We know where we provide charity care and where we generate cash and margins, so while we are a faith-based, nonprofit organization, we are like any organization. You have to generate cash and margin. If you can't pay your bills, they turn off your electric.

So, we're very focused on our mission but we also have to be financially aware. … We want to continue to grow, we want to continue to be strong and we want to continue to touch more people's lives.

LVB: If you could change one thing about your industry, what would it be and why?

Stevenson: I think if I change one thing about the industry, I think the approach that we try to take at Phoebe is we really look to promote fullness of life, for everybody – regardless of where they are in the continuum [of care]. And in order to do that, you have to treat people with dignity and respect.

And I think if across the continuum of care, we just saw all organizations really focused on promoting fullness of life and treating people with dignity and respect, [it] would just be an improvement to the entire health care system.

And I'm not trying to say that other organizations don't try to do that, but I think you need to make an effort to do that and you have to remember that every individual is an individual and has their own story.

So, I think that dignity and respect and that approach literally is a differentiator for us.

LVB: Is America prepared for the great influx of baby boomers into retirement and senior-living and assisted care? Why or why not?

Stevenson: I'm not sure America is. I think components of America are, is what I would tell you. I think you're going to see transition in our industry. I would tell you I think Phoebe is prepared.

Now, boomers are a different generation. I would tell you my understanding is most of the boomers want to age in their homes. They're a challenging group because they don't feel their age. They feel they are younger than that age. They don't want to think about getting older. They want to be treated a certain way. They have very defined expectations.

There's a big difference between boomers and the greatest generation. The greatest generation is very appreciative of what you are doing for them. I'm not saying boomers aren't appreciative. But, they have expectations. They have higher expectations than the greatest generation.

So, what are we [Phoebe] doing? … We understand that and we understand to be a viable organization, a viable ministry, we need to be as inventive as we can be. And come out with different service lines and different offerings.

So, we have a multitude of diversifications throughout the organization and more coming. And one of the programs that we're coming out with, we're prepared to roll, we're just waiting for state Department of Insurance approval.

It's called Pathstones. And that's literally a membership-based program that helps people age in their homes and get the care they need; and actually is a financial benefit to them. Ultimately, they'll save money by purchasing membership in this program.

We have significant wellness programming across our organization, and we are reaching out to the communities with that, [and] care management services and Phoebe at-home services. And more options to help people age in place.

The Phoebe Institute on Aging is really a component of the organization that provides education to the communities that we serve and all of those conferences [the institute holds] are for the community, they're for caregivers, for family members.

We provide all those conferences free. … We love doing that. We enjoy it. We think it's value added. And it's also something that we give back to the community.

We're really looking at diversification. Innovation is key for us, so you're going to see more and more as Phoebe grows and expands. You'll continue to see bricks and sticks development. … You'll also see new programs coming out from us. We take a very smart approach to our growth strategy. It needs to make sense. It needs to fit. And it needs to be meeting a need in the communities that we serve.

LVB: Where would you like to see Phoebe Ministries in three or five years – and how can it get there?

Stevenson: Phoebe's going to remain true to its mission. Since our founding, we have been serving seniors, so that's what we're going to continue to do.

We honor God in doing that, in the approach we take. We're not an evangelical organization, but we demonstrate our faith through our actions. So, we're going to remain true to that.

So, how can we do that? I think we can continue to innovate and grow. … We're literally in discussions right now with potentially doing some development in New Jersey, so I think what you will see from Phoebe is we will continue to expand our existing footprint in Pennsylvania and reach into other counties, but we may go multistate.

We have a large pharmacy program that services all of our communities, all of our employees and then outside organizations, too. … So, you'll continue to see growth there.

But, I think what you'll see is innovation for us, to reach out and … reach more people and help people receive care where they want to and help them live the fullest possible life they can.

LVB: What makes a successful day for you? Why?

Stevenson: When I see happy residents enjoying life. When I see and I hear from families how happy they are that their loved one's being cared for here at Phoebe.

And when I see engaged employees who really enjoy what they're doing. That makes me feel really good.

And it makes me feel like I am doing my job and doing it the right way. Those are the things that make me happy.