Utah Democrats challenged Republican Mia Love on some of her stands Wednesday, a day after her live televised debate with Democrat Doug Owens in the 4th District congressional race.

SALT LAKE CITY — Utah Democrats challenged Republican Mia Love on some of her stands Wednesday, a day after her live televised debate with Democrat Doug Owens in the 4th District congressional race.

Both retiring Rep. Jim Matheson, D-Utah, and state Democratic Party Chairman Peter Corroon said Love has backed away from statements made in 2012 about getting rid of the U.S. Department of Education and federal student aid.

Their comments came as Love reported raising nearly $1.5 million in the past three months. Her campaign has nearly $700,000 in cash on hand, according to her filing with the Federal Election Commission.

Owens' campaign treasurer, his brother Steve, said recently about $300,000 had been raised by the campaign from July through September.

Love, who lost her bid to unseat Matheson two years ago by less than 800 votes, said during Tuesday's debate sponsored by the Utah Debate Commission that she never has called for an end to student loan programs.

But she said that "an unlimited flow of federal dollars into colleges" is pushing the price of higher education out of reach, and she made a reference to Owens being the son of late Utah congressman Wayne Owens.

"Now, I am not the daughter of a congressman. I doubt that many of us are. But I can tell you right now, at this rate, higher education will become only available to the rich and the elite," Love said.

After the debate, Love told reporters a 2012 campaign piece labeled "Mia's Initial Plan" that listed "end student aid and all other programs" was only intended to start a discussion.

Her campaign manager, Dave Hansen, said Wednesday that it was "not a well-written piece, put out in the heat of the campaign" for her party's nomination. He also said it contained "discussion points."

Love was not pressed at the debate about whether she still wants to do away with the federal education department. She was videotaped in 2012 saying she would "love to get rid of the Department of Education."

Love has declined to answer directly whether that's still her goal, and a statement provided by her campaign detailing her position on education does not mention the federal agency.

"She's not the only person that's ever said that," Hansen said, but doing away with the education department is "a situation that's probably not going to come up. Let's talk about the things that are possible."

Matheson told KSL Newsradio's Doug Wright that candidates "can't tell different people different things. You've got to say what you think and let the chips fall where they may."

"When you say, 'I want to eliminate the Department of Education,' when you say, 'I want to get rid of student loans,' those are strong statements, and those have real meaning, and you can't run away from them," Matheson said.

Corroon held a news conference at state party headquarters to award Love's statements on education and other issues Burger King Whopper hamburgers and a pair of flip-flops.

"I'm not calling her a liar," said Corroon, the former Salt Lake County mayor. "I'm calling her a good storyteller."

He questioned Love's statement during the debate that under the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, fewer people were insured today, since more than 84,000 Utahns have signed up for insurance through the federal program.

Asked about the numbers, Love's spokesman, Brian Voeks, said, "Unfortunately, exact data on Obamacare enrollment has been obscured by the Obama administration, and more transparency is needed."

Corroon said Owens could have done a better job pointing out problems with his opponent's positions during the debate, "but he is a gentleman and doesn't like to go on the attack."

Email: lisa@deseretnews.com, Twitter: DNewsPolitics