Bernie Sanders' 2016 website is nothing but a fundraising page. It says we can expect the real thing on May 26, the day of the Vermont senator's formal 2016 launch in Burlington. But make no mistake, Sanders is already the real thing. And there's no denying the lure of that.

Sanders is that unique White House hopeful who calls himself a socialist and habitually warns that "the forces of greed" are afoot in the land. He talks out loud about a single-payer health system and redistributing wealth, about what we can learn from Scandinavia and about economic trends that are "immoral" and "wrong." He skips the sentimental Mother's Day tweets and videos and marks the day by calling U.S. child care "a total disaster." For Democrats weary of operating in the "reality-based community," this is like diving into an icy pond on an oppressively hot day.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

Or, alternatively, it's like being a conservative Republican. Think about it. Did Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan worry about whether he could pass a bill privatizing the Medicare program when he proposed that a few years ago, much less get President Barack Obama to sign it? Did Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul really believe he could get Congress to eliminate the Affordable Care Act, the tax code and the departments of Commerce, Education, Energy and Housing and Urban Development, as one of his budgets recommended?

Did Texas Sen. Ted Cruz think a filibuster or government shutdown was going to cow Obama into accepting the repeal of his signature health care law? Did virtually all the 2014 GOP candidates for the House and Senate likewise believe Obama's veto pen would run out of ink, or something, as they vowed to kill a law they described as "destructive, dangerous, reckless, debacle, train wreck, monstrosity, mess, failure, nightmare, disaster, job-killer, budget-buster, colossal mistake and ... massive redistribution scheme?" Probably not. But reality aside, these are big aspirational goals that thrill and energize conservatives.



[READ: Bernie Sanders Is No Barack Obama]

Paid family leave and a higher minimum wage, as valuable and popular with liberals as they may be, are simply not on the same scale. Nor is Obamacare analogous. If you have spent any time on the health insurance exchanges, if you are familiar with the complexities of the act and the inordinate amount we spend compared to other countries with better health outcomes, you may already be a secret fan of single-payer or, as Sanders describes it, Medicare for all.

Sanders is not the only Democrat trying to push the party and its eventual nominee leftward. But so far nobody who is in the race, outside it or thinking about it, not even Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren with her fighting words on income inequality, or New York Mayor Bill de Blasio and his progressive Contract with America, can match Sanders for audacious policy and rhetoric. Then there's the fact that he's running, and they're not.

Part of Sanders' appeal is a relative purity allowed by his state, which gave him 71 percent of the vote in his 2012 reelection race. Unlike Obama, he has not had to worry much about the opinions of moderates, either in the Senate or in swing states. In addition, unlike former first lady and ex-New York Sen. Hillary Clinton, he is not carrying the baggage of White House scandals or a history of representing Wall Street.



[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Hillary Clinton]

The differences between Sanders and Obama, in some cases, are a matter of degree. For instance, Sanders wants to invest $1 trillion in infrastructure – twice as much as Obama has proposed. Sanders would make all public colleges and universities free; Obama has gone only as far as free community college.

But there are real differences, too. Just this week, in a blow to environmentalists, Obama gave conditional approval to Shell Gulf of Mexico Inc. to drill in the Arctic. And while Sanders says he helped lead fights against the Keystone XL oil pipeline and the pending Trans-Pacific Partnership, Obama still might approve the pipeline and is pushing hard for the trade agreement.

As for Clinton, she hasn't specified her positions on many issues. But Sanders does offer one concrete example: He says he helped lead opposition to the 2003 Iraq invasion that Clinton voted to authorize.



[READ: 'Clinton Cash' Asks the Wrong Questions About Foundation Donations]

That contrast worked for Obama in the 2008 primary race but doesn't look like a winner this time around. Clinton is a stronger candidate and, to state the obvious, Sanders is no Obama. Not only is he an actual socialist, he's a 73-year-old with flyaway white hair and little of the smooth personal charm we expect of our media-age politicians – unless you're partial to gruff impatience. His first act as a Democratic presidential candidate was a 10-minute press conference outside the Capitol. Among his first words were, "We don't have an endless amount of time. I've got to get back. Let me just say this."

Nobody is going to accuse Sanders of stirring oratory. Nobody is obsessing over the design of his logo or the internal dynamics of his staff. And with the possible exception of Sanders himself, almost no one expects him to beat Clinton.