Statistics from a variety of sources show the birth rate among Colorado teens dropped by 40 percent and the number of abortions among teenagers decreased by 35 percent between 2009 and 2013.

Any way you look at it, those are excellent statistics.

The decreases can be attributed, at least in part, to a statewide effort that provided free or low-cost contraceptives to low-income women. Between 2009 and 2013, the Colorado Family Planning Initiative (CFPI) provided nearly 30,000 low-income women with some form of contraception.

Now, since the private foundation that had been funding the program has stepped aside, the CFPI needs $5 million in taxpayer money to continue. A funding proposal was laid out in House Bill 1194, which was introduced in late January in the Colorado House.

Despite the positive gains made in the past five years, I just don’t think it’s a good idea to fund this effort with public dollars. Here’s why:

Five years ago, when the CFPI began, there was no such thing as the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), and low-income women had few choices for cheap, long-term contraceptives.

Now, Obamacare requires Coloradans to purchase a health insurance plan that includes no-cost contraceptive coverage, including IUDs.

What’s more, in 2014, Colorado expanded Medicaid so more people than ever before can access health care, including IUDs and affordable contraception options. After Medicaid was expanded, a family of four making less than $32,900 annually is eligible for Medicaid benefits.

So while the work of the CFPI is to be lauded, the organization is no longer necessary. The landscape is much different now than it was in 2009, when it was created.

Now, other state-funded programs provide low-cost birth control options to women, regardless of income.

Perhaps that’s the reason the private foundation that’s been backing the CFPI has pulled its funding.

As the only Republican senator who voted in favor of Medicaid expansion, I want to ensure that all Coloradans have access to health care, including contraception.

However, Colorado taxpayers are already spending millions on mandated programs like Obamacare and Medicaid, which provide contraceptive care to women.

I have grave doubts that we can make a further impact on the teen birth rate or number of abortions performed in Colorado by funding a voluntary contraception program with public dollars.

That’s why I plan to vote against any Senate bill similar to House Bill 1194 when the Senate considers this measure in the coming weeks.

Republican state Sen. Larry Crowder represents Senate District 35 in Southern Colorado.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.