VIDEO: Cop Knocks Woman Unconscious In Front Of Her Daughter

“She was absolutely unconscious. There were a couple of other gentleman in the store with me and we were saying ‘is she breathing?’ Because at first we weren’t seeing her stomach rise and fall.”

A police officer in Round Rock, Texas, was recently caught on video smashing a woman’s face right into the concrete. The violence incident was recorded by a passerby who said that the attack was so vicious that the woman was instantly knock unconscious.

Officer Ben Johnson was seen by the witnesses instigating the altercation, and responding with violence that was completely out of place, as the victim was not resisting whatsoever.

That witness, speaking on the condition of anonymity, told local KVUE that they originally assumed the woman, Viviana Keith, had been killed by the officer.



official MintPress sponsor official MintPress sponsor

“When I look back at the tape, I can see her head bounce off the concrete because when he threw her down, she wasn’t able to brace herself.

“She was absolutely unconscious. There were a couple of other gentleman in the store with me and we were saying ‘is she breathing?’ Because at first we weren’t seeing her stomach rise and fall.”

Watch the video below…

Another eyewitness, Viviana Garcia, works in the shopping strip. She said that she ran over to help Keith’s child who also saw the whole thing.

“It looked like she was dead,” Garcia recalled. “The little girl was screaming, ‘Mommy, mommy.’”

The left side of Keith’s face was entirely black. She also had a large cut over her eye according to witnesses.

All of this was over what would have been a minor disorderly conduct, or public intoxication charge.

“She was a little loud, and disruptive,” Rebecca Tomlinson said, recalling Keith entering Deluxe Nails.

“She said she was very tired, really tired and they said, ‘Maybe you should go home and get some sleep,’ and then she turned around and stumbled out.”

For that alone, the officer assaulted her.

“We started talking to the little girl and she started telling us what had been going on. That her mom had been intoxicated all day and that she was hungry,” Garcia recalled.