Status check on the cancer 'moon shot'

Life expectancy for White Americans is falling, partly because of the striking rise in drug misuse and overdose deaths. But first: Checking in on the Obama administration's cancer initiative.

STATUS CHECK ON THE CANCER 'MOON SHOT' — The White House announced its bid to cure cancer 99 days ago. Not surprisingly, we haven't cured cancer yet. So what has the task force accomplished?

Story Continued Below

PULSE pulls out three early achievements:

· Built momentum for cancer research: Vice President Joe Biden's nationwide campaign has elevated the issue and raised new questions about funding and solutions. (More on that below.)

· Encouraged private funding: Biden last month touted Michael Bloomberg and Sidney Kimmel's combined $100 million gift to Johns Hopkins as evidence that his task force is "facilitating cooperation between government, the private sector, academia and philanthropy."

· Fostered brainstorming: An all-star panel is working on recommendations to deliver to Obama by the end of the year.

It's hard to grade the White House when the initiative isn't even 100 days old; politics and science both take time. "One needs to be modest about these things," oncologist and former White House adviser Zeke Emanuel tells PULSE, urging patience. "Even if that's antithetical to how people like to talk about them."

But on the administration's trip to the moon, "momentum" and "brainstorming" alone won't even get them to Cape Canaveral. Facebook billionaire Sean Parker arguably has done more on his own to advance cancer care in the past seven days by gifting $250 million to catalyze immunotherapy research.

And time is of the essence. While every president wants to be the one to end cancer, there's no guarantee that this effort continues post-Biden and Obama. Right now, the White House is trying to both build and launch a historic rocket — and Inauguration Day 2017 is just 275 days away.

HOW TO MAXIMIZE THE WHITE HOUSE's CANCER DOLLARS — The administration should be hailed for potentially infusing hundreds of millions of dollars into cancer research, Bruce Zetter and Lara Maggs of Boston Children's Hospital write in a POLITICO op-ed. "But it is also an opportunity to target these new funds at the most deadly forms of cancer — something the current funding streams fail to do."

— Funding out of balance? Zetter and Maggs point out that three hard-to-treat cancers — lung, colorectal and pancreatic — caused 42 percent of all 2013 U.S. cancer deaths, yet received only 14 percent of the National Cancer Institute's budget that year. Meanwhile, no cancer gets more funding than breast cancer, which, perhaps not coincidentally, continues to dwindle as a cause of mortality.

Read their op-ed: http://politi.co/1VidZzP

HEAR FROM BIDEN TODAY — The vice president will deliver remarks on the cancer initiative at the American Association for Cancer Research's annual meeting. Here's a link to the livestream, which is scheduled to start at 1:15 p.m.

WELCOME TO WEDNESDAY PULSE — Where I'm still convinced that MACRA is one of the best health care acronyms to say — and if you don't agree, you're a PDUFA. Tips to ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

With help from Darius Tahir (@DariusTahir) and Rachana Pradhan (@RachanaDixit).

CLARIFICATION TO TUESDAY PULSE — Yesterday's issue suggested that CMS is proposing to eliminate the Two-Midnight Rule. However, the agency's new inpatient payment proposal just eliminates the rule's planned reimbursement cut for providers in Fiscal Year 2017 and retroactively rescinds the cut's effects in previous years.

HOW TO THINK ABOUT UNITEDHEALTH's OBAMACARE DROPOUT — The nation's largest insurer made it official Tuesday: It's essentially washing its hands of the Obamacare exchanges and will quit most of the 34 state markets where it participated last year.

"It's a big nothing-burger in terms of market impact," insurance industry consultant John Gorman told POLITICO's Paul Demko. "But symbolically and politically it's huge." More from Paul: http://politico.pro/23YeNv7

— What Republicans are saying: It's another sign that the ACA is broken. "It’s clear the health insurance companies that helped pass Obamacare want nothing to do with it now that they’re losing money and can’t get the taxpayer-funded bailout that was tucked deep into the law," Senator Marco Rubio said in a statement.

— Where United's pulling out. Bloomberg's Zach Tracer flags 16 states where the insurer is quitting the market, including Pennsylvania, Texas, and Washington. See his chart: http://bit.ly/1NkKxX9

— A different way to think about United's earnings. The nation's biggest insurer on Tuesday said that 44 percent of its quarterly revenue came from its Optum consulting and analytics unit. It's the latest reminder that United's business model is increasingly diversified — and that its profits aren't necessarily powered by providing insurance.

LIFE EXPECTANCY FOR WHITE AMERICANS DECLINES — Striking new CDC data posted today finds that life expectancy slightly declined for White Americans in 2014, even as it continued to rise for other ethnic groups. The likely culprit: Rising drug overdoses and suicides among working-class Whites, as a growing number of researchers have documented.

See the CDC report: http://1.usa.gov/1ri8mFs

Average life expectancy at birth in 2014

· Whites: 78.8 years, down 0.1 from 2013

· Blacks: 75.6 years, up 0.1

· Hispanics: 81.8 years, up 0.2

HOUSE E&C TAKES UP OPIOID PACKAGE TODAY — The committee at 1:30 p.m. will begin mark-up on 12 separate bills intended to be the counterpart to the Senate's CARA legislation. Details.

Meanwhile: One in three opioid prescriptions is being abused. That's according to a new Castlight Health analysis of nearly 1 million patients’ data, drawn from employer-claims data.

The digital health company reviewed its data set to flag the heaviest opioid users — defined as receiving an opioid prescription from four or more providers between 2011 and 2015, or receiving more than 90 days’ supply of opioids at once — and found about 4.5 percent of patients in its sample fit the bill.

Castlight also determined that opioid misusers cost their employers about twice as much as non-misusers, and that Baby Boomers were four times as likely as millennials to misuse opioids.

See Castlight's report: http://bit.ly/1WElbFS

— States with medical marijuana laws have lower opioid abuse rates. According to Castlight, 2.8 percent of people abuse their opioid prescriptions in states that permit medical marijuana versus 5.4 percent of people in states where medical marijuana is prohibited. Researchers have previously suggested that increasing access to medical marijuana could reduce opioid misuse.

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Expand seniors’ access to prescription drugs. Right now Medicare drug plans force patients to make long trips for medication or to pay more to use their longtime pharmacy. Let Medicare beneficiaries choose the pharmacy that’s best for them. Visit www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

NEW PORTMAN AD TAKES ON OHIO'S HEROIN EPIDEMIC — The ad, which features a grieving father who lost his son to a heroin overdose, launches online across Ohio today. "I don't want to meet any more parents in a grief support group," says Wayne Campbell, who credits Sen. Rob Portman for working to curb addiction in the state.

See Portman's ad: http://bit.ly/1U69OWx

— GOP's growing focus on drug epidemic. The new ad, which is part of the Portman's campaign's ongoing six-figure online ad buy, follows similar efforts from other endangered Senate Republicans. Sen. Pat Toomey released his own ad last week that touted how he's fought the heroin epidemic in Pennsylvania.

NEW HEALTH LEGISLATION TAKING EFFECT — The president on Tuesday signed several health bills into law, including legislation that

— Reauthorized the Older Americans Act, which provides grant programs for the elderly. "Because of the Older Americans Act, neighborhoods and organizations across the country are able to continue to draw upon the wealth of knowledge that comes only with life experience," said HHS Assistant Secretary for Aging Kathy Greenlee.

— Added Zika virus to the FDA's priority review voucher program, which is intended to fast-track treatments for Zika virus. "This legislation will help researchers find a faster treatment or cure for the Zika virus that causes heartbreaking birth defects," Senate HELP Chair Lamar Alexander said in a statement.

WILL MEDICAID PAY OVERTIME? — It’s not just the business lobby that’s protesting the Labor Department’s pending rule on overtime pay. Health providers that rely on Medicaid for most of their funding say the rule — which is expected to be finalized in the coming weeks — is unworkable unless they get more government money to cover the mandated wage hike, Pro’s Marianne LeVine and Rachana Pradhan report.

The health care groups argue that they’re hamstrung because their funding comes mostly from the government. Yet many proponents of the overtime rule question the fairness of treating disability service providers any differently than other industries (the industry has made similar arguments when protesting state efforts to increase the minimum wage for hourly workers).

Read the story here: http://politico.pro/22N4rvF

CMS RELEASES MEDICAL ADVANTAGE QUALITY DATA FOR MINORITIES — “This is the first time that CMS has released Medicare Advantage data stratified by race and ethnicity,” said Cara James, director of the CMS Office of Minority Health. “While these data do not tell us why differences exist, they show where we have problems and can help spur efforts to understand what can be done to reduce or eliminate these differences." See more: http://go.cms.gov/1SsiPH2

HOW MUCH PHYSICIANS ARE WORTH — About 49 percent of male physicians reported a net worth of $1 million or more, compared to just one-third of female physicians, according to a Medscape analysis out this morning.

The report finds that, as expected, net worth is a function of age:

· About 36 percent of physicians age 55 and older had a net worth greater than $2 million

· Only 4 percent of physicians age 28 and younger had a net worth greater than $1 million

Medscape's report also busts some gender myths in medicine, finding that while male physicians may choose more lucrative specialties than their female counterparts, both genders make similar decisions with their personal finances.

See Medscape's report: http://wb.md/1MH9ADC

HOUSE APROPS COMMITTEE CLEARS FDA FUNDING BILL — The committee approved a $21.3 billion FDA-agricultural bill on Tuesday, rejecting attempts by Democrats to include the White House's request for $1.9 billion in new Zika funding and killing Democratic bids to remove FDA-focused policy riders. More for Pros: http://politico.pro/1StTXSt

HOUSE PANEL GOES AFTER TISSUE COMPANY, ABORTION PROVIDER — Congressional Republicans say they have evidence that suggests an unnamed abortion provider and an unnamed fetal tissue company may have run afoul of federal laws that ban them from profiting from handling fetal tissue.

"Anytime Congress sees something that is violation of law, it behooves us to get in there and look at that," Marsha Blackburn, the chair of the Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives, told Pro's Jennifer Haberkorn. More for Pros: http://politico.pro/23IVJ7t

MICHIGAN's AG TO FILE CRIMINAL CHARGES OVER FLINT CRISIS TODAY — Bill Schuette will announce felony and misdemeanor charges against as many as four people involved in the city's toxic water crisis, the Detroit Free Press reports. More charges are expected to come, and more context from the Free Press: http://on.freep.com/1NAquyF

HOW TO AVOID THE NEXT FLINT? — Michelle Obama and health advocates have been urging kids to drink more water as an alternative to sugary drinks — but the federal government has done almost nothing to ensure that the water in schools' taps is free from toxic pollutants, POLITICO's Helena Bottemiller Evich reports. http://politico.pro/1Sjn6KB

THE PUBLIC WANTS MORE BIOSECURITY FUNDING — That's according to a new survey conducted by the Alliance for Biosecurity, the Blue Ribbon Study Panel on Biodefense and Trust for America’s Health. About 88 percent of respondents were in favor of Congress increasing the biosecurity budget to fight diseases like Ebola and Zika, and 61 percent were surprised to learn that preparedness-funds are experiencing a shortfall.

See the polling data: http://bit.ly/1qYenqp

AROUND TOWN — Steve Easterday will join the National Committee for Quality Assurance as Vice President, Quality Solutions Group, on April 25. Easterday's previous stops include Intelliven and Booz Allen Hamilton.

— CVS Health promoted Mike Ayotte to vice president of state and local government affairs and Ann Walker to senior director of federal government affairs.

AROUND THE NATION — Obamacare analyst Charles Gaba is going to be tracking a new data set: His poll numbers. The web designer-turned-policy pundit announced that he's running for Oakland County Commissioner as a Democrat in Michigan.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

Democratic presidential frontrunner Hillary Clinton is sending two top aides to Puerto Rico to learn more about Zika, Reuters reports. http://reut.rs/1SicfAw

Veterans getting health care through the VA still can face long waits, the Washington Post reports. http://wapo.st/22MBhg5

Also in the Post, Laurie McGinley writes how immunotherapy drugs are being increasingly used to combat different types of cancer. http://wapo.st/26d0h4L

New York insurer EmblemHealth will lay off nearly 8 percent of its employees, Dan Goldberg reports. http://politi.co/1SYF6JP

NIH is halting some research amid safety concerns, according to NPR. http://n.pr/1SRLFh8

The Wall Street Journal delves into the science of making friends. http://on.wsj.com/1pfseau

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **

Correction: An earlier version of this alert misstated when Vice President Joe Biden will deliver remarks at the American Association for Cancer Research's annual meeting. He will speak at 1:15 p.m.