October is Breast Cancer Awareness month, raising money for a disease that affects about one in 12 women. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

ASBURY PARK, N.J. — The cost to treat breast cancer is anyone’s guess, but patients who are covered by insurance have lower bills than those who aren’t, researchers found.

Uninsured cancer patients pay up to twice as much for doctors’ visits and 43 times as much for chemotherapy drugs compared with what Medicare and private insurance pays, a study from the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill showed.

“This is unreasonable,” said Stacie Dusetzina, an assistant professor in the Eshelman School of Pharmacy and the Gillings School of Global Public Health. “There needs to be more transparency and less variability in health care pricing.”

October is Breast Cancer Awareness month, raising money for a disease that affects about one in 12 women. And researchers have made progress; the five-year survival rate has climbed from 75% in 1975 to close to 90%, government data shows.

But how much does it cost to treat breast cancer? No one seems to know.

The uncertainty is getting more attention since the Affordable Care Act, also called “Obamacare,” was passed in 2010. It ensured that mammograms would be covered by health insurance plans for free. But it also has led to insurance policies that have higher out-of-pocket costs — co-payments and deductibles — for consumers.

How do you know what treatment costs?

“You don’t,” said Jessica Morton, director of mission for Susan G. Komen Central and South Jersey, an advocacy group. “We try to pin down numbers like average cost, but it’s super hard.”

Kimberly Callis, 42, of Lacey was diagnosed with breast cancer in January 2013. She has an insurance policy through Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield that has picked up most of the bill for her treatment.

But each time she walks into her oncologist’s office, she has a $50 co-payment. After a few office visits a month, it adds up.

The financial strain is more acute. She and her husband own Stage Drop, which provides portable stages for events. But she hasn’t been able to work as much since her diagnosis.

“It’s a lot of co-pays,” Callis said. “It’s definitely had a financial impact.”

Pinning down the cost is a difficult endeavor. The average cost of care for breast cancer in women age 65 and older is $23,078 for initial treatment and $2,207 for continuing treatment, making it one of the less-expensive cancers to treat, according to data from the National Cancer Institute.

Breast cancer is diagnosed with many cell types and stages, said Dr. Denise Johnson Miller, medical director of the Breast Surgery program at Meridian Health, a New Jersey-based company that operates six hospitals in Monmouth and Ocean counties. There are women diagnosed with early stage disease and some who are diagnosed late. Most women respond well to treatment, but there are still women who don’t.

“Cost of treatment varies,” Miller said. “You may have breast-conserving surgery, six, seven weeks of radiation and hormonal therapy. However, if you have a complete mastectomy, breast reconstruction, chemotherapy, a year-plus of (cancer drug) Herceptin (combined with) Perjeta, the treatment costs will be greater. All women definitely need insurance.”

The Affordable Care Act requires virtually all Americans to have health insurance or pay a penalty. Even so, 10.9% of New Jerseyans under age 65 weren’t covered in 2014, according to U.S. Census data.

Without the negotiating power that private insurance or Medicare has, they face much higher costs if they are diagnosed with cancer, North Carolina researchers found.

For example, they paid $6,711 for an infusion of the colorectal cancer drug oxaliplatin. Medicare paid $3,090 and private health plans paid $3,616 for the same drug, according to the study.

Doctor visits also were more expensive — $129 to $391 for uninsured patients compared with $65 to $246 for insured patients, the study said.

“Uninsured patients don’t have the bargaining power, or they may not try to negotiate for a better price,” Dusetzina said.

-----

Tips to lower medicine costs

• Ask your doctor about generic medicines.

• Ask your doctor for samples of medicines you’re prescribed.

• Ask for medications in the form of pills, which tend to cost less.

• Shop around to pharmacies. Larger stores may have lower prices.

• Don’t order medicine from online pharmacies. Prices may be lower, but the pharmacies may not be licensed.

• Call drugmakers to see if you qualify for financial assistance programs.

Source: Breastcancer.org

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1LasHCK