More Video...

Two women were hospitalized following separate deer-related accidents on Saturday, the day before what Kansas officials say is the deadliest day for these kinds of collisions.

The first accident happened at 6:30 a.m. about two miles northeast of Lindsborg on Kansas Highway 4 in McPherson County. The Kansas Highway Patrol said the 27-year-old driver swerved to miss a deer and entered a ditch before her car overturned.

Christine Munoz of Salina was taken to a local hospital and then transferred to Salina Regional Medical Center for treatment.

The second accident happened just before 11 p.m. about two and a half miles east of Perry on U.S. Highway 24 in Jefferson County. According to KHP, the 35-year-old driver was heading east and hit a deer that had entered the roadway.

Michelle Olberding of Nortonville was taken to a hospital in Lawrence for treatment. A 7-year-old girl in the car was not hurt.

Reports state the two drivers were wearing seatbelts and the 7-year-old was properly restrained.

If you plan to be out on the road, be sure to be on the lookout for deer.

According to the Kansas Department of Wildlife, Parks and Tourism, November 17th is the most dangerous day to be on the road.

Data shows that in Kansas, this day has the most deaths cause by deer collisions. Mid-October to December is reproductive season for deer, which is one of the reasons they become more active.

“Also at this time of year, many of the crops are being harvested so we're able to see more deer,” said K-State Wildlife Specialist Charlie Lee. “They're looking for different places for cover than they're used to all summer, so it's kind of a two-pronged approach. We have deer that have unusual behavior patterns and less cover than they had through the summer."

Anyone involved in a deer-related crash is required to report it to police immediately.

If your vehicle has significant damage or if you’re injured and don’t report it, it is a misdemeanor and you could lose driving privileges.

Read more:

Man hurt when motorcycle hits deer in Butler County

VIDEO: Deer-related crashes on the rise across the state

Airborne deer hits car, injuring Kansas woman

Kansas officials urge motorists to watch for deer

Kansas man hit, killed by car after accident involving deer