Topics: Health Care, Obamacare, Paul Ryan, The House of Representatives, The Republican Party, News, Politics News

If it is a day ending in “y,” Speaker of the House Paul Ryan must be pretending the Republican Party is about to unveil its alternative to Obamacare. And only six years after Congress passed the Affordable Care Act. Impeccable timing! I can’t wait for next week, when Ryan introduces his alternative to the Smoot-Hawley tariff.

Republicans have, of course, been promising to unveil an alternative to Obamacare since the bill was being written in 2009-10. This plan is always said to be just about ready for a public rollout – before the holiday recess, before the next election, before next summer. The latest target date is just before the Republican National Convention this July. At this point, how any GOP legislator can make such a promise without a reporter laughing right in their face is beyond me.

One constant of all the theoretical GOP alternative plans has been the promise to keep the parts of Obamacare that are popular with the public and do away with anything that Fox News has convinced the voters reeks of unfettered Marxism. So provisions that allow young people to stay on their parents’ insurance until the age of 26, the removal of lifetime caps on benefits, the ban on refusing to insure someone based on pre-existing medical conditions – those will all stay. The individual mandate, the subsidies for lower-income people to purchase insurance – those will be gone, despite the fact that the popular provisions are partly reliant on the existence of the unpopular ones.

Which brings us to Paul Ryan. The Speaker has spent the last several years trying to convince everyone he is a serious policy wonk who is deeply concerned about the people of America, particularly the poor and needy. This is in total opposition to his budget plans, which would strip the welfare state — which said poor and needy Americans depend on — like hyenas stripping a wildebeest carcass. He has been slapped around for this in the past by, among others, President Obama during a 2011 speech, and the faculty at Georgetown University in 2012.

So it was deeply ironic when Ryan on Wednesday chose a speech at Georgetown to remind people with pre-existing conditions that as far as the GOP is concerned, they can all go suck a colostomy bag.

Ryan said existing federal policy that prevents insurers from charging sick people higher rates for health coverage has raised costs for healthy consumers while undermining choice and competition. The rule, a cornerstone of President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act, has been praised by patient advocates for providing access to medical care for people who previously could not afford private health insurance. […] “Let’s fund risk pools at the state level to subsidize their coverage, so that they can get affordable coverage,” he said. “You dramatically lower the price for everybody else. You make health insurance so much more affordable, so much more competitive and open up competition.”