Obama's top advisor quietly met a small group of influential industry execs, writers, and producers to discuss "creative ways for the industry to share the message" of the 'It’s on Us’ campaign.

Senior White House Advisor Valerie Jarrett, one of President Barack Obama’s closest confidants, slipped quietly into town this week to pitch an invitation-only Hollywood gathering on supporting the administration’s “It’s on Us” initiative against campus sexual assaults.

“The entertainment industry holds the largest microphone in the world,” according to the invitation obtained by The Hollywood Reporter. “The purpose of this meeting is to call together some likeminded leaders in the industry for roundtable discussion about creative ways for the industry to share the message of ‘It’s on Us’ and curb campus sexual assaults.”

Attendees at the ultra-exclusive Tuesday gathering included: Jen Salke, president NBC Entertainment.; Tiffany Smith Anoa’i, CBS’ senior vice president for diversity; Scandal writer/producer Dan Bucatinsky; Jeff Wachtel, president & chief content officer at NBCU Cable Entertainment; Amy Gravitt, HBO’s senior vice president of programming; Miki Woodard, president & CEO of the Dr. Phil Foundation; Penni Thow, head of operations & strategic growth for Scooter Braun’s SB Projects; Dan Goor, a writer for Brooklyn Nine-Nine and The Daily Show; The Good Wife producer Bridget Wylie; Pearlena Igbokwe, executive vice president for drama development at NBC Entertainment; and 30 Rock writer/producer Kay Cannon. Social impact agency Propper Daley spearheaded efforts to pull the group together.

This is the second time Obama has dispatched Jarrett to Hollywood to rally support in the creative community. During the struggle to win approval of the Affordable Care Act, she played a similar—and ultimately successful—role.

Meanwhile, on Wednesday, Jarrett gave an address to the 2015 National Sexual Violence Conference at a meeting in Los Angeles, where she discussed the White House’s efforts to raise awareness about campus sexual assaults. As part of the campaign, the White House this week released a new public service announcement featuring cameos from a number of Hollywood stars discussing “the importance of consent when engaging in sexual activity.”