Medical Overhaul: Open enrollment for ObamaCare plans starts in less than a week, and the administration is seriously downplaying what to expect. And for good reason, since the program is in worse shape than ever.

When the administration announced that the enrollment in 2016 will end up being 10 million, it was an admission of failure. Just this March the administration was claiming 11.2 million were signed up, which means it expects an enrollment drop of nearly 11% by the end of next year.

Ten million sign-ups is also less than half of what the Congressional Budget Office projected for 2016 in its most recent forecast.

ObamaCare’s troubles only start there.

Customers going into the exchanges when they open in November are likely to be shocked by double-digit premium increases for the plans they want to keep, requiring them to switch into a cheaper plan with more restrictions, pay a big increase or drop coverage altogether.

Even those getting subsidized coverage could be in for unpleasant surprises. Under ObamaCare, the subsidy amount is based on the cost of the second-cheapest silver plan in any market. If that price drops, so do the subsidy amounts, which can create huge swings in the net cost of insurance.

In Washington state, for example, the premium for the second cheapest silver plan dropped 10.4%. But the biggest ObamaCare insurer in the state — Premera Blue Cross — put in for increases of 10% or more.

As a result, someone who gets subsidies and wants to stick with Premera could see a 30% hike in their after-subsidy premiums.

These hikes will only make ObamaCare more unpopular with the young and healthy and with those who aren’t eligible for subsidies.

This year, more than three-quarters of eligible enrollees who earn less than 150% of poverty income enrolled in ObamaCare. But only 16% of those making three to four times the poverty level did so, even though they, too, are eligible for ObamaCare subsidies.

Overall, only 40% of eligible enrollees have signed up. This is a major problem, says industry analyst Robert Laszewski, because “the industry standard for achieving a risk pool with a good spread of risk is 75%.”

Meanwhile, one of ObamaCare’s “reinsurance” programs is faltering. Because insurers can’t charge the sick more than the healthy under ObamaCare, the law created a “risk corridor” program to transfer money from insurers that had a healthier-than-expected pool to those who ended up with more sick enrollees.

The idea was that the two sides of the equation would balance. But the administration’s calculations were way off. The amount insurers asked to be paid for 2014 was eight times more than the amount of money other insurers had paid in.

So a few weeks ago, the administration said it would pay just 13 cents for every dollar insurers had asked to take out of the pool — which has, for some, proved a catastrophic financial hit.

The failure of this reinsurance program is one reason so many of ObamaCare’s nonprofit co-ops have imploded. This week, in fact, the ninth co-op announced it was closing shop, leaving just 14 of the original 23 running.

President Obama might think ObamaCare is “here to stay.” But all of these developments — flat enrollment, a bad risk pool, the lack of bailout money and skyrocketing premiums — will make it more unpopular, and make repeal that much easier.