LZ Granderson got into a spat with his conservative colleagues on CNN when he pointed out the lack of transparency when the Bush administration passed Medicare Part D.

During a heated CNN Sunday panel discussion on how to reform health care, liberal commentator Granderson asked his conservative co-panelists S.E. Cupp and Mercedes Schlapp: “Where was all this investigation ten years ago when Bush had his health care reform?” Miffed by that suggestion, both Cupp and Schlapp attempted to interrupt, but Granderson pressed on: This is important because some of the same voices who are now going after the Affordable Care Act were the same voices who were silent when Bush lied to the American people how much it was going to cost on Schedule D for Medicare…. You’re saying that the American people are so upset about this, but even when the Democrats tried to introduce a bill to repeal that law [Medicare Part D], the Republicans still fought that in 2007. Let’s not pretend this isn’t partisan politics.

Brian Beutler at the New Republic points out the hypocrisy:

…nearly everyone who’s attacking Gruber as if he were a White House political employee or a Democratic senator is simultaneously trying to require the Congressional Budget Office to say that tax cuts pay for themselves. The people who brought you the phony arithmetic of the Bush tax cuts and Medicare Part D and the self-financing Iraq war are upset about the ACA, which is genuinely fiscally sound. By any reasonable standard, ACA respected budgetary constraints much better than most other laws. That the authors took pains to meet concrete budgetary goals actually underscores the point that they took CBO, and budgetary questions in general, very seriously.

And Beutler reminds us that the Bush administration threatened to fire the chief Medicare actuary if the numbers came out higher than what the White House was predicting.

An internal investigation by the Department of Health and Human Services confirms that the top Medicare official threatened to fire the program’s chief actuary if he told Congress that drug benefits would probably cost much more than the White House acknowledged. A report on the investigation, issued Tuesday, says the administrator of Medicare, Thomas A. Scully, issued the threat to Richard S. Foster while lawmakers were considering huge changes in the program last year. As a result, Mr. Foster’s cost estimate did not become known until after the legislation was enacted.

Source: Alan.com