Top Sirloin steaks are naturally lean with a robust beefy flavor. A down to earth, everyday type steak, Top Sirloin is usually more firm in texture. This steak takes a marinade well and I like it charred on the outside, but medium-rare in the middle.

No matter which steak is your personal favorite, it’s also important to prepare it using the proper technique for ultimate enjoyment. Here are my top tips for grilling the perfect steak every time:

1. Clean and pre-heat your grill on high.

2. Blot dry any moisture using a clean paper towel, and then lightly oil and season the steak before you put it on the grill. This helps with the searing process and prevents sticking.

3. Sear the outside of the steaks when grilling. This really helps with the flavor and juiciness.

4. Use tongs or a spatula to turn your meat on the grill. NEVER use a fork as it can damage and dry out the meat.

5. Cover your grill as much as possible during the grilling process. This helps to lock in the grilled flavor and will help prevent flare-ups.

6. Keep a spray bottle with water handy to douse any unexpected flare-ups.

7. Use the 60/40 grilling method. Grill for 60% of the time on the first side and then grill the remaining 40% of the time after you turn over the food. This will give you an evenly cooked product. You can find the proper grilling times for perfectly prepared steaks on OmahaSteaks.com or by downloading Omaha Steaks free SteakTime app on your iOS or Android device.

8. Place your cooked product on a clean plate and allow your foods to “rest” for 5 minutes between cooking and eating. This will help them retain moisture when you cut into them.

Personally, I really enjoy a Boneless Strip served medium-rare with French fries on the side.

Other great sides that you can grill along with your steak include asparagus, green onions, fennel, red bell peppers and Portobello mushrooms. Grilled vegetables taste great with steak and the bright colors are a nice accent to a perfectly grilled steak.

Omaha Steaks also offers a wide selection of side dishes and desserts to make serving the perfect steak dinner both easy and convenient.

No matter what your personal steak preference, there’s nothing better than the great taste of a juicy, delicious steak hot off the grill.