By Jeffrey Scheininger

For several weeks, we have seen an interesting debate regarding an innovative collaboration for health-care delivery. Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, has come under fire for announcing an innovative alliance with a number of leading health systems designed to improve the quality of care and lower costs. Its plan is to offer new, lower-premium, tiered health plans. My understanding is Horizon plans to give consumers, including businesses like mine, new choices for lower premium health plans in addition to their current broad selection of other products.

Why is that something to criticize? Horizon should be lauded for its efforts.

As president of a 65-year-old small manufacturing company and as a former chairman of the New Jersey Chamber of Commerce and past chairman of the Platform for Progress Healthcare Reform Initiative, I have a real understanding of the challenges rising health-care costs place on businesses and their employees. My insurance premiums have skyrocketed and the Affordable Care Act has accelerated those increases. Health-care insurance is now one of my top three total expenditures each year.

I fully pay for 100 percent of my employees' and their families' coverage without any employee contribution. Yet, despite this, my employees don't go to the doctor. They are afraid of the hidden costs, the "gotcha" billing practices and the never ending stream of bills that come with any doctor's visit. It's clear the current fee-for-service health-care system is not working even for folks who have insurance.



Much of the conversation around this new delivery mechanism is missing the voices of business owners and consumers who have been struggling to pay the constant increases in premiums. Let me tell you, the current increases are unsustainable.

And, not surprisingly, the problem is worse in New Jersey. We pay some of the highest health-care costs in the nation. Even our federal exchanges are 218 percent higher than the national average.

As health-care costs continue to rise, it is becoming more difficult for businesses like mine to continue to provide health benefits. Each year, one of the worst days of my work year is the day that my renewal comes and I realize that I cannot afford to continue our current plan and have to frantically work to find coverage we can afford. No wonder only 44 percent of employers with three to nine workers provide health insurance, down from 52 percent more than a decade ago.

Criticism of Horizon's strategy to provide consumers more choices and lower costs by working in close collaboration with providers of health care by paying for the quality, not quantity, of care delivered is wrong. Horizon is trying to do what most health-care policy experts have said is needed. Much of the furor over Horizon's plan to offer new plans seems directed at tiered networks. This makes no sense. Tiered networks are not new and have been operating in New Jersey for a several years.

Every business owner I know is looking for more options for more access to quality affordable health insurance. Criticizing Horizon for its leadership in confronting New Jersey's health-care cost problem, before it has even unveiled its new, lower-premium health plans seems unreasonable to me. Horizon's new program might not work for everyone, but having more affordable choices is a great thing, particularly if the new plans increase choice, deliver sustainable lower cost plans and make my employee's healthier.

Jeffrey Scheininger is president of Flexline Inc., in Kenilworth.

Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @starledger. Find The Star-Ledger on Facebook.