Michael Carro (Photo: Special to the News Journal)

Ahh, that new car smell. Everyone has enjoyed the sensation of opening the door to a new car and slipping inside to the perfection that was crafted for their pleasure. New gadgets, buttons, leather, and not a stain in sight in the foreseeable future.

This is the feeling I have when a new restaurant opens. Many times I get to watch the progress of a building going from a cold dark shell to a masterfully designed home for gastronomic delight. The kitchen is full of unblemished stainless steel that you can see your reflection in. It has that special new kitchen smell, not of food but the promise of future jobs, business and profitability. Oh, what a day.

Some recent openings have reinforced these sensory delights. The Ruby Slipper Cafe in downtown Pensacola, Zaxby’s on Nine Mile Road, Newk’s Eatery in the former Wintzells and Jersey Mike’s on Navy Boulevard and in Navarre. In each of these restaurants, the franchisee gutted what was in the building to make the space truly their own.

The multitude of jobs that are created during this process should not be overlooked. The process begins with the architect and the structural engineer. Next, a general contractor is selected and then all of the trades including plumbers, electricians, mechanical (air conditioning), carpenters, painters and landscapers hired. And that’s just inside the space. There are also the vendors who supply the products for the space including the furniture, fixtures and equipment, commonly referred to as FF & E. Once the restaurant opens, managers and employees are hired to operate the business.

The opening is a circus with twice as many staff as needed to get the crew trained, as well as large crowds of customers. Like Oz, we all wait with great anticipation to see what’s behind the curtain. Finally, the grand opening is here and we flock to it like butter on steak. We go straight into food-critic mode judging the menu, the people, the excitement, and the feel of the place. But more importantly, what we would have done differently. Either way, we’re here and ready to enjoy everything the new stainless has to offer.

Restaurants have what we affectionately call the “honeymoon period.” This is the initial rush of business for the first two to six months. What many of my clients find is there’s anywhere from a 20 percent to 35 percent drop in sales after the honeymoon period. From there, your sales settle in and this is where you begin the long and steady road of building your restaurant business. If done properly, sales should steadily increase over the next three years to a level of profitability that should sustain the restaurateurs appetite for risk. Unfortunately, it’s during this period that many restaurateurs lose patience, confidence or run out of resources. It’s important to have staying power.

The quantity of restaurants continues to increase. With new appetites being born every day, coupled with more households having additional dine-out experiences per week, the marketplace is answering that call and I look forward to bringing you more and more new options.

Below are just a few of these options scheduled to open soon:

Five Guys Burgers and Fries at 400 E Chase next to Downtown Newks Eatery

The Burger Factory on Navy Blvd in the Palmetto Plaza

Jersey Mikes Panama City Beach in Pier Park North

Beef O Brady's in Gulf Breeze in the Wal-Mart Neighborhood Center

Michael Carro is a broker/principal at Sperry Van Ness Commercial Real Estate.

Read or Share this story: http://on.pnj.com/1F4GABJ