The children's unit of Brentwood Hospital. (Photo: Henrietta Wildsmith/The Times)

Abby’s 13-year-old son Travis (not their real names) had a history of fighting — in school, out of school, whenever he had the chance. Abby said she tried to take care of the situation at home, but she couldn’t get her son to change his actions. Nothing seemed to work.

“He would sneak out at night to meet up with friends,” Abby said. “I would have to call the police to find him. He was destructive.”

Then, Travis was enrolled in Caddo’s Individualized Disposition Docket Court — the state’s first mental health court for children with severe mental or behavioral challenges — where for the first time the family had access to counseling, educational support and a parole officer who regularly checked in on Travis. Today, Abby said her son’s life has turned around.

“His number of problems have gone down. His grades are up, they offer counseling, he has a mentor that stops by and checks on him,” Abby said. “They should have more parents going through it. They help families.”

Abby and Travis — The Times has agreed to withhold their identity to protect their privacy — are an example of how children and families can turn their lives around when given access to needed services. But officials say a lack of critical mental health providers can set the state’s most at-risk children up for failure that results in imprisonment in jails, hospitals and residential treatment facilities.

“Our mental health system is definitely broken,” said Judge Paul Young, who established Caddo Juvenile Services’ IDD Court as a pro-active step to help the area’s children. “If you don’t have this program, kids get placed and have to stay in detention, which is expensive and also through the (Office of Juvenile Justice) which is also very expensive.”

Young said his previous work with individuals in need of psychiatric care helped him realize poor populations often rely on the court system for counseling and treatment. The services provided by the IDD Court have reduced the number of children in out-of-home placements and also have reduced the number of children who re-offend. Young said the court, established over four years ago, has reduced out-of-home placement for children from more than 50 percent to less than 15 percent. The judge estimated it costs about $50,000 per year to house a child in a facility; with 74 percent of children completing the program successfully — meaning they don’t reoffend — that’s significant savings and also fewer youth experiencing further trauma when placed outside their homes.

But when access to those services is interrupted or suspended — or when at-risk children don’t have access to those services to begin with — they become more likely to get into trouble with the law.

More than 70,000 children in Louisiana receive mental or behavioral health services through Medicaid, according to 2014 data from the Department of Health and Hospitals. Close to 2,000 of those children are from Bossier and nearly 4,000 are from Caddo. In 2013, Louisiana adopted a Coordinated System of Care modelto help accommodate children’s mental health care needs by listing a full spectrum of services including youth and parent support, independent living skills, and two specific crisis intervention services: respite care and crisis stabilization.

Sara Godchaux, aSouthern Poverty Law Center attorney, said the spectrum of care looks good on paper. But in reality, crisis stabilization services in Louisiana are literally non-existent, and a general lack of providers leaves local agencies struggling to meet children’s mental health care needs, Godchaux said.

“More than two and a half years after the creation of the program, huge gaps remain in the provision of CSoC services, preventing eligible children and youth from accessing the full benefits of the program and putting these children at further risk of out-of home placement,” Godchaux wrote in a 2014 letter to the state Centers for Medicaid and Medicare. “Families and providers participating in CSoC similarly report that respite care remains either nonexistent, unavailable when needed, or at best, inconsistently delivered.”

A lack of crisis intervention services

In a response letter to SPLC, the Centers for Medicaid and Medicare stated it was a challenge to provide crisis intervention services because only a small number of children needed the services. That small population — fewer than 2,000— remains a problem in the current day, said state Medicaid director Ruth Kennedy.

Kennedy said the limited number of children in CSoC in need of crisis interventions has caused a lack of investment from service providers. She added the agency has submitted a statewide Medicaid plan that would open crisis intervention services to all children who could benefit from them — not just the ones in CSoC— to create more demand for the services to interest providers and also provide another service to all families.

But Kennedy said the mental health care system’s success does not hinge completely on the availability of crisis intervention services.

“Crisis intervention is one of a list of services available,” Kennedy said, referencing the other services available in the spectrum of care. “It’s very difficult to adequately draw conclusions about such a complex system. With the first three years of everything we’ve done, our results are impressive.”

According to DHH data, the total number of children placed in restrictive environments dropped from 32.4 percent, before enrollment in CSoC, to 18 percent, after enrollment in CSoC — proof CSoC services are working, DHH spokesperson Samantha Faulkner said. At the end of June, DHH data also showed a 45 percent decline in emergency room visits, a 46 percent decline in bed days and a 25 percent drop in readmission rates for inpatient care for CSoC youth.

While DHH data may show improvements for some children, officials from SPLC and The Advocacy Center said the lack of crisis intervention services remains unacceptable.

In a 2014 letter, the Advocacy Center in New Orleans and SPLC said the centers’ failure to provide crisis intervention services puts many families and their children at risk. Children in crisis who lack access to services are often arrested and put in detention centers or hospitals, the letter said.

“Over two years later, Louisiana’s implementation of the program remains deeply flawed,” the letter stated. “This failure to provide mandated and essential services not only puts these children and youth in touch with the criminal justice system, jails and hospitals, but is also contradictory to the overarching purpose of CSoC — to keep youth out of institutions and in the community.”

Louisiana has four primary hospitals with units equipped to handle children in need of intensive services: Brentwood hospital in Shreveport, Liberty Health Care Systems in Bastrop, Children’s Hospital in New Orleans and Longleaf Hospital in Alexandria. Three of these hospitals reported transferring children, at times, to alternative placement sites — sometimes an hour or more away from the child’s family and community — due to maxed out capacity. The hospitals also voiced frustrations in finding adequate mental health providers for children once they left the hospital setting.

A reliance on law enforcement and hospitalization

The lack of crisis intervention providers means they often aren’t included in youth service plans, Godchaux said. As a result, parents of children who act out are often told to turn to law enforcement or temporary hospitalization as first responders.

“Relying on police to respond to a child in a mental health crisis puts that child at an increased risk of arrest and incarceration – simply for experiencing a mental health crisis,” Godchaux said. “The purpose of home and community-based crisis services, such as respite care and crisis stabilization, is to provide alternatives to law enforcement or hospitalization...the very places the state’s Coordinated System of Care is designed to help children avoid.”

Keturah Darby, regional program manager at Ekhaya Youth Project in Shreveport, said possible solutions to the lack of care need to include the family and a down-to-earth approach. The values of Ekhaya include providing culturally-competent services that are family driven, youth guided, and home and community-based, which take into account a child’s natural networks of support. Darby said care also is unconditional, meaning that once a family is enrolled in Ekhaya they will have access to the program’s services.

“If juveniles are on house arrest, where they can’t go out and do anything, how does that help them?” Darby said. “People don’t really know about Ekhaya. They’re starting to find out, and they’re interested.”

Ekhaya is the only family support organization in the state, Darby said, and provides a strength-based approach to working with children and their families. Darby said the program has received good feedback from enrolled families, but many families who have been through juvenile justice systems decline help based on past experiences.

Enrollment requirements for the Ekhaya program include Medicaid, a mental health diagnosis, and the youth and a related adult’s participation. Once enrolled, youth and their families have access to mentoring, academic support, direct peer and parent support services, advocacy services and life skill training. The center’s computer lab can be used by youth for research, filling out job applications or applying to colleges. An on-site kitchen and classrooms also teach students skills to empower their independence, such as how to cook healthful meals or to properly clean an apartment.

Despite the many services Ekhaya provides, Darby said some families are wary of enrolling when they first hear of the program.

“Parents with kids with mental health issues have been through so many things. They see so many people, and nothing changes in their perspective,” Darby said. “One of their first reactions when they meet us is, ‘Why are you here?’”

Local agency takes matters into its own hands

Caddo’s children’s mental health court has helped break that stigma.

Young equipped the IDD court system with two parole officers and a supervisor who had backgrounds in mental health. The court develops a treatment plan for juvenile offenders that includes individual and family therapy and regular check-ins with a parole officer who acts as a coordinator and mentor as well as an authority figure.

“I’m glad we came in the company of the IDD court,” said another mother, whose 14-year-old daughter was referred to the IDD court for breaking probation. The Times also is withholding their identity for privacy. “They actually help people. They provide counselors, they’re always finding services for the families.”

LaMarcus Williams, a parole officer with the court, said a small caseload size — currently nine kids — and his background in mental health help him form better relationships with children and their families.

“I want for the kids to understand their parole officer is there to help them. I don’t want them on probation for life, stuck in the system,” Williams said. “I think the rehabilitative approach is greatly appreciated by families and their kids.”

For Young, solutions include restored funding to a true continuum of care for children and adults on both the state-wide and national levels.

“This starts with a comprehensive system of community-based treatment and preventative services, along with an effective crisis intervention team of professionals whose purpose is to intercede in emergencies, stabilize and prevent unnecessary hospitalizations,” Young wrote in an email. “Short-term and intermediate hospital treatment needs to be available on a regional basis.”

Read or Share this story: http://tnsne.ws/1R3UU26