ERIC ADAMS ... "something clicked"

Once undercover, officer learned addiction's roots



- When Eric Adams was working as an undercover narcotics cop, he was relentless in his pursuit of those involved in illegal drugs.



"I didn't care whether it was an addict or it was a dealer, as long as I got them off the street," he said.



But after he began patrolling the streets of Laconia about three years ago, something "clicked" about the people he was interacting with who were caught up in the drug epidemic.



"I really started to understand that these people are in pain and there are underlying issues. And that they're not doing it because they just want to do it; they're doing it because they're coping. They're not getting the help they need."



Last fall, Laconia police Chief Christopher Adams (no relation) chose Adams, 38, for the new position of prevention, enforcement and treatment (PET) coordinator.



It's a novel approach to the drug crisis. "The ultimate goal is prevention," Chief Adams said.



"A lot of people focus on the substance of choice, whether it's heroin, prescription drugs, cocaine or alcohol. The focus needs to be on addiction and how do you fight addiction."



Whenever there's a drug overdose in the city, Officer Adams gets a call from the supervisor on the scene. He'll either go to the scene himself, meet the victim at the hospital or make sure the family has his card.



Then he gets in touch the following day.



Because that's often the moment when someone is ready to ask for help, he said. He offers to meet the individual for coffee and talk about the treatment options that are out there. "Then we kind of just guide them to different resources."



Adams also tells them to call his cell phone if they ever need help.



And they do call, sometimes in the middle of the night or over the weekend. "You just sit and talk with them," he said.



Adams doesn't use the word addict because of the stigma attached; instead he talks about "people that are suffering from substance misuse."



The rethink



And it's not just semantics. It's a change in attitude.



Adams makes sure all patrol officers in Laconia carry cards to hand out. They read: "Laconia police department recognizes that substance abuse is a disease. We understand you can't fight this alone. For assistance and support, please contact us."



On the back, it lists resources: the suicide prevention hotline; 2-1-1 help line; and websites where users can find information about treatment (nhtreatment.org) and health insurance that covers it (coveringnh.org).



It also provides Adams' contact information.



"It's an opportunity for them to kind of take that first step," he said.



Not everyone will. In his experience, "When they're not ready to make that change, they're not ready."



Adams knows many people are unsympathetic to heroin users. "There's a thought in a lot of people's minds that you did this to yourself and you made that choice," he said. "But unfortunately, the choice that they made was what they thought was going to be their relief and their coping mechanism."



"Nobody just picks up a needle and starts shooting heroin, or snorting heroin or smoking it, because they just feel like it," he said. "There are underlying issues, and that's what our agency is trying to work with and trying to get to the root cause."



When he talks to someone the first time, Adams asks them what's going on in their lives to cause them so much stress. And there's usually an answer.



"There's been some that I work with that we as an agency had investigated brutal sexual assaults on these people as young children."



One young woman he's currently helping, he said, "had probably one of the most horrible childhood upbringings that you could possible imagine. How she is alive is beyond me."



Heroin, he said, was how she coped with her pain.



Seeing results



Adams, who is married with two children, started his career as a corrections officer at the state prison in 1999. He decided to become a police officer and was hired in Tilton in 2004 as a patrol officer.



A year later, he got the chance to join the Attorney General's Drug Task Force and spent the next five years as an undercover officer.



He went back to patrol work, first in Tilton, then in Laconia. When the PET position was created, it seemed the culmination of his law enforcement experiences.



"It gave me an opportunity to kind of see what I could do to make a difference."



Chief Adams said Adams' outreach has already made a difference in the city. The number of overdoses is down, and people are turning to police for help.



The toughest part of his job is dealing with the lack of treatment resources, Officer Adams said.



In addition to more residential treatment beds, he'd like to see the state increase the number of "safe places" those in recovery could go, where "they can work on their recovery and they can also start being productive members of society."



The old approaches aren't working, Adams said. "It's not something we can arrest our way out of," he said. "We can't just lock everyone up."



"A jail is not a rehab."



Adams said he's already had some success stories. He's working with one young man who was caught stealing from family members for money to buy heroin.



He tried to reach the man and finally left a message on his phone: "You're going to die if you don't get help."



Two days later, the man called back. "And for the last three months, this person's been clean."



Adams talks to him every day, sometimes just about "silly things," like how the Red Sox are doing.



Those little things can make "a huge difference," he said. "I think just taking the time and opening up your eyes a little bit more, understanding that these are people and they have feelings, and you gotta be a little compassionate about it."



Almost every day, the young man tells Adams how much clearer the world appears to him these days. Addiction, he said, was like "looking through foggy glasses every day."



Adams also stays in touch with some who have failed in recovery - so far. "They're just not ready," he said.



Has he lost anyone he's worked with? "Not yet," he said, but one "was close."



The drug epidemic isn't just hurting the users, Adams said. "It destroys families," he said.



He's talked with parents who have remortgaged their homes or tapped their retirement funds to pay for treatment for their children. And he's driven "traumatized" relatives to the hospital after a loved one overdosed.



Adams has a simple answer for those who ask why they should care about drug addicts: "Because you're a community," he said.



"You're supposed to care about other people."



swickham@unionleader.com



To improve the chance of seeing your comment posted here or published in the New Hampshire Union Leader:



Identify yourself. Accounts using fake or incomplete names are suspended regardless of the quality of posts.

Say something new, stay on topic, keep it short.

Links to outside URLs are discouraged, if used they should be on topic.

Avoid comments in bad taste, write well, avoid using all capital letters

Don't cite facts about individuals or businesses without providing a means to verify the claim

If you see an objectionable comment please click the "Report Abuse" button and be sure to tell us why.

Note: Comments are the opinion of the respective poster and not of the publisher.

Post a comment