OMAHA, Neb.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--StrategicHealthSolutions, LLC (Strategic), an elite government contractor for healthcare services, announced a restructuring of its leadership team today. The changes are designed to more closely align the company with the stepped-up demand for innovative solutions to help the government respond to tighter scrutiny of its healthcare spending.

Peg Stessman, who had held the President, Chief Executive Officer (CEO) and the Chairman of the Board positions, will focus her full attention on developing the strategic vision and executing on growth strategies, as the CEO and Chairman. She will work to find the opportunities for synergies between Strategic and Federal entities and agencies in their efforts to identify and recoup misspent healthcare dollars and to prevent misuse through education and audit.

Strategic Board member John Dyer has assumed the role of President of Strategic. Pete Thompson, who had served as Strategic’s Chief Operating Officer for the past 8 years, moves into the newly created position of Chief Revenue Officer.

According to Stessman, founder of Strategic, “This is a pivotal time for America’s health care. The Affordable Care Act has mandated stronger program integrity enforcement. Our focus on developing pro-active solutions to prevent fraud, waste and abuse has already established Strategic as an effective Federal contractor for multiple agencies, including the Department of Health and Human Services (DHHS) and the Department of Justice.”

The reorganization is also the result of Strategic’s rapid growth from 2010 to 2013 when it achieved a 352% increase in revenues and moved from the small business category to the large business category in terms of government contracting.

“Our company is poised for much more growth over the next five years. We have already made significant infrastructure investments, and recognize that management will be addressing bigger and more complex demands and responsibilities for management. The need to accommodate these new challenges and to ensure that as we grow, we maintain our standard of excellence in service delivery has led to this restructuring of our leadership team,” explains Stessman.

Dyer brings a wealth of experience in the federal government and healthcare industries. He has spent more than 35 years serving in senior executive positions, has provided counsel to high level government and private sector officials, and has received four Presidential Rank awards and multiple recognitions from the private sector.

He started his career at the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) and advanced to serve in Deputy Commissioner positions, both career and political for Presidents from both parties. From 2004 to 2009, he was the Chief Operating Officer (COO) of the DHHS Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS), and the Food and Drug Administration (FDA). While at CMS, he led the implementation of the Medicare Modernization Act and at the FDA he directed the expansion of the Food and Drug Protection Programs. Prior to that, he served as the Principal Deputy Commissioner and Chief Information Officer at the Social Security Administration (SSA) where he was involved in improving customer service.

In the private sector, Dyer has worked for and as a consultant to information technology companies such as SAIC, CSC, SRA and LMI. Dyer will be based in Strategic’s Columbia, MD office and will be leveraging his deep experience to serve as a liaison between Strategic and multiple government agencies.

According to Stessman, “We are excited to have the insight and experience of John on our management team. While his contributions as a board member have always been valuable, we are especially pleased that he can take a more active role in the company’s day-to-day operations as we evolve into a larger organization and compete for significantly larger federal contracts, expand our concentration to other federal entities and ensure greater stability and advancement opportunities to staff.”

“Personally, this is a tremendous opportunity,” Dyer said. “Peg is one of the most knowledgeable persons in the Program Integrity arena and has built a company that brings innovative solutions to the table, especially on how best to prevent fraud and waste up front.

“While I look forward to managing operations, I also feel strongly that my deep experience within the Washington D.C. environment will be a great asset to Strategic as we pursue major contracts for healthcare services.”

Thompson will continue to be located at the company’s Omaha, NE headquarters. In his new position, he will focus on increasing revenue in three areas: new contracts; cost savings gained through innovation and efficiencies in processes and practices; and adding new services through partnerships and potential acquisitions of other companies.

“Pete is a valued member of our management team. He has a stellar reputation for exceptional program management and for being creative in his approach to problem solving. In his new role as the Chief Revenue Officer, his deep technical understanding of our current capabilities and his highly specialized skills in developing innovative solutions assures our clients will receive the ongoing support needed to meet more rigorous program integrity requirements,” Stessman said.

About StrategicHealthSolutions

Strategic’s purpose is to ensure the sustainability of America’s healthcare system. Strategic’s elite teams of medical and technical experts work closely with government entities to recoup misspent dollars and to prevent future misuse through education and investigation. The company brings the power of insight to superior solutions.

Trusted core values based on good enough is not enough drive the company’s work ethic. A recognized and trusted government contractor in the healthcare services industry, Strategic has achieved a CMMI for services level 3 and is an accredited ISO 9001:2008 organization which provides solutions for government health care programs.