Feb. 15 concert to be shown at 2 p.m. in the MacGregor Ballroom at The Stanley

End your Valentine's weekend by experiencing the musical talent of guitarist Jerry Barlow; singing and playing his adaptations of Celtic and mountain music. The concert is part of the Estes Park Music Festival's Winter Concert Series and will be held on Sun., Feb. 15, at 2 p.m. in the MacGregor Ballroom in the Stanley Hotel. This concert is sponsored by Estes Park Chiropractic.

Acclaimed Celtic finger-style guitarist Jerry Barlow is a virtuoso musician, a warm and accessible performer, and a world-class storyteller. His repertoire is composed of a synthesis of traditional music from the British Isles and his own original Celtic-inspired compositions.

Barlow's music will transport you across time and space on an imaginary journey to a rustic Irish fishing village, the misty Scottish Highlands or an enchanted English forest. In concert, Barlow brings the songs alive by sharing the history, legend and humor behind the music. His expressive arrangements have been described as "music to soothe the soul, warm the heart, and lift the spirit."

Music from Barlow's first CD, Keepsake, is played on National Public Radio stations throughout the country and was used in a PBS documentary, "Songs of our Children." The title track from Barlow's second CD, Bring Down the Storm, won a prestigious Indie Project Award for "Best Song."

Advertisement

This talented performer normally plays to sold out audiences, so attendees are advised to come early. Barlow will be autographing CDs after the concert.

The concert is $10, or a package of 10 tickets are available for $80 (these do not expire, but are not valid for the Festival's Summer Concert Series).

For more information, contact the Estes Park Musical Festival's business office at 970-586-9519 or visit our up to date web site: estesparkmusicfestival.org. Subscription packages are available at the door on the day of the concert or Hobert Office Services, 1140 Manford Ave, Estes Park, CO. The Stanley Hotel is pleased to offer a 20% discount on the day of the concert for dining in the Cascade Restaurant. Additional parking is available behind the hotel main building.