Photo

Michael Mohler, 42, is a fire captain for the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection in Riverside County.

Q. When did you become interested in firefighting?

A. My dad took me to the local fire station for the annual pancake breakfast when I was 13, and after that I started hanging around the station and became a Fire Explorer, which is a division of the Boy Scouts. I started riding on a fire engine at 15.

What were your next steps?

At 18, I became a reserve firefighter in Orange County and attended the Basic Fire Academy at Santa Ana College, graduating at 20 with a degree in fire engineering. Then I moved to Riverside County and attended its live-in academy for 12 weeks. Over the years I became a fire engineer and fire captain, which requires additional training.

What kind of fires do you fight, and where?

I’m part of a four-person fire engine crew assigned to municipal fire stations around the county, but I also fight wildfires. We’re usually working with our seasonal firefighters on these.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

What is your schedule like?

We work for three days and then have four days off, unless we’re fighting a wildfire. Then we work 24 hours on, followed by 24 hours off; we rest as we can. We have M.R.E.s (meals ready to eat) back at the fire engines to hold us over until we get a regular meal.

What’s the most memorable wildfire you’ve fought?

The 2003 Cedar Fire that burned over 250,000 acres in San Diego County. It started in a rural area and burned almost to the Pacific Coast. Fifteen people lost their lives and over 2,500 buildings were lost.

What have you learned about fires in the last 20 years?

That each one is different and has its own attitude. You have to be on your toes at all times and be mindful of your crew.

What do you like most about your job?

It sounds like a cliché, but firefighters really are a family. We have such a close bond because of the work we do. There’s never been a day where I have not wanted to go to work. Every day is different; answering a 911 call never gets old. There’s nothing like seeing the relief on someone’s face when we arrive.