ARLINGTON, texas — AT&T Stadium assaults the senses. The volume blares at 11 in some kind of weird tribute to Spinal Tap. The JumboTron appears straight out of science fiction like the command center for this spaceship.

Nothing is left to the imagination. This is NFL meets Sci-Fi meets “American Idol.” In the preseason finale, the field might as well be a stage. There were 28 Broncos who participated in a calorie-wringing, pregame workout. Peyton Manning, at one point, led sprints with the race beginning “on hut.” The remaining 47 players are competing for playing time and scant jobs.

The roster doesn’t have to be carved to 53 until 2 p.m. MT on Saturday, but there are expected to be some cuts Friday. With practice squads increased to 10 players this season, it’s conceivable only 12 players will disappear entirely.

It appears increasingly likely that one or two known players will be cut, making the competition at defensive line interesting. Kevin Vickerson and Mitch Unrein are competing for spots on a defensive line that hasn’t been this deep and talented since 2005.

GAMETRACKER: Broncos vs. Cowboys preseason game in Dallas

The return of Quinton Carter creates a backlog at safety, meaning that last year’s camp sensation Duke Ihenahco needs to finish strong. Among the rookies, this is the final resume tape for running back Juwan Thompson and receiver Isaiah Burse.

Thompson has led the Broncos in rushing in two of their preseason games, totaling 59 yards against the Seahawks reserves. His ability to play special teams — he started a game last year at linebacker for Duke — helps his chances. Burse finished strong on his last two punt returns against the Texans. With Jordan Norwood (knee) sidelined for the season and Wes Welker’s status uncertain — and when he returns, it’s hard to see him on special teams — Burse has a clear path to making the team. However, he is not a lock as the Broncos will keep an eye on the waiver wire if he doesn’t perform well.

Other players who are on the bubble include Zac Dysert (does the team have the luxury of carrying a third quarterback?) and tight end Gerell Robinson, who is sidelined with a leg injury.

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or twitter.com/troyrenck