Santa Catalina sophomores Katie Ridgway and Lucy Stone with Korissa Troxel at the tide pools at Asilomar State Beach in Pacific Grove to collect real data to monitor coastal tide pool ecosystems Nov. 15, 2013. (Vern Fisher/Monterey County Herald)

PACIFIC GROVE -- On a recent Friday afternoon at Asilomar State Beach, the receding surf left a pool packed with life in each rocky hollow. Teenage scientists arrived in rubber boots, armed with clipboards and pencils, to inventory every creature. Their records would contribute to an invaluable archive of coastal life.

They crouched down over grids made from PVC pipe and nylon string to count the organisms in a 20-inch-square plot. One girl reeled off the names of animals and plants as her partner counted.

"Aggregating anemones?"

"Five."

"Turban snails?"

"Two."

"Feather boa kelp?"

"Three."

Ashten Nguyen, 16, a sophomore from Santa Catalina School in Monterey, works in the tide pools at Asilomar State Beach in Pacific Grove collecting real data to monitor coastal tide pool ecosystems Nov. 15, 2013. (Vern Fisher/Monterey County Herald)

More than mere counting exercises, the students' seaside surveys had a broad purpose. The eight 10th-graders in Christian Reilly's marine ecology honors class at Santa Catalina School in Monterey are among thousands of young "citizen scientists" in California who take part in the Long-Term Monitoring Program and Experiential Training for Students, or LiMPETS.

Middle and high school students in the program learn about the process of science while monitoring precious life along the coast. Among other creatures, the students look out for limpets, common sea snails that cling tenaciously to algal "farms" on intertidal rock faces.

Advertisement

Following the 2007 Cosco Busan oil spill in San Francisco Bay, state and federal scientists used LiMPETS data to gauge the damage and track the recovery of coastal ecosystems. The California Fish and Game Commission establishes baseline conditions for marine protected areas with LiMPETS measurements. By recording typical variations over a period of years, LiMPETS and other monitoring groups help officials determine the impacts of major disruptions, not to mention the more incremental effects of global warming and rising sea levels.

A large owl limpet in a bed of mussels in the tide pools at Asilomar State Beach in Pacific Grove on Nov. 15, 2013. (Vern Fisher/Monterey County Herald)

"One of the advantages of citizen science groups like LiMPETS is that the state, and even the academic institutions, don't have the resources to do the baseline monitoring that's really needed," said Sonke Mastrup, executive director of the Fish and Game Commission. "These citizen groups can multiply that capacity by their involvement."

For an accurate inventory, the Santa Catalina students set up their grids at 2-meter intervals along an 18-meter line stretching from the relatively dry, sparsely populated splash zone down to the species-rich low tide area, which was gradually submerged by the rising tide over the course of the hour.

In each grid, they searched for some 30 types of algae and invertebrate animals. The students carefully checked each species against photos in a laminated field guide. When in doubt, they asked their teacher.

Thinking she had found the stretchy seaweed used to wrap sushi, a student inquired, "Dr. Reilly, is this nori?"

Before becoming a science teacher, Reilly, 40, earned a doctorate in marine biology. But a weeklong high school teaching stint prompted him to rethink his plans. Inspiring scientific and environmental awareness in teenagers, Reilly said, was "tremendously exciting."

"As someone who cares about promoting a scientifically literate citizenry, I realized high school was really where it's at," he said.

John Pearse, a retired UC Santa Cruz biology professor, created the LiMPETS network more than a decade ago. The program's roots go back to an undergraduate field course Pearse began teaching in 1971.

"Part of my early motivation for teaching the course was the Santa Barbara oil spill in 1969 and the prospect of having oil wells off our coast here," Pearse said. "We hardly knew a thing about what was living on our shoreline at that time, so I developed a program for students to monitor sites along the coast."

After Pearse retired, he worked with Greg McBride, a teacher at Aptos High School, to adapt his monitoring program for high school students. LiMPETS was born.

Various marine sanctuaries and research institutes cooperatively manage the LiMPETS program; the Pacific Grove Museum of Natural History is a Central Coast partner. In the last school year, more than 5,000 students tallied life between the tides at sites from Dike Rock in La Jolla to Duxbury Reef in Bolinas. Each class enters its findings into an open access database, available on the program's website, www.limpetsmonitoring.org.

Jayme Chandler, a 15-year-old Santa Catalina boarding student from Alamo, said her class' records could be used to assess the effects of an oil spill or disease outbreak on the health of intertidal ecosystems. During a pause in the counting, Chandler, who fell in love with science as a sixth-grader, declared this was "definitely by far my favorite class."

Reilly hopes to teach his students how to ask scientific questions about the data they collect. Next year they will design their own research projects. Just a few months into this school year, they are learning to graph and interpret their monitoring data.

One trend they will track is starfish wasting disease, which has spread to the Monterey Bay in recent weeks. Scientists don't yet know what's causing the white lesions and eventual disintegration of sea stars. But, Reilly said, the girls will investigate the impact of losing sea stars, which act like "big bulldozers," clearing space in the intertidal zone by devouring mussels, barnacles and snails. A drop in the sea star population will likely affect other intertidal species.

Between their shouts and giggles, the students' attentive cataloguing showed the power of the coast to draw everyday people into science. Even as they made their way back to the bus, the girls continued to snap pictures of the seascape.

"I'm not really a science person," conceded Grace Russell, 15, of Pacific Grove. "But this is not like learning about atoms. It's something you can actually see. Now I can go to the beach and say, 'I know what that is and why it's there.'"