House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy will miss an event Tuesday at Cal State Bakersfield for 23rd Congressional District candidates because he’s in session, but he may attend a candidates’ forum later this month in Taft.

Democratic candidate Wendy Reed of Quartz Hill, west of Lancaster in Los Angeles County, and Republican challenger Ken Mettler, a former school district trustee, are confirmed for Tuesday’s event, from 6-7 p.m. in the Solario Room of the Student Recreation Center.

It’s a debate/discussion, according to Pedro Naveiras, president of the CSUB College Democrats.

That’s because while candidates will give opening and closing statements, answer questions and rebut each other’s responses, they’ll have an entire hour in which to do so.

“I think they’ll have a bit of a back-and-forth, moreso than they would if there were more candidates,” Naveiras said.

The first two questions will focus on local and student issues, he said, while the remainder will come from audience members.

The event at 9001 Stockdale Highway is free but CSUB does charge for parking.

TAFT EVENT EXAMINES MULTIPLE CONTESTS

Two weeks later, the Taft District Chamber of Commerce will host a forum for candidates in the congressional, 34th Assembly District, Kern County supervisor and Kern County Superior Court judge races.

Confirmed to attend, from 6-9 p.m. on May 31, are Mettler and Reed from the 23rd Congressional District, and either McCarthy or a representative, according to Shannon Jones, the chamber’s director of operations and marketing.

In the 34th Assembly District, Republican candidates Michael Biglay, Ernie Gollehon and Vince Fong will attend. Democratic candidate Perrin Swanlund, a senior at West High School, has been invited but has not yet RSVPed.

Kern County Superior Court Commissioner W. Steven Shayer and Deputy District Attorney David Wolf, who are running to fill retiring Superior Court Judge Michael Lewis' seat, will attend.

Superior Court Judge Cory Woodward, who is running for re-election, and his two challengers, criminal defense attorney J. Arturo Revelo and Deputy District Attorney Tiffany Organ-Bowles, will also attend.

So will 4th District Kern County Supervisor David Couch, who is seeking re-election, and his challenger, Tulare County prosecutor Robert Owen.

Candidates will each have 60 seconds for an opening and for a closing statement. They’ll then answer questions relevant to their races on issues including the drought, taxes and Obamacare.

Also on the evening’s agenda is a discussion of Measure F, the one-eighth-cent sales tax being sought to help fund Kern County libraries.

Cathy Abernathy, who is chief of staff of the Bakersfield office of Assemblywoman Shannon Grove, R-Bakersfield, will speak in opposition to the measure. Jones said organizers haven’t yet determined who will speak in favor.

The forum will be at the Taft Petroleum Club, 450 Petroleum Club Road. Admission is free. For information, call 765-2165.

Email forum questions to shannon.taftchamber@gmail.com.

MEET KEN METTLER

Speaking of Mettler, he will host a free meet-and-greet event 5:30 p.m. Thursday at Sundale Country Club, 6218 Sundale Ave., Bakersfield.

Other speakers will include radio host Inga Barks, Bakersfield Tea Party spokesman Tom Pavich, and CPA and business advisor Rick Williams.