Xylitol can be very toxic for dogs, and it can be found in many sugar-free things including gum and toothpaste. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

GILBERT, Ariz. - Chances are, you've probably heard that chocolate is poisonous to dogs, but did you know that Xylitol, a common sweetener, can be even more dangerous?

Jeni Hargrove Connor's family found out the hard way this February when their 1-year-old lab wound up in the animal hospital fighting for her life.

She made a video to let people know how toxic Xylitol can be to dogs. The video that has since gone viral.

Jeni Hargrove Connor posted a video after her familie's dog ended up in the hospital after eating gum contianing Xylitol. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

Hargrove Connor said it all started with Dancer, snuck into her gym bag and ate an entire tub of Ice Breakers gum.

Dancer ate more than 20 peices of gum. About an hour later she got very sick. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

At first Hargrove Connor didn't think much of it, until about an hour later, when her husband noticed Dancer looked drunk. They called their vet who told them to immediately rush Dancer to the animal hospital.

The vet told Hargrove Connor to immediately rush Dancer to the animal hospital. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

As Dancer was laying on Jeni Hargrove Connor's daughters' laps, she had a horrible seizure that lasted about 90 seconds. They thought the worst...

On the way to the hospital Dancer had a bad seizure. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

Dancer made it through the seizure and animal hospital staff saved her. She had to spend two nights in the hospital, and her liver is still being monitored.

Xylitol can be very toxic for dogs, and it can be found in many sugar-free things including gum and toothpaste. (Photo: Jeni Hargrove Connor)

Moral of the story: Xylitol can be toxic to dogs. It is a sugar-free sweetener that can be common in gum, mints, toothpaste, vitamins, low-sugar peanut butter and other sugar-free food.

Hargrove Connor said, “We felt like we didn’t keep our dog safe. It’s just like a child. When you have a toddler, you keep your cabinets locked, you medicines up, you keep bleaches and poisons away from your kids and really the same thing needs to be done if you’re going to take on the responsibility of having a dog.”

You can watch the full video above, and see her post here:

Please view this video on Dancer's story and please share. Help us to get the word out on the dangers of xylitol and dogs. Sharing this may save a life! 󾇛❤️ Posted by Jeni Hargrove Connor on Sunday, February 21, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPNX