Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

Growing up, I didn’t have a crystal clear picture of what I wanted to do or the woman I wanted to become. You always heard about how accomplished doctors and lawyers were, along with educators and those employed in the civil service who try to pay it forward.

Nowadays, I’m a bit scared about what we consider success and the concept of leaving a legacy.

To celebrate his wife reaching 30 million Twitter followers, Kanye West thought it was a good idea to post nude images of Kim Kardashian for all to see. This is nothing new for the couple as they both seem to think it’s a wonderful idea for assets typically left for the bedroom to be on full display — and full frontal for that matter. For just $10 bucks, folks could view Kim Kardashian completely nude in last year’s Paper magazine, or pay $18 to see everything she’s working with in Love Magazine. Aside from questioning an obviously askew moral compass, I have to stop and think about what it is that drives Kim, Kanye and their brand. Is success for them having millions of social media followers who they entice with explicit photos? What legacy are they leaving, and how will it impact their daughter North’s concept of what it takes to build a brand and leave something for the next generation?

Kim and Kanye certainly aren’t the only ones capitalizing on questionable behavior. Many would consider Mona Scott-Young a trailblazer when it comes to the entertainment industry. Her company, Monami Entertainment is responsible for popular reality television shows like the Love & Hip Hop franchise with spin-offs in Atlanta and Hollywood (the original takes place in New York City). Will her legacy be her ability to break through doors previously closed to African Americans, or criticism about the “ratchet” content she creates that continues to exploit Black stereotypes?

Or what about the new cult-classic show Empire that has quickly made its network the most-watched in Black homes? Is it another case of exploitation or pure entertainment that shouldn’t be taken so seriously? Many would argue how refreshing it is to see an all-Black cast deliver memorable performances on a show co-created and executive produced by Blacks.

At the end of the day, life and business is about supply and demand. Should we get mad at those in a position to create content for the general masses who capitalize on what people want to see, or question their ideals about building a legacy of value, going beyond gimmick and popularity?

We’ve seen how folks who we thought were on the straight and narrow can easily tarnish their legacy due to poor decisions. Bill Cosby was a pioneer in creating positive images of Black family life with The Cosby Show and A Different World. Yet, his legacy continues to come under fire after numerous allegations of sexual assault. And what about Dr. Ben Carson, the first surgeon to successfully separate conjoined twins joined at the head? It’s safe to say some have lost respect for him after his remarks that equated Obamacare to being the worst thing since slavery.

What is your definition of being successful or leaving a legacy? Is it always about the bottom line, or should your morals affect your business decisions?