The Fine Arts Building for the once thriving St. Scholastica Academy. As part of the Abbey/Academy Alumni weekend, more than 60 people visited SSA Saturday for an ice cream social provided by local ice creamery, The Cup and Cone. ( DC Spencer / Daily Record )

A few Ice Cream Social attendees at the former St. Scholastica campus Saturday were from left, Jeri Fry with The Cup and Cone, Cheloyne Mosher (Class of 1974) of Littleton, Michelle Taylor (Class of 1987) of Cañon City, Betty Chess (Class of 1950) of Cañon City, Mary C. Gleason (Class of 1950) of Ulysses, Kansas, Sally Fieth of Cañon City, Loretta Miller of Lakewood and Margaret Powers White (Class of 1950) of Cañon City. (DC Spencer / Daily Record)

Grassy veins spidered across the cracked asphalt of the circular drive at 615 Pike Ave. Kochia weeds dominated the once-manicured lawns, and empty buildings stood as silent witness to Saturday afternoon visitors returning to the former St. Scholastica Academy.

Once a regal and well-kept private school for girls, the grounds now lie in disrepair and abandonment, up for sale and out to pasture.

But not for long.

Former student Cheloyne Mosher, class of 1974, has a dream, and if it becomes a reality, the SSA property will again thrive as the Academy Community Campus and Event Center.

As part of the Abbey/Academy Alumni weekend, more than 60 people visited SSA on Saturday for an ice cream social provided by local ice creamery, The Cup and Cone.

"The Abby has been so generous to invite the Academy to their joint alumni reunion," Mosher said.

Without inclusion in the weekend events, those who were once connected to SSA as employees, faculty, or students would not have been able to access the site, Mosher said.

The weekend served as the official launch of a Kickstarter campaign to "Take a Leap of Faith for Change: Forgotten & Abandoned to Vibrant & Purposeful," a building campaign aimed at opening the vacant SSA campus to the community.

"I felt a lot of gratitude and encouragement," Mosher said. "There was a lot of gratitude that somebody was trying to do something and that (the Academy) was included in the reunion."

Advertisement

Last fall, Mosher discovered the abandoned grounds of her former high school, and her dismay prompted hopes of restoring and re-purposing the site. The initial shock has finally worn off, she said, because she is moving forward with that hope.

"I'm starting now to envision what it's going to be," rather than merely what it was.

Mosher's dream is to see the Academy become a multi-purpose, multi-generational community focal point. She wants to approach the challenge on three different levels: 1. Purchase of the property via contributions to the nonprofit Academy Community Campus & Event Center through an LLC account set up at Cañon National Bank; 2. Refurbishing of the facility by alumni; and 3. The gathering of ideas, which already is under way.

"I would love to entice people to come to me with their ideas," Mosher said.

None will be disregarded, and all are welcome, whether big or small, nonprofit or for profit. She hopes to see many entities on the former SSA site, such as a community garden, crafts and skills certification classes, a model-train display related to the area's history and health and nutrition enterprises to name only a few.

"We're trying to maintain the long-standing integrity of the campus while serving the community," Mosher said.

Event attendee, Jane Schissel, taught social studies at the Academy from 1984-89 and only recently learned about Mosher's Kickstarter campaign. She also has envisioned the Academy being "very vibrant again," and considered possible uses, such as a retreat and wellness center and summer theatre.

Schissel thought the property had been sold and contacted Sister Karen Bland who put her in touch with Mosher.

"I want to work to help get some investors," said Schissel, who is now a high school librarian for the Boulder Valley School District. Her inspiration was "a call to be a part of this in some way."

Sally Fieth, former SSA instructor and employee from 1969-2001, shares Mosher's and Schissel's vision of restoration.

"I think somebody needs to use it," she said. "There are so many possibilities if everyone just works together."

Mosher and others invite not only alumni but the entire community to become a part of the site revival. With the Kickstarter campaign, Mosher hopes to generate sponsorship interest toward the purchase of the property. She has opened an account at Cañon National Bank with seed money so those interested in participating financially can donate to Sunday Drive Enterprises, LLC.

Mosher said she encourages people to ask themselves, "Is there something I can do?" Whether giving of their time, talent, skills or finances, everyone has something to contribute.

"I know what mine was," she said. "To push forward with this plan."

The 6.9-acre property includes a three-story dormitory with commercial kitchen, school and theatre, chapel and library, gymnasium, pool house, historical fine arts center and other buildings. It is owned by an out-of-state investment group and is listed at $2.35 million.

For more information, visit lifeagainat615pikeave.blogspot.com or email kmosh5@aol.com.