Candace Cameron Bure says that it was her life outside of the spotlight that drove her to bulimia and attributes overcoming the eating disorder to her Christian faith.

Candace Cameron Bure says that it was her life outside of the spotlight that drove her to bulimia and attributes overcoming the eating disorder to her Christian faith. Sidewalks TV, CC BY ND 2.0

Candace Cameron Bure is most known for playing D.J. Tanner on the 90s sitcom Full House. In a new book, titled Balancing It All, the actress reveals that she battled body image issues and bulimia after the show, when she moved to Montreal with her husband, Valeri Bure. "I talk about the emotional struggle that I had in dealing with just a totally new life," she told OMG! Insider. "That really was the time of identifying with being an actress and that being my whole life, and then now being someone's wife and moving to a new city, a new country even."

Bure says that, ironically, she did not struggle with body image issues as a teen on Full House. She attributes her then-positive self image to her parents and the producers of the show who never told her to lose weight or change her appearance in any way, according to E! News. “I was protected and it was never brought up … That was even sensitive, they asked me, ‘Would I feel comfortable doing an episode about that?’” Instead, it was when she was thrust into a new life and a new role of mother and wife that she began practicing unheathy eating habits that eventually developed into bulimia.

Bulimia nervosa, commonly known as bulimia, is an eating disorder characterized by eating large amounts of food and then trying to get rid of the ingested calories in an unhealthy way. This trend — of binging and purging — is serious, and potentially life-threatening. According to Mayo Clinic, symptoms of bulimia include preoccupations with body size and weight, forcing yourself to vomit, using laxatives after eating, and feeling like you can’t control your eating behavior. Bulimia can lead to any number of health complications, including heart problems, dehydration, digestive problems, anxiety, and depression.

Now, at age 37, Bure has overcome her battle with bulimia and hopes that her story can help others who are facing similar challenges. The publicly devout Christian told OMG! Insider that it was her faith that allowed her to triumph over her eating disorder. "I turned to food for comfort and had to find a different source, 'cause clearly it wasn't a healthy way to deal with things,” she said. “So that's really when my faith was kicked up a notch and sought comfort in my relationship with God — and not with food."

For more on Bure’s incredible journey back to good health, visit OMG! Insider on Yahoo.