While the "fair & balanced" Fox News does have some left of center contributors, it maintains a stable of conservatives, some of whom are in the totally batshit crazy category such as Sandy Rios who has compared same sex love to the rape and torture perpetrated by Ariel Castro. Fox's newest contributor, Dr. Ben Carson, isn't quite this extreme about teh gay; but his views on women's reproductive rights are straight out of the misogynist playbook of the radical anti-choice movement which has brought us such luminaries as Todd "legitimate rape" Aiken. At last week's Values Voters Summit, Carson reinforced the right wing narrative that there is no war on women and the patriarchy knows best about what we silly, misinformed women really need when it comes to our lady parts. True story.

H/T Raw Story

Dr. Carson, who also said, at the Values Voters Summit, that Obamacare is "the worst thing to happen to America since slavery" (Forget the Civil War, Jim Crow, the struggle for civil rights), provided his righteous Christian audience (Jesus and me and the hell with thee) with some red meat. He deftly morphed right wing talking points about evil Obamacare with those of evil reproductive rights: “And that’s the reason that your health should be controlled by you and not be the government. But when we’re talking about things that are important, life is important. And that includes the life of the unborn.” (And then it's OK for the government to get between a woman and her gynecologist!)

He went on to excoriate those pro-choice Svengali's who try to impose their stinking thinking on to us silly gals: You know, there are those of us in this society who have told women that there’s a war on them because that cute little baby inside of them, they may want to get rid of it and there are people that are keeping you from doing that." In further illustrating how we women are easily led, mindless creatures, he continued: "And women say, ‘No, no, they’re not doing that to me! No!’ And they get all riled up."

In a stunning rhetorical coup de grace, he proclaimed that there is no war on women because - wait for it - "men give up their seats to pregnant women." (As was said in that great film classic, Plan 9 From Outer Space, "that proves it.") Carson brayed about how the war on women is really a war on babies. (Who cares about the circumstances of the woman who find herself with an unintended pregnancy or a pregnancy that involves a seriously medically compromised fetus?) In slut shaming the women who have had abortions (Cuz that's what it's all about), he railed about the number of "babies" destroyed and how "we have the nerve to call other societies of the past, heathen." (Uh, isn't that the nomenclature used by Christians to describe not just past societies but modern day Americans who are gay, atheist, liberal Protestants, Jews, and Muslims...)

He saved his best for last: “What we need to do is re-educate the women to understand that they are the defenders of these babies.”

Uh, huh. Yep. That's just what we need. Re-education of women. Sounds a little Stalinist to me and I thought these folks were orgasmic about personal freedom. Just saying...