Eugene Lucas was working as a nurse practitioner at a clinic when the doctor he was collaborating with died. That meant he’d need to find another doctor to work with.

He called one to see if the doctor could continue his practice with him, but the doctor turned him down.

“He had no interest,” Lucas recalled.

So Lucas, who is an assistant professor of nursing for Wilkes University, had to leave the clinic — and the patients he had developed a rapport with.

“Once you develop relationships, especially in behavioral health, people cling to those relationships,” said Lucas, who has been a nurse for 35 years and a nurse practitioner for 16 years.

Lucas and some other proponents of a proposed law making its way through the state legislature say it could help people who need mental health assistance by allowing nurse practitioners to practice without the oversight of a doctor. The bill, which is in committee in both the state House and Senate, has its detractors. Legislators said it would probably stay in committee until the state’s budget crisis is addressed.

Under the current system, nurse practitioners can prescribe medicine, diagnose illnesses and provide other medical services. However, they have to do so in a contractual relationship with a medical doctor who oversees prescriptions.

“This new law opens up more access than it does anything else, because it allows a nurse practitioner to open up practice anywhere,” said Lucas.

The Pennsylvania Medical Society isn’t supporting the bill.

Saying the doctor-patient relationship is the “cornerstone of American medicine,” society president Scott Shapiro said the best approach to health remains a team-based approach with the doctor at the head.

He was quick to add that he didn’t want people to think the society is against nurse practitioners.

“They’re a very valuable part of the team,” he said.

While proponents of the change say this would help provide more access to medical care in rural areas, Shapiro said the society would work with individuals who wanted to move to those regions by finding doctors who would work with them.

A point of contention with the bill for the medical society is the amount of training nurse practitioners receive compared to medical doctors. While nurse practitioners have received graduate level studies and additional hours of clinical work, the amount of hours differs between nurse practitioners and doctors. According to the American Academy of Family Physicians, a nurse practitioner spends between 2,800 to 5,350 hours in residency while a family physician will have gone through 20,700 to 21,700 hours.

If the legislature passes the law, Pennsylvania will become the 22rd state to give nurse practitioners autonomy.

“I think it’s a responsible move to allow them to have full practice authority,” said state Sen. John Yudichak, D-Plymouth Township, a co-sponsor of the bill. “It certainly seems like a trend in health care.”

State Sen. Patricia Vance, a Republican from Cumberland County, wrote the bill that is in the Senate. A nurse, she is the chair of the senate’s Public Health and Welfare Committee.

Vance said the bill was written with the general health needs of Pennsylvanians in mind. She believes freeing the nurse practitioners will allow the state’s growing number of seniors to get adequate care more quickly.

“I think that’s where they really come into play,” Vance said.

The Hospital and Healthcare Association of Pennsylvania is taking a watch and discuss approach to the bill, said Paula Bussard, the group’s chief strategy officer.

With more residents getting access to health insurance because of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, the pool of customers is growing and creating more demand on the system, she explained.

“We still have a shortage of individuals to help assess and make that initial assessment,” she said.

A nurse who is credentialed can make that initial assessment.

“We want every Pennsylvanian to be accessing the right care in the right time in the right place,” Bussard said, later adding “It’s important that stakeholder voices and concerns are respected and those discussions occur.

pabdalla@citizensvoice.com

570-821-2066

States that have given nurse practitioners autonomy:

Alaska, Arizona, Colorado, Connecticut, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Maine, Maryland, Montana, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island, Vermont, Washington, Wisconsin and Wyoming. Washington, D.C., also allows for nurse practitioner independence.