Breast cancer patients depend on insurance and support systems to overcome the disease, and while breast cancer has a survival rate of more than 80 percent, the cost can be crippling for some. Connie Miller, a 52-year-old entrepreneur, lived alone on her Denton County ranch when she received the news that she had breast cancer.

“I had scheduled my annuals, and I knew I had a pea-sized lump in my right breast,” Miller said. “After the mammogram, the nurse took me aside and said, ‘We need to take you across the hall for an ultrasound.’”

At first, Miller thought the medical team was being a little aggressive with their concern until the ultrasound raised several red flags. Not only did she have a tumor, it was of the triple-negative variety and it required surgical removal.

Breast cancer affects 1 in 8 women and kills more than 40,000 per year, according to BreastCancer.org.

Triple-negative breast cancer, however, poses its own unique threats in women — and men — with this type of tumor.

Most treatment for breast cancer targets estrogen receptors, progesterone receptors and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2. Triple-negative tumors lack these receptors, severely decreasing the patient’s treatment options.

After hearing her diagnosis and getting a second opinion, Miller started making arrangements for treatment. By that point, her tumor had grown to the size of a golf ball.

Miller’s best friend, Allison Barton of Krum, took Miller to Previty Clinic for Surgical Care in Beaumont for treatment on the recommendation of another friend, Lisa Saulsberry. Saulsberry happens to be the first assistant to the general surgeon, Dr. Garrett Peel, who works at the Beaumont clinic.

Miller calls Barton her “best friend ever,” and the two made the 300-mile journey together.

“It’s comforting to know that your best friend is watching over you during surgery,” Miller said.

Even though the tumor was successfully removed, its triple-negative status remained a point of concern for doctors. After the surgery, Miller still had to face radiation treatment and chemotherapy.

Both types of therapy are painful and grueling for the people who suffer through them. Miller had to do two radiation treatments a day for an entire week after her surgery.

“I just slept,” she said. “All I did was sleep.”

While chemotherapy has proven to be an effective cure for various types of cancer, Miller hit another hurdle during her treatment. Her body had an adverse reaction that caused her to cough so severely that she even broke a rib at one point.

The doctors ended her treatment a week early. Round 2 of chemo treatment didn’t prove to be much better, as the concoction of chemicals caused her to break out into a rash over most of her body.

To top it off, the chemotherapy caused damage to her heart and lungs. In total, Miller had three extended stays in the hospital.

Afterthoughts

Even though Miller’s cancer is gone, she has gained a new perspective. She credits her support network for helping her battle the disease, but she sadly reflects on the relationships that were also cut out of her life.

“Some of your best friends walk away. For whatever reason, who knows? But maybe it’s because they can’t handle it,” Miller said. “At the same time, friends you didn’t know you had step forward and become a pillar of strength.”

While losing friends remains the biggest disappointment that Miller faces, she also has much to say about certain charity organizations and foundations.

Even though her business had gone under, she received very little help from any local or national nonprofits because she says she had “too many assets.” If it wasn’t for the insistence of her mother and brother, she wouldn’t have even registered for “Obamacare” — something she considers to be the saving grace of her struggle.

“I was so afraid of losing my ranch,” Miller said. “I came within one month’s payment of foreclosing on my home. Being unemployed, I didn’t qualify for any public assistance. I tried everything.”

A cancer-free tomorrow

Miller’s journey through the white, fluorescent-lit hospital hallways has come to an end. After making a full recovery, she decided it was time to get back to living by completing her bucket list. She recently was in Michigan riding horses and reconnecting with her family and currently is on a trip to Japan.

In a twist that could come straight out of a Nicholas Sparks novel, while Miller was receiving her treatment, she met David Harris, a lay minister in the United Methodist Church. In the beginning, he was there to offer her prayers and support — often driving five hours to sit with Miller in the “chemo chair.”

Miller found comfort in his visits and after spending time with him over this past year, the two are engaged to be married.

“Who meets somebody in a chemo chair, right?”