Willow Creek worshippers make care packages for prisoners

hello

The standard paper bags were packed with a few simple items -- Krispy Kreme treats, inspirational books, a journal and a Christmas card with a calendar.

But Willow Creek Community Church Senior Pastor Bill Hybels said they contain something more -- hope for a population that is often without it, and for whom the journey through the state's penal system will be long and in some cases permanent.

Worshippers at Willow Creek in South Barrington and its satellite campuses this weekend helped prepare about 70,000 of the packages -- one for every person incarcerated in Illinois.

Hybels said the number sickens him.

"I just thought 70,000 people alone in a cell on Christmas Day. Seventy-thousand. It was heartbreaking and it gave me greater resolve," he said. "I said, 'Well then let's do one for every single one of them. Let's not leave anybody out.'"

Among the worshippers were Schaumburg residents Laura and Will McKinney, members of the church for 30 years.

"These people are basically alone. They're unloved. We're reaching out with our love to touch them, particularly at this time of year," Will McKinney said.

Heather Larson, executive pastor, said the items, including the bags, were cleared with the Illinois Department of Corrections.

"Once we give the gifts, it's in their hands," she said, adding that the treats are the items most in demand.

The church began distributing the care packages two years ago, but this is the first year all state prisoners are expected to receive one. The church has been ministering to the incarcerated for years, and its members often visit prisoners.

"When an iron door closes behind you and you hear the click, you realize, well now I'm locked in while I'm going to do my pastoral visit here, but I anticipate the click of the key to let me out," Hybels said of a visit to prison. "For a prisoner, they hear the final click -- and many of the prisoners I visit are never going to get out."

During Sunday service, Steve Carter, director of evangelism, talked about a recent visit to Stateville Correctional Center near Joliet, where one of the volunteers shouted the last two syllables of the word hallelujah, getting the prisoners in the cells to respond.

Carter related the prison ministry to scripture, referring to the apostle Paul's being held captive.

The service also featured an interview between Hybels and Burl Cain, warden of the Louisiana State Penitentiary in Angola. Cain has transformed his prison, which now has 28 churches functioning within its grounds.

A video was shown in the service, containing testimony from a church volunteer named "Joe," who served time in prison for attempted murder and after being released, attended services and found enlightenment.

Brandon Grissom of Elgin, who led the worship during the service, told the audience about how he experienced the emotional strain and the complexity of having family members in the prison system.

"I'm so thankful that we're part of a church that has a vision for extending the love of Christ to those who are incarcerated," he said.