Photo: Associated Press Whenever the final book on the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is written, the year 2016 may not garner the most lengthy of chapters in terms of implementation. Most of Obamacare's policy and rules changes have been enacted (or in some rare cases, tweaked.) Heck, it might not garner much more than a footnote. But benefits professionals across the nation know better — 2016 is a shaping up to be a pivotal year in the PPACA story. Start with the numbers. Now that the nation is a few years into PPACA, there's no consensus on whether the law is making health insurance more affordable or insuring more people. Reports on health insurance rates have been widely reported, but those figures are based on parts of the law that are already in effect and carriers that have submitted rates to state insurance commissioners for 2016. Complete your profile to continue reading and get FREE access to BenefitsPRO.com, part of your ALM digital membership. Benefits:

Your access to unlimited BenefitsPRO.com content isn’t changing. Once you are an ALM digital member, you’ll receive: Critical BenefitsPRO.com information including cutting-edge post-reform success strategies, comprehensive service provider listings, educational webcasts and videos, resources from industry leaders, and informative eNewsletters.

Exclusive discounts on ALM, BenefitsPRO Magazine and BenefitsPRO.com events.

Access to other award-winning ALM publications including LifeHealthPro.com, ThinkAdvisor.com and Law.com. Register Now Already have an account? Sign In X Sign in with your ALM Account Remember Me Or... Sign In With LinkedIn

The politics Ever since Obamacare's passage, Republicans in Congress have taken every opportunity to try to replace or repeal the law. Recently departed House Speaker John Boehner announced the effort to repeal PPACA almost as soon as the ink from President Obama's pen dried after signing the bill into law. Since then, several attempts at replacement were made, but they were fought off by PPACA's supporters.

“To have them added into the small group market was going to cause a big increase in premiums,” says Marcy Buckner, vice president of government relations for the National Association of Healthcare Underwriters. “We were part of a coalition with groups like ourselves and carriers. Oftentimes, the carriers and agents aren't on the same page, but we worked well on this. It was a great success.” Under the PACE Act, though, individual states are still able to determine what constitutes a small- or large-group employer. Some states, such as New York, are holding the line at 100 employees. Compounding the confusion over the the law's requirements is the fact that some employers have already shifted their offerings to comply with PPACA's original language.