Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck is closing its hospital-based pediatric clinic for poor children at the end of April, and will transfer their care to a physician with a private office close to the hospital.

Holy Name Medical Center in Teaneck

The hospital is also moving its adult clinic off-site, to offices on Queen Anne Road, as of April 13.

Families of the 990 children with medical records at the pediatric clinic have been receiving letters from the hospital explaining the change. The hospital has offered to transfer their records to the office of Dr. Howard Fisher, a solo practitioner whose office is two blocks from the hospital.

Almost all of the children receive insurance coverage through the state Medicaid program, which will continue to pay for their care at the doctor’s office. The move will save the hospital an undisclosed amount of money, free up space on the ­hospital’s main floor, and move the patients into a private-practice model of care, said Dr. Adam Jarrett, the hospital’s chief medical officer.

“It’s certainly part of our mission to care for people who are underserved,” Jarrett said. “We feel very strongly that we are continuing to meet that mission.”

Fisher is “required to take all comers,” regardless of ability to pay, said Jarrett.

Hospitals shifting load

The change is the latest example of a hospital shifting the work of a hospital-based clinic to other operators for whom care of the poor is a financially viable business model. While hospitals lose money on their clinics, non-hospital providers often receive higher reimbursements and have lower expenses for providing the same care.

Hackensack University Medical Center and Englewood Hospital and Medical Center both transfered their clinics over the last seven years to North Hudson Community Action Corp., which is paid more for their care by the federal government.

Pediatricians have become more willing to accept Medicaid patients because of a bump in reimbursement under the Affordable Care Act, said Michael Maron, Holy Name’s president and chief executive officer. The hospital, under its contract with Fisher, will be responsible for any shortfalls for the care of uninsured patients, and will continue to provide financial counseling and social services to the patients — including help enrolling in Medicaid, if they have not already done so. He will receive $125,000 per year to help with any additional support staff needed and to compensate for his on-call hours, the hospital said in a letter to state officials about the change.

“We’re mirroring the services provided here [in the clinic] at the pediatrician’s office,” said Sheryl Ann Syby, administrator of wom­en’s and children’s services. Last year, the clinic averaged 18 visits a day, a spokeswoman said. Fisher said he did not expect the additional patients to affect his practice.

Conditional approval

The state Health Department approved the pediatric arrangement as long as Fisher “continues to provide care to all new and existing clinic patients.” If the relationship with Fisher ends, Holy Name is required to reinstate the services or arrange with another doctor to do it, with no interruption to patient care, according to a letter from a Health Department official to Catherine Yaxley, a Holy Name vice president.

Closing the clinic will eliminate 4.6 full-time positions — including one doctor and several nurses — at the hospital, said Sheryl Slonim, executive vice president for patient care services. The letter to patients said that Dr. Norma Murray, the clinic’s long-time pediatrician, would no longer be associated with the hospital.

The clinic’s bright, many-windowed space, with examination rooms and a reception area, will be repurposed to serve as the office of Dr. Robert Rigolosi, medical director of the hospital’s renal care center, and as flexible offices for surgeons and other doctors providing follow-up care at the hospital, Maron said.

Email: washburn@northjersey.com