Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois will eliminate sales commissions on new individual health plans that take effect April 1, the Tribune has learned.

The state's largest health insurer notified insurance agents and brokers of the change via email Tuesday afternoon.

Blue Cross' cutback follows commission reductions by other insurers operating in Illinois. Insurers are cutting costs because of losses in the individual insurance market.

Their struggles are hurting compensation of insurance brokers and agents — the outside sales forces that help consumers and businesses navigate the often-complex decisions around buying coverage.

"This is going to harm the consumer," said Mark Brown, a certified financial planner in Naperville who sells health insurance. "We can't work for nothing."

In a statement to the Tribune, Blue Cross said it remains committed to expanding access to health care to Illinois residents.

"However, as the individual market evolves, we in turn need to make changes to the way we operate in order to continue offering sustainable health plan options to our members," the Chicago-based nonprofit insurer said.

Blue Cross offered no promises that it will restore commissions next year in the individual market. The company said in the email that it plans "to re-evaluate producer commissions" for the sale of new individual policies with Jan. 1, 2017, effective dates.

The Affordable Care Act has transformed the individual insurance market. Under the federal health care overhaul, insurers must provide a basic set of benefits and cannot turn away consumers, even if they are sick.

Blue Cross dominates the individual insurance market in Illinois. In 2014, the first year of the ACA, Blue Cross had some of the lowest-priced policies and scored more than 90 percent of the people who signed up for coverage. As of the second quarter of 2015, Blue Cross controlled nearly 80 percent of the individual market in Illinois.

Consumers who signed up for coverage, though, are using more medical services than insurance companies expected. Blue Cross and other insurers significantly raised prices last year on their 2016 individual policies to better match premiums to their claims experience.

The law also has been difficult for the broker industry, because it set up online insurance portals where consumers could purchase coverage on their own. But insurers have come to rely on brokers to help consumers select the right insurance plan.

Blue Cross is following in the footsteps of other carriers that have reduced commissions in the individual market. In January, Aetna said it no longer will pay broker commissions on new policies that are sold outside the annual enrollment period.

UnitedHealthcare, the country's biggest insurer by membership, last year notified its sales force that it would end broker commissions starting Jan. 1 in the 34 states, including Illinois, where the company sells insurance on the government exchange.

Eliminating commissions discourages sales of health plans that cost carriers money.

Blue Cross' cut does not affect renewals of individual policies or new or renewal sales in the group or in the Medicare market, the company said in the email.

The change affects agent compensation for policies sold outside the ACA open enrollment period, which ended Jan. 31. People can still sign up for 2016 coverage after certain life events, such as loss of a job, marriage, divorce or birth of a child.

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev