On this gorgeous Saturday in New York comes the news that Chelsea Clinton, 34, has given birth to a baby girl, Charlotte Clinton Mezvinsky. Chelsea, the only child of Bill and Hillary Clinton, lives in New York with her husband of four years, Marc Mezvinsky, a hedge fund manager and the son of two former members of Congress. She has been serving as vice chair of the Bill, Hillary and Chelsea Clinton Foundation.

She announced her pregnancy back in April and there was talk all this week at the Clinton Global Initiative that her baby was due any moment. Not only are Bill and Hillary Clinton finally the grandparents they’ve long wished to be, but now the pressing questions are these: Why did the joyous parents choose the name Charlotte, the French feminine diminutive of Charles, and who else has been named Charlotte over the annals of time?

Related: Hillary Clinton’s Steady March to a 2016 Nomination

While Americans await more details of Charlotte Clinton Mezvinksy's birth, here are some other famous Charlottes in history:

Charlotte Bronte: The 19th century English author (1816-1855) created Jane Eyre, a classic of Western literature, and was the older sister of Emily and Anne Bronte, also significant literary figures.

Charlotte Hawkins Brown: The teacher and educator (1883-1961) founded the Palmer Memorial Institute, a Southern prep school for African American students.

Charlotte Church: The Welsh soprano singer songwriter (born 1986) has sung classical and pop music and has sold more than 10 million records worldwide.

Charlotte Dujardin: The British Olympic equestrian champion (born 1985) won two gold medals for her team and individual dressage events at the 2012 London Games.

Charlotte Forten: The African American teacher and abolitionist (1837-1914) wrote extensive diaries that covered the Civil War and the years that followed it.

Charlotte Perkins Gilman: The American author, poet, feminist and sociologist (1860-1935) wrote the short story “The Yellow Wall-Paper” and encouraged women to gain economic independence.

Related: Just How Rich Is Hillary Clinton?

Charlotte Mason: The American socialite and philanthropist (1854-1946) was an important patron of such Harlem Renaissance figures as Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Thurston.

Charlotte Rae: The American actress and singer (born 1926) is best known for her work on the TV series Different Strokes and The Facts of Life.

Charlotte Rampling: The award-winning British actress (born 1946), active for more than five decades, was nominated for the European Film Awards Best Actress Award five times before winning in 2003.

Charlotte E. Ray: The civil rights activist (1850-1911) became the first female African American lawyer in the U.S. in 1872.

Charlotte Ross: The soap opera actress (born 1968) is known for her long run on Days of Our Lives and has twice been nominated for an Emmy.

Top Reads from The Fiscal Times: