Packers Blog The Journal Sentinel's team of Packers beat writers provide the latest news, notes and analysis SHARE

By of the

Green Bay – He didn’t feel rushed. The snap wasn’t bad. The wind was tricky at times, but not catastrophic. The footing wasn’t the greatest. But without reviewing the film, frame by frame for the evidence of what went wrong, Mason Crosby could really only come to one conclusion.



He just missed.



“I’m obviously disappointed in myself,” said the veteran Packers kicker.



It was a crushing defeat, especially given that it was Crosby’s onsides kick late in the game that helped line up the potential game winning field goal. Detroit’s Calvin Johnson couldn’t hang on to it, and Green Bay’s Damarious Randall did. The Packers’ feeble offense managed to get to the 34-yard line to set up a 52-yard field goal.



Crosby had made 25 of those 50-plus yarders in his career since 2007 out of 49 tries.



But the 50th attempt was a dud. It didn’t even get an arc. It sailed forward, apparently untouched, barely over the heads of the men on the field.



video player to embed in JSonline stories

“Don’t know exactly what happened,” said Crosby. “My process and everything was the same. (I’ve) hit those kicks a million times.”The Packers would have won 19-18 with it.Instead, they lost to lowly Detroit, 18-16.“I hate it,” said Crosby. “It kills me inside. My teammates – I’m going to make sure they know I’m going to keep working and that they can trust me down the line here.”If there was one potential area that might have tripped up Crosby, it may have been the turf. Punter Tim Masthay said the area in between the hash marks on the south end of the field was "chewed up pretty good."He hit high on the ball, meaning his plant might have slid in to the kick a little bit.“The field on that south end was starting to get chewed up a bit, but we’ll look at it, obviously – how the ball came off,” said Crosby. “My plant must not have been in the right spot. …“That side, you’ve got to stick a good plant. It’s a little softer on the south end, here. I felt confident with it, went about my business. … So I’ve got to learn from it and move on – but obviously I’m going to be disappointed about this one.“Obviously, I feel awful that I let my teammates down.”

Masthay said it was a tricky day for kickers in terms of the wind.



“I mean, you saw a number of miskicks and punts that were awry,” he said.



In fact, Crosby’s 44-yard field goal in the first quarter bounced off the left post before going in.



But Masthay said Crosby won’t be rattled by this game.



“He’ll be fine,” said Masthay. “Mason is one of the most exemplary Packers I’ve ever seen in my six years. Solid performer, stays composed, great in the locker room. I’ve got not a shred of worry about him. He’ll be fine.

"Mason's been an excellent performer here and had a good game outside of that one play, so no, there's not going to be any guys in here pointing fingers at Mason. Not at all.”