As deadline nears, insurers mull how to adapt to abortion rider law

Abortion is a volatile political and religious topic. But for insurers, it's also a customer relations question.



Some employers want to provide abortion coverage as part of a benefits packages to employees; others are vehemently opposed.



Deciding on a business course that makes financial and political sense among such varying views among customers is a challenge facing insurers this week.



Michigan insurers have a Feb. 1 deadline to file plans to meet new state law that prohibits fully insured health plans from offering elective abortion coverage as part of their basic health insurance plan. Beginning March 13, women renewing or signing up for new insurance must purchase a separate abortion insurance rider to be covered.



Will Blue Cross Blue Shield of Michigan offer a separate policy for elective abortions? Unlike most insurers, Blue Cross already includes elective abortion coverage in most of its general health group policies unless an employer chooses to opt out.



One source told Crain's that Blue Cross is studying the feasibility of offering the abortion rider for about $1 per year. Blue Cross declined to comment.



Under current Blue Cross plans with abortion provisions, employers that want to opt out of abortion coverage receive a rebate of about $1.20 per year per covered life, sources said.



Experts told Crain's that abortion insurance riders will be inexpensive because an abortion in Michigan costs between $400 and $700 for a procedure conducted within 16 weeks.



In a statement, Blue Cross said last week it is still assessing the implications of the law and will announce its decision in February.



"There is considerable complexity to administering changes to systems to comply with the definitions in the law," said Helen Stojic, Blue Cross' director of corporate communications, in a statement to Crain's. "We will need some time to determine how to implement these changes."





"There haven't been any filings" for abortion riders to the Michigan Department of Insurance and Financial Services, Udow-Phillips said. "I expect we might not know anything until right up to the filing deadline (Feb. 1)."



Udow-Phillips said small businesses or individuals interested in whether their health plan will cover elective abortions should ask their agent or insurer what they may do.