This year has featured a number of health policy milestones, with healthcare legislation out of Washington D.C. impacting clinicians, patients, and health systems around the country.

We contacted a variety of leading health policy experts to ask:

What was the most important event affecting healthcare in 2015 and what will be its implications or after-effects in 2016?

The participants this week are:

Daniel Derksen, MD, director, Arizona Center for Rural Health and professor and chair, community, environment & policy department at the University of Arizona Health Sciences in Tucson

Jonathan Weiner, DrPH, professor, health policy & management at The Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health in Baltimore

Michael A. Morrisey, PhD, professor and chair, department of health policy and management at Texas A&M University in College Station

Gail Wilensky, PhD, economist and senior fellow at Project HOPE in Milwood, Va.

Robert Field, PhD, MPH, JD, professor, Kline School of Law and Dornsife School of Public Health at Drexel University in Philadelphia

Robert E. Moffit, PhD, senior fellow at the Heritage Foundation in Washington D.C.

Daniel Ehlke, PhD, assistant professor, health policy and management at the State University of New York-Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn

Alan Weil, JD, editor-in-chief, Health Affairs in Bethesda, Md.

Alan Sager, PhD, professor, health policy and management at Boston University

David Howard, PhD, professor, health policy and management at Emory University in Atlanta

Daniel Blumenthal, MD, MPH, professor emeritus, community health & preventative medicine at the Morehouse School of Medicine in Atlanta

The ACA: Continued Expansion

Daniel Derksen, MD: In my view the most important event affecting 2015 healthcare was the dramatic increase in those with coverage and health insurance in the United States resulting from the two major coverage provisions of the Affordable Care Act: Medicaid expansion and the Marketplace. While much progress was made in 2015, much work remains in 2016 to help eligible uninsured understand and take advantage of coverage through Medicaid and the Marketplace. Of those eligible for coverage who enrolled -- the participation rate -- this needs attention especially for rural, Hispanic/Latino, American Indian, and special populations.

Jonathan Weiner, DrPH: The ACA is the biggest healthcare story for 2015; more than that, the ACA is definitely the biggest healthcare story of the last 50 years and probably the next 5! Even with the Medicaid-expansion debacle, with red state governors using millions of their citizens as political pawns, and even with Obamacare's many imperfections, this legislation is singularly responsible for achieving the highest rate of insurance coverage in US history. Yes, we've got a way to go before getting everyone on board, and yes, the ideal balance of cost, quality, and access still eludes us, but it's about time that we've joined the rest of the developed world in trying to provide affordable healthcare to all those living in our nation.

Michael Morrisey, PhD: From my perspective the biggest issue of 2015 was the weak performance of the health insurance exchanges. Surprisingly price sensitive consumers led to low enrollment largely driven by those in poorer health. This resulted in narrower networks, more cost sharing, and higher premiums for 2016.

The ACA: Continued Debate

Gail Wilensky, PhD: The most important event was the Supreme Court's ruling confirming the use of Federal exchanges rather than just "exchanges created by the state." The ruling both clarified the use of Federal exchanges which unexpectedly has become the major source of insurance coverage in the ACA and also indicated that major refinements or replacements of the ACA will require new legislation rather than reliance on the judiciary -- as is appropriate.

Robert Field, PhD: I would have to start out with the Supreme Court decision in King vs Burwell. I think that politically, its implications are extremely important even though on a practical level, in the long term, it may not be the most important development. What it did was to allow the Affordable Care Act to proceed as it had been and to give the supporters of the act more ammunition in the political debates to argue that the act and the way it was being carried out were legal and constitutional. The main effect is that it keeps the implementation of the Affordable Care Act moving and that makes it harder for opponents in Congress or potentially in the White House in 2017 to undo it.

Robert Moffit, PhD: The Senate's repeal of the major provisions of the Affordable Care Act through the budget process of reconciliation will soon send legislation to the President's desk, which was a promise to the electorate. This move guarantees there will be continued debate on a failing law in 2016, and sets the stage for a new health policy in 2017.

An SGR Fix, Finally

Daniel Ehlke, PhD: Perhaps the most astounding health policy development of 2015 was Congress's ability to finally (after only 18 years ...) come together and pass a (more) permanent Medicare 'doc fix.' In the short to medium term this will ensure providers are compensated promptly, though over the longer term it could complicate the picture immensely by propelling forward the quest to link payment to performance.

Alan Weil, JD: The most important event of 2015 was the repeal of Medicare's Sustainable Growth Rate payment formula for physicians and its replacement, with strong support from organized medicine, with two new value-based payment models. This wholesale embrace of the principle of paying for value, in the complete absence of any certainty regarding how that principle will be operationalized, will serve as the platform for major debates and disruption in physician compensation for many years to come.

Other Healthcare Highs and Lows

Alan Sager, PhD: Health care spending blew past $10,000 per American in 2015 while the main tools to slow spending continued to be higher out-of-pocket (OOP) payments and narrower caregiver networks. Results will include growing medical insecurity, particularly for lower-income Americans, as they cut use of care across-the-board, along with rising medical debt; together, these will boost political anger.

David Howard, PhD: The final data aren't in yet, but it seemed like the pace of consolidation in health care accelerated. In the short term, health systems will bargain for higher reimbursement rates. Longer term, systems may wring savings by improving patient management, allocating patients to the right treatment setting and provider, and reducing physicians' incentives to provide high cost, low value care.

Daniel Blumenthal, MD: The most important event in healthcare in 2015 was the Global Climate Summit just concluded in Paris. The agreement reached by the participants, by reducing global warming, has the potential to prevent literally hundreds of thousands of deaths every year from tropical diseases, malnutrition, and other consequences of climate change. In the more immediate future, reduced air pollution will have a salubrious effect on asthma and other respiratory diseases.