Drinking a glass of water before bedtime wasn’t an option for 17-year-old Adriann Bechtle this past winter.

That’s because she had nowhere to go to the bathroom in the middle of the night, back when she was homeless and living in a car.

Avoiding liquids was one of many things Bechtle had to remember before hunkering down in the car for the night with her mother, 47-year-old Jage Bechtle.

Were her shoes within reach? Were her eyeglasses close by, but not so close that she’d roll over and crush them in her sleep? Was her phone charged so that its alarm would wake her for school?

Sitting on what is now her living room couch, in an apartment near downtown Eugene, Bechtle — who has bright red hair and dark brown eyes — recalled her recent experiences.

“It takes a lot of mental energy, being homeless,” she said. “The mental logistics of eating, drinking water, changing my clothes, going to the bathroom — everything but that base level of need becomes superficial.

“Decisions become simple because they’re all about survival.”

The problem of K-12 students being homeless has proved intractable and unrelenting, persisting through economic booms and busts. Each year in the past decade, about 700 Eugene School District students have been homeless. The most recent data identified 722 homeless students in the district in the 2014-15 school year, according to the Oregon Department of Education.

It’s cold comfort that the number of homeless students in the Eugene district isn’t growing, as it is in much of the state. Across Oregon, there were 20,524 homeless students, or about 4 percent of the overall statewide student body enrolled in public schools in 2014-15 — approximately a 9 percent increase from the previous year, when there were 18,902 homeless students enrolled in public schools throughout the state.

Statewide numbers have fluctuated over the past five years, but the most recent numbers for the 2014-15 school year were record-breaking, the state said. The rise is due in part to a lack of affordable housing and to economic instability for lower-income families, the state said.

Also, the state has changed its way of counting homeless students, which now requires designated officials to record student identification numbers into a secure system, instead of schools providing counts by grade level. The change may have boosted the count, the education department said.

“This year’s numbers brings the homeless student count up to levels not seen since the 2010-11 school year,” Deputy Superintendent of Public Instruction Salam Noor said.

“The majority of the increase was in the number of students identified as ‘unsheltered,’ meaning they live in vehicles, tents, and other forms of substandard housing.”

“Despite an improving economy, many Oregon families are still struggling just to meet their most basic needs,” Noor said.

Dona Bolt, a homeless-education specialist for the state, said the reviving economy has not helped all pockets of society.

“For many of our families, the economic recovery has not yet become a reality,” Bolt said. “Families are still looking for work, struggling to get by, and trying to provide a sense of stability to their children. It is critical that we all work together to address the complex underlying issues and get more children — and adults — into permanent and stable housing.”

The Great Recession, which lasted from 2008 to 2012, hammered Oregon’s jobs base. Housing costs levelled or dropped, but that was no help to the many people who lost their weekly paychecks.

Hundreds homeless locally

Nearly 500 homeless students were enrolled in the Springfield School District during the 2014-15 school year, and slightly more than 407 in the Bethel School District in west Eugene.

In terms of percentage of student body, the Bethel district had the greatest number of homeless students, more than 7 percent of all students. In Eugene and Springfield, it was closer to 4 percent.

Donna Butera, homeless liaison for the Bethel district, said there’s no simple explanation for the higher percentage of homeless students in Bethel compared to Springfield and Eugene.

“It takes longer for people at lower income brackets to recover from a recession,” Butera said, “So some people are still trying to recover from falling deep into debt or getting an eviction, or getting their house foreclosed on.”

Additionally, Butera said, in the past several years the district has been more thorough when asking about housing situations and can more easily identify homeless students during registration in the fall.

The state education department defines homelessness in a number of ways. Students are considered to be homeless if they live at a shelter or a motel, or share space in an unsheltered situation, such as a vehicle, tent or other substandard housing.

Student homelessness rising

Student homelessness has been on the rise in Oregon and across the nation for years, Bolt said.

“I’ve been coordinator of this program for nearly 30 years and have yet to see a downward trend in the number of homeless children and unaccompanied youths in the state,” Bolt said. “School district liaisons, bus drivers, counselors and other school staff work hard to help these kids and their families, but the numbers keep growing.”

Bolt said the rate of student homelessness is much higher in other states, including California and Washington. State education data indicates there were 35,511 homeless students in Washington and 269,663 in California during the 2014-15 school year.

“It’s not specific to Oregon,” she said. “Homelessness is on the rise everywhere that there’s social and economic struggle, a lack of housing, a lack of way to take care of people in chronic poverty.”

Bolt said even climate change is playing a part.

“Climate change is a big factor,” Bolt said. “The drought in California is pushing people up north to Oregon, and people losing jobs because of a lack of water in California are progressing north in search of a better life.”

Deborah Dailey, homeless liaison for the Eugene district, said the heart of the homeless problem in Eugene is a lack of housing that low-income families can afford.

A substantial increase in such housing “would be the answer to the homelessness that I see,” she said.

Dailey, who’s held her position in the district for eight years, said Eugene is well known for helping the homeless.

“People come from all over the United State (to Eugene) because they’ve heard about the services and support in the (school) district,” Dailey said. “There’s an acceptance of homelessness in Eugene, and they feel it. They show up here and somebody genuinely cares about them and they feel supported.”

The McKinney-Vento Homeless Assistance Act, enacted by Congress in 1987, established the right of homeless youth to have equal access to the same free, appropriate public education provided to other children, Dailey said. The law requires that every district designate a homeless liaison and collect data about homeless children enrolled in K-12 public schools.

Reauthorized under the No Child Left Behind Act, the program works to ensure that homeless children are provided with immediate access to education services, despite the lack of a permanent residence, a supervising parent or legal guardian, or records from a previous school.

4.0 grade point average

Adriann Bechtle is one of those students.

But despite not having a permanent address, a shower or a real bed, Adriann Bechtle maintained a perfect 4.0 grade point average at North Eugene High School during the two months she was homeless. The teenager still has perfect grades and is also considered by school officials to be talented and gifted.

Bechtle began taking high school-level math classes at the age of 9, official school transcripts show. “She was multiplying fractions using different common denominators when she was 8 years old,” Jage Bechtle said of her daughter.

“I did it in the car so I wouldn’t get car sick,” Adriann Bechtle confirmed with a smile.

Jennifer Coates, a language arts teacher at North Eugene High School said Adriann Bechtle is one of the brightest students she’s ever had.

“She was pretty remarkable from the first day she got here,” Coates said. “She’s in my international baccalaureate langauge and literature class, and we had been studying a set of vocabulary for three or four weeks. The test was the day after she started and I told her she didn’t have to take it, but she did anyway and got 100 percent — she’s extraordinary.”

Coates said on top of being extremely intelligent, the teenager also has incredible speaking skills, self motivation, and is kind and helpful to everyone in the class.

“It’s not very often that I see a student like this, especially as an 11th grader,” Coates said. “Occasionally I see some of those qualities in other students but she has it all together. She knows herself, she’s incredibly smart and she has such a positive attitude in the classroom. She’s just so wonderful.”

Adriann said she maintains high expectations for herself.

“I really like to learn,” Adriann Bechtle said. “I’m a really curious person and anything I can do to learn something I do. I want to become the best I can be. I try not to compete with other people, only with myself.”

Adriann said she hopes to become a biomedical engineer, an architect, a veterinarian or maybe something else.

“I have a lot of things I’m interested in, and a lot of passions, so I’m not entirely sure what I’ll do,” she said.

A new beginning

While Adriann says she’s maintained straight A’s throughout school, she’s relatively new to Oregon.

She and her mother moved to Eugene from Minneapolis last fall. They were in search of a new beginning in a place where they could grow their own food throughout the year, not trudge through hip-deep snow in the winter, and, most importantly, feel safe.

“We wanted a different environment, physically, politically, socially and culturally,” Adriann Bechtle said. “I didn’t like how everything was so spread out (in Minneapolis); it wasn’t environmentally friendly.”

The mother-daughter duo say they faced their share of adversity in the Midwest, ranging from domestic abuse to living on the streets to hospitalizations due to autoimmune diseases.

Both suffer from a number of health complications, including being severely allergic to a number of foods and ingredients in foods. Both are vegans and say they maintain specific diets to ensure their health — which complicated almost everything about being homeless.

“We couldn’t eat a lot of the food in the (local) food pantry,” Adriann Bechtle said. “And the only thing I can eat at school is the salad.”

Bank account drained

So in August, the two and their small 4-year-old dog, Toastie, a poodle-bichon mix, set out for Eugene to find short-term housing, set up Adriann Bechtle’s schooling and get some leads on work opportunities and community resources.

The two were on the road for about six weeks, and took some time to explore the area, camping near Cape Perpetua for a week. During that trip, Toastie ate dark chocolate and had to be rushed to the veterinarian.

“We drove as fast as possible to Florence and she had an emergency vet visit that drained our bank account,” Jage Bechtle said.

They returned to Eugene where some new friends let them camp in their backyard for a few days. Despite their costly visit to the veterinarian, mother and daughter affirmed that Eugene would be their new home, and found a roommate at a residence in the Churchill area. They headed back to Minnesota to pack their belongings, and Adriann arrived back in Oregon for keeps, via train, on Oct. 14.

Upon their arrival, the two were somewhat surprised by their roommate’s new pet — an 18-month-old pitbull. Within 24 hours, the dog had attacked Toastie, and the small family knew it had no choice but to move out.

“And just like that, we were living in our car,” Jage Bechtle said.

‘The car saved our lives’

On a recent weekday afternoon, Jage and Adriann Bechtle sat sipping tea on opposite pieces of furniture in their living room. Both agreed that if they hadn’t had their Toyota Scion, they would not have survived their period of homelessness.

“I think what saved us was being able to lay down at night,” Jage Bechtle said. “So many people out on the streets and in shelters don’t necessarily have that luxury.”

The mother and daughter also said their relationship and respect for one another played an important role.

“I’m an introvert,” Adriann Bechtle said. “So 24/7 human contact is not something I can deal with very well.”

Adriann Bechtle said she used to walk for several miles each night just to have time alone to think and breathe. But other times, she and her mother would take walks together to talk through their stresses and to temporarily escape the confines of their small SUV.

One major struggle they experienced was the lack of places to park their car at night.

“I wanted to be respectful of those around us,” Jage Bechtle said. “I didn’t want people to feel like we were intruding or invading their personal space, but I also couldn’t afford to get a parking ticket.”

She said they found that the south Eugene area seemed to have the most street parking where she felt like she could stay out of the way.

‘It exhausts your soul’

The two are now in an apartment and have a relatively stable life, buying food through the federal food stamps program and paying $333 a month in rent, with the balance of the rent paid by the federal government’s Section 8 program.

“We searched online using the computers at (the St. Vincent dePaul) First Place Family Center and did a lot of research into rental companies and managers beginning in August,” Jage Bechtle said. “First Place even helped us out with our deposit. We called and looked at places as often as we could and asked about future availability.”

Almost all of their belongings, including a piano, were found in the “free” section on Craigslist.

“We moved mostly everything in our car,” Jage Bechtle said. “I’m just really resourceful.”

Jage Bechtle said because of her Crohn’s Disease diagnosis and other autoimmune ailments, she also receives a small monthly stipend from Medicaid, and does odd jobs to earn cash.

Jage Bechtle said the worst part about being homeless was the constant moving.

“It exhausts your soul,” the mother said. “You never feel welcome, you live like you can never stop moving. There’s also a constant fear each night, ‘Am I going to be able to feed my daughter tomorrow?’ I just had to keep telling myself, ‘It’s one foot in front of the other, just keep going.’”

Follow Alisha on Twitter @alisharoemeling. Email alisha.roemeling@registerguard.com .

More Eugene School District articles »