The Cotopaxi Community Church board of directors is introduced during the church's 90th anniversary celebration Sunday at Stagecoach Ranch in Cotopaxi. From left is Avis Dempsey, Jeremy Cole, Vern McKee, Rod Farmer, Associate Pastor Bill Cosson, Chairman Rob Canterbury and Jack Strid. Pictured in the background is Pastor Bill Korf. Not pictured is board member Darren Buss. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

»

Cotopaxi — Cotopaxi Community Church may appear a small body of believers nestled in a tiny community, but it's actually quite substantial when it comes to family, friends and faith.

The church celebrated its 90th anniversary Sunday with fellowship and worship at the Stagecoach Ranch. About 250 parishioners, friends, neighbors and guests attended the half-day celebration. Guests from ages 2 weeks old to 96 years old came from as far as California, Texas and Nebraska.

Board Chairman Rob Canterbury said about 60 people attend Sunday School each week and an average of about 140 people attend Sunday morning services. He said seven Bible studies are offered throughout the week.

Jerry Estis served on the board of directors for more than 50 years, before retiring just a couple of years ago. He first began serving when he was in high school, when the church met in the science room of the Cotopaxi schoolhouse.

"It wasn't my idea to get on the board, it was my mother's idea, and I didn't argue with my mother," he said.

What he has enjoyed most about his time with Cotopaxi Community Church, he said, simply is Jesus.

Associate Pastor Bill Cosson said the church will continue to move forward, reaching out to "anybody" that God leads into their paths and will continue to abound in the work of the Lord.

Advertisement

"We are going to emphasize the sanctity and the value of life, just as God does," he said. "Whether a person is 90 years old, 50 years old, 20 years old, a teenager, a 2-and-a-half week old baby or a minus 8-month-old baby, we want to come along side what scripture says and recognize the value of human life."

The church also will continue to emphasize the sanctity of marriage, work to bring up the next generation, and future generations, in the nurture and admonition of the Lord and continue to support missions.

The church supports about 19 missionaries and designates about 40 percent of the church budget to the mission field, Cosson said.

He said in 90 years, he hopes people will recognize Cotopaxi Community Church continued steadfastly in the apostles' doctrine, in fellowship, in the breaking of bread and in prayer.

Cotopaxi Community Church formally was organized by 53 residents in April 1924. The church officially was incorporated in 1936 and in the same year, received a donation of land, where the church is located today, by Mrs. B.S. McCroy. A permanent building was constructed and opened to the community in 1956.

For more information, visit https://facebook.com/cotopaxicommunitychurch" title="facebook.com">facebook.com/cotopaxicommunitychurch.