ORLANDO, Fla. - In just months, tens of thousands of central Floridians will lose their health care coverage. They fall into a gap -- uncovered by Medicaid and making too much for significant stipends afforded by the Affordable Care Act.

[WEB EXTRA: Read the proposed bill ]

"God forbid I get some kind of illness or whatever that I won't be able to get the health care that I need," said 31-year-old Charlene Caines.



Caines can't get health care coverage. She works and goes to school but falls into the "no coverage" gap.

"She's in the gap. She's too low to qualify for subsidy through the market place or too high and doesn't qualify for the current Medicaid programs," said Larri Thatcher, of Orange County Legal Aid Bar Association.



For example, a single parent with one child falls into the gap of no coverage if he or she makes between $5,436 a year to $15,730 a year.

More than 50,000 Orange County residents fall into this area.



"In the last month alone we have seen 37 people that have come to legal aid for some other reason, but while here have told us they do not currently have health care coverage," Thatcher said.

Without Medicaid expansion, 1 million Floridians will continue to go without coverage.



And without low income pool funding hospitals will not be reimbursed for taking care of the underinsured and uninsured. The LIP federal funds are scheduled to be eliminated by June 30.



That means hospitals in Orange County alone face a tremendous financial loss.



Florida Hospital in Winter Park is at risk of not getting nearly $15 million.



Orlando Health in downtown Orlando could lose $25 million.



Health Central in Ocoee risks losing almost $10 million.



The total: Orange County could lose almost $50 million.



"It's expensive care and funding for it is absolutely critical," said Bruce Rueben, president of Florida Hospital Association. "We are working very hard toward getting this coverage extended through Medicaid using federal funds to pay for it,"

To date, the Florida Legislature has declined Medicaid expansion, but Rueben said he's optimistic.



"Things are moving in a positive direction, (but) there is a long long way to go. Last year I would have said it's impossible; this year I believe it is very possible that we will see this coverage implemented in Florida."



That's good news for Caines.

"Hopefully they can come to a conclusion to bridge the gap so that those that are in that gap can have coverage as well," Caines said.



If you have insurance, either private or through the Affordable Care Act, you may wonder why this affects you. Hospitals only have a couple ways to handle those kinds of losses.



One way is to shift the burden of those unmet costs to those who can pay, meaning an increase in commercial insurance rates and out-of-pocket cost.

The second way is to reduce or eliminate services, which affects everybody's care; not just those who are uninsured or underinsured. Everyone loses access in that case.

Copyright 2015 by ClickOrlando.com. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.