Lt. Rob Williams saw three vehicles in the rushing waters of Rock Creek when his North Metro Fire & Rescue crew arrived after a section of Dillon Road collapsed in torrential rain Thursday morning.

One car was completely overturned, and the roaring creek was buffeting the vehicles. One man was able to climb through the window of his pickup truck without aid and get to safety, leaving two people trapped.

The emergency workers could hear cries for help coming from the partially submerged car, and decided to make that rescue first.

“We hoped someone was alive in the second vehicle, but realized that he had been under water for quite a while,” Williams said.

They lowered a two-man rescue raft into the creek, and Williams, and North Metro firefighter Brian Gaines climbed in.

They reached the car, broke out a window, helped him climb out, and gave him a life jacket, said Williams, 35.

“When he came out and saw the other vehicle he said ‘My friend is in there, I’m not sure who else is in there,'” Williams said.

The rescuers took the man to safety and made a plan to get whoever was in the third vehicle out, then lowered the boat back into the water.

Williams, who has whitewater experience, and another firefighter, John Cook, made their way to the upside-down car and Williams climbed on top.

He could hear tapping coming from within, and the faint sound of a voice. “I think he was standing on the roof and breathing in an air pocket,” he said.

The firefighters hooked cables that stretched from a tow truck onto the car and the vehicle was winched onto its side.

Williams broke the window and handed the frightened occupant a life jacket. He could see that the man, who had been in the water for at least an hour, was tired and large enough that he wouldn’t be able to escape through the window, Williams said.

“By then the window was open,” so he reached in and unlocked the door.

Rushing water was rocking the vehicle and the cable holding it shifting, so rescuers on the shore winched it into a standing position.

Williams and Cook pulled the man out.

The car had shifted closer to shore, and when the firefighters got the man out, other rescuers were able to reach him and carry him up the embankment, Williams said.

“It was a great feeling, it was a great team effort.”

Firefighters from Lafayette and Westminster fire departments were also involved.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee