More Difficult Question: Which Agency?

The Affordable Care Act significantly limited the types of insurance policies that can be sold in the individual market both inside and outside of health benefit exchanges. As a result, it has also brought renewed attention to the unique system of health insurance regulatory authority we have in California.

Every other state regulates health insurance through the department of insurance (or equivalent), whereas our state divides this authority between the California Department of Insurance and the Department of Managed Health Care. The history of our bifurcated regulatory authority dates back to the late 1960s and early 1970s, and the controversies surrounding early efforts by the state to contract with prepaid health plans to provide care to Medi-Cal beneficiaries. These difficulties led to enactment of the Knox-Keene Act in 1975, which placed the regulatory authority for HMOs in the Department of Corporations rather than in CDI.

Why create this separation of authority in the first place? According to a 2001 CHCF report, a major reason is that CDI at the time was viewed as too aligned with health insurers rather than consumers. In 1999, the Legislature passed further managed care reforms and established DMHC as a separate agency to oversee these reforms and to regulate Knox-Keene licensees.

Given this history, has the time come to put authority over all health insurers back into a single agency? Obviously, achieving greater administrative efficiency is a powerful argument in favor. But the more difficult question is, if only one agency should regulate health insurers, which one should it be? And, do the historical reasons for maintaining separate agencies still apply? The simple answer to the latter question is no; California has had a series of insurance commissioners who have demonstrated their willingness to take on industry interests and to fight for consumer interests, including the current commissioner. But bringing all health insurance regulation back into CDI risks diluting the success of DMHC as a separate, distinct agency protecting the rights of Californians enrolled in managed care.

On the other hand, moving all regulatory authority into DMHC eliminates the unique role the Insurance Commissioner can play as an elected, rather than appointed, official. On balance, a single agency exclusively focused on health insurance regulation seems the best option, because of both the size of the market and the unique nature of health insurance compared to most other forms of insurance. This argues for DMHC being the sole agency. Perhaps the Legislature should also consider making the head of an expanded (and renamed) DMHC an elected official to assure the public that the head of such a combined agency will continue to be sufficiently responsive to consumer interests. Otherwise, simply combining all health insurance regulation in a single agency will seem like a gain in administrative efficiency at the expense of a lost, independent voice on behalf of consumer interests.