Ten years after their debut performance in Ireland, Celtic Woman is a worldwide phenomenon. The group’s live shows are packed with fans of all ages who have purchased 8 million copies of their nine albums and eight DVDs, and made their annual PBS telecasts among the most popular ever viewed.

Now on an 80-city North American tour to celebrate its 10th anniversary, the multiplatinum ensemble will treat Wolf Trap’s Saturday evening audience to breathtaking choreography, imaginative staging, gorgeous gowns and a fusion of contemporary and traditional music.

The stunning production features four personable women who have become role models for young girls everywhere. The three admired vocalists and the energetic fiddler backed by vivacious Irish dancers and a full band of traditional Celtic instruments will perform favorites from past seasons delivered with high energy, joy and the emotional lift that always accompanies beloved Irish songs.

All four members of the group grew up in Ireland and began singing and playing several instruments during childhood. Susan McFadden, who made her professional debut in Dublin as Kathy in “Singin’ in the Rain,” joined Celtic Woman after starring in the West End productions of “Grease,” “Seven Brides for Seven Brothers” and “Legally Blonde.”

“We’re doing well for girls who perform Irish music that, for a long time, was associated with male groups like the Chieftains and The Clancy Brothers,” Miss McFadden told The Washington Times. “Our fans tell us our music is uplifting, spiritual and even healing at times of trouble. It’s rewarding to know that what we do has that effect.”

Mairead (pronounced “maw-raid”) Nesbitt, the animated fiddler in constant motion on stage, has been with Celtic Woman from the start. Known for playing lead fiddle on Michael Flatley’s “Lord of the Dance” and “Feet of Flames” on the soundtrack of “Riverdance” and for Walt Disney’s film “Tinker Bell,” Miss Nesbitt accompanies the three vocalists during their solo turns and shared numbers alike.

The singers have alternated over the past decade and even throughout this season, which finds former members returning for several weeks at a time, to the delight of their devoted fans. Alex Sharpe, a full-time member from 2008-2009, is back to perform at Wolf Trap.

Mairead Carlin has sung with Carly Simon, toured the U.K. and Ireland with American singer-songwriter Don McLean and signed with Decca Records for her debut album “Songbook” with the London Philharmonic Orchestra.

The magnificent gowns created by famous Irish designer Synan O’Mahoney blend into the theme of each show, just as the music inspires audience interaction.

Miss McFadden emphasizes the importance of the give and take with fans whenever they join in on favorite songs like “Danny Boy,” “Oronoco Flow” and “Amazing Grace.”

“We have so much fun singing with them,” she said. “Their participation makes each concert special. We love that they energize and empower us.”

The goal of this tour, she points out, is to take the show and the music back to their roots. Instead of bombarding the audience with elaborate lighting and special effects, the atmosphere is more peaceful and ethereal.

“Wherever we perform in this country, we see little girls dressed up in princess outfits,” Miss McFadden said. “I have nieces aged 12 and 13 who often watch [entertainment that] I feel is not appropriate for their age, so it’s very rewarding to see young girls arriving at our show with their families and eager to hear lovely songs presented in a beautiful setting. Our concerts are parties for our fans.”

IF YOU GO

WHAT: Celtic Woman 10th Anniversary World Tour

WHERE: Wolf Trap Filene Center, 1635 Trap Rd., Vienna, Va., 22182

WHEN: Saturday, 8 p.m.

INFO: Tickets $30 to $65 by calling 703/255-1868, 877/965-3872 or visiting www.wolftrap.org