Naomi Garcia, 11, holds a sigh up to passing cars in Longmont last March protesting the Boulder district attorney's decision not to seek murder charges against Dynel Lane in the death of Michelle Wilkins' unborn child. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

Readers' picks 10. Eldora expansion OK'd, but only within resort's boundaries 9. Flap over forced landmarking of home on Boulder's 12th Street 8. The death of Bob Munson 7. The killing of Boulder bear No. 317 6. CU-Boulder hosts Republican debate 5. First phase of U.S. 36 overhaul complete, tolls rolled out 4. Google breaks ground on 330,000-square-foot Boulder campus

It started off as a stabbing call on March 18 at a Longmont apartment nestled in a cul-de-sac, the second in less than 24 hours after police had been at the scene of a gruesome but unrelated murder-suicide since the previous evening.

The stabbing soon became international news after police, who knew the call involved a pregnant woman, followed a trail of blood to the basement, where they found the woman barely conscious, and missing her baby.

Her name is Michelle Wilkins, 27, and she survived in spite of being choked, bludgeoned and stabbed in the neck with a broken lava lamp before her unborn child was cut from her womb.

The baby, who Wilkins planned to name Aurora, did not survive.

Later that day, police arrested 35-year-old Dynel Lane, who they say brought the baby to the hospital, at first claiming it was hers, then telling officers she believed she had killed Wilkins in self-defense and cut out the baby to save it.

Wilkins would tell police she had come to Lane's home after responding to a Craigslist post advertising maternity clothes. She said the two talked for about an hour, and she was about to leave when Lane offered to show her some baby clothes in the basement and attacked her as they walked downstairs.

Wilkins told police that she said "I love you" to Lane in an attempt to stave off the assault, to which Lane replied, "If you love me, you'll let me do this."

There was a call to charge Lane with murder, and state Rep. Gordon Klingenschmitt went as far as to say that the attack on Wilkins was a "curse from God" upon the United States because of legal abortion. (Wilkins would return a donation Klingenschmitt sent to her.)

Prosecutors were unable to charge Lane with murder because an autopsy showed that the baby had never lived outside her mother's womb. Lane is charged, however, with six felonies, including attempted murder and unlawful termination of a pregnancy. She faces more than 100 years in prison.

Lane is scheduled to stand trial in February, but her attorneys are trying to have the case moved out of Boulder County because of the large amount of publicity it has received.

In the days following the attack, a swarm of journalists descended upon Longmont, and Wilkins appeared on the "Dr. Phil" show in September to tell her story. She has given no other interviews.

At the time of the attack, Wilkins recently had moved to Longmont from North Carolina, but has since left Colorado.

Lane remains in custody at the Boulder County Jail on a $2 million bond.