With the rollout of the Affordable Care Act, everyone seems to have something to say about the state of health, fitness, and health care in America. Where you live can affect your health, so NerdWallet, a consumer advocacy website, evaluated the nation's 50 largest metropolitans to reveal the healthiest places in America.

Bostonians have lots to be proud of, as Beantown landed the top spot in NerdWallet's rankings, which were based on the following criteria:

Residents' fitness levels: NerdWallet assessed the overall fitness of residents in line with the American Fitness Index, a composite index that includes data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), environmental factors from the Trust for Public Lands, rates of disease, and other government data. NerdWallet also assessed the percentage of residents with healthy weight levels and the percentage of residents who engage in physical activity, according to data from the CDC.

NerdWallet assessed the overall fitness of residents in line with the American Fitness Index, a composite index that includes data from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC), environmental factors from the Trust for Public Lands, rates of disease, and other government data. NerdWallet also assessed the percentage of residents with healthy weight levels and the percentage of residents who engage in physical activity, according to data from the CDC. Health care accessibility: NerdWallet analyzed the percentage of residents who have health insurance, as well as the number of available physicians per 100,000 residents.

Boston beat out other health-conscious cities such as San Francisco and Seattle. Thanks to Romneycare, the state's 2006 health care reform law signed by then-Governor Mitt Romney, more than 95 percent of Bostonians have health care coverage. This is the highest percentage of any city evaluated in the study. The city of Boston has also taken great measures to improve its residents' physical fitness. The city, with help from the Boston Public Health Commission and the Boston Red Sox, offered free fitness classes throughout the summer. Mayor Thomas Menino's "Million Pound Challenge" also prompted residents to collectively try to lose a million pounds and move ten million miles.

Other places that made the rankings include San Francisco, Seattle, and Minneapolis.

More information on the healthiest places in America can be found here.

Follow NerdWallet on Twitter: http://www.twitter.com/NerdWallet.