Please enable Javascript to watch this video

FAYETTEVILLE (KFSM) – A family which lost a house in a fire this week says they still have all they need for Christmas this year, as long as they have one another.

The Ruiz family has gathered in Fayetteville to celebrate Christmas this year, after 70-year-old Luis Ruiz’s ranch home caught fire on Monday.

“The material things are not what matters during Christmas,” said Micah Edwards, who was in the home when it caught fire. “I`m just so glad that we are all able to be here alive and unscathed by all of this.”

The family says the home, which is in Summers, AR, was destroyed in the fire.

“Any time, and every time, that holidays came around, that`s where we would reunite,” said Soledad Ruiz, Luis’ daughter. “There was nothing to salvage out of the home. It was a total loss. All of our memories are there. And now, it is no longer there.”

Edwards says he helped carry his grandfather to safety.

“We had to lift him up, and carry him out. It was so hard to do with all of the smoke and everything,” Edwards said.

Soledad Ruiz live in Chicago. She was in Illinois when she heard the news.

“I woke up crying. I could not believe it. I could not believe it was happening to us,” Soledad said. “I could not believe that it was within the week of Christmas.”

She gathered her children, and made the long trip to Arkansas, making the best of the situation during the holiday to see her father.

“His smile, his eyes, he brightened up because we were there,” Soledad said. “We are just real happy that we are able to be together.”

The family has since bought new gifts for everyone.

But, they say the most valuable gift this year, is having one another.

“The material stuff is not what matters,” Soledad said. “It is about being with your family.”

“That is what I am most thankful for,” Edwards said.

The family says the home was insured.

Luis Ruiz was treated at Washington Regional in Fayetteville for pneumonia, and smoke inhalation.

He was released Wednesday (Dec. 24) and is now celebrating the holiday with his family.