JIEP is a quarterly, online-only journal focusing on interprofessional healthcare topics, including education, practice, policy, policy makers and research. JIEP is devoted to the dissemination of high quality, peer-reviewed articles covering the full spectrum of interprofessional healthcare education, including first professional degree, post-licensure learners, practitioner continuing education and faculty development.

Topics covered in JIEP include:

Assessment of educational outcomes

Clinical practice, interprofessional healthcare research, opinion, public policy and review

Innovative teaching and learning strategies

New school and program start-up strategies

Real-world healthcare activities that promote collaborative, efficient and cost-reducing measures

JIEP founding Co-Editors-in-Chief are Devin R. Nickol, MD, Associate Professor of Medicine at UNMC, for the interprofessional education (IPE) portion, and Antonio E. Puente, PhD, Professor of Psychology at the University of North Carolina Wilmington, for the interprofessional practice (IPP) portion.

Excited by JIEP's potential to advance the field of IPE, Dr. Nickol said, "In recent years, IPE has developed into an essential feature of healthcare education, a fact increasingly recognized by accrediting bodies. JIEP will serve a vital role by encouraging scholarly work in the field and providing practical resources to educators responsible for implementing IPE for students in all health disciplines."

Dr. Puente added, "JIEP's role will be to reflect the future of health care, as supported by the NAP as the sponsoring official organization. With the advent of the Affordable Care Act and modern day health care, interfacing and integrating all aspects of health care will be the standard, and the journal will be a scholarly pioneer in this critical movement."

Nina Milton, Publishing Director at Elsevier, said, "We are excited about the launch of JIEP, which gives us an early presence in the rapidly growing field of IPE/IPP. JIEP's joint focus is an ideal union because clinicians cannot practice without education and the goal of education is practice. We are also thrilled to be collaborating with NAP and UNMC, both highly influential in the IPE/IPP arena, lending credibility to JIEP's role in advancing interprofessional education and practice with resulting improved patient outcomes."

###

For more information or to submit an article, go to: http://www. jieponline. com/

About National Academies of Practice (NAP)

NAP is a nonprofit organization founded in 1981 to advise governmental bodies on the healthcare system. Distinguished practitioners and scholars are elected by their peers from fourteen different health professions to join the only interprofessional group of healthcare practitioners and scholars dedicated to supporting affordable, accessible, coordinated quality healthcare for all. For more information go to: http://www. napractice. org/ eweb/ startpage. aspx

About the University of Nebraska Medical Center

UNMC was originally the Omaha Medical College and was founded in 1881. The college became affiliated with the University of Nebraska in 1902. UNMC is one of four campuses of the University of Nebraska. In the most recent ranking of graduate schools by U.S. News & World Report, the primary care program of UNMC ranked sixth of 153 medical schools, and its rural medicine program ranked ninth.

About Elsevier

Elsevier is a world-leading provider of information solutions that enhance the performance of science, health, and technology professionals, empowering them to make better decisions, deliver better care, and sometimes make groundbreaking discoveries that advance the boundaries of knowledge and human progress. Elsevier provides web-based, digital solutions -- among them ScienceDirect, Scopus, Elsevier Research Intelligence and ClinicalKey -- and publishes nearly 2,200 journals, including The Lancet and Cell, and over 33,000 book titles, including a number of iconic reference works.

The company is part of Reed Elsevier Group PLC, a world-leading provider of professional information solutions in the Science, Medical, Legal and Risk and Business sectors, which is jointly owned by Reed Elsevier PLC and Reed Elsevier NV. The ticker symbols are REN (Euronext Amsterdam), REL (London Stock Exchange), RUK and ENL (New York Stock Exchange).