Gov. Tom Wolf and his Corrections Secretary John Wetzel celebrated a milestone for the state's prison system Tuesday: an inmate count that has slid back underneath the 50,000 mark.

The Dec. 31,2015 inmate count was 49,914. That's down 842 from the end of 2014, and represents the lowest total inmate count for the state prison system since March 2009.

That was the year then-Gov. Ed Rendell imposed a parole moratorium following a recent state parolee's involvement in the shooting death of a Philadelphia police officer.

DOC's inmate population ticked past the 50,000 mark and peaked at 51,757 in June 2012.

The prison population started to level off after the implementation of changes made possible by the 2012 Justice Reinvestment Act, Wetzel said, which allowed courts to steer more low-level offenders away from state prisons through the use of electronic monitoring programs, halfway houses and the like.

"When you put low-risk offenders in the state prison they come out worse," Wetzel said Tuesday. "That doesn't make sense for anybody."

Those and other internal departmental changes have now led to significant inmate count downturns in each of the last two years.

Wetzel said the more recent changes include better provision of drug and alcohol and other treatment services to inmates and parolees who need them; and a new focus on job training for exiting inmates to help them become more employable upon release.

Wolf stressed none of the changes involve any kind of early release of dangerous criminals. DOC data also shows that the commission of new crimes by those recently released are also trending down.

"This is not making Pennsylvania less safe," the governor said. "We're doing this within the constraints and the assumptions of the legal system that is intended to keep Pennsylvania safe."

Wetzel said the decline in population has other benefits, not the least of which is slowing the growth of the corrections budget.

At a cost of $41,000 to house an inmate for a year, "every cent that we spend on corrections is less money to spend on the things that we want to spend money on," Wetzel said.

Shifting that money to education or economic development programs, in turn, helps attack the root causes of crime, he said.

Wetzel said specific contributors to last year's population decline were:

* Expansion of Vivitrol treatments - a drug that helps treat addiction by blocking the "high" from opioids like heroin and reduces cravings for them, and was initially piloted here with female inmates - to certain male prisoners.

* The expansion of Medicaid through the Affordable Care Act. Wetzel said that's allowed more inmates, especially those needing ongoing substance abuse or mental health treatment, to sign up for coverage when they go into a pre-release program.

With roughly 18,000 inmates coming out of the state system each year, and more than 90 percent of them having substance abuse or mental health histories, Wetzel noted that's a lot of folks with significant needs for help to stay straight.

Getting them that help from Day One of their release "is a big deal for... having people go out our back door less likely to commit a crime than when they come in our front door."