A dozen physicians in Texas were paid more than $1 million by medical device companies, pharmaceutical companies or group purchasing organizations from August 2013 through the end of 2014, according to data released by the federal government as required by the Affordable Care Act.

But a San Antonio orthopedic surgeon was paid more than any other physician in the state, receiving nearly $24 million in such payments during that time, an analysis by the news organization ProPublica in Washington shows. Most of those payments were for his inventions.

Dr. Stephen Burkhart, president of the San Antonio Orthopaedic Group, is one of the world's top experts on shoulder arthroscopy, a minimally invasive surgery done to repair shoulder dislocations or torn rotator cuffs. He collected more than $16.6 million in payments in 2014 and more than $7.3 million over a five-month period in 2013 when the data was first collected — far outranking what any other doctor in Texas received, ProPublica's analysis shows.

Burkhart also stood out as the third-highest-paid physician across the nation, based on the data released by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. Almost all of the payments Burkhart received were from royalties for shoulder arthroscopic products he invented.

"Orthopedics is a specialty that is very device dependent, if you want to think of it that way," Burkhart said in an interview with the San Antonio Express-News. "If you look at all the things orthopedic surgeons do — it's not only arthroscopy, but total joint replacements. Those are mechanical devices, and they always undergo improvements."

CMS collects and publishes the fee data for its Open Payments program to promote transparency in financial relationships between the health care industry and providers like physicians and teaching hospitals, the federal agency said in a report to Congress this month.

The payments generally are for royalties and licensing, consultation fees, speaking fees, research activities, gifts or to cover dining or travel expenses, CMS said.

"Disclosure of the financial relationships between the industry and health care providers is not intended to signify an inappropriate relationship, and Open Payments does nothing to prohibit such transactions," CMS' report to Congress said.CMS began collecting such financial data in 2013 and did so for only part of that year, from August through December. It gathered a full year of data in 2014. The agency posts the information for public viewing on its website.Burkhart's shoulder arthroscopic products are sold by Arthrex Inc., a global medical device company for which he has been an exclusive consultant for more than 20 years.Arthrex sells more than 300 products Burkhart designed or invented. The surgeon, who has more than 40 patents in the United States and an equal number overseas, said the bulk of the payments revealed in CMS' data go to physicians like himself who invented medical products."Ever since this website became available to the public, I knew there would be questions because there is no context that is offered when they list these numbers," Burkhart said of CMS' data.

Burkhart, who has been an orthopedic surgeon in San Antonio for 35 years, was one of three doctors who began doing shoulder arthroscopies in 1983. He has published about 170 scientific papers and three textbooks on the subject."There's so many sales that they make — that's why it adds up," he said of Arthrex. "They're a worldwide company." Each sale of a product he invented generates a small royalty, typically ranging from 1 to 5 percent of the sales price, he said.

Nationwide, such payments by the health care industry to providers totaled $9.92 billion during the 17-month period analyzed. This reflected payments to more than 683,000 physicians and 1,143 teaching hospitals by more than 1,600 manufacturers and group purchasing organizations in the health care industry.

No other physicians in Texas were paid nearly as much as Burkhart.

Two other San Antonio orthopedic surgeons, Dr. Michael Wirth and Dr. Charles Rockwood, both faculty members at the University of Texas Health Science Center, also made the list of physicians paid more than $1 million during the 17-month period, according to ProPublica's analysis. They were ranked in eighth place and ninth place, respectively, on the news organization's list of the highest-paid physicians in Texas.Wirth was paid more than $1.6 million, while Rockwood was paid more than $1.5 million, ProPublica found.The vast majority of those payments were royalties for products they and other inventors developed that resulted in patent-protected shoulder arthroplasty implant products, health science center spokesman Will Sansom said in a statement.

Neither Wirth or Rockwood were available for comment, the health science center said. The two physicians did not respond to emails or phone calls from the San Antonio Express-News."The implant products invented and developed by Dr. Rockwood revolutionized shoulder replacement in patients suffering from disabling arthritis and have led to great technological advances in this field," Sansom said. "Dr. Wirth's inventions have advanced the field further."The bulk of the money Wirth received was paid by DePuy Synthes Products LLC and DePuy Orthopaedics Inc. Most of the money Rockwood received came from DePuy Synthes Products.All health science center faculty and staff are required to annually report any activities outside the institution for which they devote time or receive pay, Sansom said."The institution's conflict of interest committee considers any outside activity disclosure reports that indicate a possible conflict," he noted.To ensure propriety, Burkhart said he does not receive royalties for sales of any medical devices he invented that are used on any of his patients or anyone treated by his colleagues at The San Antonio Orthopaedic Group. He also does not get paid royalties for any of his products used at the medical practice's surgery center or at Baptist Health System, where he treats some patients.Other San Antonio physicians making ProPublica's list of the 20 highest-paid doctors in Texas were Dr. Charles Reasner, an endocrinologist paid $720,144 during the 17 months reviewed, mostly by pharmaceutical companies; Dr. Sherwyn Schwartz, an endocrinologist, who was paid $672,763, with the bulk of that sum coming from pharmaceutical companies; and Dr. Nancy Hinitt, a general practitioner, who was paid $637,957 by drugmaker Roxane Laboratories Inc.Reasner, Schwartz and Hinitt did not respond to requests for comment.

Seven of the dozen Texas physicians receiving more than $1 million from medical device companies, pharmaceutical companies and group purchasing organizations are orthopedic surgeons, ProPublica's analysis shows.