Childcare rebate: Productivity Commission calls for means testing, says subsidy should cover use of nannies

Updated

The childcare rebate for families should be means-tested, with middle and upper-income families paying more than they do now, a new report into the nation's childcare system suggests.

The draft Productivity Commission report also proposes the rebate cover the use of nannies, to allow more flexibility for families, especially shift workers.

Presiding commissioner Dr Wendy Craik says the recommendations in the draft report released overnight "seek to make child care more affordable, flexible and accessible".

They include replacing the existing multiple childcare subsidies with a single subsidy that would be means-tested and paid directly to the parents' choice of provider.

"The way we're proposing it in the draft report is that low-income families would receive up to 90 per cent of the cost of care," Dr Craik said.

"That would decline as income rises, with those at the upper end receiving a maximum rebate of 30 per cent."

Speaking to the ABC, Dr Craik conceded that some middle-income earners would also receive less than they do now under the proposed scheme.

"It does mean that families on a combined income of $160,000 or more would have less of their childcare costs paid," she said.

"They would certainly receive less under the system that we're proposing but they would still get some of their childcare costs met.

"What we say to them is what we've tried to do is make a system that's fair for the entire community so we're trying to create a greater subsidy to lower-income families."

While the report proposes subsidising the use of nannies, they would need to be appropriately trained with a certificate three or equivalent childcare qualification.

Dr Craik says many families have complained that the childcare system does not always provide flexible enough child care, especially those parents who work shifts.

"We had a lot of submissions from people who said: 'Well I'm a shift-worker and the childcare system doesn't meet my hours of work so we've employed a nanny'," Dr Craik said.

"And certainly if you have a number of children, having a nanny is an efficient way to meet those childcare costs ... and some people want to have child care occur in their home and not a centre."

She says the proposals in the report are aimed at encouraging tens of thousands of mothers back into the workforce.

'Middle-income earners struggling'

Some childcare centre operators have expressed reservations about aspects of the report, especially the means-testing of the childcare rebate.

Sheri Laidlaw, the director of Elfin House Community Childcare Centre in Rockhampton, says some families who will be subjected to means-testing are already finding it difficult.

"It's the middle-income earners that are struggling," she said.

"Lower earners do struggle but they get more help with their childcare benefit subsidy. It's the middle ones that don't get as much help because they are out there working two wages ... but basically one wage is coming back to cover childcare fees straight away so I don't think it's going to be a big help."

The owner of Sydney-based Heaven for Kids Daycare centre, Donna Mitrani, agrees.

"Especially if people have two or three children in child care, it's going to be totally unaffordable for families," she said.

Federal Childcare Minister Sussan Ley spoke to the ABC and appeared positive about the proposal to extend the subsidies to cover qualified nannies, which the Government had asked the Productivity Commission to examine.

"There is a role for in-home child care, clearly," she said.

"We've had so many submissions to that effect and I hear from parents all the time, worried all day that their boss is going to keep them back past the time the childcare centre closes.

"In the end, they decide to drop out of that level of the workforce, or maybe go back part-time or do a job they're not qualified or trained for.

"All of this detracts from workplace productivity and economic output for the economy as a whole."

But Ms Ley says the jury is out on the proposal to means-test the childcare rebate.

"At the moment we have no plans to means-test ... and we are really at an early point in the process by which we would see final legislation brought to the Parliament," she said.

"But also the Productivity Commission has asked for a lot of feedback, both about the way the cost model would be structured and how it would apply to people on different incomes."

The Productivity Commission has called for submissions on the proposals in the draft report.

The final report is due to be handed to the Government in October.

Topics: child-care, family-and-children, government-and-politics, business-economics-and-finance, australia

First posted