MetroHealth to hire SVP of population health

The phrase “population health” might be cliché to many working in health care today, but for The MetroHealth System, it’s a way of doing business. So much so, in fact, that the health system is hiring for the newly created position of senior vice president of population health.



The idea is to find someone who can help accelerate MetroHealth’s transformation from a health system that only cares for people when they’re sick into one that keeps people healthy. This individual, who will report directly to MetroHealth CEO Dr. Akram Boutros, will develop and lead programs that will help the system find the root causes of patients’ health risks and “upstream our intervention to make the biggest impact,” according to an email from Boutros.



This, of course, isn’t MetroHealth’s first foray in the population health arena.



As Medicaid eligibility expanded under the Affordable Care Act — and before that, through an experimental waiver in Cuyahoga County — the health system has retooled itself to manage the health care of these challenging populations. Some of those efforts include the usual targeted outreach to high-risk patients. Other efforts include offering patients transportation and even legal assistance.



The health system has also taken over the local care coordination efforts for CareSource, a nonprofit Medicaid managed care plan, and launched a Medicare accountable care organization. — Timothy Magaw





Giant Tonka truck revs up smiles at Clinic

The Ford Motor Co. brought a bigger-than-life-size Tonka truck — and plenty of presents — to the Cleveland Clinic Children’s Hospital for Rehabilitation on Thursday, July 30, for a Christmas in July event.



The vehicle has a dump truck body on one of Ford’s prototypes for a model year 2016 F-750 truck, said Mark Lowrey, marketing manager for the F-series fleet trucks. The company worked with Funrise Toy Corp., which has a license from Hasbro for the Tonka brand, to create the truck with the Tonka labels and in the trucks’ “iconic” yellow.



“The general public has really taken to this,” Lowrey said.



The vehicle was debuted at a truck show in March and has made appearances at kid-friendly events, Lowrey said, but the visit to the hospital was the first of its kind. Ford has a big presence in the Cleveland area, and the F-650 and F-750 will be made at the Avon Lake plant. The company wanted to do something for the community and show its commitment for the Cleveland area, Lowrey said. The toys were donated by Funrise. — Rachel Abbey McCafferty





Small business center goes to college

Small business owners on the far East Side now have plenty of free expertise under one roof.



The Ohio Small Business Development Center serving Lake and Geauga counties has moved to Lakeland Community College. Previously, the program had been co-sponsored by the Lake County Ohio Port and Economic Development Authority and split between two locations in Painesville and Kirtland.



The new location, located off Interstate 90 at the state Route 306 exit, will allow small business owners the opportunity to access the college’s other resources catered toward the business community, including free access to fully equipped, professional office space.



All of the resources from the Ohio Small Business Development Center will continue and are still free to residents of Lake and Geauga counties who own or want to start a small business. They can seek help with business planning, market research, human resources, regulatory guidance and finding capital and financing. — Timothy Magaw