This dispute needs to return to the courts.

Contractors for the Bureau of Land Management round up cattle belonging to Cliven Bundy with a helicopter near Bunkerville, Nev., in April. (Photo: John Locher, AP)

Our federal government has become so overtly oppressive in so many ways that ordinary citizens have decided that enough is enough, and they are prepared (and in some cases anxious) to take a stand somewhere. Anywhere.

The federal mismanagement of the events at Bundy Ranch has created a difficult and dangerous situation for everyone going forward.

OUR VIEW: Festering dispute invites more trouble

Federal authorities were eager to strap on the body armor, load up the armored vehicles and literally invade a cattle ranch, when the appropriate course of action would have been to place a legal lien on the rancher's cattle or use local law enforcement officers such as the county sheriff.

Even the sheriff recommended against the federal action, but acting with predictable arrogance, an overly aggressive and militarized federal law enforcement action prompted a predictable response from ordinary citizens.

Then a news media frenzy ensued that encouraged more people to come from far and wide to take a stand.

At the end of it all, federal authorities had to back off, but not before promising that they would return to finish what they started.

What a mess.

Another push by heavily armed federal agents is an invitation to violence, yet we cannot have a situation where citizens decide for themselves which laws they feel like following, or when and if they will recognize their own government as legitimate.

Today, Cliven Bundy is a celebrity who can raise large sums of money to fight for his cause in the courts. That is where this matter needs to return. Once a court reviews Bundy's claims as well as those of the federal government, a decision will be rendered that will need to be enforced.

When the time comes for that enforcement, local law enforcement is best suited to handle the task.

We remain a nation of laws and due process.

Bundy deserves to be heard, and in return he has a moral and legal obligation to peaceably abide by the results of a fair and impartial process.

But this process needs to begin afresh if it is to enjoy the confidence of our nation's citizens.

David Livingston is a Republican state representative from Arizona.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1myS6tX