Unresolved historical tensions continue to season modern-day debates on both sides. Before the Civil War, the majority of residents in the state were black slaves. Whites here were particularly concerned about slave revolt, and were the first to fire on Union forces, at Fort Sumter.

After Reconstruction, white South Carolina populists like “Pitchfork” Ben Tillman used violence and terror to disenfranchise newly freed blacks and usher in a long period of Jim Crow. A statue of Tillman, a former governor and senator, stands on the state capitol grounds despite recent calls to remove it.

But it was the battle flag that has stirred the most controversy over the years. And it was Ms. Haley, the child of Indian immigrants and the state’s first minority governor, who exhorted the Republican-controlled legislature to take down the flag in the aftermath of the Charleston massacre. Many black residents saw it as a generous, healing gesture, and a reason for optimism.

A few hours after the flag came down, Representative Joseph Neal, an African-American minister and 23-year veteran of the House Democratic caucus, paid a visit to Ms. Haley at her offices in the elegant 19th-century capitol, and praised her for her courage.

“She spent a lot of political capital in making it come through,” Mr. Neal said later. “But I also brought up the fact that there are some other issues that we need to talk about.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Many of them were related to South Carolina’s economy, which, like the American economy as a whole, has glaring racial disparities. Blacks have lower rates of homeownership than whites, as well as much lower median household incomes and per capita income levels, gaps that census data shows have not significantly narrowed in recent years.

The gap in the poverty rate has also remained stubborn. In 2013, census statistics show, about 27 percent of South Carolina’s black families were living in poverty. About 9 percent of white families faced similar economic troubles.

Photo

Indeed, in interviews with black residents in Spartanburg, a city of about 38,000 people, and elsewhere, economic issues were the most evident source of frustration. Some black residents, especially younger people, said it bothered them more than the battle flag ever had.

Porsha Porter, an aspiring sous chef, said she was barely making it in this region, known in South Carolina as the Upstate. Although business-friendly policies have long lured big employers like BMW and Michelin to the area, Ms. Porter, 26, said she was working two jobs, including one as a cook at a sports bar.

She was pessimistic about her ability to get ahead, and about the state of race relations.

“I don’t see it getting better at all,” she said. “I just don’t. There’s too many people with hatred in their heart.”

In their meeting, Mr. Neal pressed Ms. Haley on the Democratic priority of broadening Medicaid eligibility. Some 194,000 South Carolinians fall into the so-called coverage gap, meaning they make too much to enroll in Medicaid but not enough to qualify for tax credits to buy health insurance. Minorities make up 57 percent of the state’s poor, uninsured, nonelderly adults.

Ms. Haley has said in the past that she worried a Medicaid expansion would wreak havoc on the state’s budget. In the meeting, Mr. Neal said, the governor told him that someone would have to persuade her that the state could afford such a shift.

“That’s something I’d like to try to do,” Mr. Neal said.

Mr. Neal and other black leaders will have to persuade many more people than Ms. Haley, who has a difficult relationship with the legislature. But the governor is seen as a potential ally who could prove critical.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

She was elected in 2010 with Tea Party support and has been a vocal opponent of unions while promoting South Carolina’s business opportunities. But before the shooting at Emanuel A.M.E. Church last month, she had already made some moves that had heartened black liberals, including her decision to support a measure requiring police officers to wear body cameras.

Last year, she backed a revision to the state’s education funding formula, which led to more money for South Carolina’s poorest school districts.

Photo

Last week, her deputy chief of staff, Rob Godfrey, said the governor would soon embark on a statewide tour to discuss race relations, “focusing on what we have in common, not what makes us different, and about how we move forward united.”

For those with the longest memories, the signs of progress can be unmistakable.

“I’m from the old generation, but I like the progress that’s being made in the new generation,” said Jessie Mae Littlejohn, a retiree who lives in Spartanburg. “You can think about the past; don’t live in the past.”

But even after the wide outpouring of support for Emanuel, which is historically black, there is a reservoir of skepticism about where the state stands on race.

“There are signs of progress, but it still saddens my heart because we haven’t progressed enough,” said Sheila Henderson, a 50-year-old Navy veteran and a native of South Carolina. Her husband, Robert Henderson Jr., is the president of Vision 2 Destiny, a Spartanburg logistics company that employs about 45 people, most of them black.

“And I still have problems wrapping my brain around the type of mentality that we’re dealing with in this time,” she said, “because you’d think we would have come a lot farther in regards to relations. But we haven’t.”

About 200 miles to the southeast, Mr. Brown, the lawmaker who cried in his office, offered a tour of his largely rural district outside Charleston. He drove through the small city of Hollywood, full of abandoned buildings and storefronts and in an area where the annual median income for the white population is almost $54,000. For black households, it is roughly half that.

At the Ultra Beauty salon, the 60-year-old owner, Carol Richardson, sounded notes similar to those in Spartanburg when she said the gloomy economic prospects had prompted many young black residents to leave Hollywood for other parts of the state and the country.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Still, Mr. Brown said, the flag’s coming down suggested better times ahead.

“I firmly believe that in the next five to six years, economic development will be here, schools are going to improve, health care is going to improve and the well-being will improve for all the citizens of this area,” he said. “If that flag could come down, nothing is impossible.”