Sitting out the election? Pique or principle?

Photo: Associated Press /Associated Press Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 With Hillary Clinton said to have pretty much locked up the Democratic nomination, some Bernie Sanders’ voters are pledging not to vote. And some Donald Trump supporters were saying the same thing if their man was somehow denied the GOP nomination — an unlikely outcome. less With Hillary Clinton said to have pretty much locked up the Democratic nomination, some Bernie Sanders’ voters are pledging not to vote. And some Donald Trump supporters were saying the same thing if their ... more Photo: Associated Press /Associated Press Sitting out the election? Pique or principle? 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

There is a miasma of political peevishness plaguing the land.

It goes something like this: “If Bernie Sanders doesn’t get the nomination, I’m not voting for Hillary Clinton” or, “I’m not voting at all.”

On the GOP side, until the withdrawal of Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas and Ohio Gov. John Kasich from the race last week, it was: “If Donald Trump is brokered out of the nomination, I’m not voting.”

Let us count the ways that this is all pique masquerading as principle — the political version of taking your marbles or your ball and going home.

Let’s start with the intransigence of those who feel the Bern and are now dismayed because it appears that Clinton has a lock on the Democratic nomination.

On most of the major issues, Clinton is closer to Sanders’ positions than his are to Trump’s, who, with his win in Indiana on Tuesday, has earned the right to call himself the presumptive GOP nominee.

And by Clinton being close to Sanders’ stances, I mean Clinton is more likely to get us to many of the places he wants us to go, though by different routes and incrementally.

Not free college but debt-free college. Not single payer but improving on Obamacare. She’s been more hawkish on war and peace than Sanders — and arguably more than Trump. In any case, Clinton is no warmonger — I haven’t heard her once yearn to learn if sand can glow in the dark.

So, that pretty much leaves her super PAC money, her ties to Wall Street and her stance on banks.

Legitimate issues, but tell me: Which of the candidates left standing after the July conventions — Clinton or Trump — is likely to push for campaign finance reform or more stringent bank and Wall Street regulation?

Bust up the big banks? Not likely to happen with any Congress. Single payer, universal health care? My favorite, too. And we’ll get closer to it with a President Clinton than a President Trump.

Trump might harbor some Democrat-like sentiments — including on campaign finance reform — but none of the know-how on how to get it done.

OK, now on to angry Trump supporters in the virtually impossible event that their worst-case scenario comes true.

Let’s say Cruz and Kasich had stayed in and pulled off a miracle. Um, c’mon. Trump supporters just spent all this energy backing the guy who slams the GOP elites and establishment, and whose views on Mexico, immigration and Muslim refugees seem to animate a whole lot of folks. If Trump supporters sat out the election, this would guarantee a win for the person who is secretly (and not so secretly) the hope of those elites in a Clinton-Trump matchup — a candidate whose views on those trigger issues are the polar opposite of Trump’s.

I know many people hope Trump’s nomination will cause a whole lot of people to sit out the election. I’m not one of them.

Particularly in the case of Sanders fans, staying home would simply nurture a sense of martyrdom — make them believe even more fervently that a Clinton presidency is illegitimate, though she will have won fairly and squarely. Yes, Sanders fans, superdelegates are part of the rules and, if they are unfair, why is Sanders spending a bit of time wooing them?

It’s simply not in me to wish that people don’t vote. Voting is what fuels our democracy. I can’t bemoan all those manufactured ways — voter ID, et al. — to deny certain people the vote and wish that people deny themselves.

In fact, this will likely be one of those elections in which where you stood will tell people who you are. You will be asked. Be honest when you answer.

Elections are about choices. I’ve never been through an election in which I was 100 percent on the same page of the person I was voting for. It’s about which candidate is closer — not identical — to my views.

This kind of compromise is necessary in the voting booth — if only to be counted for what and who you’re against.

o.ricardo.pimentel@express-news.net

Twitter: @oricardopimente