From left, Suzanne Pak, the COO of Cornerstone Medical Services; Peter Ansarra, the executive director of Korean Women's Association, Sunny Cho, the director of Case Management of Cornerstone Medical Services; Kathy Krulich, the navigator senior program specialist with HBE; Lori Wada, a SHIBA Program supervisor with the Washington Office of Insurance Commission and an appointee to WA Commission on Asian Pacific American Affair; Kelly Boston, the associate director of communications with HBE; and Jae Lim, the social services program coordinator of the Korean Women's Association.

Gov. Jay Inslee, Sen. Patty Murray, Health Benefit Exchange CEO Richard Onizuka and Health Care Authority Director Dorothy Teeters thanked the in-person assisters and board members on April 25 for their outstanding work in helping individual get health insurance, through the Washington State Health Benefit Exchange.

New enrollment in the Affordable Care Act has exceeded 8 million nationwide and 587,000 in Washington state. Of the 587,000 who now have health insurance, 423,000 enrolled in Medicaid (Apple Health) and 164,000 enrolled in Qualified Health Plan (those whose incomes are higher than Medicaid level and are paying premiums).

Among those recognized were Suzanne Pak and Sunny Cho of Cornerstone Medical Services in Federal Way. The company has already enrolled over 675 individuals - exceeding their goal of 600. Pak is the chief operating officer for Cornerstone Medical Services and has recently been appointed to the Washington State Health Benefit Exchange’s Outreach Technical Advisory Committee.

Sunny Cho is the director of Case Management for Cornerstone Medical Services who was recognized as an outstanding in-person assister. She has enrolled more than 600 individuals in expanded Medicaid and Qualified Health Plans, and trained and managed 10 other in-person assisters. Cho is passionate about improving access for limited English proficiency immigrants, routinely staying up past midnight and working on weekends to get technical application issues resolved and questions answered.