I was shocked and dismayed by Kean University President Dawood Farahi’s response of “Why not?” as justification for the purchase of a more than $219,000 conference table without public bid.



According to an NJ.com article "Kean said the furniture fell under the category of professional creative services and that bids were not required. It cited exemptions from the public bidding laws for the “acquisition of artifacts or other items of unique intrinsic, artistic or historic character.” In my opinion, that statement is much too general for such a purchase.



As the former director of purchasing for Union and Essex counties, had I followed Farahi’s logic with no bid for a conference table for the Board of Freeholders in either county’s government, I would have been invited to chat with a grand jury or perhaps invited to make license plates at a state correctional facility.

What Farahi has done flies in the face of every state statute written covering purchasing and I will wait to hear a vote of confidence for President Dawood Farahi from the Board of Trustees or the students of Kean University. It was correct and proper for Assemblyman Joseph Cryan to call out Farahi. Where is the Board of Trustees?



Harry P. Pappas, Springfield

The author is a Qualified Purchasing Agent.

Someone's 'junk mail' is another person's job

Junk mail? What's junk mail? Ads that reach homes by way of the U.S. Postal Service orthose tucked in the daily newspaper?

Mail means jobs.

We replace toll collectors with technology. Corporations send jobs overseas to save money. Now we want to stop receiving ads by mail? Those are more jobs that will be lost. How? Let's start with the initial employer. The merchant.

Next, the people that compose the ad. Third: the printer. Fourth: the people who deliver it to the consumer.

Wake up, America. We are our own 'worst enemy'. The post office, and I was part of it, had its first Reduction in Force' (RIF) in 1992. And it started with 'those ads” being delivered in the Sunday newspapers and more people taking care of bills online. Then forget those people that keep interrupting our meals because they needed a job but can’t do their work because of “Don’t Call” rules.

Any suggestions where our unskilled Americans are supposed to get jobs to support themselves? I'll take the ads and the phone calls we need to keep Americans working.

Eleanor M. Strollo, Belleville

Government subsidies should go only to U.S. citizens

I support the Affordable Care Act. It seems obvious to me that in our great country, citizens should have police and fire protection, public education, and health care. Your article highlighting the story of a South Asian green-card holder who qualified for a subsidy, though, surprised and disappointed me.

A subsidy means that other working Americans shoulder some of the financial burden. I applaud doing that for American citizens needing help, but I don't think that we should stretch further our finite resources by subsidizing noncitizens.

I hope that eligibility gets a second look in any upcoming review of the Act.

James Tubman, Flemington