Former prep star rushes for 147 yards and throws TD

Christian McCaffrey couldn't wait to return to Colorado. Someday, the Stanford sophomore could be running the state if his coach's prediction comes true.

McCaffrey showed why he was a local prep star with a dominating performance for the Cardinal. He rushed for 147 yards and passed for a touchdown as Stanford routed the Colorado Buffaloes 42-10 on Saturday.

McCaffrey built on his strong season with Saturday's game. He came in leading the nation at 244.3 all-purpose yards and finished with 220 in that category. It was a good homecoming made only better by the reception he received at Folsom Field.

"It was extremely emotional," McCaffrey said. "I wish I could stay here longer and spend some time with the family. I got to see some people I hadn't seen since middle school. Very excited to be back home."

McCaffrey, the son of former Broncos wide receiver Ed McCaffrey, won multiple state titles with Valor Christian in Highlands Ranch. He opted to attend his father's alma mater but said he holds Colorado close to his heart.

"Coming home is very special to me because it's nice seeing family," he said. "Colorado is the greatest place in the world and to see the support people had even though I didn't go here was something that was special."

While many were happy to see him, Buffs fans are happy to see him go back to California. He beat Colorado with his legs and his arms as he continued to build an argument for Heisman Trophy votes. He ran for 104 yards before halftime and would have had a score but was tackled at the goal line on Stanford's first drive of the game.

Advertisement

Remound Wright took it in to give the Cardinal a 7-0 lead.

"I looked at the replay and they made a good call," McCaffrey said. "I wish the field was 99 yards. I think I would have a lot more touchdowns."

McCaffrey showed off his strong arm on his 28-yard touchdown pass to teammate Austin Hooper in the fourth quarter for the final points of the game.

"The last few weeks that play's been in and it's been really close to being called," Stanford coach David Shaw said. "This was just the perfect situation for it."

It was also the perfect day for McCaffrey. He was reunited with friends and family and his team is still in the hunt for the college football playoff. The Cardinal (8-1, 7-0 Pac-12) is ranked 11th in the playoff poll and is headed to the conference title game next month.

McCaffrey's focus is on the present but his coach sees big things for him down the road.

"One day he's going to be the governor here," Shaw said. "He really wanted to put on a show and he did today."