Being in Washington, you hear all sorts of things about the person occupying the White House, and it doesn’t matter if it is occupied by a Democrat or Republican.

Most of what you hear is not good. Taking aim at the competence of who is residing in the White House is the Washington, D.C., sport. Recently, a Democrat said about President Obama, “Half the people hate him, and the other half are disappointed in him.”

True or not, it is not possible, given the politics of the parties, for most people to be satisfied with the president, including people of the president’s own party.

This week, the Supreme Court decided to take up one more challenge to the Affordable Care Act, or ACA, also known as Obamacare. This week’s challenge is related to contraception. The court is going to listen to arguments concerning the right of a religious-focused organization such as a hospital or college or charities to not provide health care related to contraception. Currently the religious-based organization can “opt out,” but then the insurance companies, along with the U.S. government, provide the contraceptive service. Is this the separation of church and state and the exercise of religious freedom guaranteed by the United States Constitution? That is exactly what the Supreme Court will decide.

However, President Obama got it done. We now have a way to purchase health care.

I was around when the Clintons tried to get universal coverage for people, and “health care that is always there.” Then-first lady Hillary Clinton even testified before Congress about the health care plan. At that famous hearing, Hillary shot back at then-Rep. Richard Armey, who had said he was going to make the health-care hearing exciting: “I’m sure you will do that, you and Dr. Kevorkian.” (Dr. Kevorkian was the famous doctor who presided over assisted suicide.)

However good the intentions were of the Clinton White House, President Clinton left office and there was no universal health care. Because of my age and right eye problem, I was paying close to $2,000 a month when the ACA plan came on line.

This week, when questioned about the newly elected governor of Kentucky and his views of the ACA, White House spokesman Josh Earnest said, “There are significant benefits associated with this law for those Americans that already have health insurance. There are a variety of consumer protections that have gone into place because of the Affordable Care Act. These are things that allow you to keep your child on your own insurance up until the age of 26. These are provisions that prevent any insurance company from discriminating against somebody because they have a preexisting condition.”

Anyone who tried to purchase health insurance before the ACA would agree. Now Republicans say there should be more competition and that people should be allowed to purchase health insurance across state lines. I agree, so if they have these “improvements,” then where is their plan? In fact, although there has been much carping by the GOP, there has not been a plan put forth. I hope this comes up in the three presidential debates because, so far, we have not seen any kind of credible option put forth and voted on by the Republican elected members of Congress.

What about the president’s other initiatives? This week, we saw the Labor Department jobs report that 271,000 jobs were added in October, with an astounding 56,700 jobs having been added in the health care area. There is President Obama’s health-care plan providing job creation!

Then there are other areas that president has made great strides in, and many are forgotten including one on mortgage reform. Josh Earnest said, “You’ll remember back in January that the president announced a set of reforms around mortgage premium insurance where we would lower interest rates for mortgage insurance that would allow homeowners to make purchases that would save them essentially $900 a year.”

On Wednesday, Josh Earnest outlined for the press more of President Obama’s accomplishments, including the job recovery and improvements in the whole economy, saying Obama “has shown tremendous results in terms of allowing our country to recover strongly from the worst economic downturn since the Great Depression, to make historic progress to fight carbon pollution, to make progress when it comes to equality and ensuring that people can’t be discriminated against just because of who they love.”

The Washington insider who said half the people hate the president and the other half are disappointed in him should look at Obama’s record of change. There are real things president Obama has accomplished, and his record speaks for itself.