Jeffrey D. Zients was tapped to help fix the HealthCare.gov website before taking the reins as director of the National Economic Council in January. (Photo: T.J. Kirkpatrick Getty Images) Story Highlights Mom learned about son's new job from Wolf Blitzer on CNN

Zients helped fix the Cash for Clunkers website. Can he fix HealthCare.gov?

He made millions taking two companies public

Debbie Zients was having a corned beef sandwich at Eli's kosher deli in Washington, D.C., Tuesday when she thought she saw her son's face on CNN. Sure enough, Wolf Blitzer was telling her that son Jeffrey was the "troubleshooter" being brought in to fix the glitch-plagued federal insurance portal HealthCare.gov.

"The mother is the last to know," laughs Zients, who notes she did have some "forewarning" that her son was going to be director of the National Economic Council in January.

The multimillionaire Zients, who was ranked 25 on Fortune magazine's list of the 40 richest Americans under age 40 in 2002, could do anything he wants.

He wants to help fix the problem-plagued website that was supposed to be the cornerstone of President Obama's new health care law.

His mother says that's not surprising: He has always liked challenges and "always wanted a taste of government."

He's certainly gotten it. After running companies, working as a management consultant and entrepreneur, Zients did two stints as acting director of the Office of Management and Budget and also served as OMB's first "chief performance officer."

Zients is up there with Steven Rattner and Ron Bloom when it comes to business leaders who can "solve seemingly intractable problems" in the government, says Bryce Williams, managing director of Towers Watson Exchange Solutions. Zients was on the board of the venture fund Revolution Health Partners, when it invested in Extend Health, which Williams founded.

"For the last decade, he's had a front-row seat investing in health care," Williams says.

Debbie Zients says her son isn't a computer expert, "unless it's a new talent," but she and others said they believe Zients' talent will be in managing the army of tech experts in and outside the government who are trying to fix the site. In a role that likely prepared him best for his temporary role, Zients helped oversee efforts to fix the glitches in the federal Cash for Clunkers website in 2009.

Federal regulators decided to buy back old cars as a way to jump start car sales during the recession, but — as with HealthCare.gov — the system became so overwhelmed it slowed to a crawl. Car dealers couldn't complete the lengthy online forms needed and had to front consumers the money for their cars because federal payments were backlogged. Some dealers had to log on in the middle of the night to get the site to accept applications.

Zients, 46, is married to the former Mary Menell, who grew up in South Africa and came to the U.S. to attend high school. Nelson Mandela, a family friend, attended the couple's wedding in South Africa.

Before a string of federal appointments, Zients was chairman and CEO of The Advisory Board Co. and chairman of the Corporate Executive Board. He and media titan David Bradley took the two companies public, which made both men multimillionaires.

Zients and his wife also co-founded The Urban Alliance Foundation, a non-profit organization that partners with corporations to provide economically disadvantaged youth with year-round paid internships, adult mentors and job training.

Zients lives with his wife and four children in a 9,000-square-foot home in the Wesley Heights section of Washington, D.C., and also owns a 12,000-square-foot home on the water in Annapolis, Md. He paid $4.1 million and $3.9 million respectively for the homes.

His parents are divorced. His father, Alan, is a psychoanalyst in Manhattan. His mother, Debbie, volunteers with the non-profit Women for Women.

Debbie Zients says her son has "a lot of brains up there, but he's very caring and very compassionate. To me, that's more important."

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1gCFhx3