More Marriage Reaction: NY Times, White House and YouTube Celebrate as Scalia’s Ridiculed (Video)

Something's happening here and it's perfectly clear - the country is turning away from the Culture Wars founded on hate.

Thanks to the digital age, the world woke up to the print edition of the New York Times with a front page devoted to kissing same-sex couples under the dramatic headline “Equal Dignity.” Just as cool and almost as startling for LGBT people of a certain age was seeing the White House lit up with rainbow colors in celebration of the Supreme Court ruling in Obergefell v. Hodges Friday that marriage equality is the law nationwide, as tweeted out by White House photographer Pete Souza.

Not everyone is as elated, of course. Some opponents of the freedom to marry are balking in bad soap opera-ish incidents around the country. Lawmakers in Mississippi are considering denying issuing marriage licenses altogether and Ray Moore, the chief justice of Alabama’s Supreme Court, said the ruling was “even worse” than the Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson upholding the constitutional right of states to enact racial segregation laws under the doctrine of “separate but equal”—a 1896 decision maintained until the 1954 ruling in Brown v Board of Education.

“I believe it’s worse because it affects our entire system of morality and family values,” Moore—who’s always been a states’ rights kind of guy—told CNN on Friday. “I think the law of the land is plain. It’s the United States Constitution. Not an opinion of the Supreme Court which contradicts that law.” So much for his depth of knowledge about how the three branches of federal government operate.

Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley, a Republican, on the other hand, apparently took a civics class in high school and understands that, despite his own personal opinion, the Supreme Court has the final say.

“I have to uphold not only the constitution of Alabama, but I swore to uphold the constitution of the United States and we will uphold the law of the United States. I will uphold the law of the nation and this is now the law,” Bentley told reporters Friday.

Republican presidential candidates also pushed back. Former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee said he’s going to push for a constitutional amendment to ban same sex marriage and Texas Republican Sen. Ted Cruz told Fox’s Sean Hannity: “Today, it’s some of the darkest 24 hours in our nation’s history.”

Former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush tried to have it both ways: “It is now crucial that as a country we protect religious freedom and the right of conscience and also not discriminate.”

But for the most part—at least for right now—the country is celebrating the move towards a more perfect union, as President Obama put it.

Though a number of people are questioning Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia‘s over-the-top dissent, which will surely endear him to the loony right wingers:

“I join THE CHIEF JUSTICE’s opinion in full. I write separately to call attention to this Court’s threat to American democracy,” Scalia begins, saying:

“The substance of today’s decree is not of immense personal importance to me. It is of overwhelming importance, however, who it is that rules me. Today’s decree says that my Ruler, and the Ruler of 320 million Americans coast-to-coast, is a majority of the nine lawyers on the Supreme Court. Until the courts put a stop to it, public debate over same-sex marriage displayed American democracy at its best.”

Scalia jabs fellow Justice Anthony Kennedy, who wrote the majority opinion, which Scalia says is “lacking even a thin veneer of law.”

“Buried beneath the mummeries and straining-to-be-memorable passages of the opinion is a candid and startling assertion: No matter what it was the People ratified, the Fourteenth Amendment protects those rights that the Judiciary, in its ‘reasoned judgment,’ thinks the Fourteenth Amendment ought to protect.”

Scalia quotes Kennedy’s passage about how the “nature of marriage is that, through its enduring bond, two persons together can find other freedoms, such as expression, intimacy, and spirituality.” Scalia retorts:

“Really? Who ever thought that intimacy and spirituality [whatever that means] were freedoms? And if intimacy is, one would think Freedom of Intimacy is abridged rather than expanded by marriage. Ask the nearest hippie.”

Kennedy’s style of writing in the opinion “pretentious as its content is egotistic.” Scalia adds:

“If, even as the price to be paid for a fifth vote, I ever joined an opinion for the Court that began: ‘The Constitution promises liberty to all within its reach, a liberty that includes certain specific rights that allow persons, within a lawful realm, to define and express their identity,’ I would hide my head in a bag. The Supreme Court of the United States has descended from the disciplined legal reasoning of John Marshall and Joseph Story to the mystical aphorisms of the fortune cookie.

And to allow the policy question of same-sex marriage to be considered and resolved by a select, patrician, highly unrepresentative panel of nine is to violate a principle even more fundamental than no taxation without representation: no social transformation without representation. But what really astounds is the hubris reflected in today’s judicial Putsch.”

Los Angeles Times columnist Steve Lopez delighted in addressing Scalia’s reference to hippies and his dismissal of California as the handwringing of a loser on the wrong side of history in both the Obamacare and marriage equality rulings:

As the United States of America evolves, slowly becoming a more tolerant and inclusive nation, Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia is getting left behind, and now he’s taking out his wrath on California and hippies….

[Scalia] went from hand-wringing [over Obamacare] to knuckle-dragging on the gay marriage decision, arguing that the court was patrician, pretentious, egotistical and out of touch with America because its justices are successful lawyers (would we want otherwise?) who went to elite schools and grew up in either the elitist East or the wifty West but not the heartland or the South.

“Not a single Southwesterner or even,” Scalia wrote, “to tell the truth, a genuine Westerner. (California does not count.)”

Do you hear that, Californians?

We are so peculiar that Scalia put us in parentheses, like we had to be quarantined. (Is there any coincidence that the swing vote came from a California native, Justice Anthony M. Kennedy?)….

I don’t know what hippies have to do with it, but we’ve got plenty of them in California, and no shortage of carnal malefactors of all sexual persuasions.

Justice Scalia has discovered a 10th ring of hell, and we are it.

There’s only one thing to do, California.

I say we tear our clothes off, fill the streets and party like hell.

Well, while Scalia develops callouses from all that knuckle-dragging, other venues that the next generation takes more seriously are celebrating LGBT Pride Month and the Supreme Court decision. YouTube Spotlight (and parent company Google) put together a compilation of videos from the LGBT community with a description that reads:

“Over the last 10 years, everyone from moms to presidents have uploaded videos in support of LGBT awareness, to stand up against bullying and discrimination, and to say together, as a community, that marriage equality matters. That’s why we are so excited by the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision to recognize the constitutional right of all couples to marry. In recognition of Pride Month, and this historic decision, we want to celebrate the many individuals and communities that have helped inspire change.”

Move over Scalia, the lovers, not the H8ers, are taking over the conscience of the nation: