On Wednesday a task force appointed by Gov. Robert Bentley recommended that the state "move forward at the earliest opportunity to close Alabama's health coverage gap with an Alabama-driven solution."

The task force couldn't bring itself to say it explicitly, and some of its members danced around what that contortionism really means, but there's only one clear way right now to "close Alabama's health coverage gap" as they say. To do that, the state must expand Medicaid.

The reasons to do so are straightforward and abundant.

In state rankings, Alabama ranks near the bottom of most indicators of public health.

We're 49th in infant mortality.

We're 48th in life expectancy.

We have the fifth worst rate of obesity in the country.

We have the second worst rate of diabetes.

If you're a woman, we're the third worst in heart disease, and second if you're a man.

You get the picture.

And Alabama is a poor state. As it is, more than half of the births in this state are covered by Medicaid.

But Medicaid expansion isn't about those people. Rather, it's about the working poor — those who, right now, are working and making too much money to qualify for Medicaid as it is but who are not making enough to afford health insurance, even after subsidies from the Affordable Care Act.

Again, these are working people, which brings us to probably the most important reason to expand Medicaid — not doing so punishes work. If you are one of those folks with one of those health problems above — diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease — you might be better off not working than holding down a low-paying job. Refusing to expand Medicaid incentivizes people to stay unemployed.

That is, if the state continues on the course it's on.

For the first three years of the program, the federal government had promised to fully fund Medicaid expansion, but that was a clock that started ticking two years ago. Even if Alabama expanded Medicaid next year, it probably wouldn't be soon enough to capture the last year of that funding.

About $3 billion, which could have been spent in Alabama, which could have closed that health care gap, has gone elsewhere.

We might as well have put that money in a pile and set it on fire.

Or rather, Bentley might as well have lit the fire.

Because that's where this stupidity rests.

Other Republican governors have looked at the same math and come to a completely different conclusion than Bentley. Governors such as Jan Brewer in Arizona, Chris Christie in New Jersey, and John Kasich in Ohio, whom Bentley himself endorsed earlier this year for president.

But Bentley went the other way. Why? Because he said he didn't want to make people more dependent on government.

"Nearly 1 million people in Alabama are on Medicaid," Bentley said in his 2014 State of the State Address. "It is not my goal to put more people on Medicaid but to have less. It is not my intent to put able-bodied individuals on a government dependency program."

And, the governor said, he didn't want to drive up the national deficit further by accepting federal funds.

Mind you, when tornadoes tore through Alabama in 2011, Alabama under Bentley's leadership had no qualms accepting federal disaster relief funds.

Nor when a major manufacturer knocks on Alabama's door will this administration hesitate to pay out a dollar in incentives to get dimes back in back in economic impact.

Bentley didn't need a task force to tell him any of this. It was obvious from the start.

But expanding Medicaid, no matter how badly Alabama needed it, and no matter how much money it would have infused in Alabama's tepid economy, had one crucial problem — it was called OBAMAcare.

Ultimately, Gov. Bentley put his political considerations in one side of the scales and the well-being of Alabama and its people in the other, and he found that the former outweighed the latter.

The task force has recommended that Alabama "move forward at the earliest opportunity," but now is not the best time to expand Medicaid.

That time was two years ago.