The Gophers held an intra-squad scrimmage for about 110 minutes today at Concordia (St. Paul). I'll have a full report later, but here are some quick takeaways:

FIRST, SOME INJURY UPDATES

Jerry Kill said tight end Duke Anyanwu had minor surgery on his right knee and should be back to practice within a couple weeks. That's the same knee Anyanwu had ACL surgery on last year, but this one sounds like a minor clean-up procedure.

Kill said the only player who might not be ready for the Sept 3 season opener against TCU is tight end Lincoln Plsek, who has yet to practice because of a back injury. Brandon Lingen and Nate Wozniak have been the two tight ends working out with the first-team offense.

Isaiah Gentry remains out with a hamstring injury. Kill said with a hamstring injury, you just don't know how long they're going to take to heal.

ABOUT THE SCRIMMAGE

I've been covering this team since the start of spring practice in 2013, and this is the best I've seen the offense look in a scrimmage. Kill noted that the defense wasn't running all its blitz packages, etc., but there was still plenty to like.

Mitch Leidner hit Melvin Holland on a slant pass that went for 56 yards against the first-team defense. Leidner also had a nine-yard touchdown run.

True freshman QB Demry Croft had a five-yard touchdown run, capping a drive against the second-team defense. Later, against the third-team defense, Croft hit EJ Sardinha for a 35-yard TD pass.

Conor Rhoda hit true freshman Rashad Still for a 35-yard touchdown pass, with Still going up to make a great catch.

Linebacker Cody Poock intercepted Chris Streveler's first pass and returned it for a touchdown. Streveler later traded his gold QB jersey for a white No. 5 and lined up for several plays at quarterback.

Jalen Myrick had one interception and almost had another one.

Ryan Santoso hit field goals from 40, 44 and 38 yards.

Shannon Brooks broke free on a 35-yard run against the third-team defense and also got a good look against the 2's.

RECRUITING UPDATE

As expected, Eden Prairie athlete JD Spielman announced today that he is committing to Nebraska. Minnesota was one of his five finalists.

BOTTOM LINE

Kill sounded very pleased with Croft, Brooks and the young receivers. He also said true freshman linebacker Julian Huff will definitely play this season. Huff has emerged as a force on the second-team defense.