Work for livestock sale a long process

Dixon Lawson prepares his market beef, Tyson, for the Fremont County 4-H Livestock Sale on Sunday. Tyson won Grand Champion during the 2015 Fremont County Fair. He is 1 year old and weighs about 1,205 pounds. The beef was purchased Sunday for $6,600 by Kwik Stop. ( Carie Canterbury / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

»

Top 2014 Buyers No. 1 - Palace Drug No. 2 - Cripple Creek & Victor Gold Mine No. 3 - Kwik Stop No. 4 - Express Laundry No. 5 - Faricy Ford

Fremont County 4-H Fair Awards Cañon City Daily Record 4-H Family of the Year - Mark, Marnie, Taryn and Tammi Chapman 4-H Supporter of the Year - Big D Superfoods 4-H Volunteer of the Year - Gina Grisenti Friends of 4-H - Larry and Cheryl Dial

Preparing a steer for the Fremont County Livestock Sale begins long before the annual event, and the work continues even after the sale is final.

Dixon Lawson, 15, a sophomore at Florence High School, won grand champion Saturday for his beef, for the second consecutive year. He is completing his seventh year in 4-H and has taken part in the beef competition each of those years. Lawson has earned the Grand Champion title four times and Reserve Champion twice.

Knowing the animal likely will end up at a processing plant is difficult when 4-H'ers first start out, he said, still, he names his steers and devotes all the time and attention required to produce an award-winning animal.

"It was hard the first couple of years," he said. "It gets easier as you go on — you know this is what's going to happen at the end, so you tell yourself to prepare for it."

Advertisement

Lawson's animals are born and raised on his family's ranch in Wetmore. He is looking at babies now to determine which one will be entered into next year's fair. Once an animal is selected, its feeding plan is different than that of the other animals. Instead of ranging, the beef is fed grain, three times a day, and his weight is closely monitored. Entrants must weigh no less than 1,000 pounds, and no more than 1,450 pounds, he said.

Lawson's beef this year was purchased Sunday for $6,600 by Kwik Stop. He said not having to purchase an animal for the following year helps keep his out-of-pocket expenses down. Since the feed does get expensive, putting up hay also helps to cuts down on costs. Lawson said he always makes his money back from the sales, which is added to his college fund.

"It's always a great honor (to earn Grand Champion)," he said. "It's hard to do, but it's something you take a lot of pride in."

In addition to the Fremont County Fair, Lawson sometimes brings his animals to the Stock Show in Denver and the State Fair in Pueblo.

To prepare for the shows, he sets up a mock arena and leads his animal with a show stick. He also washes and blows out the fur regularly. Adding hair product helps the fur to shine. The day of the show Lawson clips the animal's hair on their necks and brisket.

"Since we got out of school, we get up every day and wash him and blow him out," he said. "We get him out and walk him, which is good exercise for him."

Lawson said contest participants also keep a record book after the fair.

"It's basically a summary that lists all the expenses, and you have to write a story on your animal," he said. "You also have to do inventory."

Based on their results at the market competition and their record books, participants have a chance to win the Supreme Beef cash-prize award. It looks at the animal's carcass and fat to meat ratio. Lawson won that award last year.

Lawson is the son of Tuffy Lawson and Lisa Lawson. After high school, he is considering a career in computer design or computer engineering.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com