QB Feauto nets five TDs as Knights roll in rivalry debut against Monarch

LAFAYETTE — Every so often Fairview coach Tom McCartney admits he can picture his assistants putting their hands over their eyes as they yell through the headphones, cringing when another potential disaster unfolds while quarterback Johnny Feauto scrambles around the backfield like a madman.

However, neither the colorful superlatives nor the stomach-churning sense of pending dread ever originates from McCartney himself. The veteran Fairview football coach is the biggest supporter of the Knights' version of "Johnny Football," and he is the first to encourage his senior's gunslinger mentality.

Feauto rewarded his coach's faith once again on Saturday, accounting for five touchdowns as the Knights quickly took control of Fairview's first Front Range League rivalry battle with Monarch before cruising to a 35-10 victory.

Fairview quarterback Johnny Feauto weaves through the Monarch defense, one of many big plays by the senior in a 35-10 Fairview win Saturday. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"It seems like some of that dialogue is maybe on some of the headsets, but it doesn't necessarily come from me," McCartney said. "I'm just such a big fan of Johnny. We know what he can do and what he's capable of. Each and every week, his knowledge of different things are very helpful. There's times when teams are dropping eight and taking passing lanes away, and you don't always know what he'll do next, but to me he's done a really good job with his decision-making.

"I kind of like the gunslinger mentality. You have to know who you are, and I like who he is. He gets better every week."

Advertisement

Feauto threw touchdown passes to four different receivers and also added a short touchdown run early in the third quarter that essentially snuffed any thoughts of a Monarch comeback. Yet it was a few plays that don't immediately jump out of the box score — such as a 22-yard sideline-to-sideline scramble on second-and-15, or a 10-yard scramble on third-and-eight — that caused the biggest headaches for a Monarch defense vainly attempting to keep tabs on the Knights' plentiful weapons.

"Even though they were 4A, they dominated 4A and have been a powerhouse for years," Feauto said. "We knew we were going to get their best game. We just needed to stay focused and do what we could do.

"The first couple games, I was skittish on my feet. The coaches have been telling me to stay in the pocket, and the offensive line is protecting real well. I feel like I can stay in there longer."

Outside an ill-advised late throw back across the middle that was intercepted by Monarch's Erik Lawson early in the fourth quarter, Feauto was flawless. The senior completed 21 of 34 passes for 247 yards, spreading the ball to six different receivers. Feauto added another 50 yards rushing on nine carries.

Fairview senior running back Jason Harvey gained 114 yards on 13 carries, and David McWilliams led the Knights' receiving corps with 100 yards on six receptions.

"They did a good job of mixing up their routes," Monarch coach Phil Bravo said. "We had them in third-and-long and second-and-long quite a bit, and (Feauto's) ability to scramble makes him tough. When you do get pressure on him, you're hesitant because you don't want to miss."

After handcuffing the vaunted Monarch rushing attack — McCartney called it one of "those nightmare games" trying to prepare for the Coyotes' ground game — the Knights will have a short week in which to prepare for Rocky Mountain, another 5-0 team and the only other unbeaten squad in the Front Range League.

Rocky Mountain visits the fourth-ranked Knights Thursday at Recht Field at 7 p.m.

"They're 5-0 and they've already beaten Legacy, they've already beaten Horizon, so they have some really solid victories," McCartney said. "What I've noticed is their defense has played really well and are playing really good team football."

Follow Pat on Twitter: twitter.com/prooney07

Fairview 35, Monarch 10

At Warrior Stadium

Fairview (5-0, 3-0) 14 7 7 7 — 35

Monarch (3-2, 1-2) 0 3 0 7 — 10

First quarter

Fairview — David McWilliams 29 pass from Johnny Feauto (Raul Magno kick). Fairview — Tommy Wakefield 10 pass from Feauto (Magno kick).

Second quarter

Fairview — Connor May 4 pass Feauto (Magno kick). Monarch — Trevor Elser 25 FG.

Third quarter

Fairview — Feauto 3 run (Magno kick).

Fourth quarter

Monarch — Philip Bubernak 23 run (Elser kick). Fairview — Steve D'Epagnier 13 pass from Feauto (Wakefield kick).

INDIVIDUAL STATISTICS

RUSHING — Fairview: Harvey 14-113, Feauto 9-50, Ryan 1-0. Monarch: Bubernak 20-82, Waddle 10-56, Sloan 7-41, Chavez 5-27, Stansbury 3-10, Oliver 1-3, Berohn 8-1.

PASSING — Fairview: Feauto 21-34-1-247. Monarch: Berohn 3-5-1-22

RECEIVING — Fairview: McWilliams 6-100, Ryan 4-68, D'Epagnier 7-49, May 2-16, Wakefield 1-10, Harvey 1-4. Monarch: Balboa 2-18, Waddle 1-4.