Readers sound off on Rep. Susan Lynn, presidential politics and the ACM awards.

Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Featured Letter

Lynn’s excuses don’t stand up

Re: "Tennessee lawmaker under heat for distributing anti-Muslim DVD," April 5.

As a resident of state Rep. Susan Lynn’s District 57, I am embarrassed, angry and disgusted with her behavior and lack of sound judgment.

Prior to the distribution of this hateful DVD discriminating against citizens of the great state of Tennessee, Representative Lynn has shown continual disrespect for her fellow citizens by voting against equal pay for equal work. In addition, she has a history of targeting members of the Muslim faith.

Lynn has consistently focused her attention on national issues rather than local issues that would help her constituents.

Her excuse for distributing the DVD is reprehensible. She says she didn’t watch it, was only helping out a constituent and, in fact, anyone could watch this on YouTube, according to Lynn. Unbelievable excuse.

Did the dog eat her homework too? Does she plan on distributing a DVD on bomb making or cooking meth, because those are on YouTube too? Where is her integrity?

District 57 needs someone to run against Susan Lynn in the November election because she does not deserve another term based on her judgment and leadership.

Jeannette McNeil, Mount Juliet 37122

Electing the least worst

Do you believe in magic? Donald Trump has made lots of promises to deal with terrorism, the economy, immigrants, health care, and many other important issues. In the best style of a magician, he uses distraction, self-promotion and challenges but has little actual substance in his performance.

Do you believe America should be governed by a Christian version of Sharia law? Ted Cruz‘s ultra-conservative stance on those of the Muslim faith reflects that, while eliminating access to health care for 13 million poor people through abolishing the Affordable Care Act. Pick him if you don’t believe in our Constitutional freedoms.

Do you believe college and health care should be free and readily available to all? Research shows that people appreciate and take better advantage of opportunities if they have “skin in the game.” If you truly believe Bernie can get his agenda approved by Congress, he’s your man.

Do you believe in continuing the track America has been on through the Obama years that the economy is improving to your satisfaction, that terrorism on our shores is being reasonably well-controlled, that our relationships with other countries are stronger now than ever, and that no secrets were revealed in spite of her poor judgment with her email servers? Hillary Clinton’s your candidate.

Do you believe America will be stronger and more respected in the eyes of the world in spite of the lack of respect the candidates show each other — and our sitting president?

Who is the least worst of the candidates? Choose wisely.

Les Hutchinson, Nashville 37221

ACM lacked 'country' music

I watched the Academy of Country Music Awards show. Forty-five minutes into the program, I realized I had yet to hear a country song.

I enjoy most genres of music. I just don’t like BAD music. Most of the songs and performances I witnessed Sunday night were terrible, no matter what category you put them in.

I understand that music evolves. Nothing stays the same. Although we embrace the Carter Family and Jimmie Rodgers, we also appreciate the influence they had on Merle Haggard, Johnny Cash and George Jones. They in turn influenced Alan Jackson, George Strait and Allison Krauss. I don’t see that influence in any of the so-called country music of today.

The current crop of “country” singers seem to be influenced by rock and hip hop.

I respect other people’s taste in music, but don’t try to pass off what Luke Bryan, Jason Aldean and Sam Hunt are doing as country music.

Let’s rename this current music as something other than country and move on.

Dennis Bieker, Spring Hill, 37174

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1N2jHmh