'It's always delightful when we know that what we've done has really helped somebody'

From left, Michele McClellan, a certified registered nurse anesthetist, and registered nurses Michele Harrell and Connie Olson usually receive cookies and candy as thanks from patients. Breast cancer patient Terry Jester chose to do something a little different. Jester donated a service dog to a woman in Chicago who is challenged by PTSD, in honor of the nurses. ( Courtesy of McKee Medical Center )

When Terry Jester went in for a routine mammogram in December 2014, she had no worries about anything being found. "I don't get colds. I've only had the flu twice. I do not get sick. The whole cancer thing never occurred to me."

Following the mammogram and further testing, Jester learned that she had stage II B breast cancer, which had metastasized and spread to the surrounding lymph nodes. "I found out it was triple-negative breast cancer, which doesn't respond to any of the hormone replacement cancer inhibitors," she shared. "It is very aggressive and very invasive."

The American Cancer Society notes that, "Triple-negative breast cancers tend to grow and spread more quickly than most other types of breast cancer. Because the tumor cells don't have hormone receptors, hormone therapy is not helpful in treating these cancers."

"I had to have surgery quickly," said Jester. "I was scared to death. I didn't know what I was going to be like when I came out."

Three McKee Medical Center nurses, Michele McClellan, a certified registered nurse anesthetist, and registered nurses Michele Harrell and Connie Olson made her journey easier the day of her surgery,

"The nurses were so good to me," said Jester, her voice breaking with emotion. "They were so reassuring and made eye contact with me. They were competent in such a compassionate way and treated me like I was a person, not just a number. I wasn't just the operation at 11 a.m."

"Everyone has a varying ability to handle stress," said McClellan. "We try to help them manage their fear."

Advertisement

Jester had a double mastectomy and spent the night in the hospital. "She was amazing," said Harrell. "She had just woken up, and she was saying it wasn't as bad as she thought it would be. 'I can handle this,' she said. She's one of those people I will never forget."

"We let the patient be the guide," said Olson. "We give them options to think about. There are many choices ahead of them, among them reconstructive surgery or the use of prosthetics. It's important to let them be in control."

Terry Jester credits three nurses at McKee Medical Center with helping her after she had surgery for breast cancer. (Courtesy of Terry Jester)

Jester was able to return to her home the following day. She later learned she would need six rounds of heavy-duty chemotherapy, then six weeks of five-days-a-week radiation. "But that's what they have to do to kill it," she said. "They have to throw everything at it to kill it. But the good thing about this kind of cancer is that once you kill it, it usually stays gone."

A dog breeder, Jester wanted to do something to thank the nurses who made such a difference for her. Through a friend, she learned of a woman in Chicago, who is challenged by PTSD (post traumatic stress disorder). The woman was hoping to obtain a therapy dog, but did not have the necessary funds.

Jester usually donates one dog from each litter to someone who cannot afford one. In honor of the nurses, she donated a black standard poodle with a little white chin to the woman with PTSD. "He looked like he had a goatee," Jester said. "The woman named him Motown."

The dog will serve as a reconnaissance dog. He will be a buffer between other people and his handler. For example, when they are starting to enter a grocery store or a room with people, he will go in first.

Her recognition meant a great deal to the nurses. "It's pretty amazing to know that I really did help her," said Harrell. "I was floored."

"I was very honored," said Olson.

McClellan agrees. "It's always delightful when we know that what we've done has really helped somebody," she said. "I don't do it for the recognition but it's nice."

The National Breast Cancer Foundation notes that:

• One in eight women will be diagnosed with breast cancer in their lifetime.

• Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer in women.

• Breast cancer is the second leading cause of death among women.

• Each year it is estimated that over 220,000 women in the United States will be diagnosed with breast cancer and more than 40,000 will die.

• Although breast cancer in men is rare, an estimated 2,150 men will be diagnosed with breast cancer and approximately 410 will die each year.

• Early detection of breast cancer is key. Self-examination and mammograms can aid women in obtaining an early diagnosis.