Standing on the floor of the 2000 Republican National Convention in Philadelphia, ready to hand over his state delegation’s votes for the party’s presidential nominee, then-Florida Gov. Jeb Bush proudly proclaimed his own singular place in the GOP.

He was the only person there, he said, to have gotten a spanking from a former U.S. president and a wedgie from the next one, his fellow Southern governor—and big brother—George W. Bush.

Fifteen years later, as Jeb prepares for a presidential campaign of his own, the days of spankings and wedgies are complicating his life. This is not only because finessing questions about the U.S. invasion of Iraq was made more difficult by family loyalty. But the name and past policies attached to it carry some baggage: Several of his 2016 Republican rivals have given him verbal wedgies just because he is a Bush. “I don’t come from a family dynasty,” Mike Huckabee said while announcing his candidacy, “but a working family.”

Scott Walker makes a point of saying, “I didn’t inherit fame or fortune from my family.” And even fellow Floridian Marco Rubio, an erstwhile friend of Jeb’s, has said that if his parents hadn’t emigrated from Cuba, “there’s no way in the world that I could have the same dreams, and potentially the same future, as the son of a president or the son of a millionaire.”

So what’s going on here?

Part of the answer is simply that Jeb Bush is a well-connected frontrunner, with high name-identification and an ability to raise vast sums of money, meaning that those trailing him in the polls believe they have to reel him in. In that sense, Jeb is a natural target. A second part of the answer, however, is that one reason Jeb has that name ID and those high-dollar connections is because his last name is Bush — and the other candidates resent him for it, especially since it threatens to take off the table the past dynasty argument they hope to use against the likely Democratic nominee, Hillary Clinton.

But the biggest issue here may be a third factor: the changing landscape of the GOP itself.

Despite winning re-election, George W. Bush was not a popular president when he left Washington. The stalemated war in Iraq, a perception his administration dithered in response to Hurricane Katrina, a sea of federal debt accumulated during his tenure, and a financial crisis that marred his last months in office soured much of the country on the 43rd president. He’s better liked now by the public than he was in 2009, but party professionals still remember the toll Bush’s presidency took on down-ticket candidates.

Moreover, the Republican Party has largely shifted away from both previous Bush administrations on a range of policy issues. In the age of the Tea Party, George H.W. Bush’s 1990 tax deal with Democrats is anathema. And George W. Bush-era bailouts and big government programs such as TARP, No Child Left Behind, and the expansion of Medicare are symbols of runaway federal spending and intrusive government overreach not qualitatively different from Obamacare. Jeb Bush will be asked about his stances on his brother’s policies, as will the rest of the field.

“Most of them view it as an opportunity, as they did with Iraq, to distinguish themselves,” says David McIntosh, president of the fiscally conservative Club for Growth, who noted that members of his group were impressed by Jeb’s economic record as governor when he participated in their forum earlier this year.

“I think W. becomes a foil for them to show how they’d be different,” McIntosh says. “With Jeb in the race, it’s an easy way to get out there and draw the distinctions, and they’re going to take advantage of it.”

Last week, Jeb Bush finally started to see around the corner.

Asked by a voter in New Hampshire to name an issue on which he differs with his brother, the soon-to-be presidential candidate offered this: “I think in Washington during my brother’s time Republicans spent too much money.

“He could have brought budget discipline to Washington, D.C.,” Bush continued, adding that he doesn’t feel compelled to criticize past Republican presidents, given that the two living ones happen to be his dad and brother. “Every president makes mistakes. The question is what do you do, what do you learn from those mistakes?”

Striking out as his own man will be made difficult, not just by primary voters but by his primary opponents who have fashioned campaign themes with such names as New American Century, Defeat the Washington Machine, and Our American Revival.

“In all political campaigns, the successful candidates are about the future—never about the past,” says one Republican strategist working for one of the presidential candidates. “Voters want to know where we're going, and the additional struggle for Bush is sort of a ‘been there/done that.’ And he’s also of an older generation.”

Also while in New Hampshire this week, Bush said he was proud of his family. “I love my mom and dad. I love my brother. And people are just going to have to get over that,” he said. “That’s just the way it is.”

Loyalty to family is understandable and admirable, and no one should expect Jeb Bush to dismiss his family. Some Republicans, however, have been surprised to see how much he has embraced his brother, specifically when he said recently that he is his top adviser on Israeli relations. But in presidential politics, such things can be complicated. A recent Bloomberg/Purple Strategies focus group of likely caucus-goers in Des Moines unveiled concerns not with Jeb’s stances on immigration and Common Core but on his ties to his brother, underscored by his stumbles over the Iraq question. Participants indicated concern about the dynasty dynamic, and some voiced interest in candidates who represent the future. One participant questioned whether Bush could be successful against Hillary Clinton in a general election match-up that would, in a sense, pit two past presidencies against each other.

That’s where Jeb Bush could have the most trouble, and where rivals can hope to make their play against him. His own credentials would normally be appealing to the party hoping to win in the general election: He has executive experience inside politics and out, he speaks Spanish and has a deep understanding of immigration reform, and his record as governor of the diverse and delegate-rich swing state of Florida is strongly conservative on both fiscal and social fronts. But his family name evokes two things Republican candidates are trying to distance themselves from this cycle: the establishment and the past.

“It was the George. W Bush administration where they started the TARP and the bailouts and all the rest of it, and the downturn of the economy began in that administration,” says the GOP strategist. “… Jeb's problem is he is going to have to spend an inordinate amount of money redefining himself so that he's not more of the same. I don't know any candidate other than Hillary Clinton who is burdened by that.”

Indeed, Clinton will have to contend with her own dynasty dynamic, and Republicans would argue that she wouldn’t be in the position she is today without the fundraising and networking machine she and Bill Clinton have built over the past three decades. Hillary is running a more liberal campaign than her husband did, reflective of the ways in which the Democratic Party has changed since he was in office. And there are powerful voices in the party pushing her to be more progressive on economic issues.

But she has managed to clear her field in a way Bush has not. There are many reasons for this, including ways in which the Clintons have cultivated and maintained Democratic support, the lack of a deep bench on their side and the large cadre of viable candidates on the other side. But an overarching explanation could also be the differing remnants of the two former presidents.

Clinton’s husband is still wildly popular among Democrats, and his presidency is often hailed even by Republicans as a time when the two parties worked together and the economy was good.

“The Clinton record is a strength. For many in the middle class and working class, the period from 1995 from 2001 was one of the longest runs of middle-class prosperity,” David Frum, a speechwriter for George W. Bush and now a columnist at The Atlantic, told RealClearPolitics.

“Republicans are wary of that, so among the problems Jeb has is the Bush years were not good years for most Americans,” Frum continues. “And while he will try to separate himself from his brother’s economics record, he’s going to raise a 100 million dollars from people who were supporters of his brother.”

Interestingly, Clinton is trying to strike out as her own woman and is insistent on her husband staying on the sidelines for now, hoping to avoid criticisms of dynasty and power-hungry politics. There’s a feeling among the other Republicans running for office that they can drive that narrative against her, and push forward a sense of freshness and innovation from the GOP. That advantage disappears, some argue, if Bush is the nominee.

Of the long bench of Republicans running for president, only Lindsey Graham and Rick Santorum served in Washington during Bush 43’s administration, which makes it easier for rest of the rivals to distance themselves from that past. When faced with the Iraq question himself, Graham pivoted to take aim at Obama for letting the situation there get worse. Indeed, Republicans don’t want to revisit the past because they feel they have a better target in the present.

The race is “going to be about the last president; it’s not going to be about the president before him,” says Republican strategist Stuart Stevens, a veteran of Bush, McCain and Romney presidential campaigns.

In fact, Stevens argues, “if Jeb wasn’t in the race, they would all be actively trying to solicit the support of George W. Bush.”

Others, though, see the connection a little differently.

“Once an unpopular president has departed office, the defeats and disappointments of his tenure vanish into American amnesia,” Frum wrote in a recent column. “But that amnesia is highly conditional on the ex-president and his namesakes staying away from politics.”

Perhaps that’s what Barbara Bush had in mind when she initially opposed her younger son entering presidential politics. “We’ve had enough Bushes,” she said then, though she supports him now.

Primary voters will ultimately determine whether that’s true. But as the first GOP debates approach this summer, the rivals for the nomination may be inclined to take up that line to avoid getting swept into an undertow of the past themselves.