Germantown's Kyle Theis pulls up for a shot against Whitefish Bay Dominican's Tywon Bressler Jr. on Saturday. Credit: Michael McLoone

By of the

Mequon — Considering how Germantown has gone about its business the past two-plus seasons, this was a fitting way for it to etch its way into the state's basketball lore.

The Warhawks, who have made a habit of harassing opponents with their pressure defense and then blowing them out, did just that Saturday night in front of a packed house at Homestead that included Marquette coach Buzz Williams and Wisconsin coach Bo Ryan. Their 75-29 victory over Whitefish Bay Dominican at the NY2LA Sports Classic allowed them to tie the state record with their 62nd straight victory.

Germantown can break the record, which was set by Dominican from 1977-'80, Tuesday night at home against Milwaukee Lutheran.

"It feels pretty good to go down in state history," senior guard LaMonte Bearden said. "We don't really try to think about that history thing in practice and stuff, but it feel pretty good to get the record."

Bearden was named the most valuable player of the game and finished with 22 points. Senior guard Jake Showalter added 14 points, 11 in the first quarter.

Junior center Diamond Stone finished with 11 points and 14 rebounds for Dominican.

The Knights entered played 4-0 but couldn't handle Germantown's pressure in the full court or its ability to get into the passing lanes in half-court sets. The result was 29 turnovers, including 15 in the first half when they made 5 of 19 shots.

Germantown, meanwhile, was shooting 50% (16 of 32) and led, 41-13, at the half.

The Warhawks took control early.

After Stone's tip-in gave the Knights a 2-0 lead, Germantown ran off nine straight points and led, 24-4, after one quarter. Bearden had eight points.

The story of the day was Germantown's defense, which took advantage of Dominican's relatively inexperienced guard corps by forcing mistake after mistake. As a result, Stone found very little room to operate.

"Right out the gate we knew we wanted to make a statement, so in the first quarter we all went out and played really hard," Showalter said. "I think we really killed their momentum right off the bat."

There was no drama from there, which has often been the case with Germantown games during the streak. Just five games during its streak were decided by fewer than 10 points.

"We tied an untie-able record," coach Steve Showalter said. "Nobody thought this would happen and for us to have our names on the record book — or at least tied and hopefully more. I can't imagine (it) from where we started to where we are now that we'd get here."

Homestead 62, Milwaukee Marquette 40: A fast start to the third quarter was the difference for Homestead, which increased its lead from six points at the start of the third quarter to 16 at the start of the fourth.

Junior forward Jaylen Key led Homestead with 19 points. Senior guard Jerrod Walton hit 2 threes and added 17 points.

Milwaukee Vincent 84, Brown Deer 68: Senior wing Marcus White went 8 for 8 from the line and scored 28 points for the Vikings, who jumped out to a 12-point lead after one quarter. Junior guard Tyree Kendrick added 17 points.

Wisconsin Lutheran 68, Pewaukee 45: The Vikings jumped out to a 10-point lead after one quarter and finished with four double-digit scorers. Senior guard Keith Franklin led all scorers with 15 points, while senior guard Jamare' Griffin added 14.

West Allis Central 68, Racine Horlick 47: Central set the tone with a 17-2 first-quarter run. Junior forward Jerome Cummings scored 17 points for the Bulldogs, while senior guard Ron Turkvan and junior guard Brandon Key added 13 points each.

Brookfield Academy 81, Milwaukee North 71: The difference was the second quarter when the Blue Knights outscored North by 10 points. Senior guard Sean Clarey hit six of Brookfield Academy's 8 three-pointers and finished with 20 points. Sophomore guard Ryan Clarey and sophomore forward Joe Lemon added 18 points each.

North junior David Hamilton finished with 40 points, sinking 8 three-pointers.