Affordable Care Act spurs hospitals to identify, address unmet community health needs

Hospitals in Southeast Michigan are working to identify unmet or significant health needs in their immediate markets under new rules mandated by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010.



One of the many little-known provisions of health care reform requires nonprofit hospitals — beginning in tax year 2012 — to conduct extensive community health needs assessment reviews in collaboration with community organizations every three years.



Section 501(r) of the Internal Revenue Service code also requires hospitals to develop an implementation strategy to address those needs and report the projects and expenditures on Schedule H on the annual Form 990 to the IRS.



Infant mortality reduction, obesity, cancer, diabetes, heart disease, asthma and signing up the uninsured are several community benefit projects being undertaken by nonprofit hospitals in Southeast Michigan.



While local experts and hospital executives interviewed by Crain's said they do not believe the health assessment reviews have significantly increased the amount of charitable or preventive health care provided, the exercises helped to direct programs to the highest need areas.

"The process did create some 'aha' moments for some (hospitals) that encouraged them to look at doing some things differently and more effectively," said Lori Boyce, director of business tax services with Deloitte Tax LLP in Detroit.



"Some hospitals have done a very good job and will accomplish much more for their efforts and dollars (expended) than others."



As part of the community health needs assessment, hospitals formed teams to identify major health issues.



They collected demographic health data and leading chronic diseases on patients they serve. They also conducted community surveys and listened to suggestions in focus groups and in telephone or face-to-face interviews.



Community health action plans then were developed and approved by the hospitals' boards of trustees.



The process was intended by policymakers to encourage hospitals to reach out into their community, work with like-minded organizations, and develop or expand programs to improve the health of populations — rich or poor — within their reach.



Below is a chart of Southeast Michigan hospital community benefit rankings, followed by some examples of projects developed by hospitals based on their community health benefit assessment reports.

Southeast Michigan hospital community benefit rankings

Hospital Dollars, net community benefit % of expenses University of Michigan Health System $298 million 13.60% Henry Ford Health System $262 million 12.20% Oakwood Healthcare Inc. $123.5 million 9.70% St. Joseph Mercy Health System $134 million 8% Botsford Hospital $22.1 million 7.70% NATIONAL AVERAGE * 7.50% Beaumont Health System $145.6 million 6.70% Crittenton Hospital Medical Center $13.5 million 5.70% Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute $13.5 million 5.70% St. John Providence Health System $96.6 million 5.60% McLaren Health Care Corp** $49.9 million 4.50% SOUTHEAST MICHIGAN AVERAGE 7.90%





*Survey of 1,800 tax-exempt hospitals, New England Journal of Medicine, April 18, 2013



**Only includes McLaren’s three hospitals in Southeast Michigan: McLaren Macomb, McLaren Oakland and Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute.



Note: Community benefit dollars include net expense of financial assistance, uncollected Medicaid costs, health professions costs, community health expenses, research and cash and in-kind expenses.



Source: IRS Form 990s, Schedule H, 2012

Henry Ford Health System, Detroit

Infant mortality rates have long been a serious problem in metro Detroit with rates three times higher for black babies than for white, said Jaye Clement, Henry Ford's director of community health programs.



Besides Henry Ford, infant mortality is an issue identified by Detroit Medical Center, St. John Providence Health System, Oakwood Healthcare and the Michigan Department of Community Health, Clement said. In 2011, the four systems and other local health groups launched the Detroit Regional Infant Mortality Reduction Task Force to coordinate efforts.



But Clement said Henry Ford's needs assessment found that young women still felt disconnected to the more than 100 programs available to them.





Oakwood Healthcare Inc., Dearborn

While Oakwood identified heart disease, obesity and the uninsured as priority health needs, Oakwood found lack of diabetes education to be another significant problem.



The four-hospital system partnered with a number of local organizations and the National Kidney Foundation to increase education on diabetes prevention, said Betty Priskorn, Oakwood's corporate director of community outreach.



Through Oakwood Healthy Communities coalition, Oakwood's four hospitals, municipalities, schools, nonprofits, businesses and other providers are addressing the four priority areas, focusing mostly on serving vulnerable populations.



"Our programs and staff are in the community, engaging residents and allowing easier access to services," Priskorn said.



For example, health navigators assist with sign-ups for the Healthy Michigan Medicaid program, and classes on healthy cooking and eating are offered through a partnership with Gleaners for Cooking Matters classes.



"The one thing that was a surprise that every community focus group mentioned was that there was not enough awareness or coordination of services by the various organizations serving the communities," Priskorn said.

St. Joseph Mercy Health System, Ann Arbor

Anticipating the need to coordinate projects, the Washtenaw Health Initiative was formed in early 2011 by St. Joseph, University of Michigan Health System and the Washtenaw Health Department.



"Before you serve people, you have to know them and what they need," said Michael Miller, St. Joseph's chief mission officer. "We also have to know others who are serving alongside them. Nobody can fix those health needs alone."



After it completed its first community health needs assessment in 2012, St. Joseph decided to expand a weight management program for obese children and teens into Livingston County from Ann Arbor. So far, 70 percent of participants of Shapedown have reduced body mass index over the two-hour, 10-week program.



Other community investments included providing education for Medicaid and private insurance enrollment, improving access to prescription drugs in Livingston County and offering health education to the public.



Next year, St. Joseph plans to publish a new three-year joint health needs assessment with the University of Michigan and public health agencies.



"We will agree on an implementation plan to reduce duplication and jointly address needs," Miller said.

Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit

Karmanos began its community health needs assessment process in 2010 by conducting focus groups to develop the survey, which was issued in 2012, said Laura Zubeck, R.N., director of patient and community education and volunteer services.



"The information and documentation process requires identification of needs, reporting on how needs are addressed, along with describing how needs are not being addressed and why," Zubeck said.



While the survey did not uncover surprise needs, Karmanos found that prostate cancer education needed more attention as national data showed 233,000 new cases of prostate cancer each year, Zubeck said.



Karmanos now is working with Wolverine Harley Davidson and Chrysler Corp. on various projects to offer prostate cancer symposiums, Ask the Doctor events for employees and a prostate advocacy training program to help train prostate cancer survivors, Zubeck said.



Over the past year, Zubeck said education for prostate cancer screening has increased 47 percent.

Botsford Hospital, Farmington Hills

Botsford's community relations and finance departments work very closely to develop and submit community benefit reports and 990 tax returns to the IRS, said Margo Gorchow, vice president of community relations and development.



One of the biggest unmet needs identified by Botsford's Community Advisory Council was access to services in the evening and weekends or timely appointments during the week, Gorchow said.



Many people said the message they have been receiving is to visit emergency departments when their physician offices are closed, Gorchow said.



"This reinforces the need to establish medical home models in primary care," said Gorchow, noting that Botsford is working to implement the medical home model with some of its employed physicians to better serve patients.



Botsford also collaborated with the Neighborhood House in Farmington Hills to help their clients find affordable health insurance either through Medicaid or the public health insurance exchange.



"Perhaps for the first time, these individuals experienced receiving education and empathy about their challenges to obtaining health care insurance," Gorchow said. "I observed people making plans to talk with one of the resources available that night or provided by the presenters."

St. John Providence Health System, Warren

Every three months, St. John's community benefits steering committee meets to discuss community needs. St. John's community market includes the counties of Wayne, Macomb, Oakland, Livingston and St. Clair with special consideration to the poor.



Using focus groups, surveys and interviews, St. John officials develop the needs assessment. Priorities are developed, including increased emphasis on diabetes and obesity programs, with the St. John board and hospital advisory committees.



No surprises were found because for several years St. John had been using a similar process developed by the Catholic Health Association.



But despite comprehensive programs to reduce infant mortality and success in many areas over the past several years, St. John's assessment determined that additional steps should be added, especially in Detroit, to reduce premature deaths and low-weight births.



For example, St. John hospitals now refer more mothers to the outpatient breastfeeding clinic and mother nurture program.

Beaumont Health System, Royal Oak

Administrators and physicians at Beaumont's three hospitals several years ago began seeing large numbers of uninsured people with asthma and other conditions coming into their emergency departments from the Brightmoor neighborhood in northwest Detroit.



During its community health assessment review, Beaumont identified Brightmoor as a target area for health improvement, despite 90 percent of patients coming from Oakland County.



In 2013, the Brightmoor Health Outreach Collaborative began to provide monthly health education and screening events. So far, more than 600 people have been served.



Comprehensive free health, dental, legal, mental health, financial and other services are offered to the 4-square-mile neighborhood where 12,836 residents live with incomes less than $25,000 annually.



Anne Nearhood, coordinator of the Beaumont Health Community Coalition and the Brightmoor project, said the community-needs assessment also helped identify common health problems in Royal Oak, Grosse Pointe and Troy, where the system operates hospitals.



"We learned the five focus factors — diabetes, drug-related admissions, obesity, asthma and suicide — affected all areas," she said.



Beaumont is addressing these needs through prevention and wellness programs coordinated by the Beaumont-led coalition, she said.



Although Beaumont spends about the same on community activities, the system is directing resources differently, Nearhood said.



"Because of this formal community health assessment," Nearhood said, "we looked at the whole health system and expanded our community engagement to determine what our focus areas should be."



Jay Greene: (313) 446-0325, jgreene@crain.com. Twitter: @jaybgreene

Related Links