Agency will relocate and open a 10-bed residential treatment facility in spring 2015

Crisis hotline The 24/7/365 mental health and addiction crisis services hotline is 844-493-TALK (4200). The hotline is operated by Rocky Mountain Crisis Partners.

If someone is experiencing a mental health crisis, a phone call might not be enough but full hospitalization or bringing in law enforcement could be more than is required.

So Touchstone Health Partners, along with other mental health services across the state, is providing a more-extensive continuum of care with a 24-7 walk-in crisis clinic and a mobile crisis response unit that sends teams to the individuals in need. The services are geared to those experiencing a mental health, substance abuse or domestic violence crisis.

"The state expanded the mid-level range of care, so people can get help where they need it," said Deanna Ryerson, the director of crisis response for Northeast Behavioral Health; she holds a doctorate degree in clinical psychology.

Following the Aurora theater shooting in 2012, the state of Colorado issued funding to increase mental health services and levels of access to care, including implementing a mental health crisis line in August to connect callers to resources and support. The access to care is available to any Colorado resident regardless of their age or ability to pay.

Advertisement

Northeast Colorado is one of four regions providing the Colorado Crisis Services, and within the region there are 12 counties, including Larimer. Northeast Behavioral Health, a for-profit provider of mental health services for northeastern Colorado, is providing the services for the region and Touchstone for the county.

"It is for clients who aren't imminently at risk for harming themselves and others but are too acute to send home," said Emily Dawson Petersen, development and marketing director for Touchstone. "It provides a mid-level range of services that's not in-patient or out-patient."

On Dec. 1, Touchstone opened a temporary walk-in crisis clinic at its current facility at 525 W. Oak St. in Fort Collins. The clinic will be relocated to 1217 Riverside Ave. in late spring 2015 when Touchstone opens a residential treatment, 10-bed facility where clients will be able to stay for supervised crisis stabilization for as many as five days.

The community crisis clinic, which will span 7,000 square feet, will serve walk-in clients with whatever crisis they may be experiencing. Staff at the clinic will assess their situation and address their immediate crisis, then help them begin the recovery process.

"It's a safe place where somebody can stay in a safe, supervised environment," said Kathy Forrest, assistant chief operations officer for Touchstone. "We just want to make sure we are wrapping services around those people the best we can, so we can stabilize them."

The crisis services at the clinic, as well as at North Range Behavioral Health in Greeley, will include screenings, crisis intervention and de-escalation, and follow-up care, such as clinical and psychiatric assessments, medication evaluation, therapy, peer support and case management services, along with referrals to mental health and addiction treatment services.

The mobile crisis response from the two clinics is available to travel to all 12 counties in northeast Colorado to assess clients and get them to the services they need.

"If they aren't able to walk in, we can send mobile teams to them," Dawson Petersen said. "It's possible we can de-escalate the crisis right then and there, so people don't have to travel to the crisis clinic or the emergency room."

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm