"These testing events are powerful examples of what can be achieved when the public and private sector come together in response to HIV/AIDS," said Tina Hoff, senior vice president and director of health communication and media partnerships for the Kaiser Family Foundation, a founding partner of Greater Than AIDS. "The very act of offering the tests in Walgreens helps to normalize HIV testing as a part of routine health care."

Throughout the year, Walgreens and Greater Than AIDS distribute HIV informational resources through Walgreens's 700 HIV-specialized pharmacies. These specialized pharmacies have specially trained community pharmacists offering one-on-one, confidential medication counseling to encourage medication adherence and can also assist with other care needs such as identifying co-pay assistance options.

Pharmacists can play a valuable role in addressing various unmet health needs and offer consumers additional access to health care beyond vaccinations, said Stacie Maass, senior vice president, pharmacy practice and government affairs for the American Pharmacists Association in Washington, D.C.

"With their medication expertise, pharmacists offer convenient access to a broad range of services that can improve patient health," she said. "Seeing a pharmacist at the neighborhood pharmacy is convenient, cuts down travel costs and reduces time off from work."

One distinct advantage is that local pharmacies have extended hours and are often open longer than more traditional health care clinic or offices.

"This increases access to care and patients may seek care sooner after the need first arises and avoid long-term costs associated with failing to receive care early on," Maass said.

Pharmacists at CVS Caremark's clinics are ramping up the types of vaccines available in its pharmacies nationwide such as having more access to shingles and meningococcal vaccines, said Papatya Tankut, vice president of pharmacy affairs for CVS Caremark.

In addition to vaccines, the company's MinuteClinic treats people for common family illnesses and injuries, conducts physicals and wellness screenings and monitors chronic conditions.

"Consumers are increasingly looking for convenient ways to keep healthy," she said. "As part of our purpose to help people on their path to better health, we will continue to make it a priority to offer convenient vaccinations and other health care services at our pharmacies and retail clinics."

John Palisano, a professor of biology at the University of Tennessee in Sewanee, Tenn., said he went to his local drugstore for the flu vaccine this year.

"It was a quick and easy," he said. "It cost $31, which is less than a doctor's appointment. The vaccine was administered by the pharmacist and was delivered as competently as any I have received in a doctor's office or hospital."

Another crucial role that pharmacists undertake is helping patients take their prescriptions correctly, said Tankut.

"CVS's pharmacies offer a number of free adherence programs and tools to help patients take their medications as prescribed and this includes automatic prescription refills, prescription text alerts and online prescription management tools accessible on CVS.com and through our mobile apps."

Drugstores such as Walgreens have expanded their role by driving into communities with buses that serve as mobile clinics and offer free health tests such as glucose and cholesterol and consultations, said John Gremer, director of community affairs for Walgreens.

"We want to be a community resource so people have access to healthcare services," he said. "The role of a pharmacist is to have consumers to come in without an appointment and talk to them for free. People want counsel and advice."

Pharmacists can help consumers be aware of various health issues, which are good indicators of potential chronic diseases, Gremer said. In many cities, pharmacists can speak other languages and communicate with consumers better.

"Prevention is something we stress because it is the most cost effective way to deal with illness," he said. "Early detection really helps to lower costs. We want to increase accessibility and have direct impact because a pharmacy is a place to go, take charge and stay well."

--Written by Ellen Chang for MainStreet