Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

SANTA CLARA, Calif. (AP) — As if there weren’t already enough humiliating elements to San Francisco’s lopsided loss to its biggest rival on Thanksgiving night, owner Jed York weighed in on an effort he said “wasn’t acceptable.”

Cassie Baalke, daughter of general manager Trent Baalke, called for offensive coordinator Greg Roman’s ouster before quickly deleting her Twitter post and later closing the account altogether.

Trent Baalke issued a statement Friday saying he and Cassie had apologized to Roman.

“My daughter and I both regret that her feelings got the best of her after last night’s game and that she chose social media as an avenue to express her feelings. We have apologized to Greg for this unfortunate matter,” Baalke said. “While disappointed, as a father I will use this as a teachable moment to help my daughter grow.”

Just when the 49ers had some nice momentum as they approached the season’s final month, it all went away in a matter of four hours in a 19-3 loss to the Seahawks on Thursday night at Levi’s Stadium.

San Francisco’s playoff hopes dwindled in the process.

“Any time you lose, it’s a low point,” wide receiver Anquan Boldin said. “But we’ll bounce back.”

The offense was awful. Quarterback Colin Kaepernick had one of his worst games as a pro. Richard Sherman and the Seattle Seahawks celebrated all over the home field that hardly offered much advantage when fans left in early.

“We celebrate every play. Even when they get a catch and it’s a great hit, we celebrate that. They didn’t even understand that,” Sherman said. “They were getting frustrated that we were celebrating those plays, but that happens when you’re a team and you’re together.”

What’s next for these downtrodden Niners? Coach Jim Harbaugh spoke about a “reboot.”

The speculation is running rampant again that he might get the boot following season four of his $25 million, five-year contract he signed in January 2011.

Any day-after thoughts would have to wait. Harbaugh isn’t scheduled to address the media again until Monday, with players likely on Tuesday as is the team’s regular schedule.

That’s a long few days for team executives, coaches, players and fans to figure out what went so wrong.

York posted on Twitter in the waning moments: “Thank you (hashtag)49ersfaithful for coming out strong tonight. This performance wasn’t acceptable. I apologize for that.”