They have played twice a season as division rivals since, but mostly without animosity or relevance — like fuel and spark, the key ingredients to feed any true rivalry. That has changed because the teams finally became contenders at the same time.

The buildup to the rivalry’s key conflict began in college football in 2007, when Seattle’s Pete Carroll was coaching at powerful Southern California and San Francisco’s Jim Harbaugh took over at long-suffering Stanford.

Photo

Harbaugh went looking for a foil to motivate his team. He chose the Trojans, a perennial contender for the national title. Harbaugh quickly angered Carroll when he suggested that Carroll was coaching his final season for the Trojans. Carroll tersely denied it. Harbaugh kept talking.

“We bow to no man,” Harbaugh said unapologetically, months later. “We bow to no program here at Stanford University.”

Stanford was a 41-point underdog to the No. 2-ranked Trojans when they played in Los Angeles that fall. Stanford won, 24-23, a “cornerstone” victory in the Cardinal’s unexpected rise to national power, Harbaugh said.

Two years later, Stanford defeated U.S.C., 55-21, and the onslaught included a late 2-point conversion by the Cardinal. The coaches converged for a postgame handshake.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“What’s your deal?” Carroll said to Harbaugh.

Somewhat taken aback, Harbaugh replied, “What’s your deal?”

In 2010, as Stanford turned “What’s your deal?” into a ticket-selling slogan, Carroll was coaching the Seahawks. The next year, the 49ers hired Harbaugh. Their rivalry, simply relocated, has been enhanced by the simultaneous rise of their teams in the division.

The 49ers won their first three meetings. In December 2012, though, at Seattle’s CenturyLink Field, the Seahawks hammered San Francisco, 42-13. It did not prevent the 49ers from making the playoffs and reaching the Super Bowl.

The teams met in September at the same stadium, which is the league’s loudest, Harbaugh acknowledged recently. The Seahawks won again, 29-3 — a combined 71-16 thwacking of the 49ers in Seattle the past two seasons.

The perceived unease between the coaches is Miracle-Gro for the rivalry.

In June, after the league disciplined the latest of several Seahawks caught using performance-enhancing drugs, Harbaugh was asked to comment.

“I’ve definitely noticed it,” he said, adding that he would tell his players to “play by the rules.”

Photo

“You want to be above reproach,” he added, “especially when you’re good, because you don’t want people to come back and say, ‘They’re winning because they’re cheating.’ ”

Carroll was asked for a rebuttal.

“I don’t know about commenting about anybody else’s team,” he said.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Last week, they played down any tension. Harbaugh revealed that he had tried to recruit Carroll’s son Nate to play for him at the University of San Diego, where he coached before Stanford. Nate Carroll went to U.S.C. and is now an assistant for his father in Seattle.

“I haven’t seen where that’s really even talked about anymore,” Harbaugh said of a rift between the coaches. “I think that might have been something four or five years ago. But I haven’t seen it as of late. And it would be as irrelevant now as it would have been then, when people made a bigger deal out of it.”

But ample boasts and invective are supplied by the players (both teams have reputations for self-congratulatory histrionics) and deep and rejuvenated fan bases.

The duel feels a bit like old money versus new money. The 49ers have won five Super Bowls and narrowly missed a sixth when they lost to the Baltimore Ravens a year ago. Part of the All-America Football Conference in 1946, and members of the N.F.L. since 1950, the 49ers have a long legacy of great players, from Y. A. Tittle and Hugh McElhenny to Joe Montana, Jerry Rice, Ronnie Lott and Steve Young.

On Sunday, the 49ers will make their third consecutive appearance in the conference championship game, but it will be only the third in the Seahawks’ history. Seattle has been to one Super Bowl, losing to the Pittsburgh Steelers eight years ago. The list of Seahawks in the Hall of Fame includes Steve Largent and Cortez Kennedy, but their most popular alumnus might still be the left-hander Jim Zorn, the franchise’s first quarterback.

Seattle fans, calling themselves the 12th Man, have built a reputation as being fervent and loud. A San Francisco Chronicle columnist wondered if it was not indicative of an inferiority complex.

“The face-painting, the costumes and the screaming isn’t classy, it’s just kind of silly,” the columnist, C. W. Nevius, wrote Tuesday. “And believe us. We know silly costumes. We have the Raiders.”

The Seattle Times tackled the issue of “our Bay Area complex,” and Danny Westneat, a columnist there, riffed on the theme.

Photo

“In boomtown Seattle of today, where we’re smug that we’re ranked No. 1 for this or that, face it, we remain deep-down envious of only one other,” Westneat wrote.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Her hipness. Her wealth. Her arts, architecture, high-tech, wine, culture, politics, you name it — we still peek insecurely south to check: What Would San Francisco Do?”

In football, though, the sides are equally engaged.

Seahawks fans pooled money to fly a “Go Hawks” banner over Candlestick Park when the teams played in San Francisco in December. A 49ers fan raised money for an electronic billboard along an interstate south of Seattle showing San Francisco’s five Lombardi trophies.

A television and web advertisement features 49ers quarterback Colin Kaepernick entering a stadium through an angry mob of shouting, rain-soaked fans — in Seahawks colors — and drowning them out with music on his Beats by Dre headphones.

Last week, the Seahawks announced that the few remaining tickets for Sunday’s game would be sold online, but not to anyone with a California billing address. (The Denver Broncos did the same for the A.F.C. championship game against New England, limiting sales to the Rocky Mountain region.) It was treated as the latest salvo.

“I actually respect it,” Harbaugh said. “That you’re trying to do for your team, put them in the best possible position to win that you can.”

The teams, for all the bombast over their differences, are strikingly similar. Each is led by a mobile young quarterback molded in the personality of his coach — cool Russell Wilson of the Seahawks, the fiery Kaepernick of the 49ers. Each has a beefy offensive line and a dependable workhorse at running back — Marshawn Lynch for Seattle, Frank Gore for San Francisco. Each is deep at receiver.

The defenses are among the best. Seattle’s was first in the N.F.L. in points and yards allowed; San Francisco was third in points allowed, fifth in yards. Each team is strong and fast up front. The 49ers have perhaps the league’s best linebackers in Patrick Willis, NaVorro Bowman and Ahmad Brooks. The Seahawks have perhaps the top secondary, led by cornerback Richard Sherman and safety Earl Thomas.

“There is no love lost,” Sherman said of the 49ers. “There is no love found.”

The game will decide which team goes to the Super Bowl, but not much else. Sunday may be the first playoff game between the N.F.L.’s fiercest rivals, but it feels as if it might be only the first in a series.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

That’s their deal.