In what could be yet another first for the state of Colorado, the possibility of a state-run single-payer health care program will be on the state’s ballot in 2016. After gathering signatures (in truth, 60,000 more than necessary), Initiative 20, dubbed the “State Health Care System,” will be presented to Coloradans in a year’s time. If approved, the measure would form ColoradoCare, a state-run single-payer health care program that would, instead of private insurers, pay Colorado residents’ medical costs.

Naturally, residents will have the ability to choose their providers on their own — ColoradoCare will be accepted universally in-state. According to one of the people behind this push, Ivan Miller, the new program would cover anyone making an income and residing in the state. This is part of what would set ColoradoCare apart from the so-called Obamacare Medicaid expansions.

How will all of this be paid for? Initiative 20 will levy new payroll taxes: For employers, 6.67 percent will be withheld and their employers will add another 3.33 percent from their own payrolls for a total of 10 percent. Those Coloradans who are self-employed will be contributing 10 percent of their net income. Together, it would raise an additional $25 billion annually for the new program.

Detractors of ColoradoCare worry about heading into what they say is potentially risky, unknown territory. Board President of the Colorado State Association of Health Underwriters Byron McCurdy told the Denver Post that he was convinced a single-payer health care system “would destroy our industry.” McCurdy says Colorado hospitals and clinics would “have trouble recruiting physicians.” He argues that the budget figures don’t add up and couldn’t possibly lead to anything better than what Colorado already has under its current expanded Medicaid system.

However, state-run single-payer advocate Ivan Miller says Colorado taxpayers would actually be saving money under ColoradoCare. Even with a 10 percent increase on payroll taxes, Coloradans would actually save a combined $5 billion annually. How? By side-stepping the costly administrative costs that come with having a variety of independent systems (as it presently is with private insurers). The state will also save residents’ tax dollars by working out bulk discount deals for pharmaceuticals.

If Colorado voters approve a state-run single-payer health program, it could do what the final version of the Affordable Care Act has failed to do (and could never succeed in, by its very nature) — insure low-income workers. As CNBC has found, a number of business owners have been stunned by the extremely low number of workers buying into ACA-mandated employer-offered insurance options. But it’s not that these employees don’t want health care coverage — rather, it’s that they simply cannot afford the insurance.

Even though the ACA requires the employer-offered options be 9.5 percent of workers’ take home, to make it supposedly accessible, that can still be out of range for many. And even if it weren’t, the sticking point is often the coverage’s high deductible; in one example, a $140 per month plan comes with a $2,500 deductible, a figure that is financially unfeasible for low-income workers who are often already stretched to afford housing and food.

Worse, most of these workers, despite being low-income, typically still earn too much to qualify for ACA-expanded Medicaid coverage. Because of the way the ACA is structured, gainfully employed workers on the lower end of the payroll spectrum often find themselves in the nether region between Medicaid-qualifying income brackets and being able to financially afford work-provided insurance. And, as such, they remain uninsured.

That’s where Colorado’s proposed state-run single-payer program comes in. As ColoradoCare’s wide tent will cover even these individuals, the Affordable Care Act’s progress will quickly seem disappointing by comparison. Coloradans would see their money going toward a public service rather than being forced by an ACA mandate to patronize a profit-driven industry that has little interest in whether low-income individuals are able to access the health care they need.

Photo Credit: psphotograph / Thinkstock