Tea, SD

House Bill 1221 is looking to change how the state handles divorce. It would allow a spouse to get a divorce without consent.

Mother of two Kristian Ellendorf is happily married, but it took years for her to get over a past relationship.

"I think for the longest time I struggled most with admitting what I had been through and feeling almost like I was weak at that point," Ellendorf said.

Ellendorf was in an abusive relationship for two and half years. The USD law student says she's trying to help other people get out from similar situations across the state.

"I think that we are failing our domestic violence victims," Ellendorf said.

Just days ago Ellendorf was in Pierre testifying about her experience. She hopes that if House Bill 1221 is passed, it could change something she thinks is vital to protecting abuse victims.

"In a domestic violence situation, you're allowing that victim to choose whether or not to talk about their abuse and under the laws we have today, they're required to. They can't even get a divorce without doing it," Ellendorf said.

South Dakota and Mississippi are the only states where unilateral no fault divorce isn't available. Representative Karen Soli sponsored the bill and points to other states as why she thinks it's important to pass it into law.

"One of the Statistics [Rep. Ray Ring] gave was the drop actually in homicides and murders of women in domestic violence situations. The drop that states have seen when they changed this little piece of the law," Soli said.

Representative Lance Russell voted against the bill. He understands the concern of abuse victims, but feels the bill needs to be more concise so that it's not too easy for people to get a divorce.

"We want to make sure that there is an opportunity for folks to try and work things out in particular circumstances," Russell said.

For Ellendorf, she knows the hardships for people suffering from domestic violence. She hopes this bit of legislature can give victims something they didn't get in their abusive relationships, a choice.

"Whether or not they take advantage, that's up to them, but at least we can afford them the opportunity," Ellendorf said.

There is currently seven different grounds for fault-base divorce in South Dakota. HB1221 is only dealing with the grounds of irreconcilable differences.

Legislature {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.