Obamacare (Photo: Rick McKee, The Augusta Chronicle )

The future of subsidies under the Affordable Care Act, and hence the future of the law itself, may depend on the level of ambiguity of ambiguous language.

I’ll try explaining without being too ambiguous.

After two differing appellate court decisions, the U.S. Supreme Court has agreed to hear a case challenging the provision of the tax credit subsidies to those who enrolled for coverage through the federal exchange.

In both cases, plaintiffs maintained language describing how the subsidies are to be calculated clearly limits the tax credits to those “enrolled through an Exchange established by the State under Section 1311” of the act.

However, the IRS adopted rules providing subsidies to anyone enrolled in an exchange, either state or federal, citing the Department of Health and Human Services definition of exchange, which included any operated by HHS.

Plaintiffs argue the “plain language” of the law is that subsidies are limited to the state exchanges, excluding the millions in the 36 states that didn’t set up their own exchange and relied on the federal exchange.

However, supporters of the law say the statute should be considered in the context of the whole law. And the law says that states may “elect” to establish an exchange and that if they don’t, HHS shall establish and operate “such an exchange.” Thus the federal exchange is the equivalent of a state exchange.

Another section also says the administration shall ensure that residents of each state shall have access to the tax credits.

When the Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals looked at the case before it, it gave credence to both sides and that’s what made the difference that led to its deference to the IRS rules.

In the court’s opinion, the government had the stronger position, “although only slightly.” The court couldn’t discern what Congress intended, so it concluded the IRS interpretation was a permissible interpretation of statutory sections that appear to be in conflict.

This all of course fits into the Republican narrative about how the law was too big, too complex and too rushed for anyone to understand.

It’s not surprising that as large an undertaking as health care reform would require complex legislation of more than 900 pages. Or that there would be drafting glitches, given the pressures of getting a bill through the Senate, the House and conference committee reconciliation.

And it’s not surprising that there’s a legal question over the meaning of the language.

The Supreme Court will have to decide whether the statue is ambiguous enough that it is reasonable to defer to the judgment of the agencies charged with implementing it.

What’s not ambiguous is why the Republican strategists have embraced the cases as a cause célèbre encapsulating all that has filled their narrative about the evils of Obamacare. The cases are clearly attempts to undermine the law.

While their rhetoric says members of Congress didn’t know what they were voting for, they argue in court that Congress knew exactly what it was saying.

Ask yourself, if the intent were to limit the subsidies, why weren’t all those despised liberal Democrats handing out gifts to the poor complaining about the limitation?

Steven Brill, founder of Court TV and author of a new book on health care in the U.S., “America’s Bitter Pill,” has observed that “no legislator or staff member on either side of the aisle that I spoke with ever thought that the subsidies would not go to the states using the federal exchange, and that the confusion and inconsistency in the wording was the result of some last-minute cutting and pasting of a phrase from a prior draft.”

The courts might say that if Congress intended something different than what the law says, then Congress can fix it. But, when one party is unanimously opposed to the bill and is more interested in repealing it than fixing or replacing it, that’s not realistic. Without the subsidies and without a fix, it will indeed undermine the Affordable Care Act’s objective of providing affordable health insurance to as many as possible.

The intent of those who want to interpret the law to limit the subsidies isn’t to make the law live up to its original intent; the intent is to interpret the law in a way that destroys that original intent.

Ron Eachus of Salem is a former legislator and a former chairman of the Oregon Public Utility Commission. His column appears on Tuesdays. Send email to re4869@comcast.net.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1qPOaDY