Agencies have released records either in full or in part for more than 90% of requests processed for disclosure.

President Obama at a Cabinet meeting last month. (Photo: Evan Vucci, AP)

From the day he took office, President Obama committed his administration to transparency and openness in government. Since 2009, agencies have undertaken unprecedented efforts to share information, including proactively posting more government records online and making data available to fuel innovation and entrepreneurship — more than 120,000 data sets are now available on data.gov.

Agencies are building government systems and software in the open so taxpayers can see — and contribute to — what is created. This year, the administration published the first open-source budget. And the Obama administration was the first to release White House visitor logs on our website showing the 4 million visitors to the White House.

OUR VIEW: Federal agencies stiff-arm FOIA requests

Increasingly, government agencies are operating with a "default to open" approach.

The administration also continues to make important strides in improving the Freedom of Information Act (FOIA) process.

Despite a historically high demand for records over the past six years, challenging fiscal realities and decreased staffing, agencies have processed more than 3.8 million requests.

Agencies have released records either in full or in part for more than 90% of requests processed for disclosure. The most commonly cited FOIA exemptions were those that protect personal privacy, while the exemption related to national security on average accounted for only 1%.

To ensure that policies and practices of government reflect the ideas and expertise of the American people, we launched We the People, where more than 15 million users have signed more than 360,000 petitions. In January, we published the Public Participation Playbook in the open with participation from the public, giving agencies a toolkit to further enhance public engagement.

While there is always more work to be done, this administration continues to demonstrate its commitment to improving open government and increasing transparency.

We invite the public to continue participating in this important work.

Corinna Zarek is senior adviser for Open Government to the U.S. chief technology officer, in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy.

Melanie Pustay is director of the Office of Information Policy at the Department of Justice.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1baZiK8