Buy Photo Manchester resident Leonard "Lenny" Brotzky recieved the Purple Heart 70 years after he was injured in World War II during the Battle of the Bulge. His wife Rose was also honored because she served in the Marine Reserves during WWII. (Photo: Doug Hood/Staff Photographer )Buy Photo

Nearly 70 years after shrapnel tore into the right fingers and hand of Leonard "Lenny" Brotzky in a 2 a.m. shelling of his artillery unit during the Battle of the Bulge, the 89-year-old Manchester resident finally received his Purple Heart.

Much has changed since Brotzky served at a Technician-5 in the Army's 36th Division 155th Field Artillery unit in World War II. But he still remembers how the shrapnel pierced his hand and arm when mortar shells hit his jeep in the early morning attack of World War II's pivotal European battle. He still remembers the cold of the battle field — temperatures so frigid that he suffered severe frostbite on his feet from sleeping outside.

"I woke up and I couldn't move my legs," he recalled. But "I was lucky."

Other soldiers had their feet amputated because of the frostbite, but Brotzky managed to keep his feet and toes, he said.

It took 70 years before Brotzky — who now lives with his wife in Leisure Village West in Manchester — was awarded the Purple Heart, an honor bestowed on military men and women wounded during combat. The reason for the decades-long delay was because Brotzky's discharge papers lacked details of his injuries, said Congressman Chris Smith. The congressman's staff spent 11 years working to locate the necessary paperwork needed to prove Brotzky's story. On Thursday, Smith was finally able to deliver the Purple Heart to the veteran inside his New Egypt office.

"I think he well deserves it, and I'm very proud," said Brotzky's wife Rose, who attributed her husband's survival to his experience as a Boy Scout.

Rose, 92, was also honored by Smith. The congressman gave her a flag that had flown over the capitol building in Washington D.C. to recognize her World War II service in the Marines Reserves Fourth Battalion.

One of less than 300,000 women who served in the military during World War II, and one of far fewer who served the Marine Reserves, Rose, or "Rosie" as she was called then, worked as a radio operator and received the rank of staff sergeant. She still vividly remembers working in a radio room in Hawaii when news of the Japanese surrender came across the airwaves.

The couple met after the war at a veterans meeting in Bloomfield, married and now have two grown children.

"The Brotzkys are the quintessential example of the Greatest Generation: patriotic, generous, brave and selfless," Smith said.

Smith's 11-year effort to secure Leonard Brotzky's Purple Heart finally came Oct. 2, after Department of Veterans Affairs records surfaced that detailed Brotzky's injuries and service.

The Purple Heart "is making him so happy," said Barbara Kolodziejczyk, the couple's daughter. "We're very proud."

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tCkQag