Seth Schorr calls it a case of “the stars were aligning.”

Today’s 5 p.m. public-invited sneak peek opening of the Downtown Grand hotel and casino coincides with what organizers of the Life Is Beautiful music festival hope will be the crowning finale of the biggest weekend downtown.

It’s not every day a new downtown resort gets to open its doors with thousands of potential guests outside the door.

“Good timing. It’s a great time for downtown,” said Schorr, the chief executive officer of Fifth Street Gaming, parent company of the $100 million renovation of the former Lady Luck.

The top-to-bottom transformation features a rooftop pool venue called Picnic that will accommodate up to 1,500 people.

Pool chairs will be cleared for movie nights, concerts and DJs.

Food orders will arrive in picnic baskets.

Schorr and company have come up with quirky twists: Four windows along Third Street will allow pedestrians to make bets and order takeout, and dice games will be on the sidewalk.

Fifth Street Gaming has moved The Mob Bar from across the street into a speakeasy-like joint at the Grand. The new Mob Bar will feature dueling pianos.

The ceremonial ribbon cutting will be at the Nov. 12 opening. Should be easy to remember: 11/12/13.

THE SCENE AND HEARD

Great catch: Marisa Findlay, daughter of auto dealership mogul Cliff Findlay, married J.T. Wise, a top catching prospect in the Los Angeles Dodgers farm system on Saturday in the grand lobby of The Smith Center for the Performing Arts. Wise, who was the Big 12 Conference’s Player of the Year in 2009, is the great-nephew of former New York Yankees second baseman Bobby Richardson, the 1960 World Series Most Valuable Player. ...

Chants of “We want Bruce, we want Bruce” broke out at Kanye West’s Yeezus Tour stop on Friday at the MGM Grand Garden. Kris Jenner was in attendance with Kim, Kourtney and Khloe Kardashian, but Bruce Jenner was not present. The Jenners recently confirmed they had split after months of rumors. ...

“Cake Boss” Buddy Valastro is getting very close to announcing his family’s famous Carlo’s Bakery will be a scone’s throw away from his Buddy V’s at The Palazzo. The Hoboken, N.J., hot spot built a huge following of celebrities. Among those ordering special cakes: Oprah Winfrey, New York Yankees star Derek Jeter and Miley Cyrus, who had a cake created in the shape of a guitar for her 18th birthday.

Correction: The first name of Caesars Entertainment regional president Eileen Moore was wrong in Friday’s column and Q&A. Moore is a Caesars Entertainment president who oversees the Flamingo, The Quad and the former Bill’s Gamblin’ Hall project.

SIGHTINGS

Morgan Spurlock of the documentary “Super Size Me” with a film crew in tow at Life Is Beautiful. ... Guitarist Jerry Cantrell of Alice in Chains, dining with a large group Friday at N9ne Steakhouse at the Palms. ... Comedian Bill Engvall, after performing his show at Treasure Island on Friday, joined country star Austin Law at Gilley’s (T.I.). Accompanying Engvall was his “Dancing With the Stars” partner Emma Slater. They are still alive six weeks into Season 17. Engvall, Slater and Engvall’s dance choreographer on “DWTS” were seen hanging out with Jesse Garon, the official Elvis of Las Vegas at the “Welcome to Fabulous Las Vegas” sign on Friday night. ... Matt Shadows, lead singer of Avenged Sevenfold, posing for photos with his wife, Val, and Ultimate Fighting Championship ring girl Arianny Celeste, who was dining at a nearby table. ... Myron Martin, CEO of The Smith Center for the Performing Arts, picking up his credentials for Life Is Beautiful on Friday, shortly after returning from Nashville, Tenn.

THE PUNCH LINE

Only 12 percent of Americans think the rollout of Obamacare is going well, while 100 percent of Republicans think the rollout of Obamacare is going great.” — Jimmy Fallon

Norm Clarke’s column appears Sunday, Monday, Wednesday and Friday. He can be reached at 702-383-0244 or email him at norm@reviewjournal.com. Find more online at www.normclarke.com. Follow Norm on Twitter @Norm_Clarke. “Norm Clarke’s Vegas,” airs Thursdays on the “Morning Blend” on KTNV-TV, Channel 13.