Sarah Jayde Williams and her band The Sharecroppers perform Friday at Music and Market in Opelousas. (Photo: Submitted photo)

The descendant of a Louisiana tradition bearer will perform for this week’s Music and Market concert.

Sarah Jayde Williams, granddaughter of the late Hadley J. Castille, learned well from that Cajun fiddle master. She and her band, The Sharecroppers, will deliver their distinctive blend of country swing starting Friday evening at the farmers market pavilion in Opelousas.

Williams is a regular on the roots music circuit in Acadiana. The Opelousas native has played Festivals Acadiens et Créoles and Festival International de Louisiane and the New Orleans Jazz & Heritage Festival as well as music clubs throughout the region.

As she has throughout her musical life, Williams surrounds herself with family and friends in her band. It includes her uncle Blake Castille on guitar, Phil Caelin on bass, Lee Tedrow on steel guitar and Danny Kimbal on drums.

The band’s repertoire includes country music that influenced the sound of swamp pop, sung in English and French — a mix as tasty as this week’s featured farm product, mustard greens. Williams has just released her debut recording, "Special Edition Cajun & Texas Swing."

Music and Market coordinator Patrice Melnick said, “I love her style,” that combines the two varieties of Southern music. “They blend together really well.”

The concert series calendar in print and online list Friday’s as the final event of the season. But wait — there’s more.

Leroy Thomas, “The Jewel of the Bayou,” will perform May 29. He’d been scheduled to play at Le Vieux Village in Opelousas on April 23, but rain washed out that appearance.

“We’re going to make up for the rainy day,” Melnick said.

Many organizations help this free concert series happen each year. They include the City of Opelousas, Bodemuller the Printer, Cleco, Delta Media, Tobacco Free Living, Louisiana Cultural Economy Foundation, Louisiana Lottery, the Jazz and Heritage Foundation, LSU AgCenter, and ZydecoOnline.com

For more information or to find out about vendor opportunities, call 337-948-6263 or visit cityofopelousas.com.

Want to go?

Music and Market takes place 5:30-8:30 p.m. Friday; the music begins at 6:00 p.m. Concert-goers are welcome to bring lawn chairs to the farmers market at 828 E. Landry St., Opelousas. Food and drinks will be available for purchase.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/05/21/swing-western-cajun-style/27736997/