Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Neighbors of Cherif Kouachi, one of the Paris terror suspects, desribe the 32-year-old as a normal guy. USA TODAY's Kim Hjelmgaard takes us on a tour of Kouachi's former apartment building. VPC

Police oficers direct the traffic at an intersection in Dammartin-en-Goele, northeast of Paris, on Jan. 10, 2015. (Photo: Michel Spingler, AP)

A terrified man hiding and texting French police from inside the printing business besieged by the Charlie Hebdo attackers gave authorities critical updates during Friday's dramatic standoff.

Lilian Lepere, a 26-year-old graphic designer at the business, managed to remain undetected during the standoff and became an integral police ally that helped save lives — including his own, according to several reports.

On Friday, Cherif Kouachi, 32, and his brother, Said Kouachi, 34, took the printing house's business manager hostage inside the building in Dammartin-en-Goele, a small industrial town about 30 miles northeast of Paris. The manager later escaped while Lepere remained in the building until police stormed in.

As the standoff with the Kouachi brothers unfolded, Amedy Coulibaly, 32, stormed a kosher grocery store on the eastern edge of Paris, killing four and taking 15 hostages, who were later released.

From inside the printing business, Lepere sent officers "tactical elements such as his location inside the premises," Paris prosecutor Francois Molins said, according to Sky News. Lepere could hear the brothers talking, which gave him more information to send to police outside, the Agence France-Presse news agency reported.

Lepere also sent a text message to his father saying, "I am hidden on the first floor. I think they have killed everyone. Tell the police to intervene," Daily Mail reports.

It is unclear where Lepere hid. Sky News reports he crouched "under a sink in the canteen" of the building. Daily Mail reports he was "hidden in a cardboard box just yards away" from the brothers.

The Wall Street Journal did not name Lepere but reported that the printing house's business manager and another man were trapped inside with the Kouachi brothers. Around 2:30 p.m., the manager escaped and ran to police but the other man remained stuck inside for almost three hours communicating with authorities, the paper said.

Just before 5 p.m. Friday, security forces launched a major assault on the printing plant with explosions and gunshots ringing out. Police killed the Kouachi brothers in the exchange and rescued their hostage.

Police eventually got to Lepere using an armored car and took him to police headquarters, where he was quickly reunited with his family, Sky News reports.

Lepere's father said the family was "doing fine" and thanked the police and the "people who helped," Sky News reports.

Police also stormed the Paris kosher grocery in another eruption of gunshots and explosions rescuing 15 hostages and killing Coulibaly.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1BMOqvi