The Obama administration announced on Saturday that Accenture Federal Services will replace CGI Federal as the lead contractor to take ove

The Obama administration announced on Saturday that Accenture Federal Services will replace CGI Federal as the lead contractor to take ove

The Obama administration announced on Saturday that Accenture Federal Services will replace CGI Federal as the lead contractor to take over the construction of the HealthCare.gov website. Accenture was awarded a one-year contract, with an initial payment of $45 million, to continue technological improvements to HealthCare.gov, according to a company statement Saturday.

“We are honored to be part of the team of technology and healthcare companies and government professionals helping the federal government meet the healthcare coverage needs of its citizens,” Accenture chief executive David Moskovitz said in the statement. “Accenture will bring deep healthcare industry insight as well as proven experience building large-scale, public-facing websites to continue improving HealthCare.gov.”

CGI Federal was replaced because of the technological glitches that plagued the roll-out of the Affordable Care Act in October. CGI spokeswoman Linda Odorisio said in a statement that the company is pleased about the role it played in turning the website around.

“We are proud that more than 400 CGI employees worked around the clock from October through December to deliver a consumer experience that works for a vast majority of Americans,” Odorisio said.

The Centers for Medicaid and Medicare Services reportedly chose Accenture over a dozen other firms.

“As CMS moves forward in our efforts to help consumers access quality, affordable health coverage, we have selected Accenture to become the lead contractor for the HealthCare.gov portal and to prepare for next year’s open enrollment period," the agency said in its own release. "We are pleased that more than 1.1 million consumers already have enrolled in a private plan in the federal Marketplace thanks to existing efforts and look forward to working with all of our contract partners to ensure a smooth transition of this work."

The change in contractors has not blunted criticism of the Affordable Care Act by Republicans, though, with House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton saying that "a change in contractors does not change the sad state of this law."

Enrollment figures for the online federal exchanges has steadily increased since October 1. In December alone, more than 975,000 people enrolled in the exchanges, nearly three times as high as the 364,682 Americans who signed up from October through November, according to Marilyn Tavenner, Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services Administrator.

The Obama administration believes enrollment will continue to increase in the coming months.

“We are in the middle of a sustained, six-month open enrollment period that we expect to see enrollment ramp up over time, much like other historic implementation efforts we’ve seen in Massachusetts and Medicare Part D,” Tavenner said in a statement in December.

[Image via Washington Post]