Rep. Paul Ryan, (R) Speaker of the House, explains why he thinks Americans are so angry. We are just skipping along the bottom of the economic path, says Ryan, sharing the 2016 GOP House agenda.

House Speaker Paul Ryan said Tuesday the rise of Donald Trump can be explained by voters being fed up that America is on the wrong track. Ryan blamed the liberal policies of President Barack Obama.

"You have conservatives, like myself ... who are very upset about the direction of the country," Ryan told CNBC's "Squawk Box." "You have people in America panicked because they have economic anxiety."

Ryan, who was the GOP vice presidential candidate in 2012, is not supporting any one candidate as the 2016 nomination contests continue.

"There's nothing we can do about what's going on in the presidential election and what the outcome of that is in Congress," Ryan said. He said he's concentrating on crafting a conservative agenda that a Republican president can help execute.

Trump, the GOP front-runner, takes his weekend win in South Carolina and his victory earlier this month in New Hampshire into Tuesday's Nevada caucuses. Sens. Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz are hoping to halt Trump's roll.



Read MoreSlow progress bridging America's economic divide

Next week's Super Tuesday contests feature primaries in Cruz's home state of Texas, Virginia, and many others. Then on March 15, the day states can award delegates on a winner-take-all basis, Rubio's home base of Florida is among states going to the polls.



Trump's home state of New York holds its primary on April 19, with the final contests coming later that month and in May and early June. The Republican Party holds its nominating convention in Cleveland in mid-July.

Ryan will play a key role at the GOP convention, which is run under the rules of the House of Representatives. The speaker presides over the convention, and typically opens and closes the gathering.

Read MoreTrump's like Schwarzenegger: House majority leader



While staying out of the presidential race, Ryan said he can help craft the conversation. "We can make this an ideas contest and not a personality contest ... and show where we, Republicans, can go in 2017 if you give us a president we can work with."

With the presidency, the House and Senate, and a seat on the Supreme Court all in play, Ryan argued the nation stands a crossroads.

He said that's why he's going to soon release a five-point agenda. It will offer ideas on an alternative to Obamacare, and how to fix the economy, reform entitlements, craft foreign policy and reclaim government by consent not executive order.