Click above to watch the entire episode or below for segments

KSN is presenting this interview with the cooperating of our sister station, KSNT in Topeka. KSN’s Darren Dedo and KSNT’s Natalie Davis sat down with Governor Sam Brownback for an exclusive interview. We talked about the issues facing our state. We are presenting the entire interview without editing or cuts so that the people of Kansas can see our full conversation with the Governor. He talked about tax cuts, education funding, welfare reform and other topics.

1) Tax Plan

KSN’s Darren Dedo: “Thank you for joining us today, Governor. We appreciate it. Let’s talk about your economic experiment, built on massive tax cuts. Now this year, the state did have to deal with that $600 million deficit. Could a change in your economic policies have prevented that?”

Governor Brownback: “I don’t think so. Kansas has been on this long-term, downward trajectory. Bob Dole’s first elected into the U.S. Congress in the old Sixth Congressional District. We’re down to four now, we’re headed to three. We were the 28th most populous state in the nation, we’re 32nd now. And so you could say, ‘Well, all right, let’s just stay with that and we’ll continue in the decline’. And we said, ‘no, let’s try to change it’. One of the big, several of the big, problems right now is oil and gas is doing really poorly. We’re a big oil and gas state. Agriculture is doing poorly right now. We’re a big agriculture state. Small jets, we’re not selling small jets. So, none of that, all of that is there and in place. I think our policy is working. We’re getting more small businesses than ever before to register in the state of Kansas. We’ve had a 40 percent increase in flow of funds from Missouri into the state of Kansas. We’ve got an unemployment rate of 4.4 percent. We’ve created over 70,000 new private sector jobs. Most of that in the small business space. So, you’ve got some big mega-factors that we can’t change.”

Darren Dedo: “Of course, the businesses are not taxed in Kansas and if they were?”

Governor Brownback: “The LLC’s and Sub S’s — big businesses continue taxed — your C Corp.”

Darren Dedo: “So, if the smaller businesses were taxed — I think I’ve seen somewhere that maybe $200 million would be generated?”

Governor Brownback: “If you didn’t allow deductions for losses.”

Darren Dedo: “I guess what I’m trying to get at, is, you know the state’s bond rating has been downgraded. We have about $6 million, I believe, in reserves. When do we get to a critical point when something drastic has to be done because the state’s running out of money?”

Governor Brownback: “My hope is, I think, that we’re past that. We had this situation now that we’re in. We just came forward with, here’s a series of things that we’re trying to do to fix the issues that we’ve had. Our objective all along has been to grow the economy, not the government. So we’re trying to get more money out to the private sector and that’s happening. Our wage rates are going up in the state of Kansas. Our income for small businesses are going up in the state of Kansas. Our net increase of family income has gone up in the state of Kansas. So our objective is to get more money and to keep it in the people’s hands in the state of Kansas. And then long-term that grows you. Your fastest growing states in the country, by and large, are those with no income tax. Nine states have no income tax.”

Darren Dedo: “Like Texas and Florida?”

Governor Brownback: “Texas, Florida, South Dakota, Tennessee, State of Washington, Alaska, Nevada. These are your fastest growing states in the country — by and large, not exclusively — and your slowest growing states, by and large, are those with the highest income tax rates. So, we’re trying to get from a high income tax state to a low, or no income tax state.”

Darren Dedo: “Let’s go back to that because the state added just less than 9,000 jobs over the past year. That was a rate of 0.6 percent, the eighth worst rate in the country over that time period, while the rest of the U.S. has seen a growth rate of two percent. Why do you think Kansas is lagging behind in that?”

Governor Brownback: “You can look at this last period of time and we were one of the fastest growing states in the country. It depends on the data point that you go from, and we go up and down in this. But we’ve had 70,000+ new private sector jobs. We are starting now to get up higher in our region average when you look at it over a period of time. Plus, oil and gas is shedding jobs, agriculture is shedding jobs, the small jets still haven’t picked up. Your, three of your big’s are still not doing well in this state.”

Darren Dedo: “But are you worried that that trend will continue, and then we get to a point where maybe you have to revisit your tax cuts and maybe eliminate them? Do we ever get to that point?”

Governor Brownback: “Well, you’re always looking at tax policy. But the thrust of this tax policy — which is to grow small business, because that’s where 70 percent of the people work — is working by the numbers. It’s not working to raise the price of oil, or to increase the sale of small jets. It is working in the Kansas City market aggressively, which is one of our best opportunities to grow, is in that Kansas City region where we share a major metropolitan area with another state.”

Darren Dedo: “These numbers came out for October recently that revenue receipts were down $15 million below expectations, and since the current fiscal year began back in July, collections have been short of expectations by about $78 million which is 4.1 percent. It seems like this trend is continuing. What can we do to stop the bleeding? What needs to be done to stop that?”

Governor Brownback: “A great Christmas season would be wonderful because most of that is sales tax. It’s not income taxes which were off.”

Darren Dedo: “Which you raised. Right?”

Governor Brownback: “The sales tax has gone from, when I started, 6.3 percent. It’s now 6.5. It was supposed to dip, it did dip down to 6.1. It was supposed to be a penny off. That kept and now it’s 6.5 on the sales tax rate. My point of it is, people look at this and say ‘Your income tax isn’t producing’. No, the income tax is hitting the revenue projections, it’s the sales tax. And this happens to be a nationwide feature. people are not spending right now. There’s a nervousness in the economy that we’re certainly feeling and a lot of states are too. ”

Darren Dedo: “And I’m wondering, do we have enough population in our state to have enough people spend to generate enough money to fill some of these holes?”

Governor Brownback: “We need more people. Kansas needs more people. We’ve got an unemployment rate.”

Darren Dedo: “Which you’re trying to get more businesses here.”

Governor Brownback: “And we actually got in-migration in 2014 into the state of Kansas. The first time we’ve had it, really, since the recession, well the last several years. We’re starting to get it but these things take time to do it. I can tell you if we stayed on the old trajectory, I could tell you where we’re going to stay, and that was continuing a long-term decline relative to the rest of the country. Our population has increased but not at the rate of the rest of the nation.”

Darren Dedo: “So as we quickly wrap things up here, in your opinion, your estimation, do you feel good where the state is right now economically?”

Governor Brownback: “I think we are well positioned to grow. You’re going to need some breaks in getting some jets sold in this state. We’re going to need to continue to be very competitive in the Kansas City market, and we need some of these commodity prices to go up for us, but I think we are well positioned for what we can do in growth and particularly for small business.”

Darren Dedo: “You see a path to prosperity it sounds like.”

Governor Brownback: “I do — a path for growth. And our people are getting more income. Our small businesses are making more income. Our individuals, they’re growing. Their family income is growing, overall, by the numbers.”

RELATED LINK | Local officials react to the governor’s comments about aviation and the state’s economy

2) Education Funding

KSNT’s Natalie Davis: “Lets start with what was in the news recently on Monday. Twenty five school districts requested and received emergency state funding. Is this a concern to you that this many school districts needed emergency aid?”

Governor Brownback: “No, because this is a new process that they didn’t have before. Before, when these sort of things happened, where they had a huge devaluation like, what’s happening in oil and gas regions of the state. You’ve got half the valuation knocked out. School districts just had to deal with it. Now, you’ve got a process where, if you lose a lot of valuation, you can come and appeal to the state, and they filled in most of the hole. The other thing that’s really nice about it is, prior, whenever you lost student enrollment, well you had a loss of funding from the state, but yet your costs are pretty fixed by that point in time. Well, now that money isn’t taken away by the state, you keep it because basically your costs are set. I think this is a much improved process for the school districts to be able to have that flexibility in the system whereas before you didn’t, and the flexibility was there actually took money away from you which doesn’t happen.”

Natalie Davis: “And that process you’re talking about is the block grand funding that is in place, correct?”

Governor Brownback: “Well, block grants, and then there’s this extraordinary needs fund that they built into it and what they did is that took, the legislature took, a piece of the funding in K-12 and said, ‘okay, we’re going to set this aside for extraordinary needs. And then we’re going to have a process where the executive council, the state basically, and you’ve got your leadership — House, Senate and Governor — looking at this and then trying to make these adjustments. And the total pool of funds is about $12 million.”

Natalie Davis: “Lets go back to the block grant funding. The Kansas Speaks Spring 2015 Statewide Public Opinion Survey came out, and it showed that almost two-thirds of respondents felt that the state block grant system actually lowered the quality of education in Kansas. Do you feel that the quality of education in Kansas is where it should be?”

Governor Brownback: “No, I think it needs to be better. I think we need to get more money into the classroom. I think average teacher salary needs to go up for the state. I think we need to get more merit pay. But what you’ve seen over the last 10 years, we’ve added about a billion dollars of funding to K-12. Student population hasn’t gone up much. But most of that money has gone into, um, front office costs, it’s gone into administration. A lot of it’s gone into capital improvements because you bifurcated the funding. You said, okay, certain amount of funding has to go into capital amounts, so its football stadiums, its school buildings. A certain amount has to go into the classroom. The block grant broke those walls down. Because most people in the state, they want this money to go into the classroom. That’s where, now, the money can go. Now, people are hesitant because they’re saying ‘well, I kind of like the old system, I’m not sure’. But now you don’t have to spend $40,000 on a piano because you can’t put into the teachers. You can say, ‘no, let’s put that into the teacher.'”

RELATED LINK | USD 259 Superintendent John Allison responds to the governor’s comments school districts

Natalie Davis: “Let’s talk about the specific money. I’ve got numbers here; $283 million has been increased into the school funding system in the last six years. The number of dollars has increased, that’s great, but the per pupil increase in state aid has only been half the rate of inflation. Is that good enough? How is that sustainable for the Kansas education system?”

Governor Brownback: “Well, I think it’s sustainable if you move it into the classroom. I’ve got the chart (pictured right) that kind of shows this amount of increase that we’ve done. And there’s basically three areas of funding increase that we’ve done in the state of Kansas. One’s K-12. The other is the KPERS system, which was in the bankruptcy zone when I came into office, and the third is Medicaid. Those are your three growth areas. And I think what we’ve got to really do is get more of that money getting into the classroom. You shouldn’t put it into administration. And you shouldn’t put it into –we’ve built a lot of new buildings in the state of Kansas and that’s wonderful. My youngest two children go to Washburn Rural. Beautiful operation and great teachers there as well but I want that money to be flexible to get into the classroom, because that’s where Kansans want it. They want it in the classroom.”

RELATED LINK | Education Chart Nov 2015

Natalie Davis: “That’s something you and I talked about when you first got elected to this next term. You talked the desire to put money into the classroom, but if you look at that $283 million increase over the last six years, more than 65 percent of the increased funds have gone into KPERS, and they went to bond and intrastate aid. It’s not going into the classroom. So is that acceptable to you?”

Governor Brownback: “Well in that bond and intrastate aid, no. That bond and intrastate aid, we want to pull that back and let that money get into the classroom. KPERS, that system has been underfunded for 20 years. I was just in Detroit two weeks ago. They went through the bankruptcy, the city of Detroit. There are going to be other cities going through bankruptcy. You know who takes it? Who gets hit when the bankruptcy happens? It’s the pensioners. That’s a big piece of where the loss takes place. Now a lot of your borrowing — you wipe off bond holders — but you also go with the pensioners and that’s not fair. And for 20 years, the KPERS system has been underfunded. We were the second least funded pension system in America when I came in. Illinois was the least funded. They remain there. We have moved our rank up substantially, we are out of the bankruptcy zone. This is critical long-term. You kind of get no real interest in it because people say I’m still getting my KPERS payment, and they are.”

Natalie Davis: “But long-term, you’ve improved sustainability.”

Governor Brownback: “Long term, this is where you go bankrupt because we had a $10 billion hole in KPERS.”

Natalie Davis: “Definitely. And there’s no disputing that we’re seeing huge improvements. But back to the focus on the classroom that involves teachers and students. I have a quote here from a teacher who has worked in the community here in Kansas for more than a decade. They described teacher relationships with lawmakers and you as abusive. They said, ‘Sadly, in the end, a lot of teachers — even school districts — are so afraid of further cuts they just shut up and let him continue his lies which is how abusers get power, rather than standing up and saying something because they don’t want to get hit again.’ What’s your reaction to that?”

Governor Brownback: “Continuous cuts? Has it been? I mean, you said in your own numbers it hasn’t been continuous cuts that have taken place.”

Natalie Davis: “The number of dollars has increased but it hasn’t been sustainable with the rate of inflation. You mention merit pay as a possibility for teachers and teachers don’t trust that. How do you regain teachers trust in Kansas? I know that’s your desire.”

Governor Brownback: “It is and I would appreciate, thank you actually for citing that money has increased in K-12, because I think if you ask the general public, ‘do you think money has increased or decreased over the last five years,’ most would say it’s decreased.”

Natalie Davis: “But it’s not in a sustainable way?

Governor Brownback: “But it has increased has it not?”

Natalie Davis: “Yes.”

Governor Brownback: “That’s my point. And I think what we’ve got to do is get more money out of the administration, out of the buildings, and put it into the classroom and I don’t think anybody would disagree with that. And if you look at your total level of student increase of numbers, it’s not been growing as fast as the amount of money.”

3) Welfare Reform

Darren Dedo: “Let’s talk about the Hope Act, you’re sweeping welfare reform that was signed into law back in April. How does this program help end government dependency here in Kansas?”

Governor Brownback: “It gets people off of public assistance and into the job market. And we have had fantastic results. We’ve had over 6,000 people this last year go from welfare dependency to a job. And the numbers of this have been extraordinary. And it’s pretty simple. We’re just saying if you’re able-bodied and capable you have to apply for a job or get a job when you come in for support, and then if you’re asking for food stamps, we provide job training programs. And it is a much more likely way that you’ll get out of poverty, if you’re working than the little pittance than the government gives you,”

Darren Dedo: “And you try to make that program work with your mentoring program too? Do they kind of work in conjunction with each other?”

Governor Brownback: “We need that because we’ve done that for people coming out of prison. We’ve got 6,000 mentor matches for people coming out of prison, and it’s cut our recidivism rate in half in year one results. Now that’s — it’d be beautiful to track that for three or four years so we don’t know — but that’s worked in our prison population. We want to get it into our population that’s in poverty. I want to get people out of poverty. I don’t want to just keep them with a dependency, we want to get them out of poverty, and that involves education, work, and family structure.”

Darren Dedo: “Some of your critics have been concerned about the cap on assistance, that it’s 36 months instead of 48 months. Does that put too much pressure on Kansas families that are in need right now to try to get back on their feet?”

Governor Brownback: “You know, it’s still three years, and the data shows that the best thing you can do, once you’re out of work and you’re getting public assistance, is get back into the job market as soon as possible so you don’t lose those soft skills, so you don’t lose the abilities that had you in that work market in the first place. The way out of poverty is work, it’s not the money from government. And so the quicker you can make that transition back into the work environment, the better off you are.”

Darren Dedo: “Another thing that caused a kind of controversy was how those coupons can be used. They can’t be used for movies, or massage parlors, or cruise ships. Why do you think we needed something like that here in Kansas? I’m not sure you can use $20 on a cruise ship, you know what I mean? ”

Governor Brownback: “I agree, And some of those things, I think, were questionable. Some of it isn’t. Some of it was wasted money that people were using, plus I think the public looks at this and says, ‘Look, you need some help, I want to help you out. I don’t want you to blow the money on things you don’t need. I want you to spend it on food and shelter and clothing and things for your children, not on entertainment.’ And, not that entertainment is bad, but look, we’re talking about a situation where we’re trying to help you out of a situation that is difficult for you and we don’t think you should spend it on these other things.”

Darren Dedo: “So your policy is more like a hand up instead of a hand out is what it sounds like.”

Governor Brownback: “It’s not only a hand up, it’s also help giving you the tools. There are some people that you say, ‘you need to pull yourself up by the bootstraps’. Well, some people don’t have bootstraps, so it’s helping them get bootstraps and that’s what our technical education program is about. We provide that free now while you’re in K-12, and the whole idea is that we want to give you a skill so you can make more than minimum wage. So you can be an electrician or a plumber or an IT or CNA and you can be above the minimum wage and you have a skill to sell. And this has worked fabulously. We’ve had over 200 percent enrollment increase in that program.

Darren Dedo: “And we’re going to get more Kansans back to work, hopefully, right?”

Governor Brownback: “That’s the whole objective here. And we’ve got jobs. We need people, really more skilled, and we need the soft skills too. Being able to show up and being able to work with other people well.”

4) State’s Rights

Same-Sex Marriage

Natalie Davis: “Mr. Governor, we’re going to talk about state’s rights. We’re going to go through a number of topics kind of quickly. We’ll start with same-sex marriage. Big in the news this year, the U.S. Supreme Court legalized same-sex marriage across the board. Kansas has a ban in its Constitution. How do you feel about federal law trumping state law and do you have any plans to stand up for state’s rights in this area, perhaps a religious liberty law this legislative session?”

Governor Brownback: “Well, the State of Kansas, the people of Kansas voted nearly 70 percent to define marriage in their Constitution as the union of a man and a woman. The Supreme Court said ‘That’s not Constitutional’ in their ruling. A number of people disagree with that. A number of people disagree with Roe v. Wade on the abortion standard that the Supreme Court found a constitutional right to an abortion. But we’re implementing the law as it stands with the Supreme Court ruling. And that’s what we’re doing in the state of Kansas and will continue to do.”

Gun Rights

Natalie Davis: “Let’s move on to gun rights. You’ve been a strong proponent of Second Amendment rights. You’ve passed a lot of flexibility in terms of gun ownership here in Kansas. But in light of recent mass shootings, there’s been a lot of talk about increasing regulation, increasing stricter background checks. If a federal law came into play that increased regulations on guns, what would your thought on that be? Do you think that would be breaking the constitution, and how would you react to that?”

Governor Brownback: “Well, you’d have to see what the specifics are, so I won’t answer something in the abstract because you always have to see what those specifics are. But you have a Second Amendment right. And it’s the same as, it’s in the Constitution like the First Amendment is in it. And you have that constitutional right. Kansans treasure that. I think most Americans treasure that, and their rights under the Constitution and the U.S. Supreme Court has determined this is an individual right — your Second Amendment right. I stand by that.”

Health Care

Natalie Davis: “Let’s talk health care. Kansas, Texas and Louisiana filed a lawsuit. They’re challenging the federal government’s legal authority, basically, to force a tax on the state under the Affordable Care Act. The Attorney General is calling it “an accounting trick”. He’s asking for $32.8 million in refunds. Are you opposed to the Affordable Care Act, and if so, why is this bad for Kansans in your opinion?”

Governor Bownback: “I’ve been opposed to the Affordable Care Act since the President proposed it when I was in the Senate. I fought against it in the United States Senate. I think this not working. I don’t think it was designed where it could work. I think we’re in an entitlement system in the United States that currently in hugely over committed, probably in the tune of $30-40 trillion, where we don’t have the money and we have promised people this promise. And here is another one to put on top of that. It’s driven up costs in health care, costs to the State of Kansas. That’s why we’ve joined this lawsuit, why the Attorney General is a part of it. And it’s just not working, and we can’t afford for it to continue to not work and to drive up our healthcare costs.”

Environmental Protection Agency

Natalie Davis: One last question with a quick answer, I hope. The Environmental Protection Agency is increasing regulations on water and power. Should the EPA be abolished? Yes or no?

Governor Bownback: “I don’t see that as a practical answer. You’re going to have environmental regulation. I think the things that they are doing are highly questionable constitutionally and I think it’s something we should deal with…”