Sonoma County will be offering its employees more health plan options this summer, reducing annual out-of-pocket expenses in its two county health plans and offering two more affordable Kaiser Permanente plans.

The changes made to the county’s exclusive provider organization and preferred provider organization health plans would significantly reduce deductibles and out-of-pocket costs, as required by President Barack Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

Meanwhile, the new Kaiser plans offer younger and healthier employees two higher-deductible plans that reduce premiums from the current “$10 copay plan” by 17 and 23 percent, respectively.

About 90 percent of county employees, or 3,012 workers, are enrolled in the existing Kaiser $10 copay plan. Another 222 current county workers and 1,241 retirees are enrolled in either the county’s EPO plan or PPO plan.

An EPO plan generally does not cover care outside a network of providers, while a PPO plan will typically cover care both inside and outside the network. Treatment from non-Kaiser doctors under a PPO plan would usually cost patients more.

“It gives our employees different choices,” said Cheryl Thibault, employee benefits analyst for the county.

The changes were approved by Sonoma County supervisors Tuesday.

For the county health plans, the current annual PPO deductible of $8,650 will be reduced to $3,400 for a single individual plan and from $17,600 to $6,600 for family plans. The EPO out-of-pocket maximums will go from $11,850 to $6,600 for the individual plan and from $24,200 to $13,200 for families.

Thibault said that before this year, drug prescription copays did not count toward out-of-pocket maximums. But she said under the Affordable Care Act, medication copays are counted toward the maximum as of this year.

Marcia Chadbourne, the county’s risk manager, called the monthly premium reductions in the Kaiser plans a “trade-off” in which employees will have to evaluate their specific health circumstances and medical needs.

“If you’re a person that doesn’t go to the doctor very often, you may choose to go with one of the high-deductible health plans and save on monthly premiums,” Chadbourne said.

“County employees are very enthusiastic about having these additional options, and the county has been very pleased with Kaiser’s willingness to extend additional plans,” she said.

The changes were among several health plan options presented to the county Joint Labor Management Benefits Committee, which recommended the two plans approved by the supervisors earlier this week.

The county said the “benefit enhancement” will increase the PPO premium by 0.07 percent and the EPO premium by 0.25 percent. The increase will be paid by the employee or retiree, since the county’s contribution is capped at $500 for medical plan costs.

You can reach Staff Writer Martin Espinoza at 521-5213 or martin.espinoza@pressdemocrat.com. On Twitter @renofish.