Prudential Financial, Inc. announced a number of senior management changes that the company said are designed to match the company’s strategic priorities with its talent management strategy.

Prudential Chairman and CEO John Strangfeld announced that Edward Baird, executive vice president and chief operating officer of Prudential’s International Division, will retire from that position on April 4.

Baird, who joined Prudential in 1979, was appointed to head the company’s international businesses in 2008 after serving in several senior management roles. He previously served as president of Prudential’s Group Insurance business, chairman and president of Pruco Life Insurance Company, and chief representative of Prudential Investment Management, Inc., where he oversaw Prudential’s Retail and Institutional Asset Management businesses in Japan.

“Ed has done a superb job as the head of our international businesses. He led the businesses during a period of tremendous growth in Japan and is the chief architect of our recent expansion into new international markets. Throughout his career, he has provided remarkable insight, and we thank and applaud him for his many contributions and dedicated service,” Strangfeld said.

Taking over the top international post will be Charles F. Lowrey, who for the past three years has served as executive vice president and chief operating officer of Prudential’s U.S.-based businesses, which are comprised of Prudential Investment Management, Prudential Retirement, Prudential Annuities, Individual Life Insurance and Group Insurance. Together, these businesses had approximately $1 trillion in assets under management as of December 31, 2013.

Before his current role, Lowrey was president and CEO of Prudential Investment Management, Prudential Financial’s asset management business. Previously, he was CEO of Prudential Real Estate Investors. He joined the company in March 2001 and earned an MBA from Harvard University, an M.A. in architecture from Yale University and an A.B. in architecture from Princeton University.

“Under Charlie’s leadership, our U.S. Businesses have increased earnings over the last three years by 50 percent,” Strangfeld said. “He is a champion of collaboration, diversity and talent management, with a particular focus on developing strong leaders.”

Steve Pelletier, currently CEO of Prudential’s Group Insurance business, which provides employee benefits solutions, including Group Life, Disability, and Group Nonqualified Benefit Funding programs, will succeed Lowrey as head of U.S. Businesses. He will be promoted to executive vice president.

Prior to his current role, Pelletier was president of Prudential Annuities and has held several senior leadership roles in the U.S. and around the world. He received an M.A. from Yale University and a B.A. from Northwestern University.

“Steve’s broad base of international and U.S. experience, skill at addressing challenging business situations and talent mindset make him uniquely qualified to take over from Charlie,” Strangfeld said.

Assuming Pelletier’s role as CEO of the Group Insurance business will be Lori Fouché, who currently serves as president and chief operating officer of Group Insurance. She will be promoted to senior vice president.

Fouché joined Prudential in 2013 and has more than 20 years of insurance industry experience, including serving as president and CEO of Fireman’s Fund Insurance Company. She earned an MBA at Harvard Business School and a B.A. in history from Princeton University.

“Lori is a highly regarded and experienced business executive who has held several key roles in the commercial insurance industry. She knows the commercial insurance market and has been an asset in the Group business since joining us nine months ago,” Strangfeld said.