Today was my first day back in the office after 12 weeks of maternity leave. Aside from feeling like it's my first day of school, I was unsure how to continue nursing my two-month-old. I don't personally know anyone who is pumping so I scoured the Internet (OK just Pinterest) for clues on how to even get started.



Part of me is excited to get back to work writing stories, but I'm also really sad being away from my baby - even if it is for only nine hours. Hey, I'm fortunate to have been given paid time off with my little one. I know that. That's not the case for many parents out there. Interestingly, I read that Facebook founder Mark Zuckerberg is taking two months of paid paternity leave. That is awesome. I hope this encourages other businesses to offer this benefit to their employees, both men and women. I can personally attest to how important that time is to be with your newborn. I loved the whole process of learning how to be a parent and bonding with my baby. But the point of this post is to share what I learned today about pumping breast milk at work. I hope this helps new mothers as they transition back into the workplace.

So here is what I found:



According to the United States Department of Labor, the Affordable Care Act amended section 7 of the Fair Labor Standards Act to require employers to provide reasonable break time for an employee to express breast milk for her nursing child for up to one year. This means if your company is required to provide you with a private place, other than a bathroom, to pump breast milk. This place must be shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public. This break time requirement became effective when the Affordable Care Act was signed into law on March 23, 2010. Click here for more details.



I'm lucky that a coworker downstairs has already forged the way and has an unused office space set up for pumping. The room locks and the small door window is covered. There's a power strip to plug in my Medela electric pump, which was 100 percent covered by my insurance btw, and a clear desktop to place my bottles and equipment. There's a kitchen downstairs to wash my pump parts, which I keep in a special bag that can be microwaved to sterilize everything. The whole process took 15 minutes and I was able to pump a little more than 5 ounces each session for my little guy. This is what he'll eat tomorrow while I'm at work. I'll do this twice a day, now that my baby is 10 weeks old and eats every four hours or so, and will hopefully be able to maintain my supply of breast milk. For those who don't know, the human body is amazing and if I continue nursing my baby, whether on the breast or by pumping, I'll continue to produce the amount of milk needed. Today was just the first day, but I'm hoping that despite a sometimes unpredictable schedule, I'll be able to keep it up.

Please comment below if you have any questions. I'm no expert and this is my own experience. Honestly without the support of the local nurses at the hospital immediately after delivery and the Victoria La Leche League Facebook group, I would be completely lost. Thanks to these lovely ladies, I'm able to commiserate and celebrate all the challenges and rewards of breastfeeding. The group plans to meet at the Victoria Public Library at 10:30 a.m. on Tuesday.





Share