WICHITA, Kan. -- Sports serve a different purpose for many people. For some, it's an outlet from real life. For others, it's a hobby to share with friends. For Wichita resident Bob Symonds, sports have guided him through the darkest times and given him hope when he least expected it.

It was sports that first introduced Bob Symonds and Bea Ritchie. Bob explained how they met on a ski trip, "I kind of went off and skied on my own in this three day trip through the Oregon Cascades. But there was one problem: Bea kept catching up with me." And it was sports that kept them together. "That began over a quarter of a century of us exploring the outer doors and the world," Symonds smiled.

Bob was a runner and Bea, a rower. But a set of bad knees and a move to Wichita finally got Bob on the water with his wife. Bob began to share his wife's love for the sport just in time to allow rowing to help guide them through a trial in life. He said, "It became even more special when she was fighting stage three cancer in 2010. We effectively rowed together through her cancer and then went on to win in the mixed doubles so that was pretty cool."

Bob and Bea spent most of their lives outdoors. The night before Thanksgiving in 2012, they were doing just that. They were on a routine walk with their dog when tragedy struck. A truck hit and killed Bea Ritchie. In an instant, Bob's world had changed. But it was something familiar he turned to when he returned home that night to try and grasp this new reality. "I went home and got on a rowing machine that night just to try to... wind down." he remembered.

The couple had rowed through Bea's cancer and Bob would continue to row even though he would now be doing so alone. He said, "It's rare to have a couple- married or not- that actually wants to row together." It was something so rare he never thought he would experience it again. But then a fellow rower, Karen Alt, asked Bob to help her improve at the sport. She reflected, "He invested a lot of time and that meant so much to me. And then I was like, That's who I want to be with for the rest of my life. To find someone with that kind of patience and compassion, why would I want anything else?"

Bea introduced Bob to rowing. After her tragic death, it was rowing that introduced Bob to Karen. Bob explained, "It's pretty special because the events of her death were not very special. You sort of see the worst aspects of mankind through her death with the driver that killed her and that kind of thing. Karen coming along after her death is one of the best aspects of living."

"It's pretty amazing. I mean it really is. I don't know if I can explain it. You know, people say things happen for a reason and people meet each other for a reason, maybe that's it," Karen added.\

The couple plans to row through the rest of their lives together with Bea always in their hearts. They have plans to have a wedding sometime late next year. They told KAKE Sports that, of course, it will be on or near the water.

For more information on the Wichita Rowing Association, visit http://www.wichitarowing.org/.