What will President Barack Obama’s legacy be when he leaves office on January 20, 2017? This question lies at the heart of David Remnick’s recent piece in The New Yorker, written after he spent some time with the president behind closed doors.

Like many presidents, Obama spends a lot of time thinking about how he will be remembered, Remnick says. But Obama aspires to leave a more significant mark on history than some of his predecessors.

Remnick recounts:

“In 2007, at the start of Obama’s Presidential campaign, the historian Doris Kearns Goodwin and her husband, Richard Goodwin, who worked in the Kennedy and Johnson Administrations, visited him in his Senate office. ‘I have no desire to be one of those Presidents who are just on the list—you see their pictures lined up on the wall,’ Obama told them. ‘I really want to be a President who makes a difference.’ As she put it to me then, ‘There was the sense that he wanted to be big. He didn’t want to be Millard Fillmore or Franklin Pierce.’

Will Obama satisfy the high standard he set for himself?

Political Deadlock in Washington

Remnick writes: “His biggest early disappointment as President was being forced to recognize that his romantic vision of a post-partisan era, in which there are no red states or blue states, only the United States, was, in practical terms, a fantasy.”

From the moment Obama stepped foot in the White House, Congressional Republicans branded themselves the “Party of No”, bent on opposing just about every policy the president proposed. The days of reasonable Republicans were no more.

“The moderate Republican tradition is all but gone, and the reactionaries who claim Reagan’s banner display none of his ideological finesse. Rejection is all. Obama can never be opposed vehemently enough,” Remnick says.

Healthcare for All?

Nowhere was this Republican opposition more vehement than with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), better known as Obamacare. Last fall, the GOP infamously shut down the government to protest Obamacare’s imminent launched. Though the opposition gave in at the 11th hour, Healthcare.gov’s sloppy roll-out soured many to Obamacare’s promise, which the GOP has capitalized on with calls for the ACA’s repeal.

In his recent State of the Union Address, Obama responded to those call for an end to ACA: “Let’s not have another forty-something votes to repeal a law that’s already helping millions of Americans.” Many top Republican congressional aides took to Twitter insisting they welcomed a fight on Obamacare. Though Healthcare.gov has resolved many of its initial problems, it is still too early to tell what will ultimately happen.

Tackling Economic Inequality

Rising economic inequality was a major theme of the SOTU. According to TIME, from 2009 to 2012, the top 1 percent of incomes rose by more than 30 percent while the rest grew less than half a percent. With a deadlocked Congress, Obama said in the early moments of his SOTU speech: “Whenever and wherever I can take steps without legislation to expand opportunity for more American families, that is what I am going to do.”

Obama focused his rhetoric on opportunity, rather than class warfare. “Opportunity is who we are. And the defining project of our generation is to restore that promise,” he said.

While economic inequality affects people of all demographics, it is particularly hurting the African-American and Latino communities.

In his piece, Remnick recalls Obama telling him: “You have an economy that is ruthlessly squeezing workers and imposing efficiencies that make our flat-screen TVs really cheap but also puts enormous downward pressure on wages and salaries. That’s making it more and more difficult not only for African-Americans or Latinos to get a foothold into the middle class but for everybody—large majorities of people—to get a foothold in the middle class or to feel secure there.”

In his SOTU, Obama emphasized the importance of investing in education to alleviate economic inequality. There is no greater investment we can make in our children’s futures, he said.

Help Small Businesses Thrive

In his SOTU, Obama said: “Let’s do more to help the entrepreneurs and small business owners who create most new jobs in America. Over the past five years, my administration has made more loans to small business owners than any other. And when 98 percent of our exporters are small businesses, new trade partnerships with Europe and the Asia-Pacific will help them create more jobs.”

Job creation is the surest way to successfully fight economic inequality, and Obama knows this. Fostering innovation through investments in education and research can lead to innovations and new industries that will pave the way to a more prosperous future for all.

The Fierce Urgency of Now

Notably, Obama said we ought to make 2014 “a year of action” to tackle inequality, health care, immigration and the several other issues afflicting our nation. This is reminiscent of the famous quote by Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr:

“We are now faced with the fact that tomorrow is today. We are confronted with the fierce urgency of now. In this unfolding conundrum of life and history, there “is” such a thing as being too late. This is no time for apathy or complacency. This is a time for vigorous and positive action.”

The president is not yet a lame duck — much can happen between now and when he lifts off on Marine I for the last time. With an uncooperative Congress, he may need to be more loose in exercising his executive powers to take on the pressing issues that will not wait. But he also is aware of his own limitations as president.

Remnick writes Obama once told him: “I just wanted to add one thing to that business about the great-man theory of history. The President of the United States cannot remake our society, and that’s probably a good thing.”