<p>Gov. Bill Haslam and his wife, Crissy, voting in Knoxville at the Downtown West Early Voting location Wednesday, Oct. 29, 2014. (MICHAEL PATRICK/NEWS SENTINEL)</p>

By Tom Humphrey

Assured re-election to a second term, Gov. Bill Haslam faced questions this fall about why he did not tie his campaigning to controversial issues that he will likely confront in the next four years.

The governor’s response, as recently reported by The Associated Press: “I’m not quite sure I understand the argument … After four years, is there any secret where I stand on things?”

Well, of course gubernatorial secrets exist regarding specifics regarding his position on matters such as Medicaid expansion, restructuring the state’s gas tax, overhauling the business tax system, expanding pre-kindergarten classes statewide, revising the state funding formula for K-12 schools and other issues.

Task forces and study committees are working on all these things, and the governor is on record as kind of, sort of supporting many governmental overhauls if specifics and funding can be figured out sometime, maybe.

But the governor has dropped some hints during the campaign season on what might be afoot.

One controversial item that Haslam has addressed during the campaign season is his plan for defending Common Core standards, which enjoy broad support within the business community but face broad opposition from both sides of the political aisle.

The plan is for state officials to set up a website inviting public comment, have an independent group review the findings, then have committees of the state Board of Education study the issue for a year or so — in other words, a task force.

That may be smart politics. The governor can reasonably argue during the 2015 legislative session that lawmakers should await the study results before falling in line with the hot-headed, anti-Common Core passion of the moment. And, by next year, maybe those passions will have cooled and Common Core, rebranded as “Tennessee standards,” can proceed more or less unscathed.

On some of those other matters:

n The governor says he will “probably” propose, post-election, some sort of Medicaid expansion plan — the No. 1 priority of hospitals and others in the business of medicine. Bringing up the specifics during the campaign season, it is argued, could have triggered Obamacare-loathing legislators to promise never, ever to vote for any kind of Medicaid expansion. Silence was seen as a means of keeping their minds as open as possible when the carefully-crafted specifics are presented.

n Haslam says that the state has to “sometime next year look at highway funding.” Privately, some say that means he won’t touch gas taxes this year, with Common Core and Medicaid expansion already providing enough controversy for the 2015 session, but — after “looking at” the matter in 2015, try something in 2016 — likely starting with a new licensing fee on electric-only or hybrid vehicles (which could even come in 2015) and proceeding to an “indexing” of state fuel taxes based on general inflation or price increases after a year’s study.

n The administration, during campaign season, has agreed to take federal funding for pre-K expansion and pass it along to programs in Memphis and Nashville. As for any statewide expansion, he’s been saying he would await the outcome of a Vanderbilt University study. Vanderbilt professors now say the study won’t be completed until 2019 (as opposed to an earlier 2016 target) and Haslam says “it’s fair to say that’s too long” and he’ll make a decision before leaving office in 2018. No timetable, but as a guess: 2017.

n Business tax reform? Well, seems the balls are still in the air because of extraordinarily complicated specifics. Maybe next year, maybe not.

n Overhauling the distribution of education money? Not until a lawsuit is filed.

So there is no secret about the governor’s position: Just wait and see.

Tom Humphrey is a longtime reporter on Tennessee’s Capitol Hill.