The vast majority of the 6.4 million Americans enrolled in Obamacare coverage for 2015 through Healthcare.gov never clicked a mouse or made a phone call this year: They were re-enrolled on autopilot.

Only 1.9 million signed up on their own, Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell said Tuesday.

Yet even with this help in capturing customers – including reluctant ones – the Obama administration is far behind what Congress' independent bean-counters estimated it would need in order to keep the Affordable Care Act financially afloat.

HHSSecretary Sylvia Burwell spoke at Florida International University College of Law in Miami, shown in a file photo. Obamacare signup numbers she revealed Tuesday are below Congressional Budget Office projections

Shorter Obamacare lines this year: Fewer Americans are signing up for the first time – an expected development – and most of the renewals are being processed without Americans' explicit say-son

The nonpartisan Congressional Budget Office (CBO) projected the overall number, including people who sign up through state-level marketplaces, at 13 million by the end of the open enrollment period ending February 15.

Big states like California and New York could boost the total, but a DailyMail.com analysis based on population figures indicates that the nationwide total at year's end will be less than 8.3 million.

New York, for instance, had enrolled fewer than 84,000 new customers as of Dec. 20.

The administration will release a full 50-state report next week, Burwell said.

'We still have a lot of work to do,' she told reporters. 'But this is an encouraging start.'

Another HHS official in November told The Hill, an inside-the-beltway newspaper, that the agency's numbers will catch up eventually, but at a slower pace than Congress expected.

'We think the evidence points to a longer ramp-up rate than the CBO projections had, and that is based on what we've learned over the last year from looking at our own data,' the source said then.

But the longer-term outlook could get worse before it gets better: CBO's numbers call for 25 million enrollees by 2018, a number that HHS hasn't said how it can hit.

Worse, CBO says that by then 12 million Americans will have lost their pre-Obamacare medical insurance plans because of the law's strict minimum standards that have made countless policies illegal.

The administration also faces trouble as costs increase for consumers.

An HHS official told DailyMail.com that the agency is bracing for a wave of cancellations in January when many of those who are auto-enrolled see the price tags on their 2015 insurance policies.

The federal government has anticipated this for months but is powerless to change the situation until at least 2016.

That's when, HHS hopes, a new rule will go into effect allowing states with their own insurance exchanges to unilaterally change people's coverage levels in order to prevent a mass 'rate shock' that could send Americans streaming toward Obamacare's exits in favor of paying comparatively modest fines.

The Obama administration's Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) wants to have that level of control for itself a year later.

'We are considering alternative options for re-enrollment, under which consumers who take no action might be defaulted into a lower cost plan rather than their current plan,' a November CMS fact sheet on the rule changes reads.

'We are considering allowing states to pursue these sorts of re-enrollment alternatives for coverage in 2016. The [federal government's marketplace] is exploring such an approach for coverage in 2017.'

SILVER LINING: Few websitge snafus have marred this year's Affordable Care Act implementation, but with a user base far smaller than the 2013 audience, HHS's web servers have fewer numbers to crunch

Another problem, warns Elizabeth Carpenter, director of the consulting firm Avalere Health, is that the government isn't equipped to re-estimate insurance subsidy levels as quickly as rates go up.

'Those receiving federal premium subsidies may need to switch plans in 2015 to avoid paying more than the limits established by the [Affordable Care Act],' she said in June, 'and the impact will be more profound for lower-income consumers.'

Meanwhile, HHS has revised its enrollment estimates downward.

The agency's expectations, lowered in November, now call for only between 9 million and 9.9 million signups for coverage through the end of 2015.

At current rates the total will likely crest 9.2 million by the mid-February deadline, but is unlikely to approach CBO's magic number of 13 million.

That target is important because when the office 'scored' the Affordable Care Act in 2009 it laid out targets that were calculated to keep enough money in the system to prevent financial shortfalls that would likely be offset by new tax increases or syrocketing premiums that Americans can't afford.