Old soldiers don’t fade away; they perish, ignored, on government waiting lists.

Veterans Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki has done the American people a great service by becoming the public face of the heartless, overwhelmed, incompetent bureaucracy who gets to decide who lives and who dies.

Shinseki is the Supreme Justice of the VA death panel system. President Obama claims to support Shinseki in his current position but the writing is on the wall. Shinseki is going under the bus.

Shinseki’s impending martyrdom serves the public interest. He has made possible the exposure of the long-running Veterans Administration health care scandal, as I have written at FrontPage magazine.

Saint Shinseki’s sacrifice is a wakeup call. Now Americans have a real-life example of the horrors that await them if the Obamacare train is not soon derailed.

VA health care and the health care delivery regime under the Affordable Care Act (a.k.a. Obamacare) are fundamentally the same. They are both so-called single-payer systems, and so, sclerotic and Soviet.

The VA system is outdated and doomed. It cannot work. Like Obamacare, it is based on the insane notion that medical services can be provided effectively outside of markets.

History shows pretty conclusively that governments are very, very bad at providing health care services. This is not an arguable point.

The Veterans Administration itself has a long, inglorious history of patient abuse and neglect that has stretched out over decades.

Yet VA health care is held up by the establishment Left as the model for the future.

VA health care is a “huge policy success story, which offers important lessons for future health reform,” says Paul Krugman, the alleged economist. Expanding VA health care is “one of my favorite ideas,” says JournoList propagandist-in-chief Ezra Klein.

If you want to know what kind of health care is in your future under Obamacare, all you need to do is follow the ongoing VA hospital scandal.

You will learn all you need to know.