Dominick Frosch, Pamela Dardess, Susan Baade, and Kristin Carman

January 20, 2015

The 2010 Affordable Care Act (ACA) moved patient and family engagement to center stage in health care reform. The law mentions “patient-centered care” at least 40 times, with explicit references to patient engagement, patient experience, health literacy and shared decision making. Evidence is growing that meaningful patient and family engagement can help achieve the triple aim of better quality, better outcomes and lower health care costs and substantially reduce preventable harm.

Yet, despite these advances, the full promise of engagement remains mostly untapped, and much confusion remains about what constitutes meaningful patient and family engagement, and importantly, how to translate this evidence broadly into routine health care practice.

Barriers to Patient and Family Engagement

There are numerous obstacles to wider implementation of patient and family engagement. The misalignment of incentives is a key challenge, but one that is beginning to shift through the passage of the ACA. Another issue is the diversity of the field of patient and family engagement. On the one hand, diversity is a strength that fosters innovation. But less well appreciated is that the diversity of the field also creates fragmentation, where overlapping concepts are often described with different terminologies specific to the sub-fields of research, practice, and advocacy.

As a result, new solutions and adoption of current, proven practices are held back because stakeholders cannot see the connections and common links between different interventions and approaches to engage patients and families across a diverse set of clinical contexts. Building on the ACA’s impetus for change, the Gordon and Betty Moore Foundation sought to bring clarity and an action-oriented vision to the concept of patient and family engagement — so that partnership with patients and families can become reality in everyday health care delivery.

Moving Beyond Barriers

We aimed to create a clear roadmap that provides concrete guidance for how to achieve meaningful patient and family engagement, bringing together the practical and conceptual advances of the last 30 or more years into a unifying vision and specific strategies for change that work together in synergy. To that end, the Moore Foundation collaborated with the American Institutes for Research to convene a multi-stakeholder meeting of individuals steeped in practice and on the leading edge of patient and family engagement to identify proven and promising strategies and tactics that will make meaningful engagement a reality.

Guided by a steering group, the convening involved more than 70 people, including patients, advocates, clinicians, researchers, payers, funders and policymakers. Each used their experiences, knowledge, and skills to forge a common vision and collaboratively create a dynamic tool that can guide, inform, and drive change: A Roadmap for Patient + Family Engagement in Healthcare — Practice and Research.

The Roadmap lays out eight specific strategies for change, which together constitute a comprehensive approach for how patient and family engagement can drive health system transformation. For each change strategy, the Roadmap provides a brief description of what it entails and numerous specific tactics that can be executed to advance the strategy. There are also milestones that can help in assessing implementation progress and results. The tactics are drawn from existing research evidence and promising directions where sufficient evidence may still be lacking.

Many of the strategies and tactics can be implemented easily and right away. For each strategy, the Roadmap also identifies existing resources that are freely available from credible organizations. The Roadmap and related resources are dynamic and evolving, so users are invited to contribute. Furthermore, the Roadmap website is a place for organizations to make public commitments to advance patient and family engagement and where their progress will be followed and shared.

Moving from Mandate to Reality

Advancing patient and family engagement is an effective way to reduce preventable harm. Not just traditional preventable harm, such as hospital-acquired infections and medical errors, but also the harm that occurs when patients receive care inconsistent with their informed preferences and goals — a problem that remains all too common in the delivery system.

Achieving a substantial reduction in harm requires a comprehensive strategic approach, as laid out by the Roadmap. We hope that it will serve as a touchstone to inform the research and change efforts supported by other funding organizations, both public and private. Most importantly, we hope health system leaders will use the Roadmap, recognizing that we cannot keep delivering care the way we always have.

The Roadmap spells out how we can meet the mandate of the ACA of working together to achieve the Triple Aim – in partnership with patients and families.