Buy Photo Ocean County - Funtown Pier in Seaside. Aerials of shots of northern barrier island in Ocean County taken on April 5, 2013 Peter Ackerman/Staff Photographer - aerials130405-12s (Photo: PETER ACKERMAN/STAFF PHOTOGRAPHE)Buy Photo Story Highlights The Seaside Park Planinng Board is scheduled to hear a presentation Tuesday night about a plan for beach buggy rides this summer at the Funtown Pier beach.

Could beach buggy rides be coming this summer to Funtown Pier?

The Planning Board is scheduled to hear a presentation about the beach buggy plan from Funtown Pier owner William Major at its meeting Tuesday night at 7 p.m. at the municipal offices, 6th and Central avenues.

Stephan R. Leone, the Toms River lawyer who represents Major, said five to six beach buggies would operate on the portion of the beach owned by Major. Riders would not get to pilot the buggies. Instead, professional drivers would take riders up and down the beach.

Leone said that the portion of the beach that would be used for the rides is owned by Major and is not the town's public beach. He said the buggy rides would allow Major to bring in some income this summer as he plans for the reconstruction of the iconic pier.

The pier was badly damaged by superstorm Sandy in October 2012 and then completely destroyed by a boardwalk fire in September 2013.

A Facebook page, "Funtown Pier Beach Buggy Ride" shows a video of a bright red beach buggy zipping down a snow-covered beach.

In February, Major presented a preliminary plan for rebuilding the landmark pier that includes adding six thrill rides that will soar 200 to 300 feet into the sky. Among the new rides: a zip line with two towers that would allow riders to view the rides and the ocean; a Sky Coaster 195 feet tall; and the high-altitude Space Shot and Turbo Force, in addition to 25 kiddie rides.

Buy Photo file photoThe Funtown Pier is engulfed in flames at the southern end of the boardwalk in Seaside Park on Sept. 12, 2013. Funtown goes up during massive fire at the southern end of the Seaside Boardwalk on September 12, 2013 in Seaside Park. Doug Hood/Staff Photographer (Photo: Gannett)

Borough ordinances prohibit rides more than 50 feet tall, so Major would need a variance to install the larger rides. Leone has said it will not be economically feasible for Major to rebuild the $20 million pier if the larger rides are not approved.

Before Sandy, Funtown had about 30 rides. The storm damaged many of the rides, and the fire, which happened in September 2013, destroyed all that were left. The fire was started by electrical wiring damaged by Sandy.

Major has already received a state Coastal Area Facilities Review Act (CAFRA) permit from the state that allows him to rebuild the pier on the same footprint as before.

Business owners in the area have said the loss of Funtown Pier has badly hurt their summer revenue.

Jean Mikle: (732) 643-4050, jmikle@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HsYGIz