Give Mike Shanahan the floor and he’ll make an audience believe it is in the middle of his one of his pregame pep talks.

On Friday, as part of a panel for Fresh Ed., a “life performance brand” founded by Denver native and former NFL player Bo Scaife, Shanahan shared words of wisdom as though he were still on the sideline, trying to motivate a group of 53 men.

The winningest coach in Broncos history told a gymnasium of primarily high school students how he scaled the coaching ranks to win three Super Bowls and five conference championships. How he was drawn to coaching two years earlier than planned because of a near-death experience in college. How he hung around Barry Switzer’s office at Oklahoma every day until he was offered a low-ranking position with the Sooners. How Hall of Fame coach Bill Walsh once told him that, to become a great head coach, he’d have to learn more about every position on the field than anyone else.

And with each shared memory, each line of motivation, Shanahan reminded anyone listening that he is still a coach. And that he still wants to be a head coach.

“You go 18 hours a day for 40-something years, and then you got a year and a half to two years where you feel like you got the time to do whatever you want to do,” he said of his life now, after he was let go by the Washington Redskins in December 2013. “I still study the heck out of football. I actually have more time. I study more football now than I actually did before.”

Shanahan’s name typically comes up when head coaching vacancies arise.

On Friday, as he not-so-casually dropped hints of his desire to return to the sideline, he admitted he wouldn’t jump at just any opportunity.

“It’d have to be the right situation, for both sides — ownership and myself,” he said.

Shanahan, who still lives in the Denver area, believes Broncos general manager John Elway has built a team primed for another Super Bowl run, saying: “Every decision he’s made is based on what he thinks gives the team the best chance to win the Super Bowl.”

Shanahan added that Gary Kubiak, his former player and offensive coordinator, is the right man to lead the team now.

“He’s everything you look for,” Shanahan said.