Nonprofit to recognize past president and CEO of St. Rose Dominican Hospital, Siena Campus

LAS VEGAS – Volunteers in Medicine of Southern Nevada (VMSN), a volunteer-driven nonprofit organization dedicated to providing the uninsured with access to preventative and comprehensive medical care, cordially invites the public to attend the Sixth Annual Volunteers in Medicine Ball at the Palazzo Ballroom, The Venetian | The Palazzo Hotel on Saturday, November 8, 2014. The fundraiser will honor community leaders who support VMSN’s distinct mission of providing charitable and accessible health care to members of the Southern Nevada community.

The black tie optional event starts at 6 p.m. in the Palazzo Ballroom with a cocktail hour and silent auction. Dinner, special entertainment, dancing and a live auction will follow.

At this year’s event, VMSN will honor Rod A. Davis, current senior vice president of operations at Dignity Health Nevada and former president and CEO of 23 years for St. Rose Dominican Hospital, Siena Campus. Dignity Health and St. Rose Dominican Hospital have always been integral partners for VMSN. Last year, the nonprofit received a $50,000 Community Grant from Dignity Health and $50,000 worth of in-kind services from St. Rose Dominican Hospitals to support VMSN’s mission to provide high-quality health care to individuals without health insurance. This donation was consistent with Dignity Health’s commitment to disease prevention, treatment of chronic disease and health education within its community. As a leader in the health care industry, Davis has been unwavering in his dedication to better the lives of Southern Nevadans by promoting innovative ways to deliver health care to address the diverse needs of the region.

“Each year, our annual ball serves as an opportunity to honor the generosity of donors and volunteers who make it possible for Volunteers in Medicine to provide the critical health care services so desperately needed by our community,” said Dr. Florence Jameson, president and founder of VMSN. “Through the compassion of partners like Rod, we are able to improve the lives of so many of our neighbors in Southern Nevada.”

All proceeds raised during the Sixth Annual Volunteers in Medicine Ball will support VMSN’s operations in Southern Nevada. VMSN provides approximately 6,000 patient visits each year and serves as the medical home for more than 2,300 Southern Nevadans. Through the generosity of volunteers and community partners, VMSN is able to deliver close to $4 million in health care every year with a budget of approximately $1 million.

Other than VMSN’s current clinical operations, the organization plans to expand its reach by opening a second clinic in downtown Las Vegas. Even with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act and the expansion of Medicaid, approximately 300,000 Nevadans remain without access to health care coverage. In addition to making the organization’s services more accessible for the city’s uninsured, a clinic downtown will allow VMSN to serve more patients and expand its services to include vision, dental and mental health care. Although VMSN has secured a location for its new facility on Martin Luther King Boulevard and Madison Avenue, the organization is still raising funds to break ground and begin construction.

For more information, or to purchase a ticket to the event, contact the VMSN clinic Development Department at (702) 912-0020 or visit www.vmsn.org.

About Volunteers in Medicine of Southern Nevada

Volunteers in Medicine of Southern Nevada, a volunteer-run nonprofit organization, was founded in 2008 by a group of concerned citizens who wanted to find a way to provide access to health care to Southern Nevada’s working citizens. Its mission is to provide quality healthcare and support, in a culture of caring, to those without access in Southern Nevada. VMSN provides preventative health care in order to care for the neglected and unseen members of the community. It also helps prevent acute hospitalization, reducing hospital cost and decreasing taxpayer burdens. Learn more: www.vmsn.org

###