"These forces should continue to swell the ranks of the independent workforce by about 6 percent annually over the next five years as the job market continues to shift."

Considering the changes in workforce demographics, labor economists are hoping the Labor Department will start doing more analysis on the various nuances of the freelance economy beyond just looking at part-time workers. Many Americans worry about labor market trends in which full-time jobs with regular paychecks and benefits like health care are being replaced by part-time and contract gigs. The trend has left many Americans engaged in slow-moving and often futile searches for permanent jobs.

Nonetheless, for some workers there's a flip side to what's going on.

Entrepreneurially-minded freelancers like Nic Mayne, 20, have found opportunity in the growing reliance on contingent help. His three-year-old business, Mayne Marketing, which has outposts in Santa Clara, Calif., and Alberta, Canada, has gotten so busy that he frequently hires part-time contractors to help with the workload. Annual revenues after expenses are now about $75,000.

Law firms and big corporations often hire the freelance marketer to tackle jobs that were once handled in-house, from writing the company's blog to tackling advertising projects.

Sometimes these clients started out seeking a full-timer to do the work, using job boards and online marketplaces like craigslist to hunt for talent. When Mayne responds to those ads by suggesting that it's more efficient for the companies to hire a freelancer—whom they don't need to train and are required to pay only when there's work at hand—he said, "They opt to give it a try."

His experience demonstrates U.S. companies' growing reliance on "contingent" workers. It is a trend that picked up momentum during the recession and shows no signs of slowing down. The job site CareerBuilder found that in 2013, 31 percent of employers planned to hire contract or temporary workers the last six months of that year, up 10 percentage points from the prior year. Meanwhile, the percentage of those expecting to hire full-time permanent workers remained flat, at 44 percent.

Other research, by Economic Modeling Specialists, a company owned by Career Builder, found that 15 percent of all job growth nationally from 2009 to 2013 was in temp work. In cities—including Chicago, Philadelphia, Kansas City, Cincinnati and Milwaukee—more than 40 percent of new jobs in that period were temporary, according to the research.

(Read more: Working for yourself? Don't forget retirement)