ANNAPOLIS, Md. — Gov. Chris Christie on Wednesday accused President Obama of lying in order to get approval of the negotiated agreement to limit Iran's nuclear program in exchange for lifting sanctions.

Christie, who has criticized the deal, said the agreement does not include unfettered "anytime, anywhere" inspections of Iranian nuclear sites that the president said it did.

Obama said later Wednesday that the inspections and monitoring in the agreement would make it very difficult for Iran to secretly develop a nuclear weapon. "This is not something you hide in a closet," Obama said.

RELATED: Christie gets 2016 endorsement from Maryland gov he helped elect

Christie, a 2016 Republican presidential candidate said that if Iran raises objections to inspections at a particular location, the country can take its case to an international panel and even if the group orders access, the process can take up to 24 days.

"Well if they're playing around, and cheating on this agreement and they have 24 days to clean up the evidence of the cheating, how's that anytime, anywhere, Mr. President?" Christie said at a press conference here to accept the endorsement of Maryland Gov. Larry Hogan for his White House run.

Obama wrote on the White House blog Tuesday, "International nuclear inspectors will have access to Iran's nuclear program — where necessary, when necessary."

At a press conference Wednesday the president said that existing Iranian nuclear sites would be monitored 24 hours, seven days a week and therefore inspectors would know if uranium was diverted to some secret location.

Even if Iran delayed inspections of a undeclared site for 24 days, nuclear material leaves a trace, the president said.

"The only argument you can make against the certification and inspection mechanism is that Iran is so intent on obtaining a nuclear weapon that no inspection regime and no verification mechanism would be sufficient," Obama said. "That means, presumably, that you can't negotiate and what you're really saying is you have to apply military force to guarantee they won't have a nuclear program."

Christie, though, likened Obama's statements on Iran to his initial pledge that the Affordable Care Act would allow everyone to keep their doctors. In actuality, some doctors chose not to accept certain plans available on the exchanges used to purchase health insurance.

"If the president likes this deal, then go and sell it, but sell it honestly, don't lie to the American people," Christie said.

MORE POLITICS

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.