Spartans headed to state for second straight year

Berthoud celebrates a point over Fort Morgan during its run to the Region 11 title on Saturday at BHS. ( Michael Bettis / For the Reporter-Herald )

BERTHOUD — There was a time this season when the Berthoud volleyball team was just trying to stay above .500.

After four straight losses in Tri-Valley Conference play, the Spartans found themselves 7-7 past the midway point of their schedule.

That was a month ago. But it seems like an eternity considering the turnaround the Spartans have made since then.

After finishing the regular season winning five of six and earning a host seed for regionals, the Spartans are now headed back to the 4A state tournament after sweeping their way to the Region 11 title on Saturday at BHS.

"This team this week was very, very coachable. They were antsy to play on Wednesday. They were like, 'Is it time yet?'" said Berthoud coach Daisha Agho, whose team won its second straight regional championship. "I can't ask for anything else. They definitely stepped up and played much better ball, which is what I needed from them."

The 11th-seeded Spartans (16-9) sure looked like a team that couldn't wait to get the postseason started, beginning the day with a dominant 25-13, 25-11, 25-17 sweep of No. 26 Fort Morgan (17-8).

Berthoud totaled 12 aces in the match, including four by Haley Hummel, three by Shaylee Pierick and two by Jessa Megenhardt, who also had 31 assists, five kills and 16 digs in the win.

Fort Morgan then had another tough time against No. 14 Thomas Jefferson, which swept the Mustangs to set up a winner-take-all tilt with Berthoud.

Berthoud's Jessa Megenhardt (8) sets the ball for Julie Ward (9) with teammates Sarah Howard (10) and Haley Hummel (right) looking on during their match against Fort Morgan on Saturday. (Michael Bettis /)

TJHS entered the day red-hot, having won 14 of its past 15, led by the 6-foot-6 outside hitter Jaden Sandoval. The University of Denver commit had her share of moments, but BHS prevented the junior from completely dominating the match and was sure to take advantage when she wasn't on the court in a 25-19, 25-20, 26-25 win.

At one point in the first set, Sandoval had four kills in the span of six points, cutting a seven-point deficit to 23-19. But the Spartans didn't panic and clinched the set coming out of a timeout thanks to blocks by Pierick, Emily Trujillo and Sarah Howard.

"I think it was more of when she hit and she got a good kill, we brushed it off more than holding it in and thinking about it," BHS sophomore Julie Ward said. "We were just like, 'Oh OK, she got a kill. Next one, we got it.'"

After a team-best 12 kills in the first match, Ward added 10 more in the win over TJHS (19-5), second on the team to Pierick's 13, while Howard and Shelby Braesch each had five kills. Megenhardt had another all-around effort in the region finale with six kills, three blocks, 33 assists, 10 digs and three aces.

"That kid, we told her she needed to be more involved, and we worked on some option balls in practice," Agho said of Megenhardt. "Jess is a very smart player, somebody like that I need on the court to be able to make plays like that. When she does it, it's usually a go-to; we know we're going to get a kill or a way to keep them out of system."

Now the Spartans turn their attention to a second straight trip to the Denver Coliseum next weekend — an unexpected run to some, but not for those involved.

"I'm not surprised," Megenhardt said. "I knew we could do it, so I'm really proud of us really pulling through."

Sean Star: 970-669-5050, sstar@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/seanvstar