One unwanted streak ended for the Avalanche on Saturday, and one continued.

The Avs used three even-strength goals and extreme toughness from Cody McLeod to beat the Dallas Stars 4-1 at the Pepsi Center and snap a four-game losing streak.

“We played really well. The start of the game was very good. I liked the way we back-checked. Our tracking was solid,” Avs coach Patrick Roy said. “We were coming back and working as a unit of five. I thought it was a really solid team effort. That’s the type of game I was hoping to see us play.”

The power play, however, remains troublesome — although the Avs had just one. Their scoreless skid with the man advantage increased to 11 games and 32 consecutive chances.

Avs Mailbag: Pose a question for Terry Frei, Mike Chambers

But the Avs will take the win, their first since beating the Stars 3-2 in a shootout Feb. 3 in Dallas. Colorado is 4-0 against the Stars.

Nathan MacKinnon, Alex Tanguay, Jarome Iginla and Dennis Everberg scored on 5-on-5 situations, goalie Semyon Varlamov was good when he needed to be and McLeod served as the sparkplug. Before being ejected at 6:22 of the third period with 30 minutes worth of penalties that included two fighting majors, McLeod had four shots, five hits, two blocked shots and contributed to a flawless penalty kill.

“That’s what he does, night in night out, and that’s why he’s in this league and one of the most effective energy players, physical players — one of the best guys in his role in this league,” Avs captain Gabe Landeskog said of McLeod.

PHOTOS: Colorado Avalanche beat the Dallas Stars, 4-1

Rookie winger Everberg scored with 23.1 seconds remaining for his second point of the game.

The Stars, who played Friday in Dallas and were without three injured forwards and a suspended fourth, produced just 15 shots on Varlamov after two periods and 25 for the game.

Iginla gave the Avs a 3-0 lead early in the third period on an awkward play that will never lose its highlight identity. Brad Stuart wound up from the point just before colliding with defensive partner Nick Holden, and the puck caromed off Iginla’s left leg and past backup goalie Jhonas Enroth.

Stuart required help off the ice and went through the concussion protocol in the trainer’s room before returning. In addition to his assist, Stuart played a big role in limiting Dallas’ chances in front of Varlamov.

Iginla’s goal was the 578th of his career, moving him into sole possession of 19th-most in NHL history. He was tied with Mark Recchi.

Trailing 3-0, Dallas scored on a 5-on-4 attack midway through the third period with Enroth on the bench for an extra attacker. It was not a power-play goal. It just looked like it.