Pat Buchanan (MSNBC)

Pat Buchanan said Kim Davis was right to disobey the U.S. Supreme Court ruling on same-sex marriage because it violated “natural law.”

The arch-conservative commentator compared the defiant Kentucky county clerk, who claims a religious right to discriminate against same-sex couples, to civil rights protesters who broke laws intended to discriminate against blacks — which were often based on religious claims.

“The people who sat in at the lunch counters, the people who defied court orders for marches, and all of these — they broke the law repeatedly, again and again, because they said the law is an unjust and immoral law,” Buchanan told Newsmax TV.

Host Rick Ungar asked Buchanan to explain why Muslims should not be permitted to express their religious principles through elected office while conservatives argue that Davis has a right to do exactly that, reported Right Wing Watch.

“Let’s go back to the Bible,” Buchanan said. “If you were told the firstborn, every child, had to be sacrificed to the state, I think we all know the thing to do would be to defy that law. So there is a natural law — Mike Huckabee would say it’s God’s law — that is higher than positive law.”

Buchanan, who has praised Russian President Vladimir Putin’s harsh anti-LGBT laws, said his own father, as a Catholic, would have defied the Affordable Care Act’s mandate to provide “abortifacients and contraceptives to his employees.”

The host said Buchanan and other conservatives seemed to be picking and choosing which laws they wished to follow.

“I think (Davis) did the right thing,” Buchanan said. “She defied the law and went to jail and paid the price — that’s the price of civil disobedience of an unjust law.”

Buchanan, a former staffer for presidents Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan, said elected officials had a right to disobey laws they didn’t like.

“When I was in the Nixon White House, I urged the president to defy court orders mandating court-ordered busing from counties into cities, which were tearing apart cities and towns,” Buchanan said. “(I told Nixon to) defy the court and work with the Congress of the United States to really circumscribe the jurisdiction of the court under Article III, Section II of the Constitution.”

“In other words, it would be a constitutional confrontation, you’re exactly right,” he continued. “I don’t disagree with that, if you believe your position is correct.”

Watch the entire segment posted online by RWW Blog: