The Texas Democratic Convention took place the OMNI hotel in Dallas over the weekend, and by the time it was through the party adopted a platform that includes language to directly combat the Republicans’ endorsement of reparative or conversion therapy for gays. This was just one of several LGBT-friendly actions listed in the platform.

Related Democratic convention notebook: Gay rights advocates storm floor

In the plank, Democrats call for a ban on reparative therapy and encourage organizations such as the Texas Medical Board, the Texas State Board of Examiners of Psychologists and the Texas Department of State Health Services to “fully investigate and to sanction any practitioner who engages in reparative therapy.”

The Texas GOP became engulfed in a media firestorm last month after its platform recognized the “legitimacy and value of counseling which offers reparative therapy.” Party chairman Steve Munisteri has publically said he does not agree with the practice, which was discredited by the American Psychological Association in 2009.

The Democratic Party also addressed equal marriage rights for gays, endorsing an “immediate repeal of Texas Defense of Marriage Act and the Texas Constitutional Marriage Amendment” to allow same-sex couples to be married and their benefits recognized in the state. Nondiscriminatory language carried over into a section about employment protections, where Democrats backed job security for gay, lesbian, bisexual, transgender and gender nonconforming workers.

In a fairly progressive move, Democrats further showed support for transgender initiatives, such as the creation of a uniform legal process to accurately update identification documents.

A separate plank in the platform calls for Texas colleges and universities to offer “diverse” cultural and academic opportunities “that promote understanding, respect and acceptance.” The section also says Democrats oppose discrimination by these institutions based on “race, sex, color, religion, national origin, ancestry, age, marital status, disability, sexual orientation, gender identity/expression, or military status.”

Dallas Mayor Mike Rawlings told Democratic Convention attendees that he is in fact a Democrat. The convention took place just one week after the city hosted the U.S. Conference of Mayors, which called on federal courts to end marriage discrimination nationwide.

“I have personally supported marriage equality for years and was glad that I had the opportunity to cast my vote in favor of this resolution,” Rawlings told The Dallas Morning News.

The Democratic platform also backs the decriminalization of marijuana possession, the passage of the DREAM Act, which would protect illegal immigrant minors, and continued implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Read the full text below.

h/t Think Progress

2014 Demo Platform