IRS Issues Health Insurance Tax Guide For Expat Plans

by Mike Godfrey, Tax-News.com, Washington

02 February 2016

The US Internal Revenue Service has issued Notice 2016-14, which provides guidance for health insurance providers in relation to expatriate health plans and the health insurance tax.

Beginning in 2014, the Affordable Care Act provided for a fee, known as the health insurance tax (HIT), to be assessed on all health insurance providers (referred to as covered entities). The IRS calculates the fee amount for each covered entity based on its portion of market premiums for the data year, which is the year immediately preceding the year in which the fee is paid (the fee year).

The total amount of the fee was USD8bn for the 2014 fee year, and will increase to USD14.3bn by 2018, after which it will continue to rise annually based on premium trends. It has been estimated that HIT revenue will amount to more than USD100bn over the next ten years.

The ACA requires each covered entity to report to the IRS its net premiums written for health insurance policies for any "United States health risk" for the data year. This term covers US citizens, US residents, and persons located in the US. The ACA's regulations dud not provide specific rules for expatriate health policies; each covered entity's total premiums written, including premiums written for expatriate health policies, is considered to be for United States health risks unless the covered entity can demonstrate otherwise.

However, the Expatriate Health Coverage Clarification Act of 2014 (EHCCA) now specifically provides that the ACA does not apply to expatriate health plans. It excludes expatriate health plans from the HIT fee by providing that, from data years after 2014, a qualified expatriate enrolled in an expatriate health plan (that provides coverage to employees, substantially all of whom are working outside their country of citizenship) is not considered a United States health risk.

For fee years 2014 and 2015, the IRS decided that calculation of the fee for all covered entities would not be affected. Instead, after the fees were calculated, the fee of a covered entity with expatriate health plans was proportionally reduced to account for premiums written for those plans. For those fee years, therefore, a covered entity with premiums written for expatriate health plans thereby paid a lower fee but this reduction had no impact on the fee for the remaining covered entities.

By contrast, for fee years 2016 and beyond, the tax reduction for covered entities with premiums written for expatriate health plans will affect the allocation of the fee among all covered entities.

While the EHCCA provides a definition of an expatriate health plan that is more detailed than the ACA's definition of expatriate health policies, the latter was deemed sufficient for HIT calculations in the 2014 and 2015 fee years.

Notice 2016-14 confirms that the IRS is still developing proposed regulations under the EHCCA that will address the new expatriate health plan definition that should be applied in the 2016 fee year. It provides that, solely for this limited purpose, covered entities will again be able to rely in 2016 on the definition of expatriate health policies as provided in the ACA rules.