Dr. David Marcozzi is a Senior Advisor for Emergency Preparedness and Acute Care within the Centers of Medicare and Medicaid Services at the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services (HHS). He has over 15 years of experience in health care and emergency preparedness. Previously, he held the position of Director of the National Healthcare Preparedness Programs within the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR).

He completed a 3-year detail at the White House National Security Council as Director of All-Hazards Medical Preparedness Policy. While there, he led multiple Sub-Interagency Policy Committees and assisted with responding to several events including the 2010 Haiti earthquake. Prior to his federal positions, Dr. Marcozzi was an Assistant Professor of Emergency Medicine at Duke University Medical Center and completed a congressional fellowship at the U.S. Senate. Serving on the Bioterrorism and Public Health Preparedness Subcommittee, he assisted in drafting the Pandemic and All-Hazards Preparedness Act that became law in 2006.

A Lieutenant Colonel in the U.S. Army Reserves, Dr. Marcozzi was mobilized four times since 2001 and is now assigned to the U.S. Army Special Operations Command as a Deputy Surgeon. He continues to practice emergency medicine and is a Fellow of the American College of Emergency Physicians. He is currently an Associate Clinical Professor of Emergency Medicine at George Washington University. As a prior member of the National Disaster Medical System, Dr. Marcozzi responded to multiple disasters including the September 11, 2001 attack on the World Trade Center.

The author of several articles and scientific manuscripts, Dr. Marcozzi is also the recipient of numerous military and civilian awards including the National Security Council Outstanding Achievement Award, a Certificate of Appreciation from the Assistant to the President for Homeland Security and Counterterrorism, the Army Medical Department “A” proficiency designator, the Army Commendation Medal, the National Disaster Medical System Distinguished Member Award and the Duke Emergency Medicine Distinguished Faculty Award.