SCOTTSDALE, ARIZ. — Trainer Keith Dugger’s 2013 season was a blur of MRIs, X-rays and endless injury reports. From Carlos Gonzalez to Troy Tulowitzki to Dexter Fowler, Dugger’s training room was filled with the Rockies’ best players.

But the smile on Dugger’s face Saturday afternoon said the M*A*S*H episode of 2013 is all in the past.

As the 2014 spring training opens, the Rockies’ trainer is busy, certainly, but he believes the team is in a very healthy place. Pitchers and catchers have their official physicals on Sunday.

“It’s great right now,” Dugger said at the Rockies headquarters at Salt River Fields. “We’ve got a few guys we have to watch and monitor, but things are looking really good.”

Dugger said a decision to keep Gonzalez from swinging a bat until December is paying dividends now. The painful sprained finger that ruined the second half of CarGo’s 2013 season is now a non-factor. Still, CarGo is going to ease into full physical activity as he regains full strength after undergoing an emergency appendectomy on Jan. 10. Gonzalez also had a small hernia near his navel repaired when his appendix was removed.

“His finger is really good,” Dugger said. “We didn’t allow him to swing until December, and that let that swelling get down.”

Gonzalez hasn’t changed his grip on the bat handle much, but he’s taping the handle differently and the bat has been tapered differently.

“We think the bat fits in his hand better, so no issues with that,” Dugger said.

The two pitchers the Rockies will be keeping a close eye on as camp opens are right-handed starter Tyler Chatwood and lefty reliever Boone Logan. Both of them had bone chips removed from their throwing elbows during surgeries in early October.

“With Chatwood, it was something we knew was coming, but we never thought it was anything major. Still don’t,” Dugger said. “We will have some restrictions on both of them early in camp; keep a close watch on their bullpens and monitor their throwing. But I think they’ll be good to go. I’m not concerned at all.”

The other pitcher Dugger is keeping close tabs on is minor-league right-hander Chris Martin, acquired along with lefty Franklin Morales in the trade that sent infielder Jonathan Herrera to the Red Sox. Martin is dealing with an inflamed ulnar nerve that forced him to shut down during winter ball.