Topics: david peterson, dothraki, Game of Thrones, HBO, Entertainment News

Here’s one way to stave off withdrawal from HBO’s hit show “Game of Thrones” after Season 4 wraps up tonight: learn Dothraki. On Oct. 7, HBO and Living Language will release “Living Language Dothraki: A Conversational Language Course” by linguist and language creator David Peterson. Peterson, a co-founder of the Language Creation Society, joined forces with HBO in 2009 to create the language spoken by the nomadic warriors seen in Seasons 1 and 2. He later invented Low and High Valryian.

Though Peterson has coined 3,800 words in Dothraki and plans to make around 10,000, the course, which serves as a primer to Dothraki culture, teaches readers around 500 words and idiomatic phrases. For those who want to gain a conversational command of the language, there’s also an online component.

But “Living Language Dothraki” is not just for the Dwight Schrutes of the world. Peterson, who has also helped create languages for Syfy’s “Defiance” and “Dominion” and CW’s “Star-Crossed,” has observed that many casual viewers are interested in the fictional languages borne from George R.R. Martin’s book “A Song of Ice and Fire” (judging by the response to the show’s “Monty Python” Easter Egg this season, Peterson’s assessment seems spot on).

Where do you start when it comes to creating a language?

With Dothraki, that was the first time that I was starting with found material. So in the books that had been published up to that point — there were four of them in “A Song of Ice and Fire” — there were about 50 words in Dothraki and about half of those were names. For Dothraki, the first step was cataloging all of those words and seeing how they were spelled and determining how I thought they would be pronounced, both by trying to determine how I thought George R.R. Martin meant for them to be pronounced, and how I thought he was thinking fans would think they would be pronounced, or would plausibly be pronounced, since it was a foreign language.

So I started there, and then, based on that, I analyzed the sound system, both what sounds I felt were represented in those words and how they fit together in the syllables and words. Once I’d done that I filled in any gaps that I saw in the system. I added one sound to Dothraki, which was a “ch” sound, which I thought should be there.

I think the longest phrase was, “a prince rides inside me” — “Khalakka dothrae mr’anha,” which, based on a few phrases like that and “strong boy” (“rakh haj”), I determined the word order of the language: the subject was first and then the verb and the object, adjectives would follow the nouns that they modified.

Why did you even need to create a full language for a fictional universe?

Well, the driving force for all of this, and of course the reason I’m even on the project, is Dan Weiss and David Benioff. More than any other show I’ve worked on, they absolutely set the tone for what’s expected of everybody that’s working on it and the vision that they want to achieve. And really what they want to do, visually and style-wise, is two things: They want to have a show that’s as realistic as possible given the fantasy setting, and they want to, as much as they possibly can, realize George R.R. Martin’s vision. So those two things combined really necessitates a full language, and that was in fact why they hired me in the first place.

They started filling in gibberish for Dothraki and they realized it just wasn’t meeting their realism goals and it wasn’t honoring George R.R. Martin’s vision.

In a show, everything that’s happening on the screen has to be explicitly reified, whether it’s the actors in the background, the sets, the costumes. Everything that shows up on the screen or can be heard from the actors on the screen adds a conscious decision on the part of the filmmakers. And so that’s why they realized that it wouldn’t just pass to throw up whatever for the Dothraki, whether it was just being spoken in the background or whether it was being spoken in the forefront. You can’t have a narrator just jump in and say, “And then he said this in Dothraki.” They need to actually be saying it.

Have you received any direct feedback from George R.R. Martin about the languages that you created?

No real direct feedback except that he likes the languages and appreciates that they exist. I think he’s used them. For example, there was a map book that came out called “The Lands of Ice and Fire” that he did where he fleshed out a lot of maps of his world. And he used some Dothraki to create new place names of the maps.

Not only that, he got my help to translate some of the words. He also did some translations of his own and did them accurately and very well. So I think he likes the languages and he appreciates that they exist because I think he gets the sense that I created them to help flesh out his world, to make it larger and more realistic.

I assume the people teaching themselves Dothraki are going to be some real “Game of Thrones” superfans.

Actually, I don’t think so. There are a certain group of fans that are really, really excited about the language and they always follow the new dialogue that comes up and record it and try to learn from it. There are a lot of fans who, especially if it’s online, they think the language sounds really cool and they would like to look it up but they don’t necessarily have the time to go look it up online. Now with the “Living Languages Course” … you can buy the book and own it. And also if you just wanted to do something quick and convenient you can download the app to your iPhone and there’s going to be a bunch of flashcards you can just flip through and use casually, which is pretty cool.

And then I think for the fans who want to go deeper, that’s what the online course is for. There’s going to be a whole lot more information that is going to be a bit more taxing and require more investment of personal time.

I think we’ve reached a point where you can now find a market for this. And that’s something that we couldn’t even have said five years ago, let alone 20 years ago.

So will taking this Dothraki course make you fluent?

It will take you to the point where you will be able to put together a variety of simpler phrases. Like you should be able to string together dialogue and you should be able to understand dialogue. There are going to be nuances of the grammar that are more for intermediate and advanced, but this will get you through the bulk of standard texts, I think. And if you wanted to go back to Seasons 1 and 2, it should give you a foothold into a lot of the dialogue that’s in the show.

Is 10,000 words still the goal?

It definitely is. The problem is I’ve gotten so busy with so many languages now that I can’t spend as much time with an individual language just to coin new words, which, by the way, is one of my favorite things to do. I don’t know how people imagine the life of a language creator, but for me one of the ultimate joys is to sit down and imagine new words.

Is there a particular world in English that you wish you could create?

Every single language has words in it that don’t exist in another language, or at least you won’t have a single word for — like in Spanish there are two different words for corner — “rincón” and “esquina” — that differ whether the corner is an inside corner or an outside corner. It would be kind of like if you’re looking at the corner of a box from inside the box or outside the box. So it’s like, you can explain that in English. Those specific words don’t exist in English. At least, not concretely. So there are words like that in every language.

One of the things I found that was most difficult is that when I’m creating a language, I often come up with a lot of those words where it’s like, “Oh, that’s a really cool word and there is no word precisely like it in English or any other language I know.”