There is no more gay marriage. Just marriage.

So it is ordered.

Wow.

What a day. What a week. It has been a time of profound cultural significance, of earthshaking change. First came the removal of the Confederate flag outside the Alabama State Capitol, then the U.S. Supreme Court said Obamacare was good to go. And today the High Court ruled that same-sex marriage is legal across the land.

Everywhere. Because this country is changed.

"Changed understandings of marriage are characteristic of a Nation where new dimensions of freedom become apparent to new generations," the Court wrote.

"Decisions about marriage are among the most intimate that an individual can make," it went on. "This is true for all persons, whatever their sexual orientation."

It was stunning. It was transformational. But it was not unexpected. The world knew it was coming, and most Americans have grown more understanding of gay rights. As Justice Anthony Kennedy penned today, "the generations that wrote and ratified the Bill of Rights and the Fourteenth Amendment did not presume to know the extent of freedom in all of its dimensions, and so they entrusted to future generations a charter protecting the right of all persons to enjoy liberty as we learn its meaning."

Wow. What a week.

The Confederate flag came down, and so did barriers to marriage for all. Think about that.

Some are calling it the greatest week in the world.

And some say it is a sign of the apocalypse.

It is the beginning or the end, depending on who you ask.

But it is not. It is neither. What happened this week is important, but for the vast majority of Americans, nothing has really changed at all.

Life goes on.

So Gov. Robert Bentley had the guts to take the Confederate flags down. Good for him, but it doesn't change anything. It is not an assault on your way of life and it does not solve all our problems. If you had asked 100 Alabamians last week whether those flags even flew, 99 would not have known. But their presence was offensive. Their absence is but a show of good manners.

We go on. We live. We work. We breathe and we struggle to make our way in difficult times. We move forward, hopefully toward a world in which the fights of the past don't have to provoke us to division in the future.

The marriage ruling is the same. It does not threaten traditional marriage. It does not cheapen it or besmirch it or make it unnecessary. It is not a wrecking ball or a poison. Not a slight or a cataclysm.

It simply allows people who love each other to marry. Like anybody else.

Why does that create such animosity?

This ruling will allow all those couples to visit one another in hospitals, to make medical choices for one another, to share all the rights and privileges and responsibilities other married couples share.

It's no skin off anyone else's nose. If it really bothers you that two people love each other enough to marry, I would encourage you to meet more people. More gay people.

With an open mind.

The time of change has come. Marriage is a right for all. It is done, no matter what loopholes your probate judge tries to find. It is time to accept it and move on.

There is no more gay marriage. There is only marriage.

So it is ordered.

The world changed this week. It did not end.