“Hi, I’d like to order a large pizza with mushrooms, pepperoni and climate change denial.”

No, that’s not a typical topping, but you may inadvertently be supporting rightwing causes when you purchase a pizza. Bloomberg Business has just put out an interesting report on the behind-the-scenes politics of the pizza industry, and they lean very conservative. If you’re a progressive like me, that’s bound to leave you experiencing something that you don’t normally expect when eating a pizza: a bad taste in your mouth.

What’s going on here? In a nutshell, pizza is a big business in the United States, and the Republican party is the one that cozies up to businesses. Each day, 12 percent of Americans consume at least one slice of pizza, generating billions annually. With recent pushes to improve nutrition standards and promote healthier eating across the country, the pizza industry is getting proactive politically.

This corporate civic engagement consists primarily of campaign donations. In the 2012 and 2014 elections, the pizza industry gave $1.5 million to candidates and PACs, 88 percent of which went to Republicans. That doesn’t leave a big slice for Democrat/Independent politics. The pizza chain with the heftiest pockets is Pizza Hut, which gave $685,000 in political campaigns, with only 1 percent of that going to Democrats. Papa John’s threw in nearly $117,000, as well. The fact that 87 percent of that money went to Republicans is a hardly a surprise to those who remember when the company’s owner famously took a controversial stand against Obamacare.

Pizza companies have even created their own lobbying group. Pizza chains that normally consider one another competitors have formed the American Pizza Community (APC). Generally, restaurant chains join larger food industry groups, but the APC has chosen to go it alone to advocate specifically for pizza. While the APC is nowhere near as powerful as a group like the NRA, it still wields a lot of influence and has scored some significant victories for pizza, including the way nutrition labels are applied to pizza menus. Previously, companies were expected to list the caloric content of an entire pizza, but now restaurants are allowed to list it by slice.

One of the main “enemies” of the pizza industry is First Lady Michelle Obama. Her agenda to improve the nutrition of school lunches has come at pizza’s expense; currently, school cafeterias sell half a billion dollars worth of pizza. For years, the government has deemed a piece of pizza to have a “serving of vegetables” thanks to its tiny amount of tomato paste, thereby incentivizing schools to serve it. For a while it looked like these rules would change, but the pizza industry has prevailed and kept its “vegetable” status intact.

At the end of the day, though, most liberals probably wouldn’t be too opposed to APC’s pro-pizza agenda. The problem isn’t what the pizza industry is hoping to accomplish, it’s that by giving money to help conservative candidates get elected, their ensuring far worse, non-pizza-related issues get promoted by lawmakers. While you might be able to live with a politician who keeps pizza in school cafeterias, can you say the same about politicians who try to strip a woman of her right to choose or block attempts to raise the minimum wage?

So what’s a liberal mozzarella lover (by which I mean a political leftie, though extra cheese is great, too) to do? Give up pizza?? Yeah right – you’ll have to pry these stuffed crusts from my cold, dead hands. Instead of purchasing pies from large chains, I’ll choose mom-and-pop pizza restaurants that are less likely to be involved in donating money to federal politicians.

Photo credit: Thinkstock