The Gluten Free Reviewer Grocery in San Francisco’s Potrero Hill neighborhood. Ariel Zambelich for The Wall Street Journal

Tuesday marks the first day that Food and Drug Administration rules dictating the amount of gluten that can be contained in food labeled “gluten free” formally take effect.

For the average person, 20 parts per million may seem like an extreme level of exactitude. But for the some 3 million Americans with the autoimmune disorder celiac disease, even the tiniest amount of gluten proteins—found in wheat, barley and rye—can cause pain.

For that reason, the FDA started in 2007 drafting the rules governing “gluten free” foods. They went through comments and revisions before being finalized last year at the level of less than 20 parts per million of gluten, with a 1-year grace period for companies to prepare. As of Tuesday, those that don’t comply will be deemed misbranded and subject to regulatory action.

Already, gluten-free foods have swept grocery shelves over the past few years. More non-celiac consumers have come to believe they have less-severe intolerances to gluten, or have turned to gluten-free foods as a form of dieting, and food makers are catering to them with reformulated gluten-free versions of everything from cereal to chicken nuggets, and by labeling foods that are naturally gluten free to boost sales. Sales of foods labeled gluten-free rose 16% in the year ended Feb. 15th, reaching $23.34 billion, according to Nielsen.

But it isn’t only the food makers that are trying to tap into demand for gluten-free products. World Centric, a 10-year-old company that makes environmentally friendly paper goods, touts that its paper plates and toilet paper also are gluten free. It says the plates are made from wheatstraw fiber, which comes from the stalks of the wheat plants, and the stalks do not store gluten. “Those are stored in the grains, and our products do not contain gluten or allergens,” its website says, noting that it meets the new FDA standards for gluten-free, which the packaging advertises.

No, World Centric doesn’t expect people to eat its toilet paper. They’re responding to consumers who believe—and post on message boards for people with celiac disease—that for people highly intolerant of gluten, even coming in contact with the protein on their skin can cause harm. Most medical experts say gluten can’t be absorbed through the skin, but consumers who share self-described horror stories involving paper products with gluten have fueled a sense that it could be dangerous for at least some people to even touch products containing gluten. One website that offers advice on avoiding gluten even lists dish soap as a possible culprit.

The FDA says it typically doesn’t have the manpower to actively regulate items cups and plates, but it does regulate “food contact substances,” including packaging and dinnerware, and will act if there is suspicion of harm.