Every day, the 340B drug discount program helps providers that treat the underserved across America and it’s more essential than ever. Yet the pharmaceutical industry has attacked hospitals for somehow failing to use it to care for the poor and vulnerable. New data show just how wrong it is.

A research study from the firm Dobson and Davanzo demonstrates that hospitals in the 340B program treat twice as many Black, Hispanic and Native American patients as non-340B providers. They also care for twice the number of low-income elderly Americans. Add to that the fact that these hospitals see two times the number of disabled patients and the picture becomes crystal clear. This is a population that is often uninsured or underinsured. Our hospitals take care of them, regardless of ability to pay.

ADVERTISEMENT

It’s their mission.

According to a new survey of 340B hospitals, savings from the program help fund direct care of the poor. This includes free and discounted medicines, immunizations, medication therapy management and HIV/AIDS, cancer and other clinics. The program also helps fund patient counseling, transport to the hospital and language translation services.

Despite overall reductions in the number of uninsured through the Affordable Care Act, 93 percent of hospitals say that the 340B program is more important than it was five years ago. Why? They’re seeing far more underinsured patients who still cannot afford high co-pays and deductibles. As a result, safety-net hospitals provide nearly $25 billion in uncompensated care annually.

The program requires drug companies to sell discounted medications to healthcare providers that serve high numbers of low-income Medicare and Medicaid patients or are located in remote rural areas. These hospitals pass the discounts on to needy patients and also use savings from the program to fund clinical services to help the poor. Yet the fact remains that 340B still represents just 2 percent of the $457 billion US pharmaceutical market.

Given its current public relations challenges regarding astronomical drug pricing, one would hope the pharmaceutical industry would redirect its attention towards ensuring that patients have access to affordable medications. But instead, the ever-profitable Big Pharma and its surrogates continue a relentless campaign to gut the critically important 340B program.

In underserved neighborhoods and communities around the country, the program allows hospitals to improve health. At Southern Ohio Medical Center in Portsmouth, OH, patients in need receive low-cost medications and 340B savings allow the hospital to expand services to remote areas. At Jefferson Regional Medical Center in Pine Bluff, AR, the program helps fund health and wellness education and low-cost insulin and other discounted prescriptions for uninsured patients.

Through its work every day, the safety-net health care community makes a powerful case for why the 340B drug discount program must be protected.

Our underserved patients are depending on us.

Ted Slafsky is the President and Chief Executive Officer of 340B Health, a non-profit organization of more than 1,200 hospitals participating in the 340B drug discount program.