Don’t call it Riverside County Regional Medical Center. On Friday, the county’s health care system was officially relaunched as Riverside University Health System, even though the county – not an institution of higher learning – will be running it.

The Moreno Valley hospital, now known as Riverside University Health System – Medical Center, is part of a rebranded, reorganized health care delivery network. Here are five things to know about the “new” system, which officials say employs 6,000 and has an economic impact of $1.6 billion.

1. HEALTH CORRIDOR

If all goes well, the hospital complex and a plan to develop 32 adjacent acres into a medical campus could be part of a larger corridor of health care facilities in Moreno Valley that includes Kaiser Permanente, the planned March LifeCare campus and a 200-acre medical campus sought by developer Iddo Benzeevi. That would make Moreno Valley a regional destination for health care services.

2. BEYOND SAFETY NET

Prior to this new vision, the hospital’s main role was as a safety-net facility for those who couldn’t afford medical care elsewhere. With the Affordable Care Act cutting the ranks of the uninsured, the hospital will now have to compete for health care dollars. In 2014, the county Board of Supervisors hired former Loma Linda University Medical Center executive Zareh Sarrafian to oversee the health system’s new direction.

3. NOT JUST A HOSPITAL

Besides the 439-bed hospital, the new system consists of 10 countywide clinics and the county’s public and mental health departments. Mental health has been renamed the Department of Behavioral Health.

4. INTEGRATION IS KEY

Officials say that consolidating departments into one system will improve patient care. For example, behavioral health services are starting to be offered in the outpatient clinics, and the Office of Aging is embedded in the hospital.

5. BALANCING THE BOOKS

It wasn’t so long ago that the hospital faced huge shortfalls that threatened to drain already-fragile county finances. The shortfalls are gone, and the hope is the new system will be self-sufficient. But the county is still making multimillion-dollar investments in the new network, including $25 million for new equipment and as much as $53 million for an advanced electronic medical-records system.