News 9 first brought you Isabelle Lawson's story in March 2015 when she was nervous about her amputation surgery.

A Luther girl who lost her leg to cancer is trying to raise money for a special prosthetic leg.

News 9 first brought you Isabelle Lawson's story in March 2015 when she was nervous about her amputation surgery.

On Saturday, Jan. 30, the community is holding a fundraiser to help Isabelle get a racing prosthesis. Desiree Lawson said the price tag starts at $8,000 and can go as high as $25,000.

“We don't have that laying around, so we need to raise the funds so we can make sure Iz runs now,” Desiree told News 9.

Isabelle or “Iz” loves sports.

“You get to play, have fun and it doesn't matter if you lose or win, all that matters is if you have fun,” Isabelle said.

3/23/2015 Related Story: Metro Girl To Undergo Rare Cancer Operation

The 8-year-old had to put sports on hold when she got cancer in her thigh bone. Iz had a “rotationplasty”, in which doctors cut out the cancerous part, then reattached the lower part of her leg backwards so her ankle functions as her knee. Every three months she has scans and bloodwork to see if the cancer has returned.

“It's very emotional, I'm sorry,” Desiree said.

Her parents say it was tough enough on Iz losing her leg. They do not want her to lose the ability to play sports, too.

“To tell an 8-year-old or a 7-year-old, ‘That's not part of your life anymore,’ isn't fair,” Desiree said tearfully.

The Lawsons are hoping a new running leg will show Isabelle what they have been telling her all along.

“You don't have to give up on anything you want to do going forward just because you're different or you have challenges,” Desiree said. “If there is a will, there is a way.”

The Amputee Basketball Invigorated team is playing the Luther school faculty in the benefit basketball game for Isabelle. Tip-off is at 7 p.m. at Luther High School. Tickets are $4 each.

There will also be raffles for Thunder tickets, restaurant gift certificates, movie certificates, as well as a bake sale at the game.

Learn about how you can donate.