Mesikapp clocks first state cut at Coaches Invite

Annika Jessen

THORNTON -- Shorthanded due to illness and short on rest due to three competitions in the past week, it would have been easy for the Thompson Valley girls swim team to have a pessimistic attitude heading into Saturday's Coaches Invite Swim Meet. The Eagles opted for a positive outlook instead.

With several of their top swimmers absent due to sudden sickness, a relatively young and less experienced Thompson Valley squad made the most of the opportunities presented at Saturday at the Veterans Memorial Aquatic Center in Thornton.

Missing Eryn Eddy for the full meet and Kelly Sheldon for finals, coach Dale Leonhart said he was pleased to see his other swimmers step up during replacement duty.

"Given our circumstances I thought we did very well," he said. "We didn't have the full heard here, but the ones who were here did a great job for us."

The Eagles had two relays make it to the consolation finals as the 200-yard medley relay finished in 14th place with a time of 1:56:11 while the 200 free relay finished 16th with a time of 1:47:69.

Annika Jessen, a sophomore for the Eagles, posted a split of 26.9 seconds during the 200 free relay, a time she and Leonhart were very proud of.

"I haven't broken 27 seconds in a year and half so that was very exciting for me," Jessen said. "Lauren (Mesikapp) had a good swim, and Dani (Pickert) and Mattea (Wabeka) both had best times during the race."

Advertisement

In addition to contributing to both relays Mesikapp also grabbed her first state cut of the year during the meet, posting a time of 1:05:73 in the 100 butterfly.

"It is awesome to be able to accomplish a goal it has taken me a lot longer to accomplish in years past," she said. "I usually have had to wait until conference or the meet before conference to get this cut."

Lauren Mesikapp

Even though the Eagles aren't yet showing quite the team dominance of seasons past, Leonhart explained he is still seeing progress and said he is confident experiences like a shorthanded Coaches Invite Meet will benefit the team down the road.

"These guys are pretty raw. Their skills are getting better every time we hit the water competitively," he said. "I see improvement in breath control, turns, breakouts and all the fundamental things that translate into speed. I think we are getting there."