Video

Image Who deserves an Oscar? 4:39 Play video News.com.au's entertainment team pick their 2014 Academy Award heroes and zeroes in the lead up to Hollywood's night of nights.

CELEBRITIES have walked more red carpets than you or I have had hot dinners, and as such, they know what poses work best for them.

Certain red carpet frequenters throw certain poses, time after time, photo after photo. With that in mind, here are the top six poses we’re expecting to see on tomorrow’s Oscars Red Carpet:

THE SKINNY ARM

Culprits: Alicia Keys, Katy Perry, Anna Kendrick, everyone

The ol’ faithful, hand-on-hip, 90-degree arm cock gives the illusion of thinner limbs. Also allows the poser to flex for added bicep tone. And which other pose allows you to show off your awards show-themed mani (here’s lookin’ at you, Zooey Deschanel)? We must admit, this pose certainly does the trick. Especially when teamed with The Knee-Cross — the winning combination that deserves its own Academy Award.

THE KNEE-CROSS

Culprits: Emma Watson, Scarlett Johansson, Taylor Swift

Although the stars will wear full-length gowns tonight, know that, underneath the 12 layers of tulle, most will have one leg crossed in front of the other. Stylist Rachel Wayman says this pose, which works best with pencil skirts, is all about creating an hourglass shape. “Instead of being ‘up and down’, you’re creating a curve with the body and bringing it back in at the knees.” Beware: the risk of tripping over your own feet is a red alert on the Pose-o-Meter.

THE PHOTOBOMB

Culprits: Emma Thompson, Jennifer Lawrence

This is a relatively new addition to the red carpet, but no less deserving of mention. It was made popular by serial trickster J-Law, when she bombed a perfect-picture moment of Sarah Jessica Parker at last year’s Met Gala. Since then, stars have been flocking to ruin pap snaps all over the world. Emma Thompson is the latest, making a perfectly good shot of Lupita Nyong’o at the SAG Awards even better. God bless Thompson.

THE ANGELINA JO-LEG

Culprit: Angelina Jolie

This is the pose that started a million memes — the leg-out pose. Championed by Ange at the Oscars in 2012, it’s been copied by many, but seldom executed correctly. Many think a thigh-high split warrants a peekaboo moment, but this is not the case. It’s a precarious combination of the right amount of awkward bend at the knee, a subtle hand on hip, and a dash of smugness due to the fact you couldn’t care less you’re about to be lambasted online. And by Joan Rivers.

THE BECKHAM BEND

Culprits: Victoria Beckham, Paris Hilton

One of the more advanced red-carpet poses, The BB involves leaning as far back as you can without tipping over (your core must be in peak condition). Although Beckham looks a tad uncomfortable, Wayman believes she’s stuck with this pose to accentuate her best asset: her slenderness. “Red-carpet poses are for showing off the best shape for the outfit and body. Victoria likes streamlined outfits and she’s got this pose down to a fine art,” she says.

THE BACKWARDS GLANCE

Culprits: Eva Longoria, Kim Kardashian, Jennifer Lopez

Noticed a culprit pattern here? If you have a buxom derrière, this is the pose for you. Also deployed with backless frocks, this stance calls for a “Who? Me?” over-the-shoulder glance towards the photographers’ pit, Bambi eyes optional. This is a particularly favourable pose should you have spilt your drink down your front in the limo en route to the event. Nothing gets Champagne out of organza, darling …

CLICK HERE to download the Sunday Style app.