The Affordable Care Act’s birth control exemption for religious groups goes far enough to relieve the burden on their religious freedom, a federal appeals court in New York ruled Friday, overturning a lower court’s decision.

Three Catholic institutions—two high schools and Catholic Health Services of Long Island—had argued that the ACA’s exemption for nonprofits, known as an accommodation, didn’t go far enough to protect their religious freedom and posed an unfair burden on their beliefs.

Under the ACA, employers must provide access to contraception as part of their health insurance. The law provides an exemption for religious employers, as well as an “accommodation” that applies more broadly to religious nonprofit organizations. This allows employers who object on religious grounds to providing contraception to opt out of paying for coverage, while allowing individual employees to seek coverage from a third party.

The plaintiffs contended that even though they qualified for the federal accommodation, the law remained an unfair burden on the exercise of their religious beliefs. By simply participating in the process, they argued, they were forced to compromise their belief system.

“Plaintiffs argue that opting out of the coverage requirement substantially burdens their religious exercise because they believe that by doing so, they facilitate access to products and services they find objectionable,” the appellate decision said.

A federal court in Brooklyn had agreed with the plaintiffs, but the Second Circuit reversed its ruling Friday, finding that the exemption imposed only a “de minimis burden.”

“Thus, under the challenged regulatory scheme, the only obligation actually imposed on Plaintiffs is identifying themselves as religious objectors. Through a modicum of paperwork, an eligible organization throws the entire administrative and financial burden of providing contraceptive coverage on its insurer or third-party administrator, generally organizations with no objection to providing contraceptive coverage,” the court said in its opinion.

The Second Circuit noted that similar claims are being denied throughout the country.

“In the time since the district court issued its opinion, six circuits have rejected these claims, either on the merits or by denial of a preliminary injunction,” the appellate court said.

Along with these cases, the U.S. Supreme Court has touched on the issue in last year’s Burwell v. Hobby Lobby Stores, and other cases continue to move through the system, the Second Circuit ruling noted, with new cases potentially finding their way to the nation’s highest court.

The decision notes that the Hobby Lobby case appears to resolve the issue by specifically pointing to the accommodation that allows nonprofit groups to opt out of a direct concern over conflict between the contraception mandates and their religious beliefs.

“Plaintiffs contend that the opposite is true. Plaintiffs believe that by submitting the opt-out notification to the government or their third-party administrators, they are indirectly facilitating the provision to their employees of products and services that have contraceptive and ‘abortion-inducing’ effects, an act which violates their religious beliefs,” the appellate court’s decision said.

While the Catholic groups argue that they believe that their religious beliefs are being unduly burdened by the accommodation, the court noted that the Religious Freedom Restoration Act’s threshold is a substantive one—whether or not a burden can be proven, not just believed.

The appellate court’s decision went into detail over the plaintiff’s claims that not complying would also prove a burden, with the court calling the argument a “non sequitur” because of how unburdensome the process of complying actually is. Likewise, the court found the plaintiff’s argument that by simply participating in the accommodation results in a “trigger” that provides contraception, noting that the opt is a means of identifying and exempting employers, forcing the government to step in.

“Plaintiffs’ decision to opt out is not the cause of the ultimate contraceptive coverage; rather this coverage happens in spite of them,” the court’s decision read.

Read the court's decision here: http://politi.co/1EdJApF