TMZ published a photo of Rep. Joe Garcia, D-Fla., enjoying a day out on the beach with a scantily clad gal pal. (Pablo Martinez Monsivais/AP)

It's one thing to find yourself fodder on celebrity gossip site TMZ. But when your political opponents jump on board, things can take a turn in a seriously weird direction.

That's the situation Rep. Joe Garcia, D-Fla., found himself in when TMZ took a pic of Garcia and a gal pal enjoying a day at the beach. Being that he represents South Florida, Garcia's lady friend (the congressman is single, by the way) is sporting a thong bathing suit bottom – a fashion move that elicited catty and mixed reviews from TMZ's staff, during the site's television program.

[READ: The Internet Is High on Cocaine Congressman Trey Radel]

Enter the National Republican Congressional Committee, whose press secretary gleefully passed along the gossip item to political reporters Monday morning.

"After embarrassing South Florida with his voter fraud scandal that has his BFF and former top advisor sentenced to jail time, Garcia is once again making headlines for everything under the sun other than his congressional record," wrote NRCC Regional Press Secretary Katie Prill in an email with the subject line "Congressman Joe Garcia's Thong Song."

Garcia's former chief of staff, Jeffrey Garcia, who is of no relation to the congressman, pleaded guilty in October to a voter fraud scheme, which took place in advance of the 2012 election.

[READ: Who's Kathleen Sebelius? Says One Quarter of Voters]

"Looks like Congressman Garcia has a lot in common with 'Thong Song' singer Sisqo who has also had a run in with the law," Prill's email continued. Sisqo's legal trouble was a cool 10 years ago, when the singer was charged with firing a gun at a car in Randallstown, Md.

It might be a stretch, but Prill continued to connect the Florida Democrat to the silver-haired "Thong Song" crooner. "Since Sisqo seems unafraid to break the law, maybe Garcia could hire Sisqo to run his re-elect?" Prill's email pointed out. "I mean how else will Garcia pull off a victory if he doesn't have someone on staff who will commit his next illegal scheme to rig the election?" Garcia's office declined to comment.