Now the state is offering glamping at the 5,579-acre Moran State Park. Set on Orcas Island, in that green puzzle of the San Juan Islands, Moran is a jewel of Washington’s parks system. You can walk beneath a canopy of Western red cedars older than our nation.

The park is also wildly popular. On almost any summer day there’s a scrum for its campsites. Yet Wanderlust Camp, which welcomes its first glampers this weekend, will occupy several campsites in a corner of the most popular campground. A reservation can cost up to $220 per night for a minimum two-night weekend stay in midsummer. Coffee delivered at your tent-flap is $9 extra.

This is the worst thing to happen to public camping since poison ivy.

State parks belong to all of us. That glamping site? It’s my campsite, too. It also belongs to the poor kid in Spokane who’s not yet craned his neck at a hemlock taller than his apartment building. Not one fire ring should be cordoned off only for those who can pay triple-digit rates to sleep under the stars.

In this era of unequaled unequalness, state parks have no business segregating people based on bank balance. Those who can’t afford to pay need to feel a bracing breeze off a park’s mountain lake just as much as those who can; in fact, they probably need it more.

The villains are not the parks but the state legislatures. Since 2008, spending by state parks has increased by only $100 million, to $2.4 billion. At the same time, state budget allocations to these parks have declined by $250 million, forcing parks to cut operations or turn to other sources of money.

This pattern continues. In Wisconsin, for instance, Gov. Scott Walker, a potential Republican presidential candidate, has proposed cutting all state funding for parks. He wants them to rely instead on existing park revenue and an increase in user fees. And the Legislature in Alabama, for another example, is considering cutting about $10 million from its parks, which could result in closures.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the face of such cuts, parks are charging (or charging more) for a slew of basic services, or adding more fee-based amenities. Fees for campgrounds, parking, you-name-it made up, on average, nearly 42 percent of state park operating expenses nationally in the 2014 fiscal year, according to Lewis Ledford, executive director of the National Association of State Park Directors.

Charging you for stuff is now a billion-dollar enterprise and the largest single source of money for state parks over all.

One of the hardest hit places has been my beloved Evergreen State. The Legislature chopped the system’s public funding by 79 percent over the last six years. The system hosts about 30 million visits annually but has lost one-third of its staff.

Washington’s Legislature also directed the state park system to fend more for itself by running more like a business. Predictably, it is now much easier today to find a fee box than a park ranger. It also costs as much as $70 to pitch a tent for a weekend in a Washington State park, not counting the $30 annual Discover Pass (or fee of $10 a day) required for cars to enter, plus any additional fees for campsite reservations. Throw in a tank of gas, some firewood and a bag of marshmallows, and a family weekend of camping can easily run to $200.

Now add glamping. And it doesn’t end there. The Washington State Parks and Recreation Commission is also looking for funding to add Wi-Fi and may consider ziplining at some parks. These aren’t ways to increase our access to nature, or encourage our increasingly nature-distanced kids to hold pine cones instead of PlayStations. These are ways to put more dollars in the till.

But nature isn’t a cash register. Parks contribute other things. Nationally, the state parks had a record 739 million visits in the last fiscal year, or nearly three times the number of visits to the national parks system, Mr. Ledford said.

His group estimates that, based on studies by several states, state parks add some $20 billion to state and local economies each year.

Certainly, his group has a stake in getting more money for parks. But parks are a bargain. You just have to invest in them. If you want to see the social benefits, you have to keep the doors open, for everyone. Isn’t that the real business of a state — protecting and giving equal access to things we’ve decided are important?

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

More than two-thirds of the states have turned to dedicated funding sources, like lotteries or fees for specialized license plates, to help make up for lost state funds. Last year, those sources contributed more than $500 million to the parks. The other states should adopt this approach.

In addition, Congress should reauthorize the federal Land and Water Conservation Fund, first signed into law in 1964, which uses money from offshore oil and gas leasing for state and local parks and recreation projects and for national parks, forests and wildlife refuges. In all, the fund has provided more than $4 billion in matching funds (leveraging another $4 billion in state and local money) for 42,000 projects spread through every county in America. If you swim in a public pool or hike a trail in a state park, you’re probably a beneficiary of this law.

Over the years Congress has significantly reduced the proportion of money that goes to states. Now the fund is set to expire in September. President Obama has called for reauthorization of the program at full funding, but Congress has yet to act.

A state park campground on a summer’s evening is a lot of things. Fireflies wink their Morse code. Kids run wild after them. A man strings a blue tarp from an R.V. to tall trees and drinks beer beneath it. Somewhere, someone is burning hamburgers over open flame. To me these places are always a big, messy, often beautiful diorama of America. We might not want to embrace all of it, but all of it is ours. We need to keep it that way, down to every lumpy campsite.