Photo

Governor Jerry Brown has ordered mandatory water restrictions for the first time in California history, thanks to record-low snowfalls this winter that compounded an already catastrophic drought. “It’s a different world,” Brown said. “We have to act differently.” I’ll have more things to say about this next week.

Due to “misperceptions” about their campaign — which drew national scrutiny thanks to a New York Times story — Kraft Foods and the Academy of Nutrition and Dietetics have canceled their plan to put “Kids Eat Right” logos on Kraft Singles. That was fast.

Drinkers in China now consume more booze than the Irish.

Walmart is pushing into urban centers with a vengeance, hoping its prepared food and produce sections will fill a niche in food deserts. This would be a good thing if the introduction of a Walmart store didn’t contribute to a rise in obesity in its surrounding community.

People who bring their own bags to the grocery store are more likely to buy organic products — and, oddly, junk food.

“War and pestilence might kill large numbers of people, but in most cases the population recovers,” writes George Monbiot. “But lose the soil and everything else goes with it.”

A zoning ordinance passed in 2008 that limited the opening of new fast-food restaurants in one of Los Angeles’ poorest sections did nothing to curb obesity or improve diets.

The way a food sounds in your mouth may greatly influence your perception of its taste.

An investigation by The Desert Sun found that California does not require its 108 regulated bottled water plants to report how much water they use.

Warren Buffett’s investment portfolio would make an 8-year-old drool.

Long regarded as a trade school, the Culinary Institute of America is trying to turn itself into the nation’s first university of food.

“I want to go home. We all do. Our parents haven’t heard from us for a long time, I’m sure they think we are dead.” An investigation by the Associated Press discovered that some of America’s seafood comes from Burmese slaves. (Update: Thanks to the investigation, Indonesian government officials visited the island where the men were being kept and helped rescue more than 300 people.)

A whopping 70 percent of frozen pizzas, pastas and meat dishes purchased in chain grocery stores exceed FDA recommendations for sodium intake.

Sen. Tom Cotton eats birthday cake with ice cream almost every day.