New gallery will feature 10 artists Saturday, hold grand opening Dec. 12

Fine arts will score another foothold in Longmont this Saturday, when the DARKROOM on Main St. opens its doors for the first time.

If you go What: Art gallery opening and open house When: Saturday, Nov. 29, 12 p.m. to 5 p.m. Normal hours will be Wednesday-Saturday from noon - 5 p.m. Where:The DARKROOM, 515 Main St., Longmont

The gallery is the creation of Julie Cardinal, a fine arts photographer who, after years of having her own photography studio, decided it was time to take that next step.

"My lease was expiring and I knew I wanted to expand and turn into a gallery so I walked up and down Main Street and I found this space and thought it would be perfect," she explained. "The biggest part of it for me is to show off all the local talent and give the artists a place to show their work and sell their work."

On Saturday, the gallery will exhibit the work of 10 local artists: Cardinal, Maureen Ruddy Burkhart, Suzanne Frazier, Brenda Ferrimani, Doug Fields, Paula Peacock, Susan Helen Strok, Tammy Helart, Joan Jordan and Chichi Ledesma.

The exhibit features photography, paintings, mixed media, jewelry, sculpture and artistic greeting cards.

The DARKROOM is at 515 Main St., and Saturday's special event runs from 12 p.m. to 5 p.m. as part of Longmont's Small Business Saturday.

Listen to an interview with gallery owner Julie Cardinal HERE

"We are thrilled to have the DARKROOM as an addition to the Downtown Longmont Creative District," said Kimberlee McKee, executive director of the Longmont Downtown Development Authority. "Julie brings great energy and art onto the 500 block of Main Street."

There are 17 other studios, galleries or art spaces in downtown Longmont, according to McKee.

Cardinal says Longmont's growing, vibrant arts community made opening a gallery fairly painless.

"It's getting easier. The LDDA (Longmont Downtown Development Authority) was a huge help. And now that we're a designated arts district that helps too," she said. "The hardest part was getting all the licensing, but finding the artists was not hard at all because there is so much local talent."

That local talent will also be teaching. Cardinal is planning courses and workshops starting in January. The first class will be on iPhone photography by Longmont's Maureen Ruddy Burkhart.

The official grand opening of the DARKROOM is Friday, Dec. 12. That's also when the gallery will kick-off its wine tasting series which will feature the Ciatano Winery out of Lyons. They will do a wine tasting on the second Friday of each month after that.

For gallery owner Cardinal, opening the DARKROOM is more than a business decision.

"The biggest thing for me is giving artists a place to show their work. I charge a much lower commission than other galleries," she pointed out. "Yes this is a business, but I love making the artists happy, I love coming here every day and being able to sit here and look at all this art. I get to go out and find new artists. What could be better. I wake up every morning and I am so happy that I found this job that I am so passionate about."

More details at cardinal-photography.com/events

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel