The claim

You can test for radiation leakage from a microwave oven by using a fluorescent light bulb.

The background

An email was received:

“Dear Mr. Fact: Is it true that you can test a microwave to see if it is leaking radioactivity by holding a florescent light bulb in front of it and if it glows, it leaks? If not, is there any way to check to see if a microwave is leaking? Or do you have to wait until cancer develops to be sure?”

The above was actually sent by a co-worker of Mr. Fact soon after the newsroom’s old, low-power microwave was replaced.

The new one is twice as big and had a button that would shoot out every time you closed the door. Fact Checker enjoyed this game of catch. But soon, the button got stuck one too many times and now a pencil sits atop the microwave with instructions to poke it in the hole where the button used to be to open the door.

Given this, it’s not surprising someone would be concerned about the integrity of the microwave.

The fluorescent claim, though, seemed absurd, like one of those viral emails about cooking an egg between two cellphones (not true) or microwaving your cellphone to recharge it (really not true with the YouTube videos to prove it).

But this is one of those rare cases where the unlikely is true.

Bill Beatty, a research engineer in the University of Washington’s chemistry department and human behind the Science Hobbyist website (amasci.com), has done numerous microwave experiments and written extensively about microwave myths.

He told Fact Checker a leak can be detected by holding a fluorescent bulb next to it — he suggests a long ceiling-light tube, even one that doesn’t work with black ends, which he said is usually related to transistors being bad, not the light itself.

But, he said, only a large leak will be detected with a fluorescent bulb. “So if it doesn’t light up, that doesn’t mean it’s not leaking,” he said.

A darkened room might help you better detect a faint glow. Hold or place the bulb close to a seal on the door that might leak while it’s running. He said when the microwave’s fan noise changes about three seconds after pushing start, that’s when the microwave action begins and you should detect something if you’re going to detect anything.

He suggests using a little orange bulb — called a neon pilot light or NE-2 bulb — that can be purchased at Radio Shack. “The metal electrodes in them concentrate the fields,” he said.

Beaty said old microwaves from the 1960s and some from the 1970s should not be turned on unless something is inside, but that with microwaves from the 1980s and later, you’ll want to turn them on with nothing inside because this makes the amount of radiation emitted from any leaks greater.

“If you’re cooking something, most of the energy is going into the food so if nothing at all is in the oven, it can be hundreds of time more leakage than if you have huge block of frozen meat in there,” he said.

Beaty has a microwave with a slight leak at home. The leak is only detectable if nothing is in the microwave when in use and only then with very sensitive equipment. He’s not worried about getting cancer.

That’s because microwave radiation is made of radio waves and is basically the same frequency as that of cellphones.

“So if you’re horribly paranoid and won’t use a cellphone, then you should start considering (ending any) microwave usage,” he said. “But if you’re not concerned about putting a cellphone up to your face, then microwave leakage is often much smaller than that.”

If you've got wi-fi in your home and you notice interference when the microwave is on — or dropped cellphone calls — then you might have a leak.

Some websites suggest putting a laptop in the microwave or a cellphone in the microwave and trying to contact them — without turning on the microwave, which would destroy them. If the microwave’s shield is working, then a signal won’t get to them since they operate at a similar frequency.

Beaty doesn’t like this idea. “I wouldn’t ever put anything expensive in the microwave under any circumstances,” he said. “You’re asking for trouble. What if your roommate pushes the popcorn button? Or what if you remember the instructions wrong?”

Beaty said microwave leakage is rare and will only be of a sizable amount if there’s been massive damage, such as after the whole microwave gets dropped and the frame is bent or the door closes but you can see a visible gap or that it’s cockeyed.

The verdict

Large leaks of radiation from a microwave can be detected by a fluorescent light bulb. Smaller leaks can be detected with a small orange neon bulb, as might be used in a waffle iron. The radiation itself is little different than that emitted by a cellphone.

Truthmeter: 9 (out of 10)

More microwave myths

The Food & Drug Administration’s website addresses a number of common myths about microwave ovens. (Go to FDA.gov and look under the tab for “radiation-emitting products.”)

• Food gets contaminated: “Microwaves are produced inside the oven by an electron tube called a magnetron. The microwaves are reflected within the metal interior of the oven where they are absorbed by food. Microwaves cause water molecules in food to vibrate, producing heat that cooks the food. That's why foods high in water content, like fresh vegetables, can be cooked more quickly than other foods. The microwave energy is changed to heat as it is absorbed by food, and does not make food ‘radioactive’ or ‘contaminated.’”

• Food cooks from the inside out: “Although heat is produced directly in the food, microwave ovens do not cook food from the ‘inside out.’ When thick foods are cooked, the outer layers are heated and cooked primarily by microwaves while the inside is cooked mainly by the conduction of heat from the hot outer layers.”

• A leaky microwave can cause sterility: “Much research is under way on microwaves and how they might affect the human body. It is known that microwave radiation can heat body tissue the same way it heats food. Exposure to high levels of microwaves can cause a painful burn. The lens of the eye is particularly sensitive to intense heat, and exposure to high levels of microwaves can cause cataracts. Likewise, the testes are very sensitive to changes in temperature. Accidental exposure to high levels of microwave energy can alter or kill sperm, producing temporary sterility. But these types of injuries — burns, cataracts, temporary sterility — can only be caused by exposure to large amounts of microwave radiation, much more than the 5mW limit for microwave oven leakage.”

• Proven cases of radiation injuries from microwave ovens: “There have been allegations of radiation injury from microwave ovens, but none as a direct result of microwave exposure. The injuries known to FDA have been injuries that could have happened with any oven or cooking surface. For example, many people have been burned by the hot food, splattering grease, or steam from food cooked in a microwave oven.”

• Don’t use a pacemaker around a microwave: “FDA does not specifically require microwave ovens to carry warnings for people with pacemakers. The problem has been largely resolved because pacemakers are now designed to be shielded against such electrical interference.”

Photo above: Getty Images.