Sports Illustrated senior writer Alexander Wolff will be at 57th Street Books, 1301 E 57th St., in Hyde Park at 6 p.m. Wednesday to discuss his new book "The Audacity of Hoop: Basketball and the age of Obama."

Before he does, we had a few questions for him.

You say that Obama is more a product of pickup basketball than organized ball. Why is that an important distinction?

Because he learned the game on the playground, he never clicked with his high school coach's more buttoned-up style. As a result he took an unrequited relationship with the game off to college and into young adulthood. You see that with a certain type of pickup player: He hasn't entirely gotten the game out of his system, or like Obama he's still working out issues with it. So the game abides. As opposed to, say, Bill Bradley, whom campaign aides couldn't get to jump into pickup games on the stump, Obama never had to have his arm twisted to play. Bradley was a Hall of Famer with nothing left to prove. After high school, Obama had plenty left to prove.

Obama doesn't play much anymore — partly because the guys he plays with are so much better and Obama doesn't want pity. Is there a basketball playing future for Obama post-White House?

Obama and basketball Pete Souza, White House In between meetings on health care reform, President Barack Obama plays a game of H-O-R-S-E with Michael Strautmanis, chief of staff for the Office of Public Engagement and Intergovernmental Affairs, on the White House Basketball Court on March 21, 2010. In between meetings on health care reform, President Barack Obama plays a game of H-O-R-S-E with Michael Strautmanis, chief of staff for the Office of Public Engagement and Intergovernmental Affairs, on the White House Basketball Court on March 21, 2010. (Pete Souza, White House) (Pete Souza, White House)

His drifting away from the game during his second term is also the result of the 12 stitches he needed to close a cut to the lip suffered in a pickup game late in 2010. He realized that he didn't want to give the State of the Union on crutches. I do see him returning to the game more actively after he leaves office. And he has signaled that he wants to turn the White House My Brother's Keeper initiative into part of his post-presidency plans. I can easily imagine him using the game, and frank talk about his own complex relationship with it, as a touchstone when he interacts with at-risk urban young men.

Beyond all the basketball connections on his staff and in the cabinet, how did basketball help shape the Obama presidency?

Obama projected youth and vigor when he played the game, and when he filled out those NCAA tournament brackets every March, he could bond with the public over it. So basketball made him seem essentially American and familiar, not the alien figure his political opponents tried to make him out to be. And the game actually helped him achieve his major domestic policy goal. After the balky rollout of the HealthCare.gov website, pundits were writing Obamacare's obituary. Yet somehow the exchanges hit their goals — and during the critical sign-up period, which happened to coincide with the NBA season, PSAs from Alonzo Mourning and Magic Johnson, plus social media efforts by the likes of LeBron James and Kobe Bryant, helped reach the very demographic groups needed to make the Affordable Care Act work.

You asked others what NBA player Obama's game most reminded them of. How would you answer that question?

I agree with the president's brother-in-law, Craig Robinson, who makes the Lenny Wilkens comparison. Like Obama, Wilkens was left-handed and calm, and a guy who learned the game on the playground, only to evolve into a more disciplined player by the time he hit adulthood.

Obama is most famously a White Sox fan. But is he really a Bulls fan?

Obama and basketball Chris Sweda / Chicago Tribune President Barack Obama watches as the Chicago Bulls and the Cleveland Cavaliers battle in the first half of the season opener at the United Center on Oct. 27, 2015. President Barack Obama watches as the Chicago Bulls and the Cleveland Cavaliers battle in the first half of the season opener at the United Center on Oct. 27, 2015. (Chris Sweda / Chicago Tribune) (Chris Sweda / Chicago Tribune)

I think his support for the Bulls is genuine. But basketball, especially pro basketball, is different from a lot of sports: Fans can be connoisseurs, and you can see that when the president welcomes those championship teams to the White House. You can tell how much he admires the Spurs, for instance — the way they conduct their business on and off the court. And he made a point of playing golf with Steph Curry after the last NBA Finals.

There are so many great photos in the book — many by former Tribune photographer Pete Souza — which is your favorite?

Pete's shots are extraordinary, and I particularly like one in which the president is coaching daughter Sasha's youth league team, and rises off the bench with excitement. But my favorite is probably a black and white photo by Chicago freelancer Marc PoKempner from 1995, in which Obama is collecting signatures on nominating petitions on the South Side for his first run for office, and he has jumped into a game with some kids in an alley. In both shots he has a sly, half-smile on his face. As if he's in on a secret or something.

You write that during the making of this book, some objected to it because it wasn't really a sports book or a politics book. In the end, what sort of book is it?

It's a bit of a mongrel — part cultural history, part political narrative, and part biographical sketch, where you're examining someone through the lens of one animating part of his life.

You started this project in 2008. Over the course of all that time and all that reporting, what surprised you most about Obama and his relationship to basketball?

I'd heard that he was something of a trash talker on the court, but was surprised to learn how much of one. And I was astonished to find that Michelle Obama attributed that streak in his personality to family games of Scrabble — that his mother, Ann, trash-talked her way through them. That's not what I would have expected.

tbannon@tribpub.com

Twitter @timbannon