On the whole, how has Grand View adjusted to the Affordable Care Act?

Grand View Health is adjusting well to the provisions of the Affordable Care Act and, as with all health care organizations, the redesign of our care delivery system is ongoing. We must adapt as a large regional employer and as an integrated system of providers, practices, outpatient centers and hospital.

Needless to say, there is much work to be done on multiple levels. Our board, physicians, staff and management believe that focusing on the triple aim of health care – providing better care at a lower cost while improving the health of our community – is fundamental to our mission.

In support of that belief, we have recently changed our mission statement to “Leading Our Community to a Healthier Future.” The triple aim and the ACA challenge us to change in ways we perhaps have not even yet imagined.

The leadership of Grand View is energized and excited for our health system to make a difference in the lives of our patients as we explore and develop new approaches to health and wellness.

What advice would you give to a private business that is in the health care industry?

Most private businesses are already in the health care business if they provide employer-sponsored health insurance. In that respect, most health systems are in the same situation as we strive to provide excellent coverage for our employees at reasonable prices.

As to other businesses entering the industry, I believe that the key is data and data analytics. It is an essential ingredient to success in the health care industry, and in that respect, we are probably not different from most industries.

If you are focused, as we are here at Grand View Health, on improving outcomes, providing excellent customer service, and if you work every minute of every day to increase safety and quality, all while striving for lower costs, you will quickly become a necessary component of the industry.

In other words, I would tell new businesses in the health care arena that if you can contribute in a positive way to the achievement of the health care triple aim, you will be successful in this field.

Should a consumer be worried about the potential loss of privacy with respect to his or her personal health care information? Why or why not?

I don't think worried is the word I would use, but consumers should be careful with their private information in the health care arena, just as they should be in all aspects of their lives. I think we all realize that the benefits of electronic medical records in terms of the appropriateness of the care you receive when your physician has immediate and full access to all of your medical information, is invaluable.

Prior to the advent of electronic medical records, we were using incomplete and anecdotal information at best, even in emergency situations. Now, in an integrated delivery system with a robust electronic medical record, accurate and complete medical information is at the fingertips of your physician as he or she provides your care.

We understand the concerns, however, and ensuring patient privacy is among our highest priorities. I believe hospitals, in general, do an excellent job at protecting privacy, and GVH has very strict guidelines and policies regarding privacy and security.

The benefits of electronic medical records are enormous, and our partners in the information technology world are working hard to keep up with the necessary security systems to protect our private information.

Is it perfect? No. But the care we all receive is far and away better because of the advent of electronic health-information sharing.

Do you see any more big changes in health care in the next year or two?

I do not foresee big changes in the next year, but do believe there will be an acceleration of the things going on right now. Physicians, other providers and health care systems will continue to integrate, and they will use data to drive excellence.

Urgent care and telehealth will expand to meet consumer demand, but these programs will increasingly be embedded in the integrated delivery systems, as opposed to free-standing, for-profit entities.

New strategies will emerge to increase health and wellness in our patient populations. These are the things we are doing at Grand View and will continue to do in order to fulfill our mission.

We will look for new ways to work with other community health care providers, with employers, with community leaders and with our patients to improve health and provide the best care possible.

If you could change one thing about your industry, what would it be and why?

So much should change in health care, and we are excited to see some of those changes starting to take shape.

It is difficult to pick just one thing, but perhaps the most impactful thing would be a change in approach to how we all think about health care delivery. We need to break down the artificial barriers that have been created so that we can collaborate in a more thoughtful, open dialogue with all providers, with patients and with community leaders about how best to improve health while reducing costs.

Health and wellness is not the responsibility of the health care community alone; in fact, we cannot be successful in a vacuum. It is the responsibility of each and every one of us, and collaboration is necessary to make any progress in becoming a healthier society.

Editor's note: Appearing periodically, 5 Questions With spotlights a business professional's take on the economy and other industry issues. If you have a suggestion for a subject for this feature, please email Bill Kline at billk@lvb.com.