Friends and relatives gather to remember a pregnant woman and her boyfriend, shot to death at their apartment complex, last week. Neighbors of Breon Stewart and Lionel Delpit, III say they're concerned, the NOPD still hasn't made any arrests in the case.

A steady line of mourners filed into the Treme Center Saturday morning, to say a final goodbye to Stewart, Delpit and their unborn son, all killed by gunfire December 16th.



“It’s so scary and like, who's next? It's really sad,” friend and neighbor Sandreaka Antoine said.



Nicole Stewart, Breon’s mother, says, “I still want her…I want her..I want her to just walk through this door. I want her to use her key and just come home…come to me. I just want my baby to come home. I just want my baby to come home.”



Breon, was just a week away from delivering a baby boy, when police say someone opened fire on the vehicle the 23-year-old and her boyfriend, Lionel Delpit, were sitting in. The shooting happened at the Wind Run Apartment Complex, where the couple lived, in New Orleans East. Residents there are angry that the crime still hasn't been solved.



Joseph Argeyo says, “They need cameras, security better, just for something to happen like this in apartment complex, and nobody seen nothing.”

Many are concerned for their own safety now as police search for one or more gunmen. Investigators believe one of the victims was targeted.

Family say the 25-year-old Delpit was a Mardi Gras Indian Chief. His brother in law, Saints cornerback Keenan Lewis, hopes this tragedy changes lives.

"The message that's the biggest thing, like to show our younger brothers that we can get along without guns, we can do positive things and that's something that he tried to preach,” Lewis said.

According to the NOPD, the shooter or shooters responsible will face two counts of second-degree murder and one count of feticide for killing Breon Stewart's unborn baby. If you know anything about this shooting, call Crimestoppers at 504-822-1111.

Copyright 2015 http://fox8live.com">WVUE. All rights reserved.