SAN FRANCISCO (MarketWatch) — Shares of solar companies were mixed on Tuesday as the U.S. government’s decision to impose higher-than-expected antidumping tariffs on some of the Chinese-based solar-panel makers continued to reverberate through the market.

On Friday, the Commerce Department determined that several China-based solar manufacturers shipped solar products to the U.S. at below cost, tacking on duties ranging from 10.7% to 55.4% on top of antisubsidies tariffs imposed last month.

Perceived beneficiaries such as First Solar Inc. FSLR, +0.20% and SunPower Corp. SPWR, +3.11% rose on Tuesday, while Canadian Solar Inc. CSIQ, +2.19% which has most of its manufacturing in China, declined. China-based solar companies were mostly higher, recovering some ground after losses on Monday.

Canadian Solar said Tuesday it was “deeply disappointed” with the Commerce Department decision, which could have an “overwhelming damaging impact on the U.S. solar industry.”

The company will continue to serve the U.S. market, and by leveraging its supply chains in other countries it does not expect “any significant disruption” to its U.S. business, it said.

Shares of Canadian Solar were down 0.5%.

Trina Solar Ltd. TSL, +1.14% which was hit with duties of 26.3%, the lowest among the Chinese exporters, also reiterated its intention to stay in the U.S. market and grow its business. The allegations of dumping are unfounded and against free and fair trade principles, Trina said. U.S.-listed shares of Trina Solar advanced 4%.

Investment banks also chimed in, with Citi analysts saying Monday that the specifics of the tariffs may be less negative than expected. Among Chinese manufacturers, Trina is likely “better positioned than peers” to weather the storm given its cost structure and resources, Citi said.

For U.S.-based First Solar and SunPower, the impact “is relatively positive as they do not rely materially on Chinese suppliers,” the Citi analysts said. “Within the US, the utility scale solar market is more price sensitive than in the residential distributed generation market and therefore the utility scale market and First Solar may see a greater positive impact.”

Shares of First Solar rose 1.1%, while SunPower shares were up 0.4%.

The broad U.S. equity market rose on Tuesday, with the Dow Jones Industrial Average above 17,000 and the S&P 500 near a record on upbeat corporate earnings and better-than-expected consumer sentiment data.

More must-reads from MarketWatch:

From the penitentiary to the podium: a MarketWatch special report

Consumer confidence at highest since 2007

More from MarketWatch