Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio mingles among those who attended his event at Mount Pleasant on Wednesday.

Republican presidential hopeful Marco Rubio stopped by the Lowcountry on Wednesday to present his vision for the future of the country.

About 100 people crammed onto the deck of the Water’s Edge restaurant in Mount Pleasant to listen to Florida’s junior senator. Though Rubio did not present or pitch any new ideas, it was an opportunity for those in attendance to hear them in person.

Rubio, who was introduced by South Carolina Sen. Tim Scott, called for the country’s electorate to pick a president who can tackle the world’s changing economy and address growing threats against the United States.

He voiced concern over decreased federal military spending in the face of a growing Islamic State.

“ISIS is a dangerous and growing threat,” Rubio said. “We have no choice but to confront them and defeat them. Either they win or we win. There is no middle ground here.”

Rubio also brought up some of his familiar talking points, such as the need to repeal the Affordable Care Act, and changing the way America treats higher education by highlighting the need for more vocational and career training outside of four-year colleges.

“The student loan problem in America is massive,” Rubio said. “It is crippling the lives of young people in America.”

Julie Beeks, 24, of Charleston said she still hasn’t decided which candidate she will vote for. But she said Rubio is young, attractive and charismatic — everything the Republican Party needs in a candidate to help broaden its base.

The Charleston School of Law student added she has seen him in person before, and that every time she walks away impressed.

“I think that he’s a breath of fresh air,” Beeks said. “It’s nice to have that in a presidential candidate.”

Though Rubio posed for pictures with those who attended the event, he did not participate in a question-and-answer session with the public nor did he make himself available to reporters.

Dave Newman of Charleston said he attended the event, however, because he wanted to see Rubio in person. He added that Rubio’s even-keeled demeanor is among the many things he likes in the presidential candidate.

“I can see him as president,” Newman said. “He was probably who I was going to vote for before. He is definitely who I’m going to vote for now.”

Reach Cynthia Roldan at 843-577-7111.