Say this for the Rockies: They don’t go quietly into the night.

But no amount of LoDo magic could rescue them from bad pitching, a mess of walks and a rash of double plays Saturday night in an 8-5 loss to the San Diego Padres at Coors Field.

A terrible start by heretofore reliable starter Jordan Lyles put the Rockies in a 6-1 hole after three innings.

“I’m not sure if I want to watch the film, it’s going to hurt,” Lyles said. “I mean, I walked 10 or 11 guys, I think. That’s not me. I guess it’s one of those things where you just turn the page and look forward to your next outing. Our guys kept battling … and they almost came back and picked me up.”

For the record, Lyles walked only six — still a career high — but it sure seemed like more. He needed 92 pitches (46 strikes) to get through 3 innings. It marked just the third time in his career he failed to make it to the fourth inning.

But led by National League batting leader Troy Tulowitzki, the Rockies rallied to make things promising. That is, until San Diego pinch-hitter Carlos Quentin rocked reliever Chris Martin with a two-run homer in the seventh inning to extend the Padres’ lead to 8-5.

PHOTOS: Colorado Rockies 5, San Diego Padres 8, May 17, 2014

Lyles was touted as the groundball specialist, but it was Padres starter Robbie Erlin who wriggled out of major trouble by inducing four double-play grounders in his 5 innings. All told, the Rockies grounded into five double plays, matching the club record set vs. Atlanta on April 18, 1997, and at San Francisco on Sept. 4, 2002.

“We got down early, made a move and got in a position to win that game,” manager Walt Weiss said. “It was a tough game, but we fought back.”

Lyles’ stock was sky high coming into the night: a 5-0 record, 2.66 ERA and impeccable control. Even the San Diego TV crew interviewed Weiss about Lyles before the game. Lyles then crashed like it was October 1929.

Lyles’ control was absent from the first inning on and he ended up getting pounded for six runs on five hits. His three walks in San Diego’s first inning were punctuated by Yonder Alonso’s two-run double.

Was it simply a matter of Lyles not having command of his pitches?

“Nothing more than he just struggled to throw strikes,” Weiss said. “He has been really good, but he just struggled tonight. He’s been pretty much lights out. He’s been very good, but he didn’t have it tonight.”

As a staff, Rockies pitchers issued a season-high nine walks.

“I just threw too many balls, and gave up too many walks,” Lyles said. “I’m not going to be successful doing that here, or anywhere.”

Lyles served up a loud two-run homer to center to former Rockies outfielder Seth Smith in the second inning. His wild pitch to Chris Denorfia in the third inning was so wild, it nearly hit the backstop on the fly.

The Rockies have now lost six of their past eight games, but Tulo just keeps raking. He went 3-for-4 and raised his batting average to .400. He’s hit safely in 16 of his 17 games at Coors Field this season, a place where he’s hitting .603 with seven homers, seven doubles and 23 RBIs.

Tulowitzki hit a solo shot to deep left field in the first inning, his 12th homer of the season. He singled in the fourth to advance Drew Stubbs to third base. Stubbs then scored on Carlos Gonzalez’s sacrifice fly.

In the sixth, Stubbs and Tulo singled in front of CarGo, setting the table for CarGo’s two-run double that soared over center fielder Will Venable. That cut the Padres’ lead to 6-5.

Tulo came close to hero time in the seventh. With two on, he screeched a two-out line drive — only to see it find the glove of diving third baseman Chase Headley. Tulo tossed his bat and helmet, a symbol of the Rockies’ frustration Saturday.

“It feels good for me, but it’s tough to lose,” said CarGo, who went 2-for-3 and showed signs of breaking out of his lingering slump. “Lyles didn’t have his best stuff tonight, so it was tough. We weren’t ready for that. I think about the way he’s been piching the whole year, so everytime he’s on the mound, we kind of expect better than that.

“But you can’t blame him, bad games happen. He’s been really good since he got the call. It’s a tough loss, but we just have to show up tomorrow and win the game.”