AURORA — Little Joel Fernandez had some respiratory problems recently, mainly wheezing, so his mother, Lindsay Halvarson, took him into the Child Health Clinic at Children’s Hospital Colorado.

The 10-month-old, born with chronic lung disease, had already undergone one lung surgery.

On this day, the boy was a champ as Dr. Maya Bunik placed a medicine-filled inhaler in his mouth.

All better.

“I love Dr. Bunik,” Halvarson said. “They have awesome support here.”

The clinic, funded in part by the Children’s Hospital Colorado Foundation, is a past recipient of Denver Post Charities Season to Share funding.

The clinic serves 24,000 patients a year, mainly low-income people on Medicaid, Bunik said.

Bunik said the clinic offers families a variety of services, from vaccinations and medical care to help with mental health issues.

Also available are financial counselors, social workers, and lawyers for medical and housing issues. The clinic also provides practical advice, such as how eligible families can secure food-stamp benefits.

“When they come, they get everything,” Bunik said.

Children’s Hospital Colorado Foundation spokeswoman Monique Bronner said the organization serves patients in a seven-state region with multiple locations throughout the area. In addition to its children’s health clinics, the organization has urgent-care facilities.

Funded through donations, the foundation is solely focused on advancing the mission of Children’s Hospital Colorado.

For people such as Halvarson, the Child Health Clinic is a godsend. She takes Joel to the clinic every two weeks or so to make sure he’s OK.

“I have a lot of people call and check up on me. I love this family,” Halvarson said of the clinic staff. “I will never change.”

Carlos Illescas: 303-954-1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or twitter.com/cillescasdp

Children’s Hospital Colorado Foundation

Address: 13123 E. 16th Ave.

In operation since: 1978 (foundation); 1908 (hospital)

Number served last year: 186,277

Staff: 5,000 plus

Yearly budget: $765 million (hospital)

Percentage of funds directly given to clients and services: 100 percent