SAN ANTONIO--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Execupay, the leading privately owned provider of HR and Payroll services and software, and Sam’s Club, a leading membership warehouse club, announced today the release of Sam’s Club Payroll powered by Execupay, a full-service payroll and HR offering that will be available for the first time to Sam’s Club members at an exclusive, members-only discounted price.

Sam’s Club Payroll brings extraordinary value to members by combining time-saving features, like easy-to-use online payroll, time and attendance, employee access, and Affordable Care Act reporting, with the white glove customer service appreciated by Execupay's customers for 40 years. Members can run payroll in as little as one simple step from a smartphone, tablet or desktop computer, in less than a minute. Tax filings and payments are automatically handled electronically, so members can leave the worries and hassles of payroll taxes to the experts.

Enrollment for a payroll service of this caliber has never been easier. Members enroll online with a simple Enrollment Wizard, and a live payroll expert helps complete the technical details. To assist members at any stage of the enrollment or payroll process, Execupay’s dedicated payroll specialists are available by phone, email or online.

Premium Features without the Premium Price

Sam’s Club Payroll powered by Execupay is the first and only online payroll service to offer premium product features at a low price point that is available exclusively to Sam’s Club members. In addition to traditional features offered by competitive online payroll services, Sam’s Club Enhanced Payroll includes the following features:

HR Library – Members gain access to HR rules, laws, sample policies, handbooks, and job descriptions.

– Members gain access to HR rules, laws, sample policies, handbooks, and job descriptions. Employee Time and Attendance – Employees can clock in/out from any PC or device, reducing data entry at payroll time.

– Employees can clock in/out from any PC or device, reducing data entry at payroll time. Employee Access – Employees can request time off, receive paystubs, and share messages and documents through an employee Intranet.

– Employees can request time off, receive paystubs, and share messages and documents through an employee Intranet. Employee and Employer Text Notifications – Members receive text messages with payroll-oriented reminders and messages

A Joint Effort to Empower Small Businesses

The collaboration between Execupay and Sam’s Club was formed out of a mutual commitment to help small businesses prosper by saving them time and money on the services they need most.

“Execupay believes that a business, whether it has 2 or 200 employees, should not have to struggle to process payroll,” says Gerald Stowers, CEO of Execupay. “Too many businesses operate without a payroll service because they think it is too expensive or too complicated, a luxury for large businesses. Sam’s Club Payroll will change that perception. With thousands of existing business members and a shared commitment to small business, Sam’s Club is the ideal retailer to join us in launching the most affordable and easy-to-use full-service payroll solution on the market.”

“Sam’s Club and Execupay recognize the need to offer small business owners simple, personalized solutions that are affordable and enabled by technology,” said Seong Ohm, Senior Vice President of Membership Services at Sam’s Club. “Execupay’s full-service, direct-style online product combines cutting-edge technology with all the benefits of a full-service payroll company. The time our members will save using Sam’s Club Payroll is as valuable to small business owners as the savings we provide.”

Sam’s Club members or businesses interested in Sam’s Club Payroll can enroll or find more information at SamsClub.com/payroll or call 1-866-895-1530 to speak to a representative.

About Sam’s Club

Sam’s Club®, a division of Wal-Mart Stores, Inc. (NYSE: WMT), is a leading membership warehouse club offering superior products, savings and services to millions of members in 643 clubs in the U.S. and Puerto Rico. To learn more about Sam’s Club, visit the Sam’s Club Newsroom, shop at SamsClub.com, and interact with Sam’s Club on Twitter and Facebook.

About Execupay

Headquartered in San Antonio, Texas, Execupay provides human capital management services and solutions covering payroll, time and labor management, talent acquisition, talent management, and HR management to thousands of companies of all sizes throughout the United States and Internationally. The company also licenses payroll service software and offers private label partnership opportunities. Driven by technology and innovation, Execupay is the largest privately owned provider of payroll and human capital management software for payroll service companies in the United States and provides payroll to over 1 million employees. For additional information, call (210) 366-9511 or visit http://www.execupay.com.