"Car and Driver" magazine provides these specs for a 2007 Maserati Quattroporte:

VEHICLE TYPE: front-engine, rear-wheel-drive, 5-passenger, 4-door sedan

BASE PRICE: $104,950

ENGINE TYPE: DOHC 32-valve V-8, aluminum block and heads, port fuel injection

Displacement: 259 cu in, 4244cc

Power (SAE net): 396 bhp @ 7000 rpm

Torque (SAE net): 339 lb-ft @ 4250 rpm

TRANSMISSION: 6-speed automatic with manumatic shifting

DIMENSIONS:

Wheelbase: 120.6 in Length: 198.9 in Width: 74.6 in Height: 56.6 in

Curb weight: 4400 lb

PERFORMANCE (MFR'S EST):

Zero to 62 mph: 5.6 sec

Top speed (governor limited): 168 mph

PROJECTED FUEL ECONOMY ( C/D EST):

EPA city driving: 13 mpg

EPA highway driving: 19 mpg

Robert Mays, 38, a former unsuccessful candidate for the Assembly in the 31st District, has been driving a blue one for months. When he first showed up in the car at some city function, I asked him about how he got the luxury sedan and he ducked the question in his usual laughing way. In my mind I just said, "Hmmmm."

U.S. Attorney Paul Fishman said yesterday it was purchased with some of more than $200,000 allegedly stolen by Mays from the Jersey City Child Development Centers Inc. where he was the executive director.

Mays also used the money to allegedly buy a fur coat and other items, I guess to look good on the way to federal court. My jaundiced reaction is simple: Why am I not surprised?

Child Development operated the city's Head Start Program for a half-century. Last June, Greater Bergen Community Action took over Head Start, a program aimed at helping families and preschool children, and funding was pulled from the Child Development agency. Jobs were lost. When news of the switch was announced, anyone who works with or covers government guessed it must have been the result of a federal audit. Although we had our usual suspicions, we just didn't know what could have been found.

Mays has a penchant for sports cars -- slightly old versions, that one presumes were more affordable, of a Jag or some such exotic vehicle.

When I saw him at any political function, I always kidded him about arriving by bicycle or if he hitched a ride with a certain Jersey City councilman who was facing DWI charges after a motor vehicle accident earlier this year. Small in stature, he would respond by nervously laughing, seeming to look smaller, telling me I "sucked" and often calling me the meanest man in the city. Of course, I'd agree.

It wasn't that he didn't have a likable personality. His most present flaw was always that he was another one of those people who seemed to be trying too hard to be liked. There was always a sense of despair about him, a need to be bigger than what he is.

When Mays ran in a losing effort for an Assembly seat in 2010, he revealed in a Journal interview: "His mother was a drug addict who left Mays and six other siblings to pretty much fend for themselves while she pursued the siren song of drugs. Mays says he's never met his father, who is in prison."

He also admitted to having spent two years in the Hudson County Youth House for robbery and assault. Having gone to community college and New Jersey City University, where he certified in special education, it seemed like a redemption story.

The problem is that when he rose to become dean of students at Snyder High school, the district became disenchanted with him when he reportedly didn't show up for work enough times to merit a job.

There was an interesting incident during his run for the Assembly.

The 31st District seat was vacated by Bayonne's Anthony Chiappone, who earlier in the year pleaded guilty to filing false campaign reports. The Hudson County Democratic Organization then chose Jason O'Donnell, also of Bayonne, to occupy the seat until the special election.

Mays is an African-American running as an independent and was a Bayonne resident at the time.

The HCDeadO-approved candidate became incensed over fliers being placed on cars parked in Jersey City's Ward F, the heart of the African-American community. Below is what was reported in the Political Insider:

"The propaganda has a picture of O'Donnell and notes that the legislator needs the black vote. It then labels him a racist. The literature claims O'Donnell, chairman of the Bayonne Democratic Organization, refused to support Barack Obama in the presidential election and attributes to him an unsubstantiated quote where the N-word is displayed.

"O'Donnell is incensed over the handouts and denies any validity to its content.

"He called it 'pathetic' and a desperate attempt to hurt his campaign. It's obvious that he blames the Mays camp without pointing the finger.

"Mays denies it.

"'I have no idea who is putting this stuff out,' said the challenger. Mays then complained about literature being spread around that portrays him as a woman-beater.

"'They even have one with a photo of me in a do-rag when I was younger,' Mays said.

"One flier shows a picture of Mays next to that of a woman's puffy, black and blue face. Her eyes are closed. It claims the candidate beat his 'pregnant girlfriend' and that he believes in the abuse because 'they are always back talking.'

"Here's the problem with this literature. The woman's photo is that of singer Rihanna when she was abused by boyfriend Chris Brown in 2009."

Ironically, Mays was arrested in May of this year on domestic violence, simple assault and criminal mischief charges by Jersey City police.

Mays allegedly got into an argument with an ex-girlfriend, grabbing the woman's arms "causing a complaint of pain with no visible signs of injuries," according to the police report.

The luxury sports car enthusiast is accused of breaking the side view mirror off of his ex-girlfriend's pedestrian vehicle before fleeing with the broken pieces (evidence?), police said. Minutes later, he turned himself into police custody without incident.

We're not sure of the court outcome but the bet is that it didn't go anywhere.

Early this year, I believe, Mays surprised me by saying he was the director of the city's Child Development Program. He's glib and could BS with the best of them. I was puzzled as to how he merited the post but he thought highly enough of himself to supposedly increase his salary from $96,500 to $155,000, after only two months on the job.

Although there were some credentials, I remind myself that this is Hudson County and he has been intimately involved in politics. You know what I mean.

I suppose we'll learn more in the months ahead in federal court.

POINT OF ORDER

When I covered the Union City beat, I recall meetings that went until three in the morning. This happened when Mayor William V. Musto was ousted in a major upset in the '70s. The Musto operatives lined up many supporters to attack the rival commissioners at every meeting.

In those days there were no limits on speech, as long as there were lucid sentences. And those people came at the commissioners in shifts. If you were an elected official back then, you were taught to take the hits and praises.

Woe unto any elected official who attempted to cut off any speaker. If they didn't get guff back in City Hall, those officials knew they'd get it in the streets.

I was thinking about this when I read and watched streaming video of Hoboken City Council President Rav Bhalla cutting off speakers and ordering police to "escort" them out of the council chambers.

It seems correspondence had surfaced that show Mayor Dawn Zimmer's husband, Stan Grossbard, actively directing and mentoring the ousting of Carmelo Garcia as Hoboken Housing Authority executive director. The ousted speakers, including constant council battering ram and Bhalla critic Perry Belfiore, wanted to question – or pontificate – about Grossbard's role in government, referring to the First Hubby as de facto mayor.

Bhalla defended his actions by saying he would not tolerate any attack at a council meeting against a "private" citizen. There were catcalls and shouts in response. Both sides had wrapped themselves tightly in blankets of indignation.

I know that somewhere, Musto is laughing.



INSIDER NOTES

-- If any of you are hungry around 2 p.m. today, here's a press release from Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop that may interest you.

Mayor Steven M. Fulop, Deputy Mayor Marcos Vigil, members of the City Council, and Office of Cultural Affairs, will join with Paella for the World Organization to kickoff the Second Annual New Jersey Paella Festival and the semi-finals of the International Valencian Paella Festival.

The event will be held today in City Hall Plaza. It will feature 14 experienced chefs representing Venezuela, Chile, Portugal, Mexico, Catalonia, Spain, Cuba, New Jersey and Florida who will prepare their best Valencian paella. The public is invited to attend and taste the different paella dishes from around the world.

The winners of the semifinals will travel to Valencia, Spain next year to compete in the International Valencian Paella Contest World Championship, the oldest and most prestigious paella competition in the world.

Maalox will be made available – kidding.

-- I can not recall receiving a press release about a citizen's intention to attend a local government meeting with a mission of raising a ruckus, but Patrick J. Leonard did – send the release and create a fuss at the meeting.

Leonard, a city employee, charged that some members of the council illegally accepted health benefits. The next day three council members said they made a mistake.

-- I'll be in Boston today but tonight, Go RU. College football No. 1 Ohio State is visiting New Jersey.

EDITOR'S NOTE: Agustin C. Torres' columns appear in The Jersey Journal every Saturday.