Cleveland Clinic's budding relationship with the Coral Springs Fire Department for a community paramedicine program was one of the key factors that influenced the medical center's decision to expand in the city.

The hospital's proposed 65,000-square-foot Family Health Center will include a clinic with a maximum of 40 examination rooms, an ambulatory surgery center with four operating suites, and procedure rooms. The facility, which will be built in two years, will be located on the southeast corner of the Sawgrass Expressway and University Drive.

"Cleveland Clinic, which now has six locations in Broward and Palm Beach counties, has been working with our fire department on some future partnership opportunities," said City Manager Erdal Donmez. "That was one of the reasons they chose Coral Springs as their future home."

The fire department's program changes the current practice of paramedics having to transport every person who calls 911 for medical reasons to the hospital emergency room. Non-emergency care is now being provided to the caller at his or her home; the department is also in the process of converting one of its fire trucks into a mobile integrated healthcare unit, or a virtual mobile urgent-care facility.

The department, after inviting bids from hospitals to be a part of the project, decided to partner with Cleveland Clinic. Community paramedicine programs, which are an offshoot of the Affordable Care Act, are gaining popularity all over the country and are already in states such as North Carolina, Colorado, Minnesota and Maine, and in cities like Pittsburgh, San Diego, Dallas and Reno.

Vice Mayor Larry Vignola and Commissioner Dan Daley were excited to welcome the medical center to the city. "They will be doing a 65,000-square-foot development," Daly said. "That is jobs; that is technology; that is a job well done. I am very excited to have them."

"This will bring great health options for our residents along with adding $70 million to our tax rolls," Vignola said. "It is very, very good for our community."

"The expansion will allow us to better meet the increasing demand for specialized services, more convenient access, and expanded inpatient capacity for the region," Toby Cosgrove, MD, president & CEO of Cleveland Clinic, stated in a press release.