By Jason Hart | Ohio Watchdog

A method of drilling for oil and gas is bringing new energy production and employment to southeast Ohio, yet Gov. John Kasich wants to tax it even more.

Free-market think tank Opportunity Ohio released a video last week criticizing Kasich’s plan to increase taxes on companies using horizontal hydraulic fracturing, also known as “fracking,” to extract oil and natural gas from shale deposits.

In March, dozens of employers and elected officials launched the Protect Ohio Jobs Coalition, claiming a fracking tax hike could jeopardize tens of thousands of jobs.

According to Opportunity Ohio, the proposal included in Kasich’s 2016-17 budget clashes with President Ronald Reagan’s adage, “if you want less of something, tax it.”

A series of Opportunity Ohio videos released in 2013 warned that a fracking tax hike represented government picking winners and losers, and it was likely to harm employment — not just in the industry but in much of Appalachian Ohio.

Opportunity Ohio estimates energy companies have invested more than $30 billion in fracking in southeast Ohio and have earned $3 billion from those investments. Oil production has been far lower than anticipated, already prompting some companies to leave the state.

Kasich, a Republican, has been pushing for a tax hike on fracking since 2012.

The governor presents his push for a fracking tax hike as proof of his indifference to special interests — but he embraced the Obamacare Medicaid expansion at the Ohio Hospital Association’s behest after campaigning against it.

Why the disconnect?

“I think John Kasich understands intimately how hospital subsidies from government work, but fundamentally doesn’t comprehend how the free market really works,” Opportunity Ohio president Matt Mayer said in an email to Ohio Watchdog.

“He can say the words, but can’t get the ideas,” Mayer added.

Like many states, Ohio charges severance taxes for removing natural resources from the ground. Kasich contends that Ohio’s severance tax is too low, and could be increased without driving employers away.

Since 2012, Kasich’s plan has been to use a severance tax hike to pay for a statewide income tax cut. He explained his dedication to the idea in the face of continued legislative opposition at a campaign event in October.

“I want everybody in Ohio to get a cut, a tax cut outta this,” Kasich said when asked about the fracking tax. “We were proposing 4 (percent). Every day they (legislators) wait it goes higher.”

Critics, including industry group the Ohio Oil & Gas Association, have pushed back, pointing to steep drilling rig startup costs and the other taxes Ohio levies on energy companies while also reminding the governor resources in Ohioans’ property don’t belong to the state.

“Like a high income tax, the proposed severance tax increase promises to penalize one of Ohio’s most promising industries and ultimately drive job-creators from the state,” Joe Nichols of the free-market Buckeye Institute wrote in a March 20 Forbes column.

Given his administration’s emphasis on job creation, why has Kasich fixated on hiking the severance tax instead of, for instance, simplifying Ohio’s tangled local income tax system?

“Kasich’s zealous drive for higher energy taxes is all about getting him the money he needs to keep government spending high,” Mayer told Ohio Watchdog. “Municipal tax reform doesn’t do that.”

The governor’s press secretary did not respond to questions about Kasich’s quest for a severance tax hike.

Ohio’s current severance tax rate for crude oil is 20 cents per barrel, and the rate for natural gas is 2.5 cents per thousand cubic feet. Kasich’s proposed fracking tax hike would not affect the rate for conventional oil and natural gas wells.

In his 2016-17 budget, Kasich is calling for “fixed rates for crude oil and natural gas of 6.5 percent when sold at the wellhead, and a lower rate of 4.5 percent for natural gas and natural gas liquids when sold downstream.”

The current iteration of Kasich’s fracking tax hike is one of several tax hike proposals included in his budget as a way to pay for additional income tax cuts. Kasich is also seeking to hike the sales tax, the gross receipts tax on businesses, the cigarette tax and e-cigarette taxes.

Both Opportunity Ohio and The Buckeye Institute have encouraged the Ohio General Assembly to pay for income tax cuts by cutting spending instead of shifting the tax burden to specific activities and industries.