Major Fast Food Chain Wants Robot Restaurants

Minimum wage movement and government drive up costs of fast food employees

By Joe Trotter

The CEO of the company that owns Carl’s Jr. and Hardees is fed up with the cost of employees and has decided to begin replacing them with automated technology. Andy Puzder, the CEO of CKE, spoke to Business Insider about fast food automation after visiting Eatsa, a completely employee-free automated restaurant.

According to Puzder, this drive for automation comes as a direct result of government intervention in the labor markets. “With government driving up the cost of labor, it’s driving down the number of jobs,” said Puzder. “You’re going to see automation not just in airports and grocery stores, but in restaurants.”

“This is the problem with Bernie Sanders, and Hillary Clinton, and progressives who push very hard to raise the minimum wage,” said Puzder. “Does it really help if Sally makes $3 more an hour if Suzie has no job? If you’re making labor more expensive, and automation less expensive — this is not rocket science.”

As for Pudzer’s take on robots, “They’re always polite, they always upsell, they never take a vacation, they never show up late, there’s never a slip-and-fall, or an age, sex, or race discrimination case.”

While there may be issues with less technologically-savvy customers being unable to understand how to work the technology, Pudzer notes there is an upside.

“Millennials like not seeing people,” he said. “I’ve been inside restaurants where we’ve installed ordering kiosks … and I’ve actually seen young people waiting in line to use the kiosk where there’s a person standing behind the counter, waiting on nobody.”

The news comes on the heels of the recent opening of an employee free store in Sweden, run entirely through a smart phone app. In that case, the company founder realized the greatest barrier to having a 24-hour store was the cost of staffing.

The core problem with the $15 minimum wage movement, which has been gaining traction in many areas around the US, is that at a certain point, it becomes more cost effective for businesses to turn to automation or to move entirely. Like Pudzer says, what’s the point in raising the minimum wage if it costs people jobs?