By Robert Alonso and Gene Wexler

A local congressman is pushing for a constitutional amendment that would require all United States Congress members to live by all the laws they pass.



Ron DeSantis formally introduced the amendment on Wednesday along with co-sponsor and fellow Republican Matt Salmon of Arizona.



“Passing laws that apply to the American people but that exempt Congress is inconsistent with the ideals of a republican form of government," DeSantis said. “Those who serve in Washington should be part of a service culture, not part of a ruling class that lives under its own set of rules."



The US House Representative for St. Johns County says this amendment would ensure that Congress members can't do things like pass the Affordable Care Act - better known as Obamacare - and then decide that it doesn't apply to them.



“Americans know full well that Congress refuses to hold itself accountable," DeSantis stated. "This very necessary amendment would ensure that Congress always lives under the same rules as Main Street and that no American need fear a law that doesn’t apply equally to their representatives in Washington.”



House Representative Ted Yoho (R-Gainesville) is an original co-sponsor of this amendment.



If it passes, it would be the 28th amendment to the US Constitution.

"I think it would be a source of political hygiene," DeSantis says, also acknowledging that passing the amendment will be "an uphill battle."



He introduced a House bill in April 2015 that would have specifically made the President, Vice-President and all Congress members take part in Obamacare. It hasn't moved since then.

DeSantis uses Obamacare as one of the ways Congress has exempted themselves from the rules. He says they created a separate exchange with separate subsidies that aren't included in the statute.

"And I'm not a part of this because I declined the subsidy because I don't think it's legal," DeSantis says. "This is an example of making a special accomodation for Congress, which is obviously unfair because so many Americans, if they have a problem with Obamacare, they don't have that type of recourse. They basically have to eat the cost."

He also says the landmark 1964 Civil Rights Act didn't apply to Congress for about 30 years after it was passed.

"That very law that now people celebrate - Congress did not apply it to itself," DeSantis says. "I think when people see that, I think they just shake their heads."



The Republican also introduced another constitutional amendment a month later that proposed a 3-term limit on House members and a 2-term limit for Senators. It's also currently sitting in subcommittee.