Steve Hoggard brought his family Sunday to Pearl Street Mall for the annual menorah lighting ceremony, joining a big, cheerful crowd.

The first night of Hanukkah is special, Hoggard said, making it a good time to connect with the larger Jewish community.

"It's a 5,000-year tradition that my people have engaged in," he said. "It's lighting a candle in the darkness."

Added his friend, Seth Frankel, "It's a holiday of hope, and we need a heck of a lot of hope right now."

During the hour-long celebration, people munched on sufganiyot — a jelly donut — and homemade latkes by local chef Josh Raderman and sang along with musician Sheldon Sands.

Sven Jorgensen performs a fire juggling act before the lighting of the menorah for the Hanukkah on Pearl Street Mall celebration on the first day of Hanukkah Sunday. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

Duo Sven Jorgensen and Bryan Connolly provided the main entertainment, wowing people with their acrobatic and fire juggling show.

And before Ron Werner, president of the mountain states board of the Jewish National Fund, lit the menorah, Rabbi Pesach Scheiner talked about the importance of community.

"There's a special power when Jews get together," he said. "Gatherings have a great power to lead to unity."

Chany Scheiner, co-director of the Boulder Center for Judaism, said the outdoor lighting event grows each year, with a goal of inclusivity. Keeping a lit menorah in the window is part of the Hanukkah tradition of sharing the light.

"It's about bringing light to the world and creating a sense of community," she said. "People really look forward to it each year."

Advertisement

Becky O'Brien, who lives in Lafayette, said this was the first year she made it to the event — in previous years, the event was on a school night, the weather was bad or conflicted with other events.

"All the stars aligned this year," she said.

Along with celebrating the first night of Hanukkah with the community, she said, she was drawn by the promise of latkes.

"You can't have too many latkes," she said.

Ron Werner of HW Homes lights the menorah for the Hanukkah on Pearl Street Mall celebration on the first day of Hanukkah Sunday. (David R. Jennings / Staff Photographer)

Sunday's event was sponsored by the Boulder County Center for Judaism, the Boulder Jewish Community Center , the Boulder Jewish News, JEWISHcolorado, the Jewish National Fund and the Oreg Foundation.

On Tuesday, another public menorah lighting ceremony is planned, this one at the University of Colorado at Boulder.

Sponsored by Chabad at CU, the event will include jelly doughnuts and latkes and free menorah kits to encourage participants to light their own at home. A nine-foot menorah also will be displayed on Hellems Lawn during the week.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa





If you go

What: CU-Boulder public Chanukah celebration

When: 6 p.m. Tuesday

Visual Arts Complex Plaza near the UMC