Buy Photo A group of Louisville residents and officials toured a methane biodigester near Fort Wayne, Ind., last November, similar to one proposed for western Louisville. (Photo: Jere Downs/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

The final neighborhood meeting to discuss a controversial plan to build a methane plant in a western Louisville neighborhood has been scheduled.

STAR BioEnergy CEO Steve Estes announced his company will host a Jan. 14 forum at the Kentucky Center for African American Heritage, 1701 W. Muhammad Ali Blvd., to discuss proposed changes to the project with interested residents.

The meeting is set to begin at 6 p.m., he said.

“This meeting will be specifically to inform the community of the changes to the original plans and why the initial plans were altered,” Estes said in a Dec. 31 letter.

STAR will also “inform the community as to any other significant changes to its plans at this meeting and attempt to answer all pertinent questions,” Estes said.

The city’s zoning board postponed voting on the project until STAR held another community meeting after the Ft. Wayne, Ind.-based company altered parts of the project shortly before officials were asked to approve a conditional use permit.

STAR is requesting a conditional use permit from the board to build a 3,700-square-foot building along with four 44-foot-tall sealed tanks at 17th and Maple streets. The original plan had called for building just three methane tanks, however.

Supporters of the plan – including Mayor Greg Fischer – have said the technology, which turn bourbon stillage and other food waste into methane gas, is an important green energy project that would benefit the city. But a growing grassroots movement made of California neighborhood leaders and other residents have opposed building the $32 million facility at that location, citing safety and health concerns.

Metro Council President David Tandy, who was initially OK with the project, said in recent weeks it would be better to build the facility at the city’s landfill as a test site before placing the methane plant in such a densely residential neighborhood.

The zoning board is scheduled to reconsider STAR's permit request at its Jan. 21 meeting.

Reporter Phillip M. Bailey can be reached at (502) 582-4475 or pbailey@courier-journal.com.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1R2142G