Editor,

L.A. Tarone’s latest skewering of Gov. Tom Wolf disguised not so well as “even-handed” analysis again fails to note the obvious. The governor won by a half-million votes in 2014 running on a platform to tax Marcellus Shale extractions and join the other 49 states that already do tax gas and oil extraction.

Two days after Tarone’s column, the Standard-Speaker published an article commenting on a Franklin and Marshall poll which definitively shows that taxing Marcellus Shale gas is not a liberal position to take in Pennsylvania. That is unless Mr. Tarone believes that 73 percent of voters in Pennsylvania are liberals.

Wolf was elected to tax drillers before they completely drain the gas fields in 19 more years. They got away with 11 years of paying a pittance for destroying our environment and lives of people whose water is polluted and roads are crushed. That is not paying a tax; that is paying guilty reparations. What value do you place on clean water, good roads and bridges, and untouched forests and streams? Can a few million a year cover that?

Tarone mentions an extraction tax in passing but doesn’t indicate what he would decide to do were he governor. I suspect he would let big business and oil and gas corporations off the hook like the GOP Legislature has done in Pennsylvania for over a decade. Former Gov. Tom Corbett and the GOP legislators in the meantime piled up millions of dollars in campaign contributions from the Marcellus Shale drillers’ trillionaires who are raping the environment like the coal barons did for 100 years.

We already pay the lowest personal income tax of any state in America that pays that tax. A few states don’t. I agree in the GOP position that raising a regressive flat tax is not helpful to the middle class.

Raising the sales tax to 6.6 percent on the same items taxed now plus a 5 percent severance tax on the drillers’ extractions would balance the budget. Neither of those are likely to happen with this current corrupt Legislature.

So, we will drift along year after year with no state budgets in the years they are due. This year’s budget will drag into 2017 while June 30 just passes by. There is a constitutional duty to pass a balanced budget in Pennsylvania, yet the Legislature has pressured the governor to not do that. Maybe they are looking for a back door to impeach him? This new budget agreement is $2 billion short by June 30. Is this constitutional? The Legislature is required to pass a balanced budget. It has deliberately failed to do that.

When Senate leader Mitch McConnell said on the day President Barack Obama was inaugurated the first time in 2008, the GOP’s mission was to oppose everything the president proposed. Well, the Pennsylvania GOP has followed suit and doubled down with Wolf. You cannot fool most of the people all of the time. Wolf will win by a million votes in 2018 because the national GOP will have been destroyed by Donald Trump in 2016.

The clock is ticking; the gas is being extracted tax free in Pennsylvania. No wonder the other 49 states are laughing at us and our Legislature. Please, Mr. Tarone, tell us what you would do with the extraction tax issue in Pennsylvania?

Dave Panckeri,

Weatherly