Registration is now open for one-day workshops for adults at Arts Guild New Jersey. The Arts Guild will be offering two exciting workshops one of which will be taught by Newark artist Lisa Conrad, Paper Lithography on Saturday, April 26.

The second workshop will be taught by Donna Conklin King, Mosaics: Making Pictures with Tiny Pieces also on April 26. The Mosaics workshop will be held in our studio classroom space on the corner of Easterbrook and Milton Avenues in Rahway at the Senior Center Annex, 125 West Milton Ave. Paper Lithography will be held at Arts Guild New Jersey, 1670 Irving St, Rahway.

For more information about these workshops, as well as our regular 8-week art classes, access the online course catalog at agnj.org (Art Classes page) or call 732-381-7511 to request a printed booklet.

To register for workshops access our website (agnj.org) or the call our office at 732-381-711. Payment for these workshops can be done with a credit card through the website.

Paper Lithography will be held on Saturday, April 26, from 10 a.m. to 2 p.m., at Arts Guild New Jersey. The workshop fee is $85 for members, $95 for non-members. This photo-transfer technique is based on the act of grease repelling water. Participants should bring 6 to 8 Xerox prints to the workshop which will be treated and transferred to art papers. High contrast prints with few or no gray tones works best for this technique. All other materials are included. The workshop aims to guide participants in the production of multiple prints using this simple process and basic printmaking techniques.

Mosaics: Making Pictures with Tiny Pieces will be held on Saturday, April 26, from 10 a.m. to 4 p.m., at the Arts Guild New Jersey Senior Center Annex. The workshop fee is $110 for members, $125 for non-members (includes materials fee). Learn the exciting art of mosaics. Design, cut, glue and grout vitreous glass tiles to create an original 6” x 8” work ready for framing. Bring in your own simple design, or pick on of the designs provided in class. Learn about the Picasiette (broken plate) method and other techniques. Your original mosaic will be ready to frame.

Lisa Conrad is an artist and trained art educator living and working in Newark. She studied studio arts and art education at Kean University in Union. As an educator, she seeks to create the conditions necessary for authentic artistic engagement through a structured, exploratory, and sensory-based pedagogical approach. As a practicing artist, she has created a multifaceted body of work including ceramics, works on handmade paper, artist books, paintings and prints. Her work references a range of influences, from memory, regeneration, the natural world and the urban environment. To see examples of her work, visit: lisaconradarts.com/

Donna Conklin King is an award winning artists whose drawings and sculptures are in many public and private collections including the Museum of Modern Arts’ book collection and the Newark Public Library's Artist’s book collection. Her teaching experience includes the instruction of children and adults of all ages in both public and private schools, museums, professional development, and Community College. Donna received a Fellowship in Sculpture from the New Jersey State Arts Council in 1993. She holds a B.S. in Studio Art from Skidmore College, and an M.F.A. from Rutgers University. To see examples of her work, visit: donnaconklin.com

Workshop space is limited, so early registration is encouraged to ensure enrollment. Call 732-381-7511, email info@agnj.org, or visit agnj.org for more information.

Arts Guild New Jersey is a non-profit multi-disciplinary arts center located in the downtown Arts District in the City of Rahway, with a mission to provide quality arts programs for the benefit of the Northern and Central New Jersey area. Each year the Guild presents: a fine art exhibition series; multi-week art class sessions in the winter, spring and fall for adults, teens, and children; an on-going series of adult art workshops; summer art workshops for kids; and a variety of other cultural events and activities. Arts Guild New Jersey is accessible from the Garden State Parkway, NJ Turnpike, Routes 1 & 9, Saint Georges Avenue, and NJ Transit via the Northeast Corridor and Jersey Shore lines.

Sponsors of this program include Northfield Bank Foundation and Investors Bank Charitable Foundation.