Topics: Christianity, faith, Neil degrasse Tyson, Power, Religion, Scientology, Innovation News, News, Politics News

In a recent Daily Beast interview with astrophysicist Neil deGrasse Tyson, the title says it all: “Neil deGrasse Tyson Defends Scientology.”

I like Tyson, and I believe he does important work in advocating for and defending science to the general public, even though I’ve criticized him for his views on philosophy before. So I’m always interested in reading pieces about him, especially when they have a sensational-seeming headline like the one mentioned. And, while Tyson doesn’t defend Scientology because he’s secretly a member, what he has to say about it is somewhat worrying nonetheless.

The interviewer begins by asking Tyson his opinion on the current state of science, but then quickly pivots to Scientology because “the intergalactic story of Xenu does encroach on your territory a bit.” Tyson responds cautiously, mentioning by way of comparison the “crazy” Catholic belief that the Eucharist wafer is literally transformed into the body of Christ during Mass. He then elaborates:

“What matters is not who says who’s crazy, what matters is we live in a free country. You can believe whatever you want, otherwise it’s not a free country—it’s something else. If we start controlling what people think and why they think it, we have case studies where that became the norm. I don’t care what the tenets are of Scientology. They don’t distract me. I don’t judge them, and I don’t criticize them.”

This response is typical of Tyson’s diplomatic approach to the culture wars, like when he explained last year why he doesn’t use the term “atheist” to describe himself. “He has as much interest in meeting with other people to discuss their absence of belief in God as in meeting with non-golfers to talk about their absence of a passion for watching golf,” as NPR’s Tania Lombrozo explained.

But Tyson’s contention that he doesn’t care enough about Scientology’s claims to judge or criticize them is at odds with his recent emergence from his diplomatic tortoise shell, criticizing Florida’s proposed ban on using the term “climate change” in government communications. Of that controversy Tyson said, “Now we have a time where people are cherry picking science. The science is not political. That’s like repealing gravity because you gained 10 pounds last week.”

But even this attack is somewhat oblique, because he’s not directly accusing the powers that be but those of us who put them in power: “We should be talking about what we are going to do about this. I don’t blame the politicians for a damn thing because we vote for the politician. I blame the electorate.”

But in his effort to be tactful, Tyson fails to appreciate the power of the powers that be, and that’s why he should be concerned with the teachings and influence of Scientology. Educating the electorate is necessary but not sufficient for rectifying the harmful effects of ideology; education alone can’t do much to influence those in power in the here and now.

The sins of fundamentalist religion are all around us, and have been since the beginning of recorded history—from the Canaanite genocide by the Israelites to the Christian crusades to the rise of the Islamic State. And while Scientology doesn’t have a hold on the rest of the world, and is only a small religion practiced by a minority here in America, the psychological and physical damage it inflicts on many of the individuals who get caught up in it is still real.

Consider what the HBO documentary “Going Clear” has exposed. As Vulture’s Bilge Ebiri put it: