Residents at housing flats in South London have criticised the building's segregated entrances policy, where one doorway is set aside for the rich and the other for its housing association tenants.

London Mayor Boris Johnson recently faced calls to ban ‘poor doors’ in upmarket blocks of flats, which force people on low incomes to use different entrances.

But developers in London are promising wealthy tenants they will not have to share their smart lobby entrances, courtyard gardens or secure parking with people living in flats classed as ‘affordable housing’.

Scroll down for video



The entrance to the rich part of the housing development, where private tenants enter and exit

The 'poor door', located just around the corner, where housing association tenants must enter and exit

Social housing residents from a block of flats in Woolwich have spoken of feeling like 'scum' after being kept apart from their wealthy neighbours.

A resident named only as Donna told the Sunday Mirror she and her family must enter the flats through the 'poor door' - an entrance without the concierge or 24 hour service her wealthy neighbours enjoy around the corner.

She said: 'I've never felt poorer in my life because of the way we're kept apart.

'I don't want my kids thinking they deserve to be treated differently. It's humiliating and wrong.'

The practice faces being banned in New York after a backlash and has sparked a political row in the UK with Labour condemning the covert ‘segregation’.

The housing block in Woolwich where tenants are frustrated they are being segregated from wealthier neighbours

The problem stems from rules which are supposed to stop areas becoming ghettos for the very rich.

When planning permission is granted, developers are often told to set aside a set number of units for affordable housing.

From the outside, there is often no way of telling the more basic homes from the hi-spec apartments aimed at the super-rich.

But behind the façade, less well-off tenants are forced to enter through different doors and use separate bicycle racks, bins and post boxes.

Labour’s shadow housing minister Emma Reynolds told MailOnline: ‘I am strongly against this kind of segregation. There shouldn’t be separate doors for people living in affordable housing.