Chris Christie, whose presidential hopes have been running into increasing turbulence, sold himself to influential Republicans as a straight-talking problem solver during weekend appearances in South Florida.

The New Jersey governor isn't — officially — running for president, but he sounded like a candidate throughout a 25-minute speech. "If you're ready to fight with me to restore American greatness I will fight with you for the kind of America we are proud to leave our children," he said.

Christie repeatedly offered up crowd-pleasing criticism of President Barack Obama before more than 600 people at the Palm Beach County Republican Party's annual Lincoln Day dinner Friday night. He decried Obama as the most divisive president he's ever seen and offered a litany of complaints: Obamacare, his first-term economic stimulus, and implementation of policies through executive actions.

He sharply criticized Obama's foreign policy. He said Obama's handling of the relationship with Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel, who is sharply opposed to the president's attempts to negotiate a deal with Iran to prevent it from developing a nuclear weapon, is a "disgrace."

"Our influence as a nation is in decline. We are being challenged by China. We are being embarrassed by Russia. We seem hapless in the Middle East" and allies no longer trust the U.S, he said. "I believe it's the job of our president, no matter how hard, no matter how frustrating, no matter how challenging it may appear, to be the one to articulate a strategic vision for the world."

A look inside the Palm Beach County Republican Party Lincoln Day dinner. (Michael Laughlin)

The New Jersey governor is no stranger to the Sunshine State; he visited Florida 12 times in 2014 to help Gov. Rick Scott win re-election.

But he now needs to impress the kind of people — many of whom are in a position to write hefty checks to help finance a presidential effort — who attended the dinner at Donald Trump's Mar-a-Lago Club in Palm Beach.

Once one of the most talked-about potential candidates for his party's 2016 presidential nomination, Christie now faces a multitude of challenges: He's been eclipsed in national news media attention by Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker and former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush; Walker is enjoying a boomlet of attention among the Republican Party's conservative base, and the New Jersey pension reform that was his signature achievement as governor is unraveling.

Polling in recent days continued the drumbeat of bad news for Christie.

• In a Gravis Marketing poll of Florida voters out Thursday, Christie had the support of 6 percent of Republicans. He was in sixth place, behind Bush, Walker, U.S. Sen Marco Rubio of Florida, former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee, and retired neurosurgeon Ben Carson of West Palm Beach.

• A national Quinnipiac University poll also released Thursday, showed Christie tied with Huckabee for third place with support of just 8 percent of Republicans. They were way behind Walker's 18 percent and Bush's 16 percent.

Christie fared even worse among critical blocs of Republican primary voters: 4 percent among tea party adherents, 5 percent among white, born-again evangelicals, and 3 percent among people who describe themselves as very conservative. He fared better — though still behind Bush — with 12 percent of moderate and liberal Republicans.

Well known as a moderate, Christie portrayed himself Friday night as a conservative in the mold of Ronald Reagan, mentioning the 40th president several times during his speech.

• A Fairleigh Dickinson University/PublicMind Poll released Tuesday found that only 35 percent of his home state voters approve of his job performance while 51 percent disapprove. That gives him a favorability rating of minus 16. In the national Quinnipiac Poll, Christie's favorability rating was minus 7 points.

A Rutgers University-Eagleton Institute Poll released last month found just 34 percent of New Jersey voters believe he would make a good president and 59 percent said he would not. When asked to describe him in a single word, the top choice, of 10 percent of Jersey voters, was "bully." Second choice, at 7 percent, was "arrogant."

Christie doesn't want the current standings to determine the nominee so he warned the crowd not to buy the idea that the race is already down to the candidates with the most endorsements, most money and most plaudits from pundits. "We are 20 months away from electing our next president. So calm down. Don't be afraid. The nomination is to be decided by you and people like you all around this country," he said.

Chuck Hardwick, a former New Jersey legislator who is now retired and living in Palm Beach Gardens, Christie's recent difficulties don't predict the outcome of the race for the nomination. "I think the bumps are looking backward. But I think the American people are looking forward," he said. "He's a very strong candidate."

Nick Loeb, a Delray Beach investor who is helping raise money for Christie's Leadership Matters for America political action committee, said there is a contingent of people in South Florida who like Christie.