Recently, Walton County officials have noticed a number of issues when it comes to residents disposing of medical sharps in the county. But there are ways to properly dispose these items that are safe for the community.

According to Walton County Chair, and District 4 Commissioner, Sara Comander, her office gets calls on a routine basis from residents seeking information on how to dispose of their medical sharps.

Based on estimates from the American Diabetes Association and the National Institution of Health, 408 residents in Walton County have diabetes requiring insulin injections. This patient population generates an estimated 374,064 syringes and lancets, which represents approximately ten times the sharp waste generated by physician offices in the county.

“It is important for residents, users of sharps and caregivers that assist with treatments involving sharps, to understand the importance of the proper disposal of these materials,” said Comander. “Sharps should never be disposed of through normal waste disposal methods as doing so puts many Walton County residents at risk of exposure to blood-borne pathogens such as HIV or Hepatitis.”

In addition to the general population, the improper disposal of sharps more directly affects solid waste and landfill employees. Sharps can penetrate normal containers that are used for disposal including paper bags, plastic trash bags and thin plastic containers.

In order to address this issue, there are two programs in Walton County to assist patients and caregivers in the correct disposal of sharps.

Florida Department of Health in Walton County

The Florida Department of Health in Walton County offers a free, convenient program that provides sharps disposal containers at no cost to those who need them.

The free containers can be picked up at the following locations:

Wal-Mart Pharmacy

Dr. Garcia Office

South Walton Fire Station 3 SRB

Gateway Medical

Once the container is obtained, it is taken to the home for users to begin disposing of their syringes, needles, and lancets intact into the container.

Once the container reaches capacity, it is sealed, signed, dated, and can be taken to one of the following drop-off locations:

Healthmark Regional Medical Center

Healthmark Rural Health Clinic

South Walton Fire Station 3 SRB

Waste Management Program

Waste Management, the County’s solid waste provider, provides MedWaste Safe Solutions for Sharps Disposal program allows for the correct disposal of syringes and lancets in purchased sharps containers, helping to protect families and the community from potential needle stick injuries.

This program allows a user to purchase a sharps container for as little as $45.00. Once the container has been filled, the user seals the container and ships it using pre-paid packaging slips via the U.S. Postal Service. Waste Management takes care of the final disposal of the materials.

This program specifically benefits those users that may not be able to travel from their homes to obtain and return the containers provide through the Health Department’s program.

More Information

While these programs exist to ensure proper disposal, sharps that are properly placed into containers and sealed can be placed in regular garbage. It is important to follow the instructions provided by the Florida Department of Health to insure the safety of the employees who handle waste such as the collection workers, landfill employees and inmate crews.

For questions, or to receive more detailed information on programs offered by the Health Department, residents can contact the Florida Department of Health in Walton County at 850-892-8040.