Transcript for Election Countdown: 30 Days to 2014 Midterms

? Back now with our politics buzz board. Topping it off one month from election day Isis invading campaign airwaves. Tough gop ads and tight senate races from New Hampshire to Colorado like this one in north Carolina from Tom Tillis. While Isis grew, Obama kept waiting and Kay Hagan kept quiet. Hagan fired back. I think north carolinians need to know his position and he is spineless in this regard. President Obama talking about the economy and his agenda. I'm not on the ballot this fall but make no mistake these policies are 0 the ballot. Every single one of them. But was it smart to make the mid-terms an Obama referendum? Gop candidates pounced and new grandmother Hillary Clinton is hitting the trail. Political reports that she'll barnstorm key midterm states like Colorado, Iowa and new Hampshire when not baby-sitting Charlotte. Add it all up and Nate silver's team at fivethirtyeight gives them a 59% of retaking the senate. Down one point from last week. Back with the roundtable, mark Halperin, Bloomberg, is Nate silver right to move just an inch away from the republicans. In the world of margins of err errors, I'm not sure that's much of a move. Right now democrats must change the electorate and the reason you see president Obama injecting his economic record in and see him attacking Fox News in that same speech is because they need to change the electorate, they need to get the coalition of the ascended, Obama voters who don't normally vote in the midterms to vote in North Carolina and Iowa. They got three of the six in the bag. Republicans. Republicans do and I think right now they would get the final three. Kansas, though, is a huge problem for the republicans. They may end up netting five, even though they win six. Pat Roberts not closing the gap. Van Jones, I have to ask you this. I understand what mark is saying about energizing the electorate for Obama, but it did not seem like a wise move for the president to put his agenda front and center. We have to get the base going. The other thing, we can't let them get away with bashing Obama. Hey, you know, government is always your enemy until you need a friend. This ebola thing is the best argument you can make for the kind of government that we believe in. A year ago Ted Cruz shut down America's government, shut down the CDC over shenanigans. What if that happened this year? You got to start putting the republicans on the defensive for the fact that they believe you can take a wrecking ball to America's government and never pay a price. Obamacare means that 8 million people who couldn't have gone to the doctor last year, if they feel sick today, they can go see the doctor. The democrats have to start talking like that. But, Peggy, that does not seem to be top of mind of voters right now and certainly the campaign, at least the republican campaigns want to make this Isis front and center. Yeah, there's Isis. There's a bunch of stuff, look, the republicans in some of the close cases have been very interested in hanging the past six years on their democratic opponents. I think that the president meant to help his democrats out in the field when he said in his speech the other night, I am not on the ballot but my agenda is. Well, how many republican senators moved forward and started saying, that's right, it's his agenda we're voting on? I don't think that did him or them a lot of good. We'll see the president raising a lot of money, John heilemann. We won't see him in the close states. As you'll write in Bloomberg tomorrow, we'll see a lot of Hillary Clinton and bill Clinton. I mean, it's really striking. If you think about the races in play, president Obama is welcome in virtually none of those states and he will not going to some of those contested races but be on the coast raising money. Hillary Clinton is welcome everywhere and will be almost everywhere, and then her husband also welcome everywhere and will be almost everywhere. They can do things, if the candidates want them there as a matter of persuasion, as a matter of getting out the vote and I think it signifies a big moment in the party because for the last six years this has been Barack Obama's democratic party, it's not the Clintons' party. They been in the wings. This is the moment they come out and more or less take control. They have to put Ws on the board. They have to do that. You can go back longer than six years. President Obama came to national prominence in 2004. Got elected. In 2006 he campaigned everywhere in the mid-terms, went to Missouri, northern Florida. He was welcomed everywhere and as John's piece makes clear there are very few places where there are contested races. More people going to the poll, van Jones, saying they want to send a message against rather than for him. He's not as popular as he once was. But he is not wrong. His policies are incredibly popular. You have a republican party that won't raise the minimum wage, that won't extend unemployment insurance to active job seekers who just knead a little more runway. They won't be for fair pay for women. They won't help on student loans so the republican agenda is incredibly unpopular. Just because president Obama is not as popular, we've got great people out there like Elizabeth Warren and like Hillary Clinton and bill Clinton to build that case that's important. These races are still close, and we're seeing Jeb bush out on the trail and did hear from his brother, the former president this week. Yeah, I think he wants to be president. I think he'd be a great president. He understands what it's like to be president for not only the person running or serving plus family, he's seen his dad. He's seen his brother. So a little nudge right there. Talking about you can't be seen anywhere. That's somebody who can't be seen anywhere. Go out there. Oh. It's going up. Jeb bush, he seems to be holding back a little bit. This was the first time the interview with former president George W. Bush that I thought, geez, maybe Jeb is going to go forward. I had been feeling his ambivalence. May I say, van, I think the story of next month's election is on the republican side. The past six years didn't work. And on the democratic side, ha, ha, we're not sure the past six years worked. Let's look at Hillary and bill. That I think is the undermeaning of all of it. You guys nodding your head when Peggy was talking about Jeb. Well, they're polite. I've got a piece about Jeb coming about where he stands. It's funny, this week he was impressing on the campaign trail. There are those who say he's definitely in. I had three calls from people saying he's in and others saying there's no way he's running because of three generations of bush women. The reality more simple and complicated. He hasn't decided but he is much closer to running than people realize. Haven't decided at this point, are you running? Well, question decide in January. The thing about Jeb bush, he can decide late. He is a monster fund-raiser. He is very popular with the elites in the party. He's got some work to do on common core and immigration, work to do at the grass root, but in terms of what normally gets through, elite support and fund-raising he is first among equals in this. Here's what you got to say. If you want to put competence on the table you got a republican party with Chris Christie, Ted Cruz, Rand Paul and somebody named bush. I'll take that fight in 2016 any day. Which is why some people -- we only have a few seconds left, Jo. Which is why some people are talking about the first guest on your program tomorrow, Mitt Romney opening the door a tiny bit. There is a story written this week, talked to a lot of Romney people and it was a very obviously planted story in the sense he had cooperation on background from a lot in Romney's world saying, he's really looking at it. I think he's been looking over it more and more seriously over the last few months and I think he's more interested today for some of the same reasons he actually got in the race in 2012. He looks at the field that van just talked about and says I don't think anybody else out who might be able to win. That's what always drives people. We got to -- The elites and the money men also like Romney a lot, as much as they like Jeb so that might be a little interesting to see. No? Cannot decide until after January.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.