By KATY BERGEN, staff writer

SARASOTA

Chuck and Vanessa Bennington mark their relationship using milestones related to Crossfit, the fitness program that combines Olympic weightlifting with gymnastics and other strength training.

The couple met six years ago on a Crossfit program messageboard, and had their first date at a trainer certification course. On Valentine’s Day, they celebrated their second wedding anniversary — at a USA weightlifting event.

This week, the Benningtons will open “Seaward Crossfit,” a new Crossfit gym on Boulevard of the Arts.

The gym came together incrementally, just like their relationship. Local athletes painted the walls green and blue a couple of weekends ago. Barbells and bumper plates arrived a few days later. Next, a logo — a glaring octupus with curling tentacles — debuted on Facebook.

The couple chose Sarasota for their venture because it’s Chuck Bennington’s hometown, and close to family. A Sarasota High graduate, Chuck Bennington, 28, found Crossfit online while serving in the U.S. Air Force. Vanessa Bennington, 34, began the workouts while attending graduate school in Fort Worth, Texas.

Now, Chuck Bennington travels across the globe to teach Crossfit Gymnastics certification courses. Vanessa Bennington keeps up with workouts while working as a nurse practitioner.

Because Crossfit has become among the most popular workouts in the U.S. in the past decade, the Benningtons acknowledge that the success of their gym relies on creating a place that can simultaneously cater to both experienced athletes and novices.

Since its founding in 2000, Crossfit has grown to include more than 7,000 affiliated gyms. Members participate in “WODs” (Workouts of the Day). The program champions building overall fitness, as opposed to specializing in specific disciplines through a range of workouts that might include repetitively deadlifting a barbell, flipping massive tires or completing handstand push-ups.

Crossfit has received criticism, as well, for being overly competitive and for causing workout-related injuries. Proponents counter that the Crossfit program itself is sound; individual trainers may not be.

At Seaward Crossfit, novices will complete a “Foundations” class, mastering basics before advancing.

“We don’t necessarily feel like your average layperson should be brought right into a Crossfit gym,” Vanessa Bennington says.

Success will stem from safety over competitiveness, especially for beginners, the Benningtons say.

It’s a philosophy, combined with individualized attention, a unique camraderie and guided classes, that patrons have shown they are willing to pay for. Classes at Crossfit gyms — including Seaward Crossfit — typically charge between $10 to $30, the same price that the average fitness gym charges for monthly memberships.

“You need to be technically efficient,” Chuck Bennington adds. “You need to know why you are doing something.”

Neither Vanessa or Chuck Bennington played sports as children.

Chuck Bennington didn’t start working out until he joined the military. In high school, Vanessa Bennington suffered from eating disorders and an unhealthy obsession with exercise. It wasn’t until she started doing Crossfit — and earning certifications as an instructor — that she began to re-evaluate what it means to be physically fit.

“They valued how you performed,” Vanessa Bennington said. “I started to say, “I’m strong. I’m good at this. It made me feel like an athlete, which I had never felt like.”

Chuck Bennington flew to Texas from Sarasota to meet his future wife in 2009, months after they began chatting online on a Crossfit forum.

Within six months, he moved and begun working at a GSX Crossfit gym, where Vanessa Bennington trained.

From the beginning, the couple talked about opening their own gym, even after Vanessa Bennington pursued a nursing career and Chuck Bennington was promoted to GSX’s director of operations, and traveled the globe to teach Crossfit Gymnastics certification courses.

After they married in 2012, they felt ready for a change. Last year, they moved to Sarasota, and recruited two friends from Texas to join them in Seaward. Chantel Zandi and Dale Wilson, formerly of GSX Crossfit, agreed to join the new gym as coaches, along with intern Samm Kayne.

“I think it was about us being able to create something on our own,” Zandi, 28, says.

Wilson, 22, agrees.

“It’s a crew of like-minded invidivuals who value being better at what we do and pushing ourselves out of our comfort zone.”

On Friday, the new team finished laying down mats and setting up barbells for a free community class on Saturday. The gym is open officially for business on March 10.

When Chuck Bennington first flew to see the woman he loved six years ago, he says he didn’t expect to find out something else.

“I loved teaching,” he said. “I never expected that in a million years.”