But despite its history of resistance to changes in the business, WellPoint has emerged in the early months of the rollout as the largest participant in the newly created state marketplaces. The company has signed up about a half million people in the 14 states where it has Blue Cross plans, and it has captured a leading share of the market in at least a half-dozen states, by its own count, including California, Connecticut, Indiana, New Hampshire, New York and Virginia. It lags in Maine and Kentucky, where new entrants have emerged as formidable competitors.

WellPoint is also increasing the number of people it insures through Medicaid, as states rely more heavily on private companies to manage the program. About a year ago, the company bought Amerigroup, a large Medicaid managed care company. Selling coverage to the government now accounts for 45 percent of the company’s overall revenue, compared with 10 percent just a couple of years ago.

“We’ve made a big bet on the partnership with government,” said Mr. Swedish, a former hospital system executive who took over as chief executive of WellPoint less than a year ago and is at least partly responsible for the change in the company’s tone.

WellPoint’s new posture was driven both by the need to protect its existing business and a vision of the future that recognized it would have to remake its relationship with doctors and hospitals to change the way health care was delivered; it would also have to recognize that the government was going to be a major customer through such programs as Medicare and Medicaid. The company spent $300 million in preparation and expects to invest more. “We’re not old Blue,” said Mr. Swedish. “If we position ourselves simply as an insurance company, we are going to fail.”

While it is too early to tell whether WellPoint will succeed in signing up large numbers of members in plans that prove to be profitable, the company signaled in its earnings call with investors last week that it was comfortable with the mix of customers it was enrolling and the premiums it was charging. The company reported net income of $2.5 billion on revenue of $71 billion for 2013.

Photo

The company is nicely positioned, according to Ana Gupte, an analyst with Leerink Partners. WellPoint, which had historically concentrated on selling commercial insurance, is “now playing as leaders” in Medicaid and the exchanges as well.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

It is quite a turnabout for a company that under the leadership of its previous chief executive, Angela F. Braly, a former lawyer, had been at the forefront of resistance to much of the health care overhaul. “They were the one that has been for years and years the most frankly antagonistic to health reform,” said Anthony Wright, a consumer advocate in California.

The company’s decision in early 2010 to seek a rate increase of 39 percent for some of its customers in California was met with outrage from both federal and state officials. Proponents of the law used it as evidence for why insurers needed to be heavily regulated, and WellPoint, operating as Anthem Blue Cross, was eventually forced to back down, acknowledging that it had erred in calculating the increase.

“We were very aggressive,” conceded Pam Kehaly, a senior vice president at WellPoint who now oversees California and the overall exchange strategy. “The tone for us now is collaboration and partnership.”

The difference in posture has been noted. “I see the change of heart,” said Mr. Wright, the consumer advocate, who said WellPoint had recently embraced such moves as including maternity coverage in its policies before the law mandated it.

WellPoint had — and still has — the most to lose under the new environment. The company, which covers nearly 36 million people, is the largest player in the individual and small-business markets. Unlike some of its peers, such as UnitedHealth and Cigna, it could not afford to largely sit out the exchanges and watch its former customers sign up with other insurers. Its recent decision to seek another double-digit increase in rates for some customers in California could prove a test of its relationship with regulators.

The new businesses are also likely to be less profitable, particularly the sale of plans in Medicaid and Medicare.

And the company is clearly struggling with much of the change. The insurers — and President Obama, who promised people they could keep their health plans — faced sharp criticism for their handling of canceled policies, surprising customers with offers of much higher-priced replacement plans. WellPoint is also having difficulty keeping up with the volume of new customer calls, worsened by the troubled start of the federal website and the incorrect and missing information it has about its customers.

Under Mr. Swedish, whose background outside the insurance industry was initially met with skepticism by Wall Street, the company also seems more willing to pursue a variety of relationships with hospitals and physician groups.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Mr. Swedish argues his background allows him to understand how premium dollars flow to money for medical care. “I see the end result as it plays out for the benefit of the patient,” he said.

While the company has traditionally been viewed as less innovative in the way it pays hospitals and doctors, relying on its size to squeeze out the lowest prices, it has now undertaken a flurry of initiatives. It purchased a Medicare plan, CareMore, that uses its own medical centers to better coordinate care, and it is looking at different ways of working with hospitals and doctors, including experiments with so-called accountable care organizations.

“We’re testing all of these models now,” said Dr. Samuel R. Nussbaum, the company’s chief medical officer.

Among its most controversial moves has been to embrace, at least in some markets, the idea of narrow networks, where people signing up for a plan have limited choices of hospitals and doctors to bring down the cost of coverage. “You have to do it,” said Ms. Kehaly, arguing that the concept has been around for a decade. “There are only so many levers to pull.”

What is clear is that the Affordable Care Act has created enormous upheaval, as employers look to exchanges, both private and public, to cover their workers. “This is the biggest change ever,” Ms. Kehaly said. “There’s nothing bigger than this.”