Do you reimburse employees for individual health insurance policies?

If you provide a medical reimbursement plan, health reimbursement arrangements or Section 125 cafeteria plans that are used to reimburse employees for health insurance policies – or reimburse your employees directly for individual health insurance policies – you may be in violation of the Affordable Care Act and subject to significant excise taxes.

The requirements of the Affordable Care Act on employers are very complex and in a constant state of change and interpretation. The provision detailed here is contained in Notice 2013-54, which affects small businesses, defined as fewer than 50 full-time employees.

Large employers (50 or more full-time employees) should be aware that beginning in 2016, they will be penalized (pay or play) for not offering group health insurance.

As of July 1, 2015, employers may need to change the way they provide health insurance to their workers. A law that permits reimbursing employees for health insurance is still tax-free under Revenue Ruling 61-146.

This longstanding provision of the Tax Code may no longer be an acceptable option under the Affordable Care Act. Existing rules, that remain unchanged, allow employers who do not offer group plans to reimburse the cost of individual plans because of the cost, or because the employee is on a spousal plan or because the employee prefers to shop for his or her own plan.

Employees were only required to substantiate their expenses, and the employer would either reimburse the premiums or pay them directly to the insurance company. The employer would deduct the payments, and the employee would exclude them on his or her tax return.

The tax laws have not changed; the provisions of the Affordable Care Act have essentially made these reimbursement plans obsolete.

Under the Affordable Care Act, a medical reimbursement plan that has at least two employee participants (employee participants not defined) – even if the plan is not discriminatory – is a group plan and can cause numerous problems. These medical reimbursement plans fail the requirements of the Affordable Care Act because a group plan:

(1) Has no annual limits (the amount paid for health insurance is deemed to be the annual limitation), and

(2) Must provide preventive health services at no cost to the employee (many stand-alone medical reimbursement plans or health reimbursement arrangements do not meet this requirement).

As a result, any employer who reimburses or pays directly the premiums of at least two employees will create a Section 4980D excise tax of $100-per-day times the number of participants or $36,500 per participant per year (cap of $500,000 for nonwillful violations) beginning July 1, 2015.

Sole proprietorships without employees are not subject to these excise taxes.

In Notice 2015-17, the Internal Revenue Service provides the only way to offer a reimbursement plan for health insurance and comply with the Affordable Care Act. The employer could say that reimbursements are part of the employees’ salary and avoid violating market reforms.

This option clarifies the IRS’ position and aligns it with the U.S. Department of Labor. Both agencies concluded that the only way to fix the problem with reimbursement plans, except for going with a group health plan through the Small Business Health Options Program marketplace, is to treat the reimbursement as taxable compensation and to gross up an employee’s salary. And that additional compensation cannot be tied to the employee’s insurance premiums.

The employer would treat any reimbursement of premiums for individual health insurance policies as taxable compensation, taxable for both income tax and the Federal Insurance Contributions Act, or FICA.

Simply treating the reimbursements of insurance premiums as salary (as compared to grossing up an employee’s salary) will not eliminate the Section 4980D excise tax.

Employers that have at least two employee participants who offer a reimbursement arrangement for their employees may be in violation of the Affordable Care Act and subject to a significant excise tax under Section 4980D.

Consult with your tax adviser to determine if you are in violation of the rules and at risk of a significant tax.

John D. Rossi III is a business leader, lecturer, accountant and financial planner with more than 30 years of business and academic experience. An associate professor of accounting at Moravian College in Bethlehem, he is president of JR3 Virtuoso Solutions Inc., specializing in financial reporting, taxation, professional training and consulting services. He can be reached at jdrossi3@verizon.net.