ADVERTISEMENT

NEW YORK (MainStreet) — Consumers who filed an extension back in April to pay their taxes are not the only ones who need to pay heed to the October 15 deadline since repayments for healthcare subsidies and conversions of Roth IRAs back to traditional IRAs are also due.



Tomorrow is a big day on your financial calendar: here's your game plan.

Still Owe Money on Taxes?

Even if you still lack the funds to pay your entire tax payment, now is the time to make payment arrangements. Jackson Hewitt estimates that 13 million taxpayers requested an extension for filing their tax return.



Consumers who are struggling to make their tax payments still need to file their return. Failing to file on time means they will incur another fee, the late filing penalty, which is 5% each month, said Chuck Lovelace, vice president of affordable care at Liberty Tax Service based in Virginia Beach, Va.

“The taxpayer still will be charged with interest and late payment penalties for any unpaid balance after October 15,” he said.

The IRS offers a six-year installment payment plan online for people who owe $50,000 or less. Once you are approved, you can make monthly payments versus coming up with one lump sum.

Even though you can use a credit card to make your tax payment, avoid them, because the interest rates charged by the IRS are lower, said Mark Jaeger, director of tax development for TaxACT, the Cedar Rapids, Iowa tax preparation company. Taking money out of a retirement account such as a 401(k) or IRA is not the solution either because you could pay a penalty and income tax on the amount withdrawn.

“Play by the rules and be honest,” he said. “The IRS can be a reasonable creditor. Pay as quickly as possible.”

Ignoring the problem will only compound it, said Eric Green, a tax attorney for Green & Sklarz based in New Haven, Conn. The IRS can enforce payments by garnishing your wages or imposing bank levies where they take funds out of a checking or savings account.

“Deal with the issue and get it resolved,” he said. “Though taxpayers often believe they should hide the fact that they owe money, they will simply make their situation much worse.”