Coulter to PJM: Cut Off All Immigration, Focus on White Voters to Win

Author and political commentator Ann Coulter said there should be a 10-year freeze on immigration to the U.S. since the federal government has demonstrated it cannot enforce current law.

“There’s a law on the books that says if a country will not take a criminal back the attorney general shall, not may, shall deny visas, any visas coming from that country – that is on the books right now. Has it been enforced by Republicans or Democrats? No, it has not,” Coulter said during an interview with PJ Media.

“There’s a law on the books right now that says an immigrant who has been convicted of a crime in America who does not cooperate in being sent home, that itself is a crime, not signing the papers, not showing up when you’re supposed to, that itself is a crime punishable by 4 years in prison – that’s never enforced. It’s just not enforced. Three times Congress has voted to build a fence and it never gets built,” she added.

According to Senate Judiciary Committee Chairman Chuck Grassley (R-Iowa), Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) released 33,007 illegal immigrants with criminal records in 2013. Following these releases, 121 were charged with homicides.

Based on the research Coulter conducted, she concluded that a legal fix is not going to improve the immigration system.

“The entire thing has to be shut down. No more immigration for 10 years. We get our books in order. We assimilate the ones already here. Build a fence. Repeal anchor babies and then we start up with the pre-1970 immigration policies,” Coulter said.

“It’s not just Obama; Bush was the same way. Bush didn’t enforce it, either. The entire immigration bureaucracy is corrupt. It is run by and staffed by left-wingers who hate America who in other times would have been fighting with revolutionaries in Latin America and getting themselves arrested. Now they punish Americans here at home. They say we are racist, sexist, imperialistic, greedy, they want to transform America because they hate America,” she added.

Coulter told PJ Media that Republicans can win in 2016 without substantial support from the Hispanic community.