Immunization is the first line of defense against the flu

University of Colorado Health nurse Robin Smith, right, gives a flu shot to Marilyn Schock, chief operating officer at Medical Center of the Rockies and Poudre Valley Hospital. University of Colorado Health requires all employees, volunteers, faculty, contractors and vendors to receive the flu vaccine. As flu season nears, most people should consider getting a flu shot. ( Kari Blocker, University of Colorado Health / Special to the Reporter-Herald )

It's that time of year again, influenza (commonly called flu) season, with its fever, dry cough and aches and pains. Even in the midst of mounting concerns about Ebola and enterovirus D-68, it is still important to be aware of the need to be prepared for the flu.

The most important thing an individual can do is, "get immunized," said Averil Strang, R.N., M.S.N., director of Community Health Services at Larimer County Health and Environment.

Paul Poduska, of University of Colorado Health/Medical Center of the Rockies, Infection Control and Prevention, agrees. "Get the shot," he said.

It's impossible to gauge what type of influenza season this will be. "The more people who are immunized, the more likely we are to have reduced cases in our community," shared Strang.

Many people have misconceptions about what the "flu" really is, confusing it with an intestinal bug, commonly referred to as "stomach flu." The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) point out that, "Flu is a respiratory (lung) disease. People who have the flu often feel some or all of these symptoms: fever, headache, extreme tiredness, dry cough, sore throat and muscle aches. Nausea, vomiting and diarrhea also can occur with flu, but are more common in children than adults."

Something that differentiates flu from a cold is its sudden onset. "Initially, the flu may seem like a common cold with a runny nose, sneezing and sore throat," noted the Mayo Clinic website. "But colds usually develop slowly, whereas the flu tends to come on suddenly. And although a cold can be a nuisance, you usually feel much worse with the flu."

Don't take the flu lightly. It can be a serious, contagious illness. The CDC estimates that between 1976 to 2006, thousands of individuals (in some years, tens of thousands) died from flu-associated deaths.

Advances in flu injections coming Many people avoid getting their flu shot because of a fear of needles, but a new device may soon diminish those concerns. Researchers at Medical Center of the Rockies and other University of Colorado Health facilities participated in a 2012-13 study of a new needle-free injection device called the PharmaJet Stratis. The device was approved by the FDA in August 2014 for delivery of the AFLURIA® influenza vaccine to individuals aged 18 to 64 years, according to Adam Jaskowiak, director of research at Medical Center of the Rockies. It "delivers the vaccine by means of a narrow, precise fluid stream that penetrates the skin in about one-tenth of a second." A positive step for consumers concerned about needles, the device will also remove the danger of needle stick contamination for health-care workers administering flu vaccine.

Who is most at risk from the flu? "It's the young children," said Poduska, "especially if they have any underlying symptoms such as asthma or bronchiolitis. This is followed by those over 65 years of age."

Pregnant women, people living in long-term care facilities, caregivers of children or the ill, those with chronic diseases and anyone who has a depressed immune system are also at greater risk from the flu.

Flu vaccine is available either through injection or nasal spray (for healthy individuals age 2 to 49 years, who are not pregnant).

Along with getting immunized, it's important to remember to cover your cough and wash your hands frequently. The CDC noted that, "Most experts believe that flu viruses spread mainly by droplets made when people with flu cough, sneeze or talk. ... Less often, a person might also get flu by touching a surface or object that has flu virus on it and then touching their own mouth, eyes or possibly their nose."

If you are diagnosed with the flu, "antivirals like Oseltamivir (Tamiflu) and Zanamivir (Relenza) can be helpful if given early, within 48 hours of development of illness," said Strang.

When individuals have the flu, Strang advises them to stay home from work and from the public.

She also suggests that over-the-counter painkillers such as ibuprofen or acetaminophen can relieve fever, headache and body aches. Over-the-counter antihistamines and decongestants may help with congestion. Acetaminophen (Tylenol) is not recommended for children under 18 months of age. Consult with a medical provider regarding what medications, if any, may be taken by children.

"Drink lots of fluids and get plenty of rest," added Strang. "Consult with a medical provider, if you are concerned about the severity of illness or complications."

Emergency warning signs of influenza in children include:

• Fast breathing or trouble breathing

• Bluish skin color

• Not drinking enough fluids

• Not waking up or interacting

• Irritability

• Flu-like symptoms that improve but then return with fever or worse cough

• Fever with a rash

To learn more about the flu, visit cdc.gov/flu/keyfacts.htm and larimer.org/health/chs/flu.htm.