Friday November 13, 2015, marked the complete move-in by brokers and support staff of LIV Sotheby’s International Realty, into one of Cherry Creek’s most coveted new workplaces, 100 St. Paul. The lifestyle-oriented brokerage now occupies the second floor of the exclusive new building, a long-term plan of the firm’s that has been in planning stages since 2012.

“Since the inception of our affiliation with Sotheby’s International Realty, we have aimed to change the look of our work spaces to reflect the quality of our agents,” said Shannel Ryan, managing broker of the Cherry Creek office. “St. Paul is elegant, yet simple- extracting confusion and clutter to create a sense of ease and certainty of both culture and service. We are thrilled with the result.”

The premium office space at 100 St. Paul is located in the heart of Cherry Creek, easily accessible to the Denver Polo Grounds and Country Club, Hilltop, Belcaro, Cherry Creek, and Washington Park neighborhoods, all of which the brokerage services.

With more than $2 billion in sales recorded to date in 2015, the brokerage continues to experience a surge in production. LIV Sotheby’s International Realty encompasses a total of eleven offices in Denver Metro and surrounding areas, including Boulder, Castle Pines Village, Cherry Creek, Denver Tech Center, Downtown Denver, Evergreen and the resort communities of Breckenridge, Vail, and Beaver Creek.

The new LIV Sotheby’s International Realty Cherry Creek office features a contemporary corporate office design with high-end residential influences. The balance between professional design and home decor supports both the business services and products of the Sotheby’s International Realty brand. The current layout includes an open-plan office environment along the perimeter for access to daylight and views, with glass-enclosed private offices for shared or individual use at the core. The project is highlighted by a multi-purpose room accommodating more than fifty brokers, a floor-to-ceiling glass enclosed lounge overlooking East 1st Avenue, an outdoor terrace, reception area, and multiple conference spaces.

To match the exclusive exterior look and feel of the 100 Saint Paul building, LIV SIR contracted Acquilano Leslie, Inc., an award winning interior design firm to outfit the interior of the project.

“We’ve completed projects all over Denver metro, and specialize in corporate office design, but what makes this project so special is the 100 St. Paul development,” said Drew Marlow, principal architect at Acquilano Leslie Inc. “The development sits on the corner of St. Paul and 1st and is highly visible to those approaching the Cherry Creek shopping district. The views out are amazing too; whether you’re lounging in the semi-circular rotunda or catching a breath of fresh air on the outdoor terrace atop Del Frisco Grill- the experience is truly Cherry Creek.”

In addition to the amenities offered within the building, the physical location puts LIV SIR at the center of Cherry Creek with access to much more. “Its proximity allows agents to quickly reach Denver’s top neighborhoods and the glitz and glam of Cherry Creek reinforces LIV SIR’s position in luxury realty,” said Marlow.

More than 25 years have passed since a new, class A office development has been offered in the Cherry Creek business district, exclusively built with Denver’s most business savvy professionals in mind. The state-of-the-art building is matched with top-tier amenities and features 149,000 square feet of rentable space, 135,000sf of office space, 14,000sf of retail space, and is eight stories high with covered, underground parking.For more information, contact Brittanny Havard, public relations manager, LIV Sotheby’s International Realty at 303-486-3738. To access current market reports, visit ColoradoMarketReports.com. To service all of your real estate needs visit LivSothebysRealty.com.