2015-09-24 10:36:06 -0400

There was a significant amount of nonsense in O’Reilly’s material last night.



Yes, the discussion of the bogus additional “Born Alive” material left out the most important information – that the procedure is already illegal. The new GOP hard right wing bills are actually intended to add more penalties and to attack all clinics that provide any abortions, regardless of whether this illegal procedure is involved. The votes here were intended to pull a “gotcha” on the Dems, and they backfired. O’Reilly’s sham outrage at the Dems who refused to vote for even more penalties and additional attacks is laughable.



More laughable is O’Reilly’s attempt to spin the Pope’s statements as “a shot at Obama”, when in fact the Pope was offering mutually supportive and friendly statements. Sadly, O’Reilly was so committed to his feelings on this that he refused to allow Jessica Ehrlich to finish a sentence in correction to his rant. It’s interesting that he allowed Andrea Tantaros to throw some fairly nasty invective, including a shameful cheap shot at the end of that segment – and showed none of the righteous anger he’s displayed at moderate or liberal guests who have behaved similarly in the past. For Ehrlich’s gentle statements, O’Reilly had no patience at all – he cut her off and began lecturing her before she could even make her point. In fact, she was reminding him that he was taking the Pope’s sentences out of context and even trying to speak for the Pope. She tried to note that the very next sentence from the Pope completely disproved what O’Reilly was saying, and that his body language (something O’Reilly has always professed to study) showed his support and friendship toward President Obama. O’Reilly’s response was to have a bit of a tantrum – “You’ll see that I am RIGHT and you are WRONG”, etc.



O’Reilly’s only little allowance to Dems or President Obama was that he acknowledged that the President was a good host and showed good manners. Mike Huckabee, on the other hand, seems to have abandoned his earlier statements along those lines. Maybe three years ago, Huckabee sounded a bit like John McCain at times, noting that he disagreed with the President but didn’t doubt his faith or his sincerity. This week, Huckabee tried something fairly vile – he threw in the notion that the President is only “pretends” to be a Christian, and issued an embarrassing apology to the Pope for what Huckabee somehow thinks is disrespectful behavior by President Obama. Like Huckabee’s frantic rush to the side of Kim Davis, this move was similarly disregarded by most media. It was seen for what it is – a desperate attempt by Huckabee to stir up more of the hard right GOP base and thus allow him to stay in the race a little longer. (It’s becoming obvious that Huckabee and Cruz are each attempting to outlast each other – they’ll wind up as the Santorum/Gingrich couple of the 2016 campaign. This is why Cruz is desperately trying to say he’s raising “so much” money and why Huckabee keeps jumping up and down for every extremist cause. (I confess to enjoying the spectacle of Cruz trying to crash Huckabee’s Davis event and being told no.) When the 2016 election is over, we’ll see if Cruz gets his wish and winds up in Huckabee’s old slot at Fox News, or if Huckabee himself takes it back. I’d guess the latter, with Cruz getting a “commentator” position like that of Sarah Palin. But the bad blood between these guys is palpable, even thousands of miles away. You can see it directly through all the false piety and the desperate clambering for the moral high ground neither man possesses.