Join Indian Country Today Media Network and 25,000-plus gaming industry professionals at Global Gaming Expo (G2E) 2015, to be held September 29 - October 1, at the Sands Expo and Convention Center in Las Vegas.

The Global Gaming Expo 2015 (G2E), presented by the American Gaming Association, will host elite experts exploring a $240-billion industry through in-depth presentations. Interactive seminars will cover a variety of topics instrumental to the future of casino gaming, such as the development of skill-based slot machines, a comprehensive look into tribal gaming, innovations in security, the growth of the “Integrated Resort Experience,” and the evolving state of sports betting and daily fantasy sports.

ICTMN invites you to attend as our guest with a complimentary Exhibit Hall Pass. Please register for your free pass here. Registered attendees gain access to the newly launched Integrated Resort Experience as well as the G2E show floor.

The Integrated Resort Experience at G2E will present innovative non-gaming technology, products and services as guests would experience them in a gaming-resort setting. This new effort will deliver a complete “end-to-end” solution to help casinos attract more guests, encourage them to stay and play longer, and increase revenue per visitor.

At G2E 2015, guests will:

—Explore an improved show floor designed to maximize networking opportunities and optimize conducting business on-site.

—Discover the latest products, technologies and services from leading exhibitors.

—Learn cutting-edge ways to immediately impact their business and career at world-class seminar sessions.

—Build new connections at exclusive networking events.

Tribal gaming executives should include these seminars on their G2E agenda:

Tribal Overview: The State of Indian Gaming

This annual update by Alan Meister, principal economist at Nathan Associates Inc., will cover the recent performance of Indian gaming on a national and state-by-state basis, with a historical trend analysis and comparisons to other segments of the gaming industry.

State Incursions into Tribal Government Gaming: Recent Developments

State taxation and regulatory threats on Tribal casinos have increased recently. While the United States Constitution and the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act prohibits these acts, states have increased efforts to tax Indian gaming operations. At this session, attendees will learn the political dynamics at play and hear what is at stake and what may happen next for Tribal gaming.

Tribal Tribulations: Keys to Creating a Sustainable Gaming Economy

With increased competition facing all casinos, commercial and Indian alike, Tribes need to determine how to maintain gaming revenues. At this session, moderated by Jamie Fullmer, CEO of Blue Stone Strategy Group, speakers will explain how Tribal governments can work with gaming operators to ensure a successful casino operation. The comprehensive session will address how to improve the performance and viability of the casino operation as well as the unique obligations of protecting tribal lands and sovereignty.

Council Considerations: Tribal Roundtable

While running a Tribal casino is a lot like running a commercial casino, it has unique attributes. At this session, chief executive officers of Indian casinos across the nation compare and contrast the operational aspects of Tribal and commercial casinos.

For show information, please visit www.globalgamingexpo.com, and register for G2E with this Free Exhibit Pass compliments of ICTMN.