A group of academics have channeled their inner Bernie Sanders and written a wonderfully naïve op-ed about how to lower drug prices: Destroy the industry that made America the world leader in biotechnology.



It's simple. Let government control drug prices and then corporations will just do what they always do, but it will be a lot cheaper. It is so simplistic it could have been written by Paul Krugman in the New York Times. It is also in defiance of how science, creativity and medical advancement works, and would lead to a mass exodus of science jobs from America.



Writing about the piece in Mayo Clinic Proceedings, lead author Ayalew Tefferi, M.D., a hematologist at Mayo Clinic, says, "The average gross household income in the U.S. is about $52,000 per year. For an insured patient with cancer who needs a drug that costs $120,000 per year, the out-of-pocket expenses could be as much as $25,000 to $30,000 - more than half their average household income."

He and colleagues cite a 2015 study by D.H. Howard and colleagues in the Journal of Economic Perspectives, which found that cancer drug prices have risen by an average of $8,500 per year over the past 15 years. What has risen markedly in that time? Cancer survival rates.



They claim that by controlling the market, the free market will work better. If you are a California resident enjoying paying 50 percent higher utility rates compared to the rest of the country, you see how in the real world more government control does not make the free market more efficient. If you can do math, it is better to be skeptical.



Here are their recommendations, and then evidence-based insight:

Academics: Create a post-U.S. Food and Drug Administration drug approval review mechanism to propose a fair price for new treatments that is based on the value to patients and heath care



Reality: Drug prices have gone up because government has created a Byzantine approval process, it now takes a dozen years and $2 billion to get a successful drug approved. This notion says companies should do all that work, spend the money, and then get told what to charge.



Academics: Allow Medicare to negotiate drug prices



Reality: The government will dictate prices, and industry will scale back to match it. If you are trying to get a doctor's appointment from the Veteran's Administration or under the Affordable Care Act, you already know what happens when government controls cost. It instead controls supply. Innovation costs money. If government controlled the cost of cell phones, we would still be using those giant brick things from the 1980s.



Academics: Allow importation of cancer drugs across borders for personal use (For example, prices in Canada are about half of prices in the U.S.)



Reality: Let Canadians subsidize drug costs for American consumers - or do what Canadians do and create a price floor for generic drugs, which the U.S. does not have. In reality, many poor person have a high-definition television and a cell phone because rich people pay more for faster access to technology. That is the long tail of economics. Even Paul Krugman understands that. Some African companies pay a dollar for a drug, and that is because companies can afford to do so after uptake in rich countries. In proposing this, these academics must be secretly neo-conservatives who believe poor people should be doomed to never affording drugs because they are not wealthy elites born in America.





Want to have no drug development at all, but make sure people die cheap? Ask academics how to fix science.



Academics: Pass legislation to prevent drug companies preventing a drug becoming generic



Reality: There are two issues here. One is that generic drugs have not actually helped much. As soon as a generic drug is truly cheap, the generic manufacturer abandons it. This also does nothing to solve the problem of the cost of discovery, it is just vague populism.



Academics: Reform the patent system to make it more difficult to prolong product exclusivity unnecessarily



Reality: "Unnecessarily"? Most academics have never actually created a product so this fuzzy, pointless language would be exploited by the large companies they seek to penalize, while killing small companies, which are already being damaged by the onerous approval process these academics want to make even longer, more expensive and less rewarding.



Academics: Encourage organizations that represent cancer specialists and patients (e.g., American Society of Clinical Oncology, American Society of Hematology, American Association for Cancer Research, American Cancer Society, National Comprehensive Cancer Network to consider the overall value of drugs and treatments in formulating treatment guidelines



Reality: This is another example of the concern people have about "death panels" - treatment guidelines for the rich and the poor will be different. Right now, American health care is expensive because every life is important and doctors are steeped in that mentality. Increasing such a "teach to the protocol" environment, and creating more centralized control over medical decision-making, will mean the most disenfranchised people will be impacted.



20 years ago, people said they wanted doctors to make decisions, and not the government. Now the American Cancer Society is going to pick winners and losers in the marketplace and among the public? Not a good idea for anyone.



*****



It's laudable that a team of academics have gotten together to draft a plan that other academics will cheer about (corporations evil, academics goooood) - but it is instead a reminder that it is always easy to spend someone else's money. To people who understand economics and drug development, these recommendations are equivalent to a homeopath telling doctors 'you don't know until you try it' about curing cancer.



Citation: Tefferi, Ayalew et al., In Support of a Patient-Driven Initiative and Petition to Lower the High Price of Cancer Drugs, Mayo Clinic Proceedings July 23, 2015 DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.mayocp.2015.06.001

Co-authors include:

Vincent Rajkumar, M.D., Mayo Clinic, Rochester

Morie Gertz, M.D., Mayo Clinic, Rochester

Robert Kyle, M.D., Mayo Clinic, Rochester

Hagop Kantarjian, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

James Allison, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Robert Bast Jr., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Jorge Cortes, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Isaiah Fidler, D.V.M., Ph.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Emil Freireich, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Jordan Gutterman, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Waun Ki Hong, University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Gabriel Hortobagyi, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

John Mendelsohn, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Louise Strong, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Naoto Ueno, M.D., Ph.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Charles LeMaistre, M.D., University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston

Lawrence Baker, D.O., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, Michigan

Theodore Lawrence, M.D., Ph.D., University of Michigan, Ann Arbor

Jan Abkowitz, M.D., University of Washington Medical School, Seattle

Joachim Deeg, M.D., University of Washington Medical School, Seattle

Elihu Estey, M.D., University of Washington Medical School, Seattle

Gary Lyman, M.D., M.P.H., University of Washington Medical School, Seattle

John Adamson, M.D., University of California, San Diego School of Medicine, La Jolla, California

Ranjana Hira Advani, M.D., Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford, California

Steven Coutre, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford

Peter Greenberg, M.D., Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford

Michael Link, M.D., Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford

Saul Rosenberg, Stanford University School of Medicine, Stanford

Karen Antman, M.D., Boston University School of Medicine, Boston

John Bennett, M.D., University of Rochester Medical Center, Rochester, New York

Edward Benz Jr., M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

George Peter Canellos, M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

George Daley, M.D., Ph.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Daniel DeAngelo, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Charles Fuchs, M.D., M.P.H., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Robert Handin, M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Philip Kantoff, M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

David Steensma, M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Richard Stone, Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Eric Winer, M.D., Dana-Farber Cancer Institute and Harvard Medical School, Boston

Nancy Berliner, M.D., Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston

Robert Handin, M.D., Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston

Joseph Bertino, Rutgers Cancer Institute of New Jersey, New Brunswick, New Jersey

Ravi Bhatia, M.D., University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, Alabama

Smita Bhatia, M.D., University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham

Harry Erba, M.D., Ph.D., University of Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham

Deepa Bhojwani, M.D., Children's Hospital Los Angeles, Los Angeles

Charles Blanke, M.D., Oregon Health&Science University, Portland, Oregon

Clara Bloomfield, M.D., The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus, Ohio

John Byrd, M.D., The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus

Raphael Pollock, M.D., Ph.D., The Ohio State University Comprehensive Cancer Center, Columbus

Linda Bosserman, M.D.

Stephen Forman, M.D., City of Hope Medical Foundation, Duarte, California

Hal Broxmeyer, Ph.D., Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis

Lawrence Einhorn, M.D., Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis

Fernando Cabanillas, M.D., Auxilio Cancer Center, Hato Rey, Puerto Rico

Bruce Chabner, M.D., Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston

Gerardo Colon-Otero, M.D., Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston

Asher Chanan-Khan, M.D., Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida

James Foran, Mayo Clinic, Jacksonville, Florida

Bruce Cheson, M.D., Georgetown Lombardi Comprehensive Cancer Center, Washington, D.C.

Bayard Clarkson, M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Sergio Giralt, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Clifford Hudis, M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Ross Levine, M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Martin Tallman, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Anas Younes, M.D., Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Andrew D. Zelenetz, Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York City

Susan L. Cohn, M.D., University of Chicago, Chicago

Harvey Golomb, M.D., University of Chicago, Chicago

Samuel Hellman, M.D., University of Chicago, Chicago

Richard A. Larson, M.D., University of Chicago, Chicago

Wendy Stock, M.D., University of Chicago, Chicago

Massimo Cristofanilli, M.D., Sidney Kimmel Cancer Center at Thomas Jefferson University, Philadelphia

Walter Curran Jr., M.D., Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta

Fadlo Khuri, M.D., Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta

Sagar Lonial, M.D., Winship Cancer Institute of Emory University, Atlanta

George Daley, M.D., Ph.D., Boston Children's Hospital, Boston

Joachim Deeg, M.D., Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Gary Lyman, M.D., M.P.H., Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Oliver Press, M.D., Ph.D., Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Jerald Radich, M.D., Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Brenda Sandmaier, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Rainer Stone, Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, Seattle

Francisco Esteva, M.D., Ph.D., New York University Langone Medical Center, New York City

James George, M.D., University of Oklahoma Health Sciences Center, Oklahoma City

Paulo Marcelo Hoff, M.D., Universidade de Sao Paulo, Sao Paulo

Ronald Hoffman, Icahn School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York City

Mary Horowitz, M.D., M.S., Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee

Jean Pierre Issa, M.D., Temple University, Philadelphia

Bruce Evan Johnson, M.D., Lowe Center for Thoracic Oncology, Boston

Kenneth Kaushansky, M.D., Stony Brook University, Stony Brook, New York

David Khayat, M.D., Ph.D., Pitié-Salpêtrière Hospital, Paris

Thomas Kipps, M.D., Ph.D.

Scott Lippman, M.D., University of California, San Diego Moores Cancer Center, La Jolla

Margaret Kripke, Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas, Austin, Texas

Maurie Markman, M.D., Cancer Treatment Centers of America, Eastern Regional Medical Center, Philadelphia

Neal Neropol, M.D., University Hospitals Case Medical Center and Case Western Reserve University, Cleveland

Yoav Messinger, M.D., Children's Hospitals and Clinics of Minnesota

Therese Mulvey, M.D., Southcoast Centers for Cancer Care, Fairhaven, Massachusetts

Susan O'Brien, M.D.

Richard Van Etten, M.D., Ph.D., University of California, Irvine, California

Roman Perez-Soler, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, New York City

Josef Prchal, M.D., University of Utah, Salt Lake City

Kanti Rai, North Shore-LIJ Cancer Institute, New York

Jacob Rowe, Northwestern University Feinberg School of Medicine, Chicago

Hope Rugo, University of California, San Francisco, Helen Diller Family Comprehensive Cancer Center, San Francisco

Carolyn Runowicz, M.D., Florida International University Herbert Wertheim College of Medicine, Miami

Alan Saven, M.D., Scripps Clinic Medical Group, La Jolla

Richard Silver, M.D., Scripps Clinic Medical Group, La Jolla

Andrew Schafer, M.D., Weill Cornell Medical College, New York City

Charles Schiffer, Barbara Ann Karmanos Cancer Institute, Detroit

Mikkael Sekeres, M.D., M.S., Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland

Lillian Siu, M.D., Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University Health Network, Toronto

Marc Stewart, M.D., Seattle Cancer Care Alliance, Seattle

Michael Thompson, M.D., Ph.D., Aurora Research Institute, Aurora Health Care, Milwaukee

Julie Vose, M.D., M.B.A., University of Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska

Peter Wiernik, M.D., Cancer Research Foundation, New York City