Grassroots Commentary Obama's 'Trump' Wall, Outsourced Jobs

With $25 million Mr. Obama’s de facto Middle Eastern “jobs for jihadis” program is funding a 125 mile Donald Trump style wall in Tunisia. Is Tunisia — which borders Algeria and ISIS-infested Libya — one of the extra “57 states” then-candidate Obama referred to back on the campaign trail in Beaverton, Oregon, in May of 2008?

For the president who famously said, “If you’ve got a business — you didn’t build that. Somebody else made that happen,” turns out Mr. Obama is pro-jobs, just not domestically or for fellow Americans. Specifically, I refer to the 93 million unemployed, able-bodied citizens out of work due to high corporate taxes (read: the widespread phenomenon of corporate inversion) and, in large measure, to restrictive employer mandates in the bureaucratic behemoth that is Obamacare.

The impediment of a wall was a great historical deterrent to China’s invading Mongols and the Vatican’s Muslim raiders. Likewise in today’s world, how is a U.S.-paid one appropriate for Tunisia, but not for America’s southern border? Related to Trump’s proposed wall to be paid by Mexico, he who is responsible for absolutely nothing had the audacity to say:

“People expect the President of the United States and the elected officials in this country to treat these problems seriously, to put forward policies that have been examined, analyzed, are effective, where unintended consequences are taken into account. They don’t expect half-baked notions coming out of the White House. We can’t afford that.‘”

Speaking of things the American people can’t afford is Mr. Obama’s virtual doubling of the national debt, by adding almost $9 trillion ($19 trillion and counting). How is that his version of “examined and effective” governance? Further, giving this devil his due, how is the following not unintended consequences: his wasteful stimulus spending (to corrupt political cronies like now bankrupt Solyndra), his race-baiting encouragement of Black Lives Matter (advocating cop-killing chaos), announcing the withdrawal date of U.S. forces from Iraq (convenient for terrorists to re-establish an Islamic caliphate), and the ruinous nuclear deal with Iran (which will guarantee the Imams the leverage and/or use of the bomb within a few short years.) Not only has this fascist ideologue not taken the Constitution, the Bill of Rights or the duties of the nation’s highest office seriously, he has wrecked the joint with his disastrous “fundamental transformation of America.” Indeed, he who is the laughingstock of supposed allies and geo-political foes alike really shouldn’t throw stones in the crumbling glass house that is his failed presidency.

Despite the farce of a 5% unemployment rate, Mr. Obama has gutted the economy (and the military). Try the experiment of making a technical support call these days. The accent on the other end of the phone is invariably exotic — and likely half a world away — from far flung places like India or the Philippines. Those are formerly American jobs exported to where the labor is cheaper, and the regulations and taxes are less. Capitalist producers, the One Percenters, wrongly demonized by Clinton/Sanders-Democrat/Socialist is standard Sal Alinsky style class warfare: alienate and divide the electorate to ensure their ilk’s election. To this end, that is why Clinton fundraising bagman Terry McAuliffe (moonlighting as Virginia governor) did an end around a two days out of session legislature to restore the vote of 200,000 convicted criminals.

As nature abhors a vacuum, any country without borders isn’t really a nation. For example, open borders in Western societies invite all manners of gang violence, specifically Europe’s rape epidemic. Further, every form of criminality is ignorantly condoned as the rule of law is disregarded from Mr. Obama’s White House to local border patrol agents directed to sit on their hands, and collect a government paycheck. The result has facilitated a golden age of drug trafficking, most notably seen in the heroin epidemic in Ohio’s heartland. As previously mentioned, globalization of the workforce has outsourced jobs, crippled an already anemic U.S. economy. Democrats’ big government intrusion, tax and spend policies, and the bogeyman scare tactic (which hamstrings U.S. businesses with the promise of a “greener” environment) of climate change, has left America sinking like the Titanic into a leftist quagmire.

Make no mistake, this has been accomplished by progressives with no loyalty to America — the place or the ideal. Lapel pins and lip service notwithstanding, when was the last time Mr. Obama or Mrs. Clinton said or acted like they actually love America? With all the prurience of a Caligula, Mr. Obama prattles on about banality, North Carolina bathroom laws with British Prime Minister David Cameron. (With Europe, the Middle East and America in anarchy, do these “world leaders” have nothing more pressing to discuss?)

While the left endlessly debates the wisdom of co-ed, transgender shower rooms, gay wedding cakes baked by cowed Christians and gender non-specific toilets, how are these people any different from metaphorical fiddling 21st century Neros as Rome (read: America and the West) self-destructs? To this end, the Middle East literally burns from current conflicts thanks to Mr. Obama’s “apology tour” and subsequent “leadership from behind.” There are hordes at nonexistent gates — and rot from within our wall-less society — as the heedless and careless elites of both political parties leave America’s prospects to fate by laying out the welcome mat.

David L. Hunter is on Twitter and blogs at davidlhunter.blogspot.com. He is published in The Washington Post, The Washington Times, Patriot Post, FrontPage Mag, and extensively in Canada Free Press and American Thinker.