50 years of Medicare-Medicaid slavery



Excerpts of Ronald Reagan's Coffeecup speech (1961)





Now back in 1927 an American socialist, Norman Thomas, six times candidate for president on the Socialist Party ticket, said the American people would never vote for socialism. But he said under the name of liberalism the American people will adopt every fragment of the socialist program....



One of the traditional methods of imposing statism or socialism on a people has been by way of medicine. It's very easy to disguise a medical program as a humanitarian project. Most people are a little reluctant to oppose anything that suggests medical care for people who possibly can't afford it.



Now, the American people, if you put it to them about socialized medicine and gave them a chance to choose, would unhesitatingly vote against it. We had an example of this. Under the Truman administration it was proposed that we have a compulsory health insurance program for all people in the United States, and, of course, the American people unhesitatingly rejected this.



So, with the American people on record as not wanting socialized medicine, Congressman Ferrand introduced the Ferrand Bill. This was the idea that all people of social security age should be brought under a program of compulsory health insurance. Now this would not only be our senior citizens, this would be the dependents and those who are disabled, this would be young people if they are dependents of someone eligible for Social Security.



Now, Congressman Ferrand brought the program out on that idea of just for that group of people. But Congressman Ferrand was subscribing to this foot in the door philosophy, because he said "if we can only break through and get our foot inside the door, then we can expand the program after that."



Walter Ruther said "It's no secret that the United Automobile Workers is officially on record as backing a program of national health insurance." And by national health insurance, he meant socialized medicine for every American. Well, let's see what the socialists themselves have to say about it.



They say: "Once the Ferrand bill is passed, this nation will be provided with a mechanism for socialized medicine. Capable of indefinite expansion in every direction until it includes the entire population.' Well, we can't say we haven't been warned....



James Madison in 1788, speaking to the Virginia Convention said: "Since the general civilization of mankind, I believe there are more instances of the abridgment of the freedom of the people by gradual and silent encroachment of those in power, than by violent and sudden usurpations."...



Let's take a look at social security itself. Again, very few of us disagree with the original premise that there should be some form of saving that would keep destitution from following unemployment by reason of death, disability or old age. And to this end Social Security was adopted. But it was never intended to supplant private savings, private insurance, pension programs of unions and industries.



Now in our country under our free enterprise system, we have seen medicine reach the greatest heights that it has in any country in the world. Today, the relationship between patient and doctor in this country is something to be envied any place. The privacy, the care that is given to a person, the right to choose a doctor, the right to go from one doctor to the other....



This is a freedom that I wonder whether any of us have the right to take from any human being....



In this country of ours, took place the greatest revolution that has ever taken place in world's history. The only true revolution. Every other revolution simply exchanged one set of rulers for another. But here for the first time in all the thousands of years of man's relation to man, a little group of the men, the founding fathers – for the first time – established the idea that you and I had within ourselves the God given right and ability to determine our own destiny.



This freedom was built into our government with safeguards. We talk democracy today. And strangely we let democracy begin to assume the aspect of majority rule is all that is needed. Well, majority rule is a fine aspect of democracy, provided there are guarantees written in to our government concerning the rights of the individual and of the minorities....



So write, and if your this man writes back to you and tells you that he too is for free enterprise, that we have these great services and so forth, that must be performed by government, don't let him get away with it. Show that you have not been convinced. Write a letter right back and tell him that you believe in government economy and fiscal responsibility; that you know governments don't tax to get the money the need; governments will always find a need for the money they get and that you demand the continuation of our traditional free enterprise system. You and I can do this. The only way we can do it is by writing to our congressmen even we believe that he is on our side to begin with. Write to strengthen his hand. Give him the ability to stand before his colleagues in Congress and say "I have heard from my constituents and this is what they want."



Write those letters now; call your friends and tell them to write them. If you don't, this program I promise you will pass just as surely as the sun will come up tomorrow and behind it will come other federal programs that will invade every area of freedom as we have known it in this country. Until, one day, as Normal Thomas said we will awake to find that we have socialism. And if you don't do this and if I don't do it, one of these days you and I are going to spend our sunset years telling our children and our children's children, what it once was like in America when men were free."



<NOSPAM>

By Ellis Washington ~ Soviet Premiere Nikita Khrushchev~ Ayn RandTo celebrate the 50 anniversary of Medicare and Medicaid, like clockwork the Socialist apparatchiks at the New York Times had their resident "journalist" Robert Pear, write his prepackaged article, a glowing assessment of Medicare and Medicaid programs . Like all Socialist-Communist schemes since the French Revolution, when President Lyndon B. Johnson signed the bill creating Medicare and Medicaid on July 30, 1965, its always done in the name of the "public good," therefore, in addition to warehousing Blacks, Hispanics and poor Whites on concentration camps euphemistically called "Projects" where they live lives of despair warring against each other like rats. Where in order to get your welfare, government cheese and all the other free slave chain links of LBJ's Great Society programs, no father must be in sight. Now socialist slave chains would extend anew to America's seniors – "the miracle of healing to the old and to the poor," LBJ said at the signing ceremony with former President Harry Truman. Now the omnipotent, evolution atheist, federal government would have the healing power of God!The legislation fulfilled decades of socialist dreams going back as far as Woodrow Wilson (1913-1921) and only partially fulfilled by FDR's Socialist New Deal, but, unlike Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act, it was passed with votes from a substantial number of Republicans. You see America like the Objectivist philosopher Ayn Rand famously observed many decades ago during FDR's New Deal Era (1933-45):Thus, there has always been many RINO Republicans eager to "cut a deal" of treason with the Democrat Socialist Party because since Theodore Roosevelt (1901-09), every single U.S. president for over 100 years except Warren Harding, Calvin Coolidge and Ronald Reagan, has been a self-described "Progressive" which is a synonym for liberal, socialist, and in most extreme cases like Obama, a communist. How else could the Welfare State slavery have been passed over these now 80+ years with Republican duplicity and treachery?Pear continued, "They believed that commercial health insurance had failed the elderly, and they wanted to replace it with social insurance, as a first step toward similar coverage for the rest of the population," said Theodore R. Marmor, a Yale professor and historian of Medicare. Yet with evil men the truth always resides in secret, thus Pear's writes about a covertly recorded telephone conversation in March 1965, Rep. Wilbur J. Cohen, one of the architects of Medicare, defined the bill that had just been approved by the House Ways and Means Committee. "Quite frankly," Mr. Cohen told President Johnson, "there's no longer any room for the private insurance companies to sell insurance policies for people over 65." Therefore, America the Socialists on both sides of the aisle realize that Americans love freedom, thus in order to enslave you they must do so gradually, this is called Fabian Socialism named after a famous Roman General Fabius Maximus whose Fabian strategy advocated harassment and attrition rather than direct warfare against General Hannibal and his Carthaginian Army during the Second Punic War (218-201 B.C.).Soviet Communist Premiere Nikita Khrushchev said it best regarding propensity to embrace Fabian socialism slavery: "We cannot expect the Americans to jump from capitalism to communism, but we can assist their elected leaders in giving Americans small doses of socialism, until they suddenly awake to find they have communism." Like America's "newspaper of record" the New York Times, the propaganda newspaper of the Democrat Socialist Party, the Soviet Union in their Communist era had a State-controlled media, its major newspaper always glorified Communism to the starving, miseducated masses and was cynically called "Pravda," Russian for Truth, yet like every Communist, Socialist, Liberal, Progressives plot and scheme truth is relative. Truth is what the fascist State say it is!In 1961, Ronald Reagan's gave a prescient warning about socialized medicine in a Coffeecup speech he gave. The video and complete transcript can be found at the Lonely Conservative America, you must chose this day what kind of people we will be – Free or Slaves? What is freedom? Objectivist philosopher Ayn Rand has given the most compelling definition of the word – "Freedom (n.): To ask nothing. To expect nothing. To depend on nothing." This aphorism doesn't mean to leave our children, our elderly, our sick, our homeless, our psychotics, our Wall Street Occupiers laying around in the streets like dogs, No! Freedom means that as a unique, individual creation of God you have a mandate to make your own way in this world; to use your God-given gifts and talents to master and conquer this world rather than always being an existential victim of this world.Ronald Reagan warned you: "Fascism was really the basis for the New Deal. It was Mussolini's success in Italy, with his government-directed economy, that led the early New Dealers to say 'But Mussolini keeps the trains running on time.'" Ayn Rand warned you:The mandate from God given to our ancestors Adam and Eve couldn't be more definitive in Genesis 1:28 – "And God blessed them, and God said unto them,, and replenish the earth, and subdue it..." This means from the beginning that Man, with God's help, is the master of our own destiny.Therefore America, stop allowing the Progressive-Communist criminals in Congress, the phony oligarchy who rules over us on the Supreme Court, and the tyrants in the White House enslave you with the servile chains of FDR's Welfare State, LBJ's Great Society, Obama's Cultural Marxism. Don't celebrate the 50th anniversary of Medicare and Medicaid... but be responsible for your own Life and LIVE!Please purchase my latest opus dedicated to that Conservative Colossus, Supreme Court Justice Clarence Thomas. Here are the latest two new volumes from my ongoing historical series –(University Press of America, 2015):However, before the book is officially released to the public, I have to place 100 pre-publication orders (50 orders per each volume). I need your help to make this happen ASAP. Please place your order today for Volume 3 & Volume 4. Of course, if you can order all 100 copies today, the book will become official tomorrow.Please circulate this flyer to all your email contacts & Facebook/Twitter followers who may be interested in purchasing this opus which will serve as a ready apologetic against the rampant Marxist-Progressive propaganda taught in America's public schools, colleges, universities, graduate schools, and law schools. Thanks in advance to all my friends, associates and colleagues for your invaluable support! Law and History Blog: www.EllisWashingtonReport.com I am starting a new a program on my blog dedicated to giving young conservatives (ages 14-35) a regular place to display and publish their ideas calledIf you know of any young person who wants to publish their ideas on any subject, have them send their essay manuscripts to my email at ewashington@wnd.com .© Ellis Washington