The number of U.S. job openings up for grabs at the end of December climbed to its second-highest level ever, as employers struggled to fill existing openings with more and more workers quitting their jobs.

There were 5.6 million vacant positions in the labor market in the last month of 2015, according to a report released Tuesday by the Bureau of Labor Statistics. July is the only month on record to exceed that total (with about 5.7 million openings), which managed to climb by more than 700,000 positions over the course of the last year.

"Job openings rose in several industries over the year with the largest changes in health care and social assistance (+172,000) and finance and insurance (+99,000)," the report said.

Indeed, the government's most recent job creation report released last week highlighted both health care and financial activities as stellar performers in terms of employment. The former area managed to generate 37,000 new jobs in January and has added 470,000 new positions to the labor market on the year, while the latter contributed 18,000 new jobs over the month and 149,000 positions since Jan. 2015.

"All of the job reports that have come out over the last couple months have cited health care as a growing area. When you add in the ... Affordable Care Act, that has added millions of people who were uninsured and are now insured, that's putting stress on the health care system," says Edward Fleischman, chairman and CEO of The Execu|Search Group, a recruiting and temporary staffing company. "This is the most robust job market over the last number of years that I have seen in my career. Demand is huge."

But employers actually aren't hiring at a fast enough rate to put a dent in the growing number of vacancies across the country, even though the number of hires made last month (nearly 5.4 million) climbed to its highest level since 2006.

Part of the problem is that the rising number of individuals leaving their jobs, for one reason or another, is limiting companies' ability to fill existing gaps. Nearly 5.1 million Americans quit or were laid off from their jobs in December – making it the biggest month for job separations since 2008. Layoffs and discharges actually ticked down to a 13-month low, while the number of voluntary quits in the U.S. exceeded 3 million for the first time since 2006.

That in itself is a positive sign: Quits are typically viewed as being good for the labor market, as economists interpret a relatively high reading to mean that workers are confident in their ability to find alternative means of employment. So with hiring and quits numbers at their highest levels in nearly a decade, it's clear that labor in the U.S. is standing on stable footing.

"We're getting a very large influx of jobs. As a recruiting firm, we can't handle the demand for the jobs," Fleischman says, noting that payroll growth within the recruiting industry is generally a good sign for the rest of the labor market. "If the staffing and recruiting industry is hiring internally, they're hiring because there's demand out on the street. Look at Execu|Search. We've been in business 30 years, and each of the last three years we've grown 22 percent, 22 percent and 21 percent in our own head count."

A relative downside is the thriving job market has made it difficult for employers to keep people around, as employees who aren't satisfied with a particular company's wages or benefits typically have plenty of other options on the table. Wages have risen modestly in recent months, with Americans' average hourly earnings up 2.5 percent over the year, according to the BLS, and overall personal income (including benefits and other revenue streams) up 4.5 percent over the course of 2015, according to the Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Many analysts interpret the income uptick as meaning employers are starting to have difficulty attracting and retaining talent, so they're trying to adjust to remain competitive. Fleischman says such a strategy is important but ultimately not the only thing employees are looking for.

Execu|Search's 2016 Hiring Outlook showed a disparity between what employers thought candidates wanted out of a job and what prospective employees were actually looking for. The key finding: Money isn't everything to the labor force.

"Slightly more employers thought that if they paid higher salaries, they'd attract someone. We also surveyed candidates, and surprisingly, they said they want career growth," he says, noting more than half of prospective candidates said opportunities for professional development were their No. 1 priority in deciding on a job. "There isn't a complete disparity there, but there is a disconnect."

That disconnect could continue to make it difficult for employers to attract qualified candidates and fill the gaps in their payrolls. And while that makes life complicated for corporate America, Tuesday's report adds further evidence to the idea that U.S. workers have plenty of power and plenty of options in the job market today.