A Fidelity-Investments-backed startup in New York (NY), Oscar Health Insurance, reported a major loss for 2015. It revealed a loss of more than $100 million in a recent filing to NY and New Jersey (NJ) regulators.

In Febraury, Fidelity Investments injected $400 million to the startup, bringing the latter’s valuation to $2.70 billion.

Expensive Contracts

Mario Schlosser, Oscar Health Insurance CEO, justified the hefty losses by saying that they were largely driven by costly health network contracts. Being new in the industry, the three-year-old company was unable to negiotate well to minimize the costs. In 2015, the insurer spent more than 75% of its premiums on hospital costs alone. This is significantly higher than the 63% spent by the biggest American health insurance company, UnitedHealthcare, for the same year.

The company hopes to recover from the recent downturn as the contracts are about to expire. Oscar Health Insurance seeks to obtain a more powerful negotiating stance this time, enabling it to reduce the hospital costs.

Oscar Health Insurance served nearly 53,000 members in NY. They acquired their respective insurance on the state-based exchange instead of opting for the healthcare benefits offered by Medicare and Medicaid.

Health Insurers vs. Obamacare

Many American health insurers have long been suffering since the 2010 Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (ACA), also known as the Obamacare, was enacted.

Last year, Health Republic, the biggest Consumer Oriented and Operated Plan (CO-OP) in NY, was shut down by federal authorities after losing $130 million during its first 18 months. More than 200,000 residents in the state lost their insurance due to the foreclosure.

NY-based health insurance companies are not the only ones suffering from the current administration. Nearly half of the 23 CO-OPs established under the 2010 healthcare legislation located in various states such as Oregon, Nevada, Nebraska, Louisiana, Kentucky, and Iowa has also failed at large.

Dave Wichmann, UnitedHealth Group, Inc. (NYSE:UNH) President and CEO, believe that health insurers throughout the country are greatly challenged by expenses way costlier than projected due to public exchanges.

Receive News & Ratings Via Email - Enter your email address below to receive a concise daily summary of the latest news and analysts' ratings with MarketBeat.com's FREE daily email newsletter.