Buy Photo The Fiesta Rides as seen from atop the floodwall at the HotRod Harvest-themed 2015 Harvest Homecoming Festival in New Albany, Ind. Oct. 10, 2015 (Photo: Brian Bohannon, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

While Booth Days draw thousands to New Albany’s downtown during Harvest Homecoming each year, there’s much more on offer than vendors and fair food.

A car show along the city’s scenic riverfront tied in nicely with this year’s theme of Hot Rod Harvest on Saturday; while a number of children’s activities, including a Big Wheel Race, Baby Crawl, and Children’s Tractor Pull drew families downtown.

The pedal-powered tractor pull pitted pint-sized competitors against each other as they struggled to pull the weighted sled the farthest.

Reaghan Wiles, 10, won her weight division in the event. “She won two years ago,” said her mother, Leann Davis. “We come down here every year. It’s nice to see people you’ve not seen in years, and the food.”

A costume contest attracted a number of entries, from toddlers to adults, running the gamut from a tiny Minnie Mouse to a trio of Pink Ladies from the movie “Grease”.

“We watch 'Grease' a lot,” said Praylie Gresham, 12, in costume as Jan. She said her favorite part of Harvest Homecoming is the costume contest and the rides.

In the afternoon, the Petite Little Miss, Little Master, Little Miss, and Little Miss Pre-teen pageants were held. Proceeds from the entry fees benefit the Miss Harvest Homecoming Scholarship Pageants.

While some of the kid-friendly action took place in the heart of downtown, carnival rides on the city side of the floodwall and a number of activities on the other also drew families toward the river.

The Carnegie Center for Art & History brought its popular monthly Family Fun Workshop to the waterfront, providing all the supplies to paint miniature pumpkins. The activity took place during Kids’ Day in the Tent in the Sounds Unlimited Productions Party Tent between the floodwall and the river.

With free admission, balloons, beverages and popcorn, the tent offered a variety of hands-on activities, displays and interaction for kids through sixth grade. Sand art, dog faces created from dog treats, and coloring sheets were just a few of the activities on offer.

Some kids eschewed the delights of the Kids’ Tent for a more traditional children’s activity – rolling down the grassy floodwall.

Also near the floodwall a number of percussion instruments were set up by Sound Community, under the direction of Gregory Acker and Hamidou Koivogui. For the fifth year, children were free to experiment with the instruments and play rhythms together.

“It can go a lot of ways,” Acker said. “Sometimes we get a group of kids playing together. The parents love to see their kids playing with others in a noncompetitive way. Some kids don’t want to leave.”

Also along the riverfront, the Harvest Homecoming Car Show welcomed any type of stock, classic, show or racecar, antique vehicles, trucks and motorcycles. Scores of vehicles lined the road running between the river and floodwall.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Lomwvd