MESQUITE — Petra Ruiz called her husband on FaceTime and put her phone in the cup holder of her Yukon.

She was on her way home from a hair salon. They talked about what was for dinner, but not about the weather.

Then she screamed. The screen on Ruben Porras’ phone went dark. The call dropped.

He used a Find My Friends app to find her location. He rushed to Interstate 30. Police cars were everywhere. Roads were blocked.

He parked his car and ran.

“I was just hoping she was still alive,” said Porras, 31.

After about a mile or so, he spotted what was left of her Yukon. He saw her inside. He grabbed her hand and tried to talk to her.

“She wasn’t responding,” Porras said. “She had no pulse. She was gone.”

Ruiz, 27, was one of 11 people killed in Saturday’s storms. The tornado had tossed her SUV off an overpass, Porras said.

One of six siblings, Ruiz had four children of her own — Jasmine, 9; Michael, 7; Angela, 6; and Camila, 2.

She was a simple woman “with expensive tastes,” Porras said, laughing. The day before the wreck, he got her Versace perfume, a stocking full of makeup, a Michael Kors bag and a Bluetooth headphone set for Christmas.

But, he said, she didn’t need all that.

“I could bring her a chocolate, and that would make her happy,” he said. “But she spoiled me, and I spoiled her back.”

Ruiz met Porras online when she was 15 and known as “imatxhoney214” on AOL. He was a poor kid in East Dallas. She was a chess-playing, bossy Pleasant Grove girl, the second-oldest child in a big family.

The two stayed up late into the night, talking “about everything.” They eventually switched to phones, but she could only talk to him after 9 p.m. to avoid outrageous cellphone bills and angry parents.

The couple’s first date came later. His brother dropped him off at the movie theater to see Freddy vs. Jason.

He said about 20 of her relatives and friends came with her.

“They were trying to scare me,” Porras said. “But I stuck around.”

By the next date, the posse shrank to 10. A year later they married.

One of the men who consoled him in his living room Sunday was among those who had been “breathing down” his neck at the theater.

The couple worked together for the last three years as paralegals at Dallas attorney Glenn Tucker’s office. Ruiz brought his wife breakfast all the time — Fuel City tacos or Subway, she wasn’t picky. They ate lunch together every day.

And she took care of him. She even bought him remote-control cars and the Hot Wheels that he had never had.

“She said, ‘You know what? You don’t have to worry about that now. Whatever you didn’t have as a kid, you get now, plus more,’” Porras said.

Porras “loved her to death.” He had his wife’s name tattooed on his left arm. She had his on her shoulder.

They planned to grow old together.

“I always told her, ‘We’re going to be two old-a– people, sitting back, fishing,’” he said. “She didn’t much like the fishing part. But she liked the sitting out by the lake part.”

Ruiz’s big family surrounded him and the children Sunday. He cried often, but managed a few laughs as they talked about the past.

“She was always happy,” he said.

But he blamed himself for letting her go out and not being more careful. He wasn’t holding up well, he said.

“I’m really not. But I’ve got to show strength for these children. I’m going to have to fulfill whatever she wanted for them. … I’m not going to let her down.”

Then he turned to his daughter and said, “We’re going to make Mommy proud.”