Q: If a placebo treatment “works,” what’s not real about it?

A: The “placebo effect” is a phenomenon in medicine whereby patients feel better without the use of drugs. Although scientists have been studying placebos for decades, there are still a lot of misconceptions about how they work. Here are the most common.

The placebo effect is all in the mind: A significant proportion of patients feel better after taking placebos, but many scientists claim this improvement is totally mental. Prominent doctors have called the placebo effect the “beer goggles of medicine.”

In reality, placebo treatments can cause measurable, biological changes similar to those triggered by drugs. Studies show that depressed patients on placebos experience increased activity in their prefrontal cortex, which eases their symptoms. In patients with Parkinson’s disease, placebos trigger a flood of the neurotransmitter dopamine, just as their drugs do. And taking a placebo painkiller dampens pain-related activity in the brain and spinal cord and causes the release of pain-relieving endorphins.

Placebos work only if patients think they’re real: Expecting to feel better is a key ingredient in placebo responses. Physicians and researchers have questioned the ethics of placebo use, suggesting that it requires doctors to willfully deceive their patients.

Over the past few years, however, scientists have found this isn’t true. Honest placebos work, too. In one trial, patients with irritable bowel syndrome were told that they were taking a placebo, yet still experienced significant relief. Researchers have found the same effect for depression, migraines and ADHD.

Some research shows that patients learn to associate taking a pill with a particular physiological response, so when they take a placebo, their bodies automatically mimic that response. There’s also evidence that simply being cared for in a trial — even if patients know a treatment is fake — helps them feel their conditions will improve.

Neurotic, suggestible people are more likely to respond to placebos: Doctors once took a very patronizing view of placebos. A 1954 article in the Lancet advocated placebos as a means to comfort “unintelligent or inadequate patients.” Recent studies, however, suggest that about a quarter of the variation seems to depend on personality.

It’s not neurotic people who see benefits, though, but those who are optimistic, altruistic, resilient and straightforward. Scientists think this is because these types tend to be more engaged with their treatment and have more positive expectations. Neurotic and hostile people are least likely to respond.

Real medicines don’t have a placebo effect: It’s true that placebos won’t shrink a tumor, cure an infection or replace insulin in someone with diabetes. But many “real” treatments — particularly those that modify symptoms like pain, fatigue, nausea or depression — rely on the placebo effect. Common opioids such as Tramadol are about a third less effective if we don’t know we’re taking them. And in mild to moderate cases of depression, the placebo effect is thought to account for almost all of the benefits of the drugs.

Drugs are always more effective than placebos: A rigorous recent study of 152 trials found that placebo effects are often about the same as drug effects.

Of course, when patients take an active drug, they benefit from both the drug and the placebo effect. But medication can also do harm. For conditions like chronic pain, for which drugs aren’t especially effective, patients can actually do better with alternative therapies.

— Jo Marchant, The Washington Post