HACKENSACK — The middle-aged woman was perched on the doctor’s examining table, grimacing in pain. She explained that she had suffered from dizziness and shooting pain in her stomach for days.

Viorel Florescu / Staff photographer Dr. Jayant Kiriane talks with Lida Maurad, a patient at Bergen Volunteer Medical Initiative.

Lida, who lives in Bergen County and speaks only Spanish, is among the working poor of North Jersey and could not make a regular doctor’s appointment, because she doesn’t qualify for government assistance and lacks health insurance.

Viorel Florescu/Staff photographer

But she, and other such residents, have found help in the free treatment accorded at The Bergen Volunteer Medical Initiative, which operates a center at 241 Moore Street in Hackensack, with six exam rooms and a lab as well as a close relationship with five area hospitals where the doctors can send patients for free follow up treatment, said Dr. Arthur De Simone, the program’s medical director.

The healthcare center is only for adult, low-income residents of Bergen County who do not have health insurance.

On a recent day, another client, Jonathan Leo of Hackensack, whose arm was in a sling after a mishap while cleaning his apartment windows, read a book with his 4-year-old son, William, in the center’s waiting room of the center while awaiting his appointment.

“This place helps a lot of people,” he said. “They really helped me control my cholesterol. Whenever I’m sick, I make an appointment and I come. They are very nice, very professional here.”

Although Obamacare was intended to give healthcare to the uninsured, experts estimate that there are 35,000 to 40,000 in Bergen County alone who lack health insurance, say health industry experts. “Many people lack medical insurance for a variety of reasons and, when faced with the choice of buying food for their families or health insurance, they choose food,” said Amanda Missey, executive director of the Bergen Volunteer Medical Initiative.

The volunteer medical initiative opened in November 2009 to treat Bergen residents with no insurance and little money. What started with a few dozen patients has grown every year, thanks to word of mouth. The center now has a roster of 1,000 patients and logged 5,700 visits last year, said De Simone.

The center has outgrown its current site and plans to move into larger headquarters nearby within a few months. Its hours, 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. on Mondays through Wednesdays, 9 a.m. to 7 p.m. on Thursday and 9 a.m. to 1 p.m. on Friday, also will be extended so that patients can come in for weekend and evening appointments.

“We get people from virtually every town in Bergen County,” said Missey. “The typical patient is a mother who makes approximately $200 a week and can’t afford health insurance and needs to choose whether she wants to feed her kids and pay rent or get health insurance.” Such women almost always opt against health insurance.

“There’s a common misconception, that the Obamacare has given everyone healthcare. But that’s not true. For a lot of reasons many people don’t have health insurance. Between 35,000-40,000 people in Bergen County are uninsured,” said Missey. “They don’t take care of themselves until there’s a crisis. They treat the emergency room as their doctor. So that’s what we are trying to do instead. We are their doctor. We find malignant tumors. We find cancers. We are saving their lives.”

The center is supported entirely by donations, fundraising and grants. Patients pay nothing for appointments and the center receives no government funding.

More than 20 physicians, 21 nurses and 8 nurse practitioners volunteer at the center. Patients come in for primary care with everything from routine problems to diabetes and cancer.

“It’s very rewarding to volunteer here,” said Dr. Lisa Miller, a retired OB/GYN from Upper Saddle River. “I see eight patients a week, and many of them are repeat patients who I’ve been treating for years, so we have a relationship. There’s a continuity of care.”

Another client, Gerarda Faison of Mahwah, who works part-time in accounts receivable, came for a routine physical and was grateful for the attention he received.

“I love coming here,” he said. “They treat you like family.”

Email: yellin@northjersey.com