Who knew that we would someday be nostalgic for the Cold War? Sure, there was always the risk of nuclear annihilation, but at least the enemy was rational, events unfolded relatively slowly, we had a coherent lens for viewing other conflicts around the world, and in a pinch the president could always pick up the phone and call Moscow.

By comparison, the world is now a dangerous mess. Let’s start with the obvious problems: the Islamic State in Iraq (formerly known as ISIS); Putin meddling in Ukraine; Israel and Gaza; and the implosion in Syria.

Then there are problems that have been bumped off the headlines, not because they are no longer dangerous, but because there is only so much room on the front page: Iran’s nuclear program; the U.S. withdrawal from Afghanistan; instability in Pakistan; China bullying its neighbors; North Korea being North Korea.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Iraq]

I’ve probably missed one or two. The point is that the world is more unstable and parlous than at any time in my lifetime. Less obvious, these challenges are interrelated in fabulously complex ways. If we get tough on China or Russia for perceived bad behavior, then we lose their potential leverage in pressuring Iran to give up its nuclear program.

Then again, maybe we should give Iran a temporary reprieve, as better relations with Tehran might help stabilize the rest of the region. Of course, Israel would go apoplectic at any hint of softness towards Iran, but U.S. support of Israel has costs, too. Can’t we do something about the settlement building in the West Bank that undermines moderate Arab politicians because they appear powerless to stop it and rankles our European allies?

And how exactly should we be dealing with Turkey, as it drifts from a model democracy in a Muslim country to a less benign state?

[READ: What's Going on in Iraq?]

You get my point. So here is a radical proposal to deal with this global conflagration: It is time for President Barack Obama to create a bipartisan War Cabinet. It’s debatable whether we are at war (Iraq? Afghanistan?), but the global dangers are such that we ought to be on wartime footing in any event. Obama ought to invite the Republicans into the Situation Room, literally and figuratively.

Speaker John Boehner, Senate Minority Leader Mitch McConnell and their foreign policy advisers should become partners in the foreign policy process. They should be sitting at the table during key deliberations and have a voice in the subsequent decisions. Most important, they need to own those decisions. We need to create an environment, as we had during the Cold War, where there is an American foreign policy, not an Obama foreign policy.

A War Cabinet has two advantages, one substantive and one political. The huge substantive advantage is that our foreign policy would be more informed, more deliberate and more politically stable. Obama could spend more time conferring with thoughtful experts — including experts from the Bush administration who wrestled with many of the same issues for eight years — and less time reacting to relentless Republican sniping.

[MORE: Editorial Cartoons on Syria]

Our foreign policy would look more like the Simpson-Bowles deficit reduction commission (a bipartisan panel that produced a comprehensive fiscal strategy lauded across the ideological spectrum) and less like the Affordable Care Act (which passed without any meaningful Republican input or votes).

Unlike with the Affordable Care Act, if Obama invited the Republicans into the Situation Room, they could not say no. Refusing to support the president at a time of national urgency would be perceived as an act of cowardice and political opportunism.

In short, the current global situation is too complex to conform to simple Republican and Democratic worldviews. Unlike the Cold War, when Democrats tended to be dovish and Republicans were hawkish, the political lines now blur when a map of the world gets unfurled. The Republican Party has an interventionist wing that wanted bolder action in Syria and Ukraine; at the same time, Republican Sen. Rand Paul has tapped into an isolationist wing of the party that has grown fatigued by feckless U.S. activities of the past decade. Democrats are less inclined to project U.S. force abroad, yet also keener to intervene for humanitarian reasons.

[SEE: Cartoons about the Republican Party]

Amid that intellectual confusion, we’ve settled into a routine: The Democrats fall in line with whatever ad hoc things Obama tries to do (while periodically reminding the public that George W. Bush is the one who broke Iraq). The Republicans lambaste any White House decisions so predictably that the critiques lose any value. It’s a sloppy and dangerous way to approach the world.

In the short run, asking for foreign policy help is the presidential equivalent of moving in with your parents after age 30. It’s an obvious sign that you are not succeeding on your own. But that doesn’t make it the wrong thing to do. Longer term, Obama would get credit for doing the right thing for America. He might even get political points for cleverly co-opting his political enemies with the kind of wily move worthy of an FDR or LBJ.