Buy Photo Former president Bill Clinton speaks to members of AFSCME Council 25, union members, and supporters during a campaign stop for Democrat presidential candidate Hillary Clinton at the AFSCME headquarters on Saturday, March 5, 2015, in Detroit, MI. (Photo: Salwan Georges, Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

With his wife preparing for Sunday’s Democratic debate in Flint, former President Bill Clinton on Saturday kicked off a rally of union canvassers in Detroit preparing to go door-to-door in search of votes, outlining Hillary Clinton's economic and social policies to help make their case.

Praising President Barack Obama’s last State of the Union address in which he painted “this beautiful picture” of the progress made in the last seven years, Bill Clinton said the problem is that too many Americans still “look at that pretty picture and (can’t) find themselves to save their lives.”

Despite huge strides in making health care more accessible and bolstering the economy and Michigan’s dominant auto industry, Clinton said for many Americans there remains a “disconnect” over stagnant wages, college debts and businesses moving overseas that his wife, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, has concrete plans to address.

“Hillary is running for president to put everybody in the picture,” he said to a cheering crowd of about 200 people at the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Council 25’s auditorium in Detroit. “It’s as simple as that.”

After the speech, the former president, who said he was hoarse after having “lost my voice in service of my candidate,” was set to help whip up the vote in Detroit before Saturday night’s Michigan Democratic Party event at the fund-raiser at the MGM Grand. Hillary Clinton is set to meet rival U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders of Vermont in a CNN-hosted debate in Flint at 8 p.m. Sunday.

Polls have suggested Hillary Clinton has a big lead over Sanders in Tuesday’s Democratic primary in Michigan, but she seems to be leaving little to chance: On Friday, she visited auto supplier Detroit Manufacturing Systems and delivered an economic address lamenting the decline of labor unions and criticized Chinese trade practices and deals in which companies move overseas to avoid taxes.

In Saturday’s speech, her husband Bill reiterated part of that address, noting that she has proposed clawing back tax breaks and other government aid given to companies if they decide to move overseas. Meanwhile, he also outlined proposals to allow college debts to be refinanced and students to graduate from certain schools debt-free.

Much of the speech and those leading up to Bill Clinton’s address also dealt with Flint, where both candidates have decried actions — or the lack thereof — that led to high lead levels in the tap water being detected there.

Bill Clinton noted that Sanders, too, has drawn attention to the public health crisis in Flint, and Clinton said he was “proud to be a Democrat because of the way both of them have responded.” But he noted correctly that Hillary Clinton did so first, reaching out to Mayor Karen Weaver months ago and asking how she could help. Weaver has endorsed Clinton.

While not specifically mentioning Sanders’ own proposals, Bill Clinton quietly criticized them: Sanders, for instance, has called for tuition-free education at public colleges and universities, but Clinton said his wife’s debt-free proposal is better and it only make sense for students from higher-income families to continue paying.

And while Sanders has called for a “Medicare-for-all” plan to insure all Americans, Bill Clinton said that with Obama’s Affordable Care Act already reaching 90% of the population, it makes more sense to tweak and improve that — especially with Republican numbers in Congress — rather than trying to replace it with a different plan.



“She’s the best change maker I’ve ever seen,” Bill Clinton said, adding that while Sanders has supported admirable policies, “You’ve got to pick a president.”

Chelsea Clinton, Bill and Hillary’s daughter, was expected to be campaigning for her mom in Michigan on Sunday ahead of the Flint debate. Meanwhile, Hillary Clinton also has agreed to participate in a town hall meeting to be broadcast by Fox News Channel on Monday night from Detroit’s Gem Theatre, beginning at 6 p.m. It will mark her first appearance on the Fox News Channel in two years.

Contact Todd Spangler: 703-854-8947 or at tspangler@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter at @tsspangler.

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1p7zeHg