LEXINGTON, Ky. (AP) - Organizers of the successful campaign to halt the Bluegrass Pipeline are gearing up for new battles.

The widespread introduction of hydraulic fracturing, or “fracking,” has unlocked gas reserves in Ohio, Pennsylvania and West Virginia.

Chris Schimmoeller told the Lexington Herald-Leader (http://bit.ly/10DhIgI) that Kentucky can expect more pipeline proposals as companies search for ways to move the gas to Gulf Coast refineries.

Kinder Morgan Energy Partners and MarkWest Utica EMG already have announced plans to convert 1,000 miles of the Tennessee Gas Pipeline from carrying natural gas to carrying natural gas liquids. It runs from Greenup County in northeastern Kentucky through Morehead and Campbellsville to the Tennessee line.

And that project will not be as easy to stop as the Bluegrass Pipeline, which was a brand new line that required new easements to be purchased.

“With the Tennessee gas line, they already have easements in place that are probably pretty broadly written to let the company get by with changing the substance that flows through the pipe,” Schimoeller said.

The Bluegrass Pipeline was a joint venture of Boardwalk Pipeline Partners and the Williams Cos. Inc. that would have carried flammable ethane, propane, butane, isobutene and pentane liquids through 13 Kentucky counties before connecting with existing pipelines in Breckinridge County.

During public meetings, residents expressed concerns about explosions or leaks that could pollute groundwater.

After much debate and a Franklin Circuit Court ruling that the companies could not use eminent domain to take private property, Boardwalk and Williams announced in April that they were suspending plans for Bluegrass Pipeline. And this week, Boardwalk president and CEO Stanley Horton said the company agreed with Williams to dissolve the related joint ventures.

Schimmoeller was one of the organizers of a Saturday meeting in Lexington to discuss natural gas liquids, landowner rights and what local governments can do to protect their citizens.

“There will very likely be other pipeline proposals, and Kentucky just needs to be educated and prepared,” she said.

___

Information from: Lexington Herald-Leader, http://www.kentucky.com