Topics: Editor's Picks, Military, Support the troops, Veterans Day, Life News, News

When I first wrote about my experiences in the Navy, I expected some sort of angry backlash from some veterans. After all, the image of sailors huddling around a computer screen watching videos of attacks against insurgents in Iraq and Afghanistan isn’t exactly an image the Navy would want to project. However, the backlash never came. Instead, hundreds of people, including veterans with whom I never served, reached out to me and expressed their support. They understood that, ultimately, I was writing about a social phenomenon – I call it otherification – where we devalue the lives of those we do not identify with. I heard numerous times from these veterans that they could not have done X activity if they saw those they acted against as real people. I was simultaneously embarrassed for myself and yet immensely proud to call myself a veteran, embarrassed that I underestimated my colleagues and proud of how they embraced my words and translated to their personal stories.

This is the conversation I wanted to start. Otherification is not a military-specific problem. Its effects tarnish our domestic political processes as well as foreign relations. Our society is paralyzed because we rush so quickly to label ourselves and others. Those that claim labels that we do not approve of are unworthy of respect and human dignity. These labels represent various identities, and their precedence can change depending on the circumstances. This helps to explain why, for example, Democrats and Republicans can be at each other’s throats on Sept. 10, and then be cooperative and unified on Sept. 11. The political identity meant more the day before while the national identity took primacy the later day, at the expense of the Afghan people. Unfortunately, my point was hijacked by someone claiming to want the same conversation. David Masciotra’s ill-timed article perpetuates the damaging dichotomy that many U.S. veterans are placed in – the sadistic warmonger and the medal-clad paladin who righteously defends freedom and regularly smites dragons (my Marine friends will appreciate the reference to the old recruiting video). Mr. Masciotra’s words stymie the very conversation he wants on our democracy and associated role of the military.

Vice President Joe Biden’s speeches are often more profound than he likely intends. I certainly believe this was the case with his Veterans Day address where he said that veterans are “the heart, soul, and spine of the United States.” Some may see this as bland pandering to the institutionalized sense of patriotism that Mr. Masciotra writes about, but I do not. Americans from all sectors of the socioeconomic stratum, even the “1 percenters,” join the military. There is a variety of reasons that people sign up for service. Sure, some do join because the military can be a push-button to a better socioeconomic status. Some, such as myself, join because of the incredible education benefits that the American people graciously provide for us. In terms of those who have left the military, yes, there are thousands of homeless veterans and even more struggling to find their place in both society and in the workforce. But there are millions more who have used their benefits and experience to make a difference in diverse fields ranging from medicine to nuclear energy. The point is that because our military is a snapshot of the American population, it makes sense that we represent the absolute best, the absolute worst, and everything in between, of the American people.