“I mean, people could be dead before they collect their money,” said a veteran teacher at Midwood High School, in Brooklyn, who declined to provide her name. (The union has not officially negotiated a solution to that macabre possibility, though Mr. Mulgrew, in the webinar, said, “If that happens, we’ll work it out.”)

Another fear is about the union’s promise to the city that it could deliver $1.3 billion in health care savings. The union has said that it can achieve those cuts by finding more efficient ways to deliver care and streamline the administration of benefits.

But if it does not succeed, a mediator could make the cuts, or possibly require teachers to contribute to their premiums, negating one of the union’s most dearly held benefits, free health insurance.

“I don’t know if it was purposefully vague, or if they aren’t sure themselves how this is going to work out, said Colleen Torres, a fourth-grade teacher at Public School 261 in Boerum Hill, Brooklyn, who plans to vote no. “When we asked how it would pan out, there were no answers.”

Photo

Still others wondered about another feature of the contract, more time for parent-teacher communication, a priority for the new schools chancellor, Carmen Fariña. Not only will it cut into their time for helping struggling students, teachers said, but it also presents a steep hurdle for teachers who already struggle to get parents’ attention.

To be sure, many teachers said their problems with the deal would not keep them from affirming it, and even those who thought they would vote no believed it would ultimately pass. One risk, many said, is that they could do worse, a feeling especially held by younger teachers with fresh memories of having no job at all. Some teachers also said they did not want to alienate a mayor they considered friendly to labor, and did not want the union put to the back of a long line of municipal unions also awaiting new contracts.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“I would be deeply shocked if it doesn’t pass, even with all the concerns,” said Peter Vilbig, an English teacher at Midwood High School, who plans to vote yes. “From a political standpoint, it’s the best deal we can get.”

If the agreement is approved, the starting salary would rise to $56,709 by the end of the contract, from $45,530, and the top salary would rise to $119,471 from $100,049. The raises would be the first in four years, though many teachers, particularly those starting out, saw their pay go up by thousands of dollars in the intervening years because of so-called step increases to boost their pay based on experience.

Under the deal, select teachers could earn $7,500 to $20,000 per year in additional pay for taking on leadership roles, such as coaching colleagues in other schools, and teachers accepting assignments at short-staffed schools would be eligible for $5,000 bonuses. The city would also gain more authority to remove some of the 1,200 teachers who make up the so-called absent teacher reserve, a pool of teachers who do not have permanent positions but still draw full salaries.

Leaders of one caucus within the union, the Movement of Rank and File Educators, have decided to vote no on the contract and are hosting informal discussions to urge members to think critically before voting.

“It seems misleading to me that our union is saying, ‘Don’t worry, don’t worry, your health care costs won’t go up,’ when that isn’t something they can promise,” said Megan Moskop, 27, a teacher at Middle School 324 in Washington Heights who is a caucus member.

A rejection of the contract would be an embarrassment to Mr. Mulgrew, who in last Monday’s webinar found himself defending several questions about the retroactive raises, saying that despite what many members thought, the money was not automatically entitled to them and was something he had to fight for.

“It’s the city’s money; we work for the city,” Mr. Mulgrew said. “So, once again, I can’t stress this enough, we work this out through negotiations. Retroactivity is not a God-given right.”

In the history of the union, a contract has been rejected only once before, in 1995, when teachers objected to a two-year wage freeze at the same time Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani said he would support large raises for himself and other city administrators. After some modifications, teachers later approved the contract, buying the argument that the city’s financial condition required the freeze.

In an interview, Mr. Mulgrew said it is a “very good contract,” and one he is cautiously optimistic will pass. Carefully tending the point that his members should not view the new mayor, or the chancellor, as they did the previous ones, he added: “Little glimmers of sunshine are starting to shine through as we move forward.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

As for Mr. Rosen, the history teacher in Manhattan, he said teachers believed the contract would ultimately pass. “Most people have some issues with it, but when you have a lot of complicated issues, not all are going to be happy,” he said. “If no one’s happy, then usually the negotiation’s been a success.”