Deirdre Macnab, past president, Florida League of Women Voters

SUGAR ADDICTION. Last week: Many Central Floridians are unaware of the massive fish kill — in the millions — along both of Florida's coasts. This problem will only grow much worse with the warm air and water of summer turning into deadly algae blooms. The cause? The congressional sugar addiction our Florida politicians have for Florida sugar industry campaign contributions. Let's not 'waste' this crisis; lets use it to finally help Congress kick its sugar addiction. End the price supports that take our tax money to support these polluting industries that pour deadly chemicals and waste into Lake Okeechobee. South American countries are limited from selling their sugar here, while our tax dollars prop up an unsustainable and polluting industry that is already having a devastating effect on our tourism industry and quality of life for all our coastal citizens. Before we have lifeless coasts, lets face our addiction and act now.

BOWLING ALONE. Looking ahead: Women’s groups, as well as several other Florida organizations are reported as losing membership. Noted author and professor Robert Putnam wrote bestseller "Bowling Alone In America," noting the cause of this decline: impact of television, suburban sprawl, and single-parent households holding multiple jobs. Result: A country that is famed for joiners from the Rotary, PTA, Shriners, or the monthly bridge club, has shown a marked reduction. He ties joining to good physical and emotional health and happiness, as well as safer neighborhoods. There is light at the end of this tunnel, however: Formerly single sex groups like the local League of Women Voters have branched out using social media, and encouraging diversity and inclusiveness, looking for new ways of engaging busy people and found success. The Orange County League of Women Voters is now the largest local chapter in the country, peopled by women and men of all ages. Putnam ties joining groups to better health and more happiness. Find a group and join.