Topics: Alan Simpson, Barack Obama, Bowles-Simpson, Budget, Dean Baker, Debt, Diabetes, Erskine Bowles, exclusive, interview, Medicaid, Medicare, Paul Krugman, Social Security, Politics News

In 2010, President Obama elevated ex-Sen. Alan Simpson to center stage in Washington’s budget battles, appointing the Wyoming Republican to co-chair (with Morgan Stanley board member and former Clinton chief of staff Erskine Bowles) his National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform. Simpson and Bowles’ budget proposal received the support of a majority of the commission, and a passel of pundit plaudits, but failed to secure the supermajority of the commission required to formally advance to Congress.

“It was damn good,” Simpson told Salon, this week, “because it effectively pissed off everyone in America …”

While the Bowles-Simpson plan was embraced by some congressional liberals including Nancy Pelosi (and Obama issued subsequent deficit proposals Ezra Klein called “in almost every category, to the right of Simpson-Bowles”), it was panned by a battery of progressive pundits and economists. Paul Krugman called the plan “tax cuts for the wealthy, tax increases for the middle class,” and charged that it was “basically saying that janitors should be forced to work longer because these days corporate lawyers live to a ripe old age.” Dean Baker slammed the pair for “ignorance of basic economics” and “xenophobic fear-mongering” about China, writing that “the current deficit is a support for the economy, rather than a drain on the economy,” and “the transfer of wealth to China depends entirely on our trade deficit, which is determined by the value of the dollar, not the budget deficit.”

In an interview this week, Salon asked Simpson – now co-chair of the Pete Peterson-backed Fix the Debt — about his past predictions of a supposedly imminent debt crisis, whether it’s fair for the retirement age to go up faster than many Americans’ life expectancy, and why his deficit commission plan would have capped federal revenue. The ex-senator told Salon that the current healthcare system “can’t possibly work,” citing, among other culprits, “people with diabetes Type 2 — that’s mostly self-induced.” (According to the National Institutes of Health, “Family history and genes play a role in type 2 diabetes,” as well as weight, diet and activity level.) A condensed version of our conversation follows.

I’m 29 years old. Why should I and my friends be more concerned about the debt than about climate change, or about mass unemployment?

Well, I’m 82, and when I was your age I didn’t think about anything. And as I watch … and then serve as co-chair of the National Commission on Fiscal Responsibility and Reform, and work on that for 10 months and hear the results: That we can’t grow our way out of this mess with double-digit growth for 20 years, we can’t cut spending way out of our – that won’t do it. You can’t tax your way out of this mess. So you ought to get serious.

So we did a 67-page report, which was serious. But it was – and it was damn good because it effectively pissed off everyone in America, which is the best way to do one of those …

2033, by doing nothing, you’re going to walk up to the window and get a [Social Security] check for 23 percent less. So I would think you would begin to pay attention. But if you’re going to say, “Well, I didn’t really think there’d be anything for me there in that time,” then you really have rot for brains, because you’ve put in 6.2 percent of your salary for 40 years.

So I would think you’d start paying attention. But probably, you won’t. Not you – just generically.

Should we increase the cap on how much income is taxable for Social Security?

Sure, and that’s in our report. I think you need to read our report. It’s 67 pages. It’s in English. It uses terms like “going broke” and “shared sacrifice” …

We would give the lowest 20 percent of people in that [Social Security] system a payment of 125 percent of poverty. We would give the older old, from 80 to 85, an extra percent. We would raise the wages subject to the tax to 190 [thousand] plus, and you can keep right on going after that. We change to the chained CPI … And then we said that retirement age should be raised to 68 by the age 2050. And the senior groups said, [switches to a funny voice] “Oh no, how will anybody ever be able to prepare for that? What’ll happen?” I said: Well you know, if that’s the way you’re gonna act, well, you’re the children.

Congress voted in 1983 to raise the Social Security retirement age by two years over a 22-year period. In 2007, the Social Security Administration found that for the bottom half of the income distribution, life expectancy of male workers who retired at 65 had only gone up by 1.3 years over the prior three decades. Do you see any problem with raising the retirement age faster than life expectancy for big swaths of the population?

Well, all I do is math. I really don’t do mystery or hypotheses. All you have to know is that the average age today is 78, got it? And in two years will be 80. And here’s a system that was set up in 1937… it was set up to replace a person’s wage … the age of mortality was 63 and the retirement age was 65. Now the average age is 78 and you can retire at 62 …

When I was your age — a little earlier — there were 16 people, 15, paying into the system, and the next month, one taking out-… Today there are three people paying in and one taking out. How long do you think that’ll last?

You and Erskine Bowles have warned, including in a 2012 USA Today Op-Ed, that “we face the most predictable economic crisis in history.” In March 2011 you testified, “I think it will come before two years,” and that “within a year,” if debt holders “just thought you’re playing with fluff,” they’re “going to say, ‘I want some money for my paper …’ It won’t matter what the government does, they’ll say, ‘I want my money, I’ve got a better place for it.’” Were those predictions wrong?