Lehman Brothers’ 2008 filing was the largest-ever U.S. bankruptcy. Zuma Press

By Emily Glazer

As U.S. Bankruptcy Judge James Peck leaves the bench, one object is definitely going with him: a Lehman Brothers baby rattle.

Judge Peck, who presided over the Lehman Brothers bankruptcy, is joining law firm Morrison & Foerster LLP after stepping down from the Manhattan bankruptcy court. The rattle was purchased at an auction of Lehman memorabilia by a participant in the case who also was involved in the Residential Capital LLC Chapter 11 case, in which Judge Peck served as mediator.

Judge Peck spent thousands of hours over 5½ years working on Lehman’s U.S. bankruptcy case and related insolvency proceedings in courts around the world. More than 42,000 docket entries were filed in the case, the largest ever U.S. bankruptcy filing.

The judge says the rattle bearing the Lehman name and with links to ResCap is a fitting memento. It was delivered to his chambers with a letter explaining its relation to the Lehman case after he announced his retirement from the bench. Judge Peck declined to name the rattle’s sender but said it wasn’t a lawyer involved in the case.

“How do you come up with one item that is emblematic of perhaps the two most significant things I’ve done in my career?” he said. “This is definitely coming with me.”

Judge Peck, who is slated to join the firm March 3, will serve as co-chairman of Morrison & Foerster’s global business-restructuring and insolvency group in New York, alongside Gary Lee, who co-heads the firm’s finance department.

Judge Peck will focus on cross-border cases, mediation and complex “safe harbor” provisions that shield certain derivatives products in bankruptcy, Mr. Lee said.

Mr. Lee spoke with bankruptcy partner Brett Miller as soon as Judge Peck announced his retirement in hopes the judge might join the firm. “He knows the techniques for mediation…understands the commercial levers, the law, and where the law will go,” Mr. Lee said.

Judge Peck, 68 years old, said the Lehman bankruptcy has given him an appreciation for the increasingly global nature of corporate restructuring and insolvency. Lehman collapsed into Chapter 11 protection in September 2008, with affiliates around the world following the U.S. holding company and its brokerage into insolvency proceedings.

Under Judge Peck’s purview, an army of lawyers and advisers sorted out tens of thousands of claims and hundreds of disputes among the company’s thousands of creditors.

In 2009, about a year into the case, Judge Peck helped initiate a protocol for cross-border communication in the case, allowing parties around the globe to communicate and resolve disputes. In December 2011, three years after the historic filing, Judge Peck signed off a creditor-payment plan for Lehman that is expected to return about $80 billion to creditors, an outcome few thought possible when the investment bank failed with $613 billion in debt.

Cross-border mediation will play a larger role in so-called “mega” bankruptcy cases moving forward, he said, since there is no mechanism for enforcing cooperation between jurisdictions. That was the case with MF Global Holdings Ltd., the commodities brokerage that collapsed into bankruptcy in October 2011. Judge Peck served as the mediator in the case, helping to, among other things, resolve disputes dealing with MF Global affiliates in the U.S. and U.K., including one involving a client of Morrison & Foerster.

Judge Peck’s work as mediator in the ResCap Chapter 11 case put him in close quarters with lawyers at Morrison & Foerster, which represented the mortgage lender. During one negotiating session, Judge Peck traveled among 14 conference rooms in a law office and met with about 140 people in an attempt to reach a deal, Messrs. Lee and Peck said, adding that some mediation sessions lasted until the early hours of the morning. Ultimately, Judge Peck was instrumental in brokering former ResCap parent Ally Financial Inc.’s $2.1 billion settlement with the unit’s creditors.

Judge Peck said the cost of the ResCap bankruptcy case, which racked up more than $100 million in legal fees, helped push the parties toward an agreement. Failure in mediation would have led to expensive litigation that would have cut into creditor recoveries, he said.

Judge Peck has also presided over the Chapter 11 cases of cable-TV company Charter Communications Inc. and Extended Stay Hotels, which filed for an initial public offering in July 2013. He brokered in the Chapter 11 cases of American Airlines parent AMR Corp. and Syms Corp., which owned retailer Filene’s Basement.

Judge Peck was appointed to the U.S. Bankruptcy Court of the Southern District of New York in January 2006. Before his appointment, he was a partner in the business reorganization practice at Schulte Roth & Zabel LLP.