The Oklahoma attorney general's office has grown in a time of state cutbacks, moving into expanded and higher-priced office space, adding dozens of new employees and boosting expenditures.

Attorney General Scott Pruitt, a small-government advocate, staffed a new operation in his office to fight federal overreach. He has filed lawsuits against the federal government over environmental protection, immigration and the Affordable Care Act, among other things.

Obvious questions are raised when an agency grows while others are shrinking, State Auditor and Inspector Gary Jones said.

"The questions are, 'Is there a need for that?' and 'Is that the best way the dollars should be spent?'" he said. "Agencies have been taking huge cuts. There are services that need to be delivered that aren't being delivered.

"We have the responsibility of trying to be as frugal as possible."

New offices

Before Pruitt was elected in 2010, the attorney general's office moved from its traditional home in the state Capitol, to a new, 76,153-square-foot, $15.6 million building the state constructed nearby.

A year ago, the attorney general's office expanded its Tulsa operation, moving from 3,495 square feet at $10 a square foot in the 12-story Sun building to 10,357 square feet at $13.75 a square foot in the 32-story Bank of America Tower, according to the state Office of Management and Enterprise Services.

Jones' office maintains a Tulsa operation in the Sun Building.

Staff growth

Pruitt's staff has grown from 149 employees in 2011 to 199 this year. His state-appropriated revenues have remained relatively flat, while total expenditures jumped from $28.3 million in the 2011 fiscal year to $48.6 million in the 2015 fiscal year.

Many other state agencies have been hurting. Last budget, widespread cuts were required to fill a hole of more than $600 million. With falling oil prices hurting state revenue, the hole is expected to be at least that big next year, and possibly grow to as much as $1 billion.

Mike Hunter, first assistant attorney general, responded to a series of questions from The Oklahoman in consultation with Pruitt and Pruitt's press office. Hunter said the agency is frugal and there are good reasons behind the growth in office space, expenditures and number of employees.

Limited government

Pruitt's views about the value of limited government and the expansion of his own agency are not in conflict, Hunter said.

"To advocate for a more limited government does not mean a focus solely on the size of the state budget or the number of state employees," Hunter said. "Advocating for a more limited government means working — as Scott Pruitt has done his entire career — to ensure that state and federal government is not standing as an impediment to the rights of Oklahomans to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness."

The attorney general's office received $14.57 million in appropriated revenues in the 2015 fiscal year and had $28.93 million in non-appropriated revenue.

"Of the approximately $14 million the agency receives, $4.2 million is passed through to domestic violence shelters, $2 million for local law enforcement through the Safe Oklahoma grant program, and approximately $900,000 for legal aid," Hunter said.

New attorneys

With an overall budget of more than $40 million a year, about half that amount is payroll. Non-appropriated funds include case settlements, revolving funds, federal funds.

Since the 2012 fiscal year, the attorney general's evidence fund has received almost $54 million through the state's settlement with tobacco companies.

Hunter said the attorney general's office has added nine new employees to cover expanded responsibilities of providing legal counsel to more state agencies.

It has added six new employees to take over responsibilities of the Human Rights Commission when it was abolished.

Five new attorneys were added to a "federalism unit to combat the unprecedented and ever-increasing overreach of the Obama administration," Hunter said.

He also said that when Pruitt took office the number of attorney general employees was "deceivingly low" because budget shortfalls had forced furloughs. Other positions were open because people took voluntary buyouts during the transition of administrations.

Summit Club

Pruitt lives in Tulsa. He upgraded and tripled the size of his Tulsa offices by moving to the Bank of America Tower. This was necessary in order to house the newly created Office of Civil Rights Enforcement, make needed staff additions to the Tobacco Enforcement Unit and add other staff, Hunter said.

"The larger space also provides office space in Tulsa for AG Pruitt as well as meeting space, an evidence room, break room and other necessary amenities," he said.

Pruitt divides his time between his offices in Tulsa and Oklahoma City.

Pruitt opened a campaign office in the Tulsa building that he used for his 2014 re-election, in which he had no opponent. His campaign has continued to pay rent on that office through the last quarterly campaign finance filing cycle.

One of the draws of the Bank of America building is its Summit Club on the 30th, 31st and 32nd floors.

Pruitt spoke to the Republican Club of Tulsa at the Summit earlier this year and discussed how difficult but important it is to sue the federal government.