TRENTON — A bipartisan commission appointed by Gov. Chris Christie on Thursday released a more detailed plan to drastically reduce New Jersey's public employee pension and health care costs.

It's been a year since the commission first introduced its sweeping plan to reinvent government workers' benefits. At first, Christie sold the plan around the state, but that campaign gave way to his presidential one.

The latest report confirms state and local governments can save billions of dollars by moving workers onto less generous health care plans, commission members said.

The proposal calls for freezing the pension system and moving active public employees onto a cash balance retirement plan, but it hinges largely on reducing health care costs to free up cash.

"At that time we estimated the state could save over $2 billion in health benefits spending annually and use those savings to preserve pension benefits earned to date," the commission said in its report. "This report confirms the necessary savings can be achieved. Indeed, the new analysis shows this can be done with less impact to employees and retirees than envisioned in our 2015 report."

Those savings would be recycled to cover pension costs.

Losing pension court case could cost N.J. big, Moody's warns

The commission argues pension and health benefits need to be rethought to prevent them from swallowing 27 percent of the state's annual budget by 2022. It recommends instead that employee benefits be contained to 15 percent of the budget or less. This year, it's 14.3 percent.

The state and locally funded public pension system is nearly $55 billion short what it would cost to pay for future benefits. The state-funded portion accounts for $40 billion of that debt.

The state is contributing $1.3 billion into the pension system this year and $3.53 billion for health benefits. Absent reforms, the pension payment is on track to reach $5.48 billion in 2022 and health benefits, $5.43 billion by 2022.

The report estimates its recommendations will halve those costs.

While the proposed changes are quite involved, broadly, active employees would be moved onto health care plans equivalent to gold plans under the Affordable Care Act, and retirees would be given retiree reimbursement accounts to cover the cost of purchasing coverage through a private exchange.

In total, the state would save $2.23 billion, including $1.42 billion through lower-cost benefits and $810 million by shifting the cost of retired teachers' benefits to their employers (the commission assumes that will be offset by benefit changes at the local level).

While the report stressed that the plan reduces the total cost of the system, rather than just shifting those costs to members, active and retired workers would still have to pick up an additional $190 million.

The commission estimated premiums will fall 30 percent, and the state will save $510 million.

Active employees would also pay lower annual premiums, because the total cost of the plan is lower, but higher out-of-pocket expenses.

For example, a single worker making $33,000 and enrolled in the NJ Direct 15 plan paying a $1,043 annual premium and $435 out of pocket could wind up paying a $711 premium and $1,561 out of pocket.

A worker making $72,000 and enrolled in the family plan is paying a $6,404 premium and $1,213 out of pocket, but after reforms could pay a $4,366 premium and $4,356 out of pocket.

For early and Medicare-eligible retirees, the public employer would cover the cost of purchasing the equivalent of a gold level plan or gold level equivalent supplemental insurance, respectively. Early retirees, who pay no premium, will likely see jumps in their out of pocket costs. But the employer would cover "average" out of pocket costs for those on Medicare.

OPINION: N.J. faces financial calamity without reduction in pension spending

But slightly more than a third of the state's projected savings depends on convincing school districts to take on the cost of teachers' future retirement costs. The municipalities' savings, the commission said, should actually exceed its new expenses by about $1.5 billion, which they can choose how to spend.

"The school district's share of a homeowner's property tax bill would increase as a result of the shifted expenses, while the municipal share would decrease as a result of its health benefits savings," the report said. "All that is necessary for the shift to work is for the school districts and municipalities to implement the necessary health benefit reforms."

Christie presents his budget to the full Legislature on Tuesday.

Tom Healey, who leads the commission, said actually implementing the changes would be "fairly complicated. And the governor's office has just started to think about what kind of legislation is required to implement it."

Meanwhile, the Democratic-controlled Legislature has already begun the process of putting a proposed constitutional amendment requiring the state stick to a pension payment schedule on the fall ballot. Both chambers passed the measure by simple majorities in the previous session and must do so again this year.

The commission slammed that amendment, saying "any attempt to fully fund the existing pension benefits, whether under the terms of the proposed pension funding amendment or any other schedule, will inevitably force cuts in essential services such as education, infrastructure and public safety."

Samantha Marcus may be reached at smarcus@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @samanthamarcus. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.