KNOXVILLE (WATE) – A Knoxville man who has cancer is not sure if he’ll be able to continue his chemotherapy treatments. There had apparently been some miscommunication when he signed up for his new health insurance in early December and his out-of-network deductible is tens of thousands of dollars.

When the Knoxville-based Community Health Alliance closed at the end of December, around 27,000 Tennesseans had to search for new health insurance. The CHA was the state’s first health co-op, part of the Affordable Care Act or Obamacare.

John Vickers, diagnosed with stage three colon cancer last year, was enrolled with CHA. When he signed up with a different company in December, he believed his new plan would cover his expenses, but he found out in January that’s not the case.

The former school bus driver and over-the-road tractor trailer driver was treated at Ft. Sanders Regional Medical Center and the Thompson Cancer Survival Center. At the time, his insurance was with the CHA. Vickers says when it came time for surgery in mid-November, his insurance paid for his care.

Everybody except for my primary care physician was in-network. Everything was perfect. I was relieved. I felt good. Everything was going to happen the way it should,” he said.

When CHA announced it was closing in October, Vickers and thousands of others had to look for new health insurance on the Health Exchange Marketplace. He chose United Healthcare because it fit in with his present treatment. He was told Ft. Sanders was in network, as was Thompson Cancer Survival Center and his surgeon.

Then, on January 1, Vickers got sick and ended up at Ft. Sanders for three days. As he checked out, Vickers got the bad news that Ft. Sanders was no longer in-network.

“I’m sure that three day stay in the hospital is going to be expensive. I’ve got a $50,000 copay to meet,” he said.

Vickers was scheduled to begin a second round of low dose chemo the day WATE 6 On Your Side visited.

“They called me yesterday saying they can’t get the paperwork done, it could be another month,” he said. “Somebody messed up. I hate to think it was me. I just took them at what they put before me which was everything was in network. That’s why I picked that insurance.”

Over the last few weeks, Thompson Cancer Center and Vickers’ surgeon appealed his situation to United Healthcare. Then came the harsh facts.

“I just told them this is urgent, this needs to be decided quick. They said, ‘We do not have an urgent protocol. You just go in line like everybody else,'” said Vickers.

Two weeks after our initial interview, Vickers returned to Thompson Cancer Center after being given a special GAP waiver.

“A GAP extension is where they treat me as if I am in network when actually I am out of network,” said Vickers.

His renewed chemotherapy treatment began January 26. Initially, he was told his treatment would be considered in-network, but then as he checked out of the cancer center, just like in January, things changed as they told him he is not covered. Vickers says he is back to square one, but will continue his treatment.

“I’m going to have to pay for it. I’m going to owe about $25,000,” he said.

Thompson Cancer Center called Vickers on Monday saying they will try to find another provider. For now, his chemotherapy sessions are on hold and he’s scrambling to find someone to help him.