In a recent study put out by WalletHub, Texas ranked fifth overall in a ranking of the best and worst states in the U.S. for nurses.

Fifteen factors, including job availability, annual salary and competition in the field, were considered in determining which states boast the most favorable conditions for current and future nurses looking for career opportunities — as well as the ones they might want to avoid on a job search.

A nursing career in the Air Force allowed Tammy Strasser, director of nursing for women’s services at Seton Medical Center Harker Heights, the opportunity to practice around the world, including several other states in the U.S.

Strasser said her experience since taking on her current role at Seton in 2012 has been “amazing.”

“I feel that there is an increased level of professionalism, practice and development within nursing in Texas, as opposed to other locations,” she said.

With several major hospitals in close proximity to one another, the Killeen area is no stranger to the profession.

“In this area, you have four hospitals within 60 miles of one another, so the employment opportunities are substantial,” said registered nurse Tammy Rodriguez, chief nursing officer, Metroplex Health System.

“From a facility perspective, there aren’t many places where you can work, or careers you can choose, that are as fulfilling and satisfying as helping people get better.”

Attractive area

The military presence, education options and quality staff and facilities makes the area attractive for nurses seeking employment opportunities, Strasser said, adding that the field in Central Texas is growing in all areas, from education to technology.

“We have a unique market in which to garner nursing candidates due to the military presence and the existence of top rated nursing programs in Bell County,” she said. “Central Texas has a growing medical community that has top-notch physicians and knowledgeable and experienced nurses to serve as peers and resources.”

In an outlook report from the U.S. Department of Labor, the employment of registered nurses is projected to grow 19 percent over the next 10 years.

The chairwoman for Central Texas College’s nursing department, Sandra Thomason, also a former military nurse, said now is a great time for individuals to consider a career in the field, specifically in Texas, where opportunities are abundant, and should remain that way through the next decade.

“There are going to be some states that are at maximum, but not Texas,” she said. “Texas is still going to have employment, lots of opportunity in the nursing field.”

Some of the reason for the demand, she said, is due to implementing the Affordable Care Act.

“With more millions of people having insurance, more health care providers are going to need it, and at the bed side you’re going to need your nurses. Opportunity for employment is expanding when all that gets into place,” she said.

‘Leader in nursing’

With high qualifications and competitive training, Thomason attributes some of the state and local success in the field to education.

“When Texas developed the competencies for nursing graduates, we were ahead of the game there, nationwide,” she said. “I think Texas is a leader in nursing.”

The Lone Star State leads the pack in several of the WalletHub standards, including the No. 1 spot for highest annual salaries, adjusted for cost of living.

However, in the overall “work environment” ranking, Texas fell in the bottom half of the list of states.

Rodriguez said many things could be factored in the category, and each facility varies on how they are addressing issues to ensure local hospitals provide an environment that attracts and maintains a quality nursing staff.

At Metroplex, she said the hospital continues to make improvements to meet this goal through a recently renewed pay scale, offering internships for new nurses and fellowships for experienced nurses, as well as sign-on bonuses.

Another important aspect of maintaining a positive work environment, she said, is focusing on their health by offering wellness programs for the nurses total mental, physical and spiritual health.

A profession that offers an abundance of opportunity, as well as a sense of fulfillment, nursing appears to have a positive outlook for the years ahead.

There are some challenges, however, in getting there.

Rodriguez said while local employment is high, there is a shortage of qualified nurses who want to transition into education, in order to train up the next generation of nurses to enter the field.

“We need nurses in a large way here in Texas, but also across the nation, and you have to have educators to make that happen.”