While WBA would be able to increase its margin, the risk of smaller supplier base have to be considered as rival pharmacies buy their own suppliers.

Generics are getting more popular as it is at least 30% cheaper than branded and the consolidation WBA would be able to squeeze cost.

Purchase of Supplier and Rival

The cost control reforms under the Affordable Care Act (ACA) (also known as ObamaCare) is the prime mover behind the ongoing consolidation in the health care industry. In my previous article, I have written about how Walgreen Boots Alliance (NASDAQ:WBA) sought to improve its margin by buying over its supplier AmerisourceBergen Corporation (NYSE:ABC) as it continued its acquisition of smaller rival Rite Aid (NYSE:RAD).

Businesswire reported that WBA exercised the right to purchase 22.69 million shares of ABC for $1.17 billion on 18 March 2016. On paper, WBA purchased ABC for $51.55 per share which is a 40.4% discount from the current ABC price of $86.48. Besides the paper gain of this move, we will have to look at the bigger business implication. After all, WBA had accumulated approximately 34.2 million shares of ABC or 14.97 percent of outstanding common shares.

Click to enlarge

Source: MarketRealist

This would mean that WBA is slowly but steadily building an effective control over its main supplier. By this purchase alone, WBA would get a second board site on ABC. This article will look at why it make sense for WBA to purchase ABC.

Rising Market For Generic Medicine

First of all, generic medicine are filled in nearly 8 out of 10 prescription in the United States according to the Federal Drug Administration (FDA). Generic and branded medicine are of the same identity, strength, quality, purity, and potency which is enforced by the FDA with a small absorption difference of 3.5%. Generic medicine is at least 30% cheaper than branded medicine and this explains its strong growth especially in today's cost conscious market.

Source: Visiongain

Research firm Visiongain estimated that generic medicine will experience steady growth over the next decade and the compounded annual growth rate will be at least 15%.

Source: MarketRealist

As WBA acquires ABC and RAD, it would now control $13.5 billion of generic purchasing which would give it higher bargaining power with generic manufacturers and also lower cost for its own acquisition of generics. As a pharmacy that is competing on price and seeking to improve its margin, this is a strong factor in its favor and it would receive increasing dividends as a shareholder.

Conclusion

WBA holds the warrants to exercise another 22.69 million of ABC shares from March 2017 onward. If the growth trend of generic medicine continues and ABC were to perform, it is almost guaranteed that WBA would exercise these options. This would mean that WBA would be successful in widening its profit margin from next year.

However investors will have to note the risk arising from the lack of diversification. The current trend of big pharmacies buying their suppliers would only continue and this would mean a smaller supplier base. For example, rival pharmacy CVS (NYSE:CVS) purchased supplier Omnicare for $10.4 billion in 2015.

If ABC were to trip over any regulations in the storage and transport of medicine that affect the quality of the medicine, WBA would be hard pressed to find an alternative to fill its pharmacy. For the American people, if the ongoing consolidation were allowed to continue, there might just be 2 major pharmacies of WBA and CVS left in 2017 with Wal-Mart (NYSE:WMT) as the significant marginal player.

Disclosure: I/we have no positions in any stocks mentioned, and no plans to initiate any positions within the next 72 hours.

I wrote this article myself, and it expresses my own opinions. I am not receiving compensation for it (other than from Seeking Alpha). I have no business relationship with any company whose stock is mentioned in this article.