The cuteness arms race among Sellwood restaurants has a new contender, and they’re going nuclear: Arugularium, a brick-and-mortar offshoot of the Hillsdale, Lloyd and Oregon City farmers market vendor Savory Et Sweet, a.k.a. Chris Douglas, might sound like a scuttled agency from an early draft of the Affordable Care Act, but the sunny little creperie is actually a delightful breakfast and lunch joint with seasonal menu and limited hours well suited to the neighborhood’s laid-back lifestyle.

The chow: Crepes are the main feature here, and they come in three batters: white flour, gluten-free buckwheat and, for and extra $1, vegan and gluten-free polenta. All are light and tender, and come with a broad range of fillings. Start with a savory plate like the bacon and brie ($8) or fig, brie and ham ($8) in a buckwheat crepe, and maybe add a cup of soup on the side. If it’s on the menu when you visit, get the excellent French onion soup ($4 cup, $6 bowl). For dessert, the dark chocolate crepe with fleur de sel ($5) is a lovely, balanced finish that won’t leave you feeling bloated from whipped cream. Want something sweeter? The "Rose City," with rose chocolate and rose jelly ($7), has your name on it.

Real deals: "Les Trois Mini," three miniature dessert crepes for $8.

Hangout factor: The sunny shop’s decor seems to be as seasonal as the specials. At present it’s dressed up for Valentine’s Day, with tulips on every table and heart-shaped lights in the window. Plenty of sunlight and bottomless coffee makes it a great place to linger, if you don’t mind small children underfoot. If the place had a liquor license, there’d be no reason to leave.

Liquids: Blue Kangaroo coffee ($2), Steven Smith tea ($3), hot cocoa ($3), juices ($3–$4).

What’s half-baked? Service can be a little awkward -- this is obviously Douglas’ first restaurant -- but the place has only been open four months. They’ll get it sorted soon enough.

Inside tips: Want to take home some of the honey in your crepe for later? Arugularium sells it by the jar.

The numbers: 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. Thursday-Friday, 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday to Sunday; 8337 S.E. 17th Ave.; arugularium.com.

-- Ben Waterhouse