A photograph of the Babri Masjid from the early 1900s. Copyright: The British Library Board

An investigation into allegations that the demolition of Babri Masjid was premeditated has put the Bharatiya Janata Party, India’s national opposition party, in an uncomfortable spot.

The 16th-century masjid, or mosque, in the northern Indian town of Ayodhya was brought down by Hindu activists in 1992, who were allegedly led by L.K. Advani, a member of Parliament and senior leader in the BJP. Mr. Advani has denied any wrongdoing. In the aftermath of the demolition, hundreds of people died in riots that broke out between Hindus and Muslims.

Days before India heads to the national polls, Cobrapost, an Indian investigative news organization, released videos of undercover interviews with several Hindu activists purportedly associated with the demolition of the three-domed structure.

Cobrapost in a statement on Friday said that evidence uncovered in its investigations “establishes beyond doubt that the demolition was not an act of frenzied mobs but an act of sabotage” by those who laid out an “elaborate plan and executed it with precision of a military operation”. Many Hindus believe the mosque was built on the ruins of a Hindu temple.

A long-simmering political and legal dispute between Hindus and Muslims over the ownership of the Babri Masjid site is now before the Supreme Court of India. The Allahabad High Court in a 2010 ruling said the land be divided between the two religious groups—two parts to Hindus and one part to Muslims. Both sides claimed they did not seek the division of the site and appealed against the ruling. Their appeals rest before the Supreme Court which hasn’t begun hearing the case yet.

Hindu petitioners have claimed that site is the birthplace of revered Hindu god, Lord Ram, and a giant temple dedicated to him should be built there. Muslim petitioners have claimed the same site for a mosque.

The BJP, along with its sister organizations, was the face of the Ram temple movement in late 1980s and early 1990s, which allegedly led to the demolition of Babri Masjid.

Responding to Cobrapost’s revelations, BJP on Friday wrote to the Election Commission of India asking to halt the broadcast of the investigative tapes, calling it a “diabolic move to create a communal flare up” ahead of the elections that start Monday.

The party’s prime ministerial candidate, Narendra Modi, is promoting a soft image of the Hindu nationalist party in a bid to assume power. But the ghost of the party’s past activities could hurt Mr. Modi’s efforts to appeal to Muslim voters.

The Wall Street Journal in 2012 wrote a series of investigative stories on the dispute over the religious site in Ayodhya. The stories – told through events and characters chronicling several decades — traced how the dispute influenced social and political life in India.

India’s fragmented politics today, as our series showed, is in many ways the legacy of the temple movement in Ayodhya. No political party, including the BJP and Congress, both of whom sought to use the dispute in Ayodhya for electoral gains in the 1980s and 1990s, has been able to muster a simple majority in Parliament since Ayodhya became a political issue.

Revisit our series, “Ayodhya: the Battle for India’s Soul.”