Topics: Birth Control, Books, Condoms, Editor's Picks, International, Women's Rights, Writers and Writing, Sustainability News, Business News, Life News

Excerpted from Countdown

Rubber

Thirty kilometers below Bangkok, where the Chao Phraya River meets the Gulf of Thailand, stands a remnant mangrove forest. In the early twentieth century, several monks retreated here from the city to practice the oldest form of Buddhism, known as Therava¯da, or the Forest Tradition. They named the temple they founded Wat Asokaram, the Monastery of No Sorrow.

In the twenty-first century, the estuary surrounding Wat Asokaram is no longer a forest wilderness. To one side are shrimp farms; on the other, a beach resort. The temple itself is now a Buddhist tourist attraction: a three-tiered, white wedding cake with thirteen spires. At one end of its ample parking lot, a path leads into what is left of the mangroves. Along raised walkways amid the trees are the monks’ kutis: clapboard cottages on pilings above tidal mud flats, shaded by curtains of hanging aerial roots.

The throb of urban Thailand fades here beneath the chitter of curlews and the splash of crabs and mud skippers. “In a city,” says Ajaan Boonku, a monk here for more than half a century, “you can study to control the mind. But it is difficult to achieve tranquility. In a forest, it is much easier to not think.”

At eighty-three, Ajaan Boonku is mostly sinew and bone. Wrapped in a brown muslin sanghati, he sits cross-legged atop a prayer rug on his covered porch. A bench against the wooden porch rail holds offerings from pilgrims who come seeking peace and guidance: shampoo, bars of soap, mouthwash, toothbrushes, Sensodyne toothpaste, and boxes of tissues.

To Buddhists, attachment to material things, even to the world itself, is a trap, because nothing is permanent. Is there no obligation, then, for a Buddhist to try to conserve the world, such as these mangroves and their fragile fauna?

“A humble Buddhist cannot strive to control the world,” he whispers in a voice like rustling leaves. “But balance cannot be achieved without nature. We monks of the forest try to preserve nature, as examples for others to follow.”

And if the entire human race falls out of balance because there are more of us than nature can accommodate, does Buddhism permit us to control our reproduction?

“If more people means more problems, they can adjust by any means. In Buddhism, we don’t prevent birth control. People with good morals know to have the right-size family.”

But to those who lack a monk’s discipline, the means to act on those morals were long unavailable, and human numbers grew overwhelming, undoing much of nature. Has an onrush of humanity possibly hastened its own demise? Ajaan Boonku shuts his eyes and leans on one thin forearm atop his thigh. Minutes pass. Then he straightens.

“We don’t know if the end for humans nears. We know it may come, so the mind must be ready. Overuse of this world by people brings disaster — floods, global warming. But it’s not the end of the Earth, even if it is our own. Nature will move onward, beyond us. But for now,” he says, “it is a good idea for us to save trees. It helps.”

*

Across the mouth of the Chao Phraya, another Buddhist temple, Wat Khun Samut Trawat, has been severed from the mainland by the rising Gulf of Thailand. Perched now atop a rocky islet, surrounded by half-drowned utility poles where there once was a village, the temple’s floor has been raised several feet, but the water keeps coming.

In 2011, a monsoon bearing 345 percent more rain than normal submerged much of Thailand, including half of Bangkok, a metropolitan area of 14 million people.

To the Western world, it would have been yet one more flood in a low-lying south Asian country, except that this one inundated Bangkok factories that assemble much of the world’s computer hard drives and semiconductor chips, as well as Japanese and American automobiles. The toll in Thailand approached $50 billion, and supply delays amplified those losses throughout the world. Damages would have been even higher, but a decision was made to open floodgates to divert the floodwaters into millions of hectares of rice paddies upstream of the city, to spare Bangkok’s downtown.

That included Sukhumvit Soi 12 — a narrow four-block spur off Sukhumvit Road, a Bangkok thoroughfare lined with Sheratons, Westins, and a high-rise fashion mall. Along Soi 12’s length, food stalls sell skewers of fried fish, pad Thai, oyster omelets, and sizzling chicken. Every few steps is a parlor offering variants of massage: herbal, oil, aroma, or soapy; facial, foot, head, or full-body — the last sometimes featuring Thailand’s euphemistic “happy ending.”

Halfway down Sukhumvit Soi 12, just past a miniature Buddhist shrine atop a white marble pedestal, a brick path lit by bamboo lanterns leads through a garden of banyans and palms, to a restaurant. According to guidebooks, it is one of Bangkok’s best. Inside, the lanterns give way to yellow, orange, green, and red fixtures shaped like globes, bouquets, and giant strawberries. On closer inspection, their designs turn out to be glowing collages — of multicolored condoms. A step farther, and condoms are covering everything, including several life-sized mannequins. Here’s Santa Condom, his suit, beard, and curly hair entirely confected of red and white rubbers. Same with the dress of the Thai princess at his side. A bride’s traditional white wedding gown and her tiara: all condoms. Ditto for bikini’d beachgoers, a bowing Chinese couple, assorted superheroes (including one named Captain Condom), and even Tiger Woods, the shaft of his putter a long stack of rolled condoms, next to a sign asking if he remembered to use them.

In addition to condoms, a gift shop sells coasters that read, “No Glove, No Love”; long-stem condom flowers; condom brooches; condom-shaped USB drives; 100 percent Thai silk neckties bearing a Gumby-like happy condom; condom key-chains that read, “In Rubber We Trust”; and T-shirts printed with ditties such as “Weapons of Mass Protection” — and:

“We took off our clothes, I got on top of you. How long before it starts feeling good?”

“I don’t know, but I’ve got a headache already.”

Above the bar, near a portrait of a sly Mona Lisa dangling a pair of rubbers, is a model of the Mayflower, its hull, sails, and riggings crafted of condoms. In the restaurant’s courtyard, where the haute prophylactic décor continues, menus reassure that “Our food is guaranteed not to cause pregnancy.” In lieu of after-dinner mints, the check arrives with flavored condoms.

The name of this discombobulating place is Cabbages & Condoms. Although its history is peripherally meshed with that of Thailand’s legendary sex industry, which crescendoed when fifty thousand U.S. troops were stationed here during the Vietnam War, the impetus behind Cabbages & Condoms goes far deeper. Quirky as it seems, it is part of what many call a miracle that changed all of Thailand — and continues to do so.

*

“Foreign assistance,” Mechai Viravaidya once told a visiting delegation of U.S. congressmen, “is like an erection. It’s nice while you have it, but it doesn’t last forever.”

That exchange took place in 1976. At the time, Mechai was in charge of something for which his economics and commerce degree from Melbourne University had absolutely not prepared him. Upon graduating, he had taken a post with Thailand’s economic development agency, traveling to evaluate infrastructure projects. Until then, he knew little of his country outside of Bangkok, where his parents were doctors.

The job was a chance to learn about transportation, energy, irrigation, schools, and telecommunications. But as Mechai’s biographer, Thomas D’Agnes, recounts in his book From Condoms to Cabbages, wherever he went, the same thing repeatedly grabbed his attention: astonishing numbers of children.

“In every village I asked women how many,” he recalls over coffee at the conference table he moved into the Cabbages & Condoms bar, which is much more fun than his office upstairs. “Seven to ten was typical.” He would look at the hordes of kids, then at mothers nursing one while pregnant with another, then at the prospectus for the project he was evaluating. Nothing added up.

“When I studied economics, they taught us not to worry about the number of people, because we can always expand food production. No problem.” Except there were plenty of problems. Mechai hadn’t studied demography, but he’d learned accounting. The numbers he ran told him that at a certain point there wouldn’t be any more places to put more rice paddies. And not just food. Every child ratcheted up demand for housing, clothing, schooling, and jobs. Add things like plumbing, water purification, and health services, then multiply them by the multiplying little bodies that surrounded his government jeep in every village he visited, and he concluded that his agency’s goals were futile.

There was no way that Thailand could go forward with so many people. On the contrary, they were doomed to fall farther back with each new, bigger generation. What were developmental economists possibly thinking?

With his agency reports vanishing into the bureaucratic maw, Mechai Viravaidya began moonlighting, writing folksy newspaper columns about economics under the pseudonym “GNP.” They earned him another extracurricular job as a radio commentator under yet another pseudonym, as he was still working for the government. But then radio led to television: A tall and handsome former national tennis champion, Mechai soon became a highly recognizable soap opera star and stage actor.

But he was still an economist, and he was thinking hard about how to leverage his media skills to that end. A column he wrote in 1968, extolling family-planning workers as unsung heroes of development, caught the eye of a Thai government advisor from a U.S.-based NGO, The Population Council. Their ensuing friendship led him to a position with the newly created Planned Parenthood Association of Thailand.

He didn’t stay long. His director proved to be squeamish when talking about sex: a bit of an occupational challenge under the circumstances. She was especially mortified by Mechai’s public presentations.

“I would start out with a box of pills, and people would just look at it. Then I’d show an IUD and get blank stares.” One day, while showing a condom at a training session for schoolteachers, without thinking he unwrapped its foil pouch.