AGOURA HILLS, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--In the Contacts section, email address should read: dchopra@alignedth.com

The corrected release reads:

ALIGNED TELEHEALTH SECURES PRIVATE FINANCING TO FUEL GROWTH INITIATIVES

-- Deepak Chopra and Hector Sulaiman Become Advisors to Company --

Aligned TeleHealth, Inc., a leading healthcare company that provides full, end-to-end telemedicine solutions, including specialty physician consultations to acute-care hospitals, emergency rooms, skilled nursing and critical access hospitals, today announced it has secured private financing from two investors to support the company’s growth initiatives.

The investors include Deepak Chopra, chief executive officer and founder of OSI Systems, Inc., a Hawthorne, Calif.-based designer and manufacturer of specialized electronic systems and components used in healthcare, among other industries, and Hector Sulaiman, chief executive officer of Controles Graficos, a Mexico City-based manufacturer and supplier of healthcare services and goods. Chopra and Sulaiman are also serving as advisors to Aligned TeleHealth’s board of directors.

“With Chopra and Sulaiman as our newest investors and also serving as advisors to Aligned TeleHealth, we believe the next chapter in our company’s evolution is upon us,” said Nitin Nanda, M.D., chief executive officer of Aligned TeleHealth. “We are entering a pivotal stage with respect to gaining significant traction in urban and rural markets by serving an increase in patient visits to acute and critical care hospitals, especially emergency rooms, following the Affordable Care Act.

“In an era of healthcare reform, our company is focused on reducing wait times for specialty consults in emergency rooms, as well as improving throughput,” Dr. Nanda said. “Facilities are searching for these solutions to help reduce costs and provide patients with the highest quality of care, and Aligned TeleHealth is addressing these needs with the delivery of physician consultations through telemedicine and hospitalist services.

“At the same time, Aligned TeleHealth’s solutions appeal to physicians who increasingly face burdensome workloads by providing a highly flexible and effective patient care delivery system through telemedicine technologies,” Dr. Nanda added.

About Aligned TeleHealth, Inc.

Aligned TeleHealth is a fast-growing provider of telemedicine specialty physician services to suburban and urban hospitals and emergency department’s via interactive, two-way, real-time, video telecommunication, which is a $3 billion addressable market. The company’s solutions address the growing need for hospitals to reduce lengths of stay, improve quality of care scores and treatment outcomes, as well as create unique and flexible career opportunities for physicians through telemedicine technologies. For more information, please visit www.alignedth.com.