Sam Burgess impressed by Billy Slater 1:01 Play video Rabbitoh Sam Burgess says the form of Billy Slater will make the Blues job difficult coming in to State of Origin I

SUZANNE Hadley and new love Matt Parish capped off a week of personal turmoil by attending a friend’s wedding yesterday.

The estranged wife of radio heavyweight Ray Hadley and the NSW Blues assistant coach strolled arm in arm as they made their way to the Balmoral wedding of Ms Hadley’s close friend Carolyn Denton.

The two women became friends after Ms Denton’s ex-husband Dave was hired to build the Hadleys’ sprawling Dural home.

Hadley, who also remains friends with the Dentons, was originally invited to MC yesterday’s ceremony.

With his arm slung over the shoulder of his new love, Parish stopped for a moment to brush hair from Ms Hadley’s eyes and she laughed and threw an arm around his waist. He casually sipped a Corona beer while she drank from a can of Jim Beam and Coke.

Ms Hadley looked stunning in black slacks and a cream blouse that accentuated her toned physique, while Parish beamed in a suit as he hid his beer bottle under his jacket thrown over his arm.

Parish was angry when he realised it wasn’t the wedding photographer who had photographed them together.

Distressed about the breakdown of her 20-year marriage with the 2GB presenter, American-born Ms Hadley has started building a life for herself.

A few weeks ago she moved her two teenage daughters out of the luxury Dural homestead she and the influential radio commentator shared. It is believed she has since moved into a unit not far from Dural to make it easier for the couple to share time with their two teenage daughters.

Mr Hadley has moved back into the Dural home.

DON’T MEDDLE WITH ME: HADLEY FIGHTS BACK ON AIR

HADLEY AND DALEY CALL TRUCE OVER STORM

The Hadley marriage broke down after a much-publicised heated row in February, which resulted in Ms Hadley filing an Apprehended Violence Order against Mr Hadley and his police officer son Daniel. Ms Hadley later withdrew the application.

The new couple’s appearance together at the wedding yesterday surprised many, coming as it did just two days after The Daily Telegraph revealed Hadley had contacted NSW Origin officials asking for Parish to be more discreet with their relationship.

Mr Hadley said this week he wanted to protect his daughters.

“She is not planning on taking a backwards step, despite what Ray does and says,” one close friend said.

Another friend said Ms Hadley was enjoying a new love. Concerned for her daughters, Ms Hadley has refused to speak about the break-up but has, friends say, been under “extreme pressure” and shaken by what they describe as false claims that she and Parish started dating before her marriage ended.

“It’s been an unbelievably difficult time for her and her family,” one supporter said.

“Her marriage ended, she did the courageous thing and moved out of the relationship, but because her estranged husband has a popular radio show, she feels she has an obligation to protect him, even though someone is clearly hell-bent on smearing her good name.”

It was during a night out with girlfriends at Terrigal’s Crown Plaza Hotel in March that the newly single Mrs Hadley met divorcee Parish.