Honour Norman Borlaug on his centenary by approving GM crops

These, he says, are critical to increasing agricultural yields, reducing hunger and conquering poverty. He seeks to raise funds to prosecute Greenpeace and other GM opponents for crimes against humanity in international courts.

Patrick Moore , co-founder of Greenpeace but now a strong critic of that organisation, is livid about the hypocrisy and pseudoscience of activists opposing genetically-modified (GM) foods.

This is relevant in today's debate in India on GM crops. Many Indian activists have long opposed GM foods, claiming to be saviours of humanity against wicked multinationals promoting monster foods. But Moore would say that the real monsters are the activists. He sees them as ideologues of pseudoscience determined to hurt farm incomes and yields, thus prolonging hunger. These, he says, are crimes against humanity.

Guilty Without Evidence

The last UPA government didn't approve even field trials, let alone commercial cultivation, of GM foods. But now the Genetic Engineering Approval Committee has cleared field trials (under stringent controls) of 15 GM crops including rice, brinjal, mustard and chickpeas.

This is not approval for commercial sales. It is simply approval to test the varieties. Yet, ideologues oppose even testing. In effect, they have declared GM foods guilty of being dangerous without evidence, and refuse to permit tests that would establish the evidence.

A major farmers' group like Chengal Reddy's Federation of Farmers Associations has long campaigned in favour of GM crops, saying these are essential to raise farm incomes, and reduce pesticide use. Chengal Reddy points out that farmers spray conventional brinjal with pesticide 30-35 times per crop, whereas Bt brinjal will require only five sprayings.

Far from being more dangerous, Bt brinjal is much safer because of lower pesticide content. Environment minister Prakash Javadekar says no final decision has yet been taken.

Umbilical Cord Called Funds

International NGOs now have enormous budgets and channel millions of dollars into developing countries to spread their ideas, good or bad. Many Indian NGOs now depend critically on dollar inflows for their fortune, fame and future prospects.

This explains why they exude so much passion on western agendas like GM crops, while saying relatively little about environmental disasters that India actually needs to focus on, like millions of deaths and disease caused by polluted water and air, the destruction of acquifers by farmers using free electricity to pump excessive amounts of water, and fertiliser misapplication that ruins our soil.

There is no space in this column to go into all the issues relating to GM crops. Suffice to say that the same activists opposing GM foods earlier opposed Bt cotton, a GM variety, as dangerous and useless.

In fact, Bt cotton helped double cotton yields, greatly reduced pesticide use and converted India into a major cotton exporter. Over 90 per cent of cotton farmers switched to the Bt variety. Instead of admitting their folly, the activists keep insisting that Bt cotton is actually a disaster, and that poor farmers have been misled by the propaganda of seed companies into adopting Bt cotton.

The activists have told repeated lies and published bogus research — which has consistently been proved false in detailed reviews in top scientific magazines like Nature. It's worth highlighting Mark Lynas, once a famous crusader against GM crops. He has now reversed his anti-GM beliefs as unscientific and untenable given growing evidence that GM foods are potential saviours of the human race, not dangers.