Premiums for individual health insurance in New Jersey may drop by as much as eight percent next year, according to an analysis funded by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation.

The upper range of its prediction has them rising by just three percent — far below the national upper figure of a 15 percent jump.

Its prediction has little to do with the actual cost of health care, which continues to rise. Instead, it reflects the state insurance companies' accuracy at setting rates high enough to cover claims filed by their customers. That means they won't have to drastically boost their premiums, as may happen in other states.

The analysis is based on how much insurers had to pay in claims in 2014, the first year of the Affordable Care Act. Any company that miscalculated by setting rates too low for the claims that were ultimately were filed could be expected to boost their premiums a lot the following year, the report said.

That report shows New Jersey insurance companies did a pretty good job — compared to insurers in other states — of predicting how much health care their customers would use.

Nationwide, other insurers underestimated what their costs would be during the first full year of the Affordable Care Act. That landmark legislation drew many newcomers to the health insurance market — customers who either had costly preexisting conditions, or who needed more medical attention because they had put off care while they were uninsured.

As a result, insurers nationally spent an average of 92 percent of their revenue on claims — a figure that is too high to keep most of them solvent. As a result, the foundation expects that rates nationally could jump for 2016 by anywhere from two to 16 percent.

Some states will see prices jump by more than a third.

By contrast, New Jersey insurers spent just 82 percent of revenue on customers' claims. That figure is very close to the 80 percent minimum set by the Affordable Care Act.

Before the ACA, the foundation analysis stated, there were years when the national average dropped below 80 percent. Now, all 50 states are above that figure.

At first glance, it would seem that New Jersey consumers didn't get as much value for their premium dollar as customers in other states, said Lisa Clemans-Cope, of the Urban Institute, which analyzed insurance markets around the county. But it also means rates here won't yoyo up and down as insurers try to find the sweet spot that means competitive pricing that also covers their costs.

"On the one hand, New Jersey residents received somewhat less value from their individual market plans in 2014 compared with most states," she said. "But on the other hand, on average, rates are likely to be more stable in New Jersey."

In neighboring Pennsylvania, insurers clearly set rates too low for the claims they ended up paying: They ended up paying out 100 percent of their revenue in claims. As a result, the foundation estimates premiums there will rise by anywhere from 12 to 25 percent to make sure that doesn't happen again.

While New Jersey customers paid a lot for their insurance — an average of $4,891 per person annually — the state's insurance companies also paid a lot for their care, an average of $4,102 per person annually.

The study looked at all individual plans sold in New Jersey, not just those offered through the federal online marketplace at healthcare.gov.

The open enrollment for the third year of the Affordable Care Act begins Nov. 1. Rates on policies offered through healthcare.gov are expected to be released by late October, according to the site.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.