Davis is a high-profile Democrat and Abbott is a well-established Republican. | AP Photos Davis vs. Abbott: 'Bruising'

The Texas governor’s race is shaping up to be a bloody and expensive contest between a high-profile Democrat who fires up the party and a well-funded, well-established Republican.

Democratic state Sen. Wendy Davis last week sent the clearest signal yet that she’s eyeing a gubernatorial run, telling supporters in an email blast that she will announce her next steps in early October. Attorney General Greg Abbott is the presumptive GOP nominee and, by all accounts, the clear front-runner in the race to succeed Republican Gov. Rick Perry.

Story Continued Below

“I expect it to be a bruising campaign,” said Texas GOP Chairman Steve Munisteri. “There’s a lot of material on Wendy Davis. I expect it to be within the bounds of appropriate political discussions. She’s going to have a lot of questions to answer.”

( QUIZ: Do you know Wendy Davis?)

Matt Angle, a Davis adviser, said that Republicans — who have held the governor’s mansion for nearly two decades — need to brace themselves for a real race if she runs. He contended that Abbott isn’t used to competitive contests and that his team has already blundered.

Angle pointed to Abbott recently tweeting thanks to a supporter who referred to Davis as “retard Barbie,” though he later walked that back. In another instance, Angle noted, an Abbott adviser retweeted a user who said Davis is “too stupid to be governor.”

“Early on, it doesn’t look like Abbott really has a firm grip on a statewide race,” Angle, also director of the Lone Star Project, a Democratic group aiming to turn Texas blue, said. “Early on, there are unforced errors. Wendy Davis is not officially running, and she’s all in his head. Look at his consultants hurling personal insults at her; he retweeted an insult. Just the kind of errors you see made by people running for city council rather than people running for governor.”

Davis catapulted into the national spotlight this summer after mounting a lengthy filibuster that temporarily derailed a restrictive abortion bill. That effort drew attention and plaudits from national Democrats up to President Barack Obama himself, who issued a “#standwithWendy” tweet.

( PHOTOS: Wendy Davis’s filibuster)

Since then, she has appeared in the pages of Vogue, on stage at Washington’s National Press Club and as a speaker at an EMILY’s List event. She represents a state Senate district that voted for Mitt Romney in 2012 and in appearances like the one at the National Press Club has sought to paint herself as a moderate.

Abbott entered the race with more than $20 million in his war chest, while Davis pulled in about $1 million in the wake of this summer’s filibuster. The attorney general is crisscrossing the state, making the conservative case against Obamacare and government regulations. He is running on a platform of “preserving Constitutional, traditional values — like faith, family and freedom for future generations,” as his campaign website proclaims.

Abbott is no stranger to running statewide campaigns — he’s in his third term as attorney general and is considered a workhorse with sterling conservative credentials. He is paralyzed from the waist down, an issue he confronted head-on in his campaign announcement speech: “Some politicians talk about having a steel spine. I actually have one,” he said — before “the whispering” about his health could start, according to one Republican strategist.

( Also on POLITICO: Texas AG Abbott kicks off campaign)

Observers say Abbott will champion the Lone Star State’s economic growth and aim to paint Davis as a liberal easily linked to Obama and House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi.

“Since announcing for his bid for governor, General Abbott has communicated that his focus will be on the continued growth of the Texas economy to preserve its reputation as No. 1 in the nation,” Abbott spokesman Avdiel Huerta wrote in an email. “To accomplish this, he believes we need to launch a new era of education reform and expand our transportation and water infrastructure to meet the growing demands of people moving to Texas as a result of our great economic environment.”