PETALUMA, Calif.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Bed-bound patients may soon receive more communications and care options using the Patient Engagement Table just launched by GCX, the industry leader in medical-grade mounting solutions. GCX designed the over-bed, adjustable table to accommodate mobile devices, particularly the iPad, and it can serve as a charging station for the mobile device.

Within 24 hours of the Patient Engagement Table’s official launch in mid-September, some of the largest U.S. healthcare systems indicated the table meets a strong need among their hospitalized patients for more connectivity while in the hospital and a stronger link to their physicians.

“This versatile solution addresses something very much on the minds of IT organizations and hospitals around the country, which is empowering patients with mechanisms that help them become more engaged in their care and increase their control over their situation,” Cris Daugbjerg, GCX Vice President of Development and Sales, said. “It’s a very current, very real need, and it definitely struck a nerve with hospital administrators who had been looking for this type of solution.”

There are almost one million hospital beds in the U.S., according to the American Hospital Association. Unlike existing over-bed tables, the medical-grade Patient Engagement Table includes an adjustable arm to hold a personal or hospital-issued tablet. Patients can then use the devices to stay connected, entertained and informed. Tablets also are used to schedule follow-up appointments and provide secured patient data, including discharge instructions.

The Patient Engagement Table’s patent-pending design includes:

An adjustable-height, over-bed table made of a durable, synthetic, thermoplastic surface, with welled areas to contain spills

Easy-to-use hand controls

Anodized aluminum construction for durability and ease of cleaning

Integrated, industry-standard GCX channel profile to facilitate IT hardware integration

Accessory track to add storage, a 4-port USB charging module and medical-grade coiled or straight power cord

Grip points for easier positioning by patients and clinicians

Finding ways to improve the patient experience is a top priority for U.S. healthcare systems complying with The Patient Rights and Affordable Care Act. Patients with more options to communicate with clinicians, hospital staff, family and friends may rate their hospital experience more favorably on satisfaction surveys.

Hospitals looking to utilize the Patient Engagement Table also are exploring mobile applications that can improve staff productivity, such as an app to control a room’s lighting and climate – one of the most popular reasons patients call a floor’s nursing station.

Optional USB ports and power strips also provide a convenient place for patients and visitors to recharge mobile phones or tablets.

For more information or to place an order for the Patient Engagement Table, visit the GCX website at www.gcx.com or contact Kevin Merritt, Director of Marketing, at (800) 228-2555, Ext. 713.

About GCX Corporation

GCX Corporation, based in Petaluma, Calif., has been providing medical instrument and IT mounting solutions for the healthcare industry since 1971. It sells directly to hospitals as well as through original equipment manufacturers (OEM). Major product lines include wall mounts, roll stands, ceiling mounts, countertop mounts, pole mounts, and a variety of mounting accessories. GCX mounting solutions feature space-saving, ergonomic designs to improve both equipment and patient access. The company has offices in North America, Europe and Taiwan. It also operates warehouse and production facilities in Petaluma; El Paso, Texas; and New Taipei City, Taiwan. For more information, visit www.gcx.com.