A 22-year-old recent Dillard graduate is shot dead in New Orleans Saturday night, the city's first shooting death of the year. Now, Myeisha McDaniels’ family has an emotional plea to her killer.

Through tears, McDaniels’ mother, Shirleen Jefferson says, “I’m begging y'all to come forward, please lord Jesus this has got to stop, please Jesus y'all have got to stop.”

Instead of celebrating the New Year and new beginnings, the parents and sister of Myeisha McDaniels are making funeral arraignments for the 22-year-old.

“This is a good person who dedicated her life to school, to saving lives, not for someone to take her life,” McDaniels’ sister, Tyeshia, said.

The recent Dillard graduate had a bright future. Plaques and trophies inside her room showcase the accomplishments of the straight-A student, who earned a degree in biology, with aspirations of becoming a brain surgeon.

“I come from a good foundation, we used to be the four musketeers. Now we're the three musketeers and I don’t have my sister so whoever did this, look what you done tore up,” Tyeisha said.

“All I know, she left with her friend, she didn’t come back home. Her friend called about an hour later, telling me she got shot,” McDaniels’ father, Harry Jefferson, explained.

Someone drove McDaniels to Tulane Medical Center around 9 p.m., in her White Nissan Altima, with the front windshield partially shattered.

“They ain’t telling me who it was,” Shirleen said.

New Orleans police say McDaniels had a gunshot wound and later died at the hospital. Investigators believe the shooting happened in the 3700 block of Clio Street, but have released few other details.

“Anybody know, please tell me, please come tell me, please tell me what happened to my child,” Shirleen pleaded.

Tyeshia, adds, “Please come forward, please say what you did done, you took our soul, took our soul, you took our soul.”

McDaniels’ family says she just secured a job in the medical field, which she was to start this Tuesday, and was looking into medical schools. If you know anything about her murder, call Crimestoppers at 504-822-1111.

Copyright 2016 WVUE. All rights reserved.