Updated at 7:41 p.m.: The Wood family has released a statement to KXAS-TV (NBC5), which is copied below:

“Philip Wood was a man of God, a man of honor and integrity. His word was gold. Incredibly generous, creative and intelligent, Phil cared about people, his family, and above all, Christ. Though our hearts are hurting, we know so many families around the world are affected just as much as us by this terrible tragedy. We ask for your prayers, not only for ourselves, but for all involved during this difficult time.

As a family, we are sticking together through Christ to get through this. Thank you for your understanding.

The Wood Family.”

Updated at 6:13 p.m.: Austin-based company Freescale Semiconductor confirmed that 20 of its employees were passengers on the flight. Of the 20, 12 were from Malaysia and 8 were from China.

“At present, we are solely focused on our employees and their families,” said President and CEO Gregg Lowe. “Our thoughts and prayers are with those affected by this tragic event.”

The company will provide counselors and other professionals.

Original item at 4:43 p.m.: One of the 239 people aboard the Malaysian Airlines flight that disappeared early Saturday had roots in North Texas.

Philip Wood, 50, who is believed to have worked for IBM in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, previously lived in Keller. The passenger manifest for flight MH370 bound for Beijing lists a Philip Wood as one of three Americans who were on board.

His ex-wife, Elaine Wood, posted a statement about her former husband on Facebook and asked for privacy.

“Philip Wood was a wonderful man,” she said. “Although we were no longer married, he is still family. His sons and I just want peace and quiet right now.”

The Malaysian Embassy notified Philip Wood’s parents that their son was on the flight, KTVT-TV (Channel 11) reported.

Reached at his home in Keller, Wood’s father, Aubrey Wood, told The New York Times that the family had little information beyond what has been reported in the media.

“We’re all sticking together,” he said. “What can you do? What can you say?”

Philip Wood had followed in his father’s footsteps when he joined IBM, from which his father retired, the Times reported. He previously lived in Beijing and had two sons in Texas, one who is a student at Texas A&M University and another who is an alumnus.

A family friend told the Dallas Morning News that Wood was in Keller last week. His mother, Sandra Wood, said she has a sense of peace after seeing her son recently, KXAS-TV (NBC5) reported.

Updates from Malaysia Airlines have been sporadic. An international search and rescue mission has so far been unsuccessful at determining the plane’s whereabouts although two large oil slicks were spotted off the southern tip of Vietnam. It’s unclear whether the slicks were related to the flight, but the Vietnamese government said they are consistent with with the kind of slick that would be produced by the jet’s two fuel tanks, the Associated Press reported.

[#MASalert] We would like to humbly ask all Malaysians and people around the world to pray for flight MH370 – http://t.co/xGT1P7SsHM — Malaysia Airlines (@MAS) March 8, 2014

American Airlines, a partner in the oneworld alliance that includes Malaysia Airlines, said it is willing to assist in any way.

“Our thoughts are with everyone on board Malaysia Airlines Flight MH370, their families and the employees of the airline,” the airlines said.

Spokesman Matt Miller said they are willing to do “anything and everything that is asked of us,” and added that team members in Beijing are ready to help.

Staff writer Hannah DeClerk contributed to this report.