NC Healthcare Improvement has been paid million of pounds in public money

Boston-based multinational Institute for Healthcare Improvement (IHI) has been paid millions of pounds in public money to introduce sweeping reforms across Scottish hospitals. The extraordinary relationship was cemented two years ago when the former chief executive of Scotland's NHS stepped down in the wake of a scandal to become Executive Vice President of IHI. Derek Feeley and his colleagues in Massachussetts now work closely with Scottish Government and play a key role in steering policy in the NHS, as well as social services, early years care and education. This is despite the SNP insisting that the private sector is only involved in the "margins" of the health service in Scotland. Last week, Health Secretary Shona Robison praised a fall in hospital death rates and announced a funding boost for the "world-leading" Scottish Patient Safety Programme. However, the programme was in fact developed by IHI and the firm has been instrumental in rolling it out across the country ever since the SNP first came to power. Carol Hararden, another IHI Vice President, "currently leads IHI's work with Health Improvement Scotland aimed at transforming the safety of every Scottish hospital over five years". The Scottish Government has paid IHI at least £5.6million in Scottish public money for its various contracts.

FILE Derek Feeley works with the Scottish Government

t's incredible that the Scottish Government should be so damning of private health on one hand, yet so dependent on it on the other Jackson Carlaw

IHI - founded by Professor Don Berwick, who led the controversial 'Obamacare' health reforms in the USA - is a not-for-profit company. However, accounts show it generated some £26million in operating revenues last year and had £62million in cash and investments. It also receives funding from a number of US health insurers, such as Kaiser Permanente and Blue Cross Blue Shield. Mr Feeley resigned to join IHI in April 2013, with a glowing reference from then Health Secretary Alex Neil, just weeks after it emerged he had put pressure on Audit Scotland to water down a report on problems with hospital waiting times. A career civil servant, who also served as Principal Private Secretary to First Minister Jack McConnell, he retains a gold-plated Scottish Government pension worth £1.1million. His new salary has not been disclosed, although IHI paid out £17million in wages and other benefits to its 140 staff last year. Mr Feeley had to be granted special permission from then First Minister Alex Salmond and Permanent Secretary Sir Peter Housden, head of the civil service in Scotland, in order to take up his new role in August 2013. A letter from Sir Peter, released by the UK's Advisory Committee on Business Appointments, shows that Mr Feeley was forbidden from "lobbying" the Scottish Government for two years from that date. However, he was back in Scotland earlier this month to attend a "strategic meeting" between IHI and the Scottish Government.