My family has been on public assistance. We are not what you think.

Maria Gaie Beyer (Photo: Courtesy of Maria Gaie Beyer)

A few years ago, after an unexpected job loss, my family was on food stamps. During that time, my kids brought home a letter asking us to bring cookies or bars to a school potluck.

We had already asked for their choir dues to be waived and a break on their bus fees, so I felt like we should contribute.

But buying ingredients for making cookies is expensive, so we used our food stamps to buy Oreos, self-consciously explaining our dilemma to the store clerk. That’s also what we’d do when asked to bring a two-liter of soda to a church or school event that we had to purchase with food stamps. I always felt obliged to explain.

These memories flooded my brain while reading that the newly enacted state budget calls for drug-testing some FoodShare recipients and making them pay the cost of replacing lost or stolen benefit card cards. (Gov. Scott Walker vetoed language saying the state needed “reasonable suspicion” to drug test “because I object to limiting the department’s ability to determine which program participants will be screened,” he said.)

The Legislature is also pursuing a bill that will require two-thirds of purchases go for approved foods and will bar recipients from buying some items, like shrimp.

Seven states have tried drug-testing and found that the money spent operating the program was wasted when little or no fraud was uncovered. Also, when people finally apply for help, any delay in receiving benefits is time they cannot eat.

In our case, we received this assistance during a time of great need. Although we have made it past that difficult time, I have not forgotten how it made me feel.

My family adhered to self-imposed restrictions: no junk food, no soda, and no candy. But school functions were circumstances of exception and I made sure my children understood that using food stamps was our way of sharing with the community.

Make no mistake: Forcing families to spend two-thirds of their benefits on approved foods is not about stemming growth in programs, teaching responsibility or curbing the extremely rare instances of abuse. It is about shaming.

When my kids were young, we received help for a time from the Women, Infants and Children nutritional program. The food on this list — which the state wants to use to guide all FoodShare purchases — is not appropriate for feeding whole families. It’s a very restrictive list intended for low-income pregnant, breastfeeding, and non-breastfeeding postpartum women, and for infants and children up to age 5.

If I chose a juice that wasn’t 100 percent fruit or a cereal that wasn’t “on the list,” the cashier would stop and yell for a supervisor over the loudspeaker. It was humiliating that I had to be told what I couldn’t buy.

In retrospect, I am not ashamed of using benefits to help feed my family in a difficult time. My husband, my children and I had been working and paying taxes for years before that. We had earned the right to the assistance we received.

According to the Department of Human Services, adding food restrictions will cost the state $12.6 million. We don’t need to punish people for being poor. Our tax dollars would be better spent investing in the health and well-being of families in our own communities.

Maria Gaie Beyer is a lawyer and small-business woman who volunteers for progressive causes. She is a board member of the Forward Institute.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MyRmPA