Incident: Trainer Wayne Hawkes. Photo: Pat Scala

Racing Victoria stewards opened an inquiry into an alleged altercation in the mounting yard at Moonee Valley between prominent trainers John Sadler and Wayne Hawkes after the running of race three, a benchmark 90 over 1200 metres, on Saturday.

During the race, the Hawkes-trained Laohu led before finishing seventh, while Sadler's Henwood finished fifth.

Chief steward Terry Bailey said a complaint had been lodged by Hawkes following the alleged incident with Sadler. "Mr Hawkes made a complaint to stewards that he had been hip and shouldered by Mr Sadler," Bailey said.

Sadler described the incident as just "brushing someone".

Advertisement

Both parties were interviewed by stewards, as was Hawkes' wife, who witnessed the incident. Bailey said the inquiry had been adjourned and would be completed next week.

Kick in the pants for Avdulla

Brenton Avdulla escaped with a stern reprimand and has been put "on notice" by stewards for his ride on Celtic Prince at Rosehill last Saturday. Chief steward Ray Murrihy wrapped up the inquiry into Avdulla's ride, in which he steadied the resuming stayer at the 800-metre mark allowing hotpot Entirely Platinum and James McDonald to slot in after being planted three wide. Cups-bound Entirely Platinum eventually cruised to victory under McDonald. Murrihy told Avdulla – who argued he had already used up Celtic Prince in the early stages to find a position – stewards took objection to the competitiveness of his ride and the fact he was seen talking to McDonald as they returned to scale. "You didn't ride in a manner as competitive as we would expect," Murrihy said. "Race tactics not only have to be right, they've got to look right. What compounded this further is you ride [regularly] for the Hawkes stable and you were chatting [with McDonald] after the race. Irrespective of the price of the horse you're on, whether it's first-up or you're on a stayer, we expect you to ride competitively. We place you on notice you must be competitive at all times. Don't go to the well a second time. Ride it with as much competitiveness as the rules allow. That doesn't include letting the odds-on favourite in halfway through the race." Avdulla had three wins from just 12 rides for the Hawkes partnership last season.

Bull Point defies Coolmore's concerns

Chris Waller and Coolmore's late plea to scratch Bull Point fell on deaf ears before the stallion prospect turned in a cracking first-up run when third in the Show County Quality. Chief steward Ray Murrihy dismissed the connections' case to scratch Bull Point because of the track, which had remained a heavy (nine) up until the group 3 sprint. It was downgraded after the Warwick Stakes. "Although the track hasn't officially deteriorated we are a little bit concerned," Coolmore Australia's racing manager, James Bester, said before the race. "We were 50-50 this morning, but we can't do anything about it now." Bull Point made significant ground late to finish just behind Terravista in his first start for Waller. "He's obviously travelling a lot more kindly and he's a very happy horse," Bull Point's jockey Glyn Schofield said. "He'll be one to follow."

Liberation sent back to school

Corporate bookmaker Sportsbet.com.au refunded all bets on beaten runners after the carnage in the Up And Coming Stakes on Saturday. The cause of the trouble, Liberation, will be spelled, but chairman of stewards Ray Murrihy made it clear that he needs to improve his manner. "We want to see it trial before he starts again and ridden out fair dinkum in the small saddle," Murrihy said. "We don't want to see that carnage again or we will start to lose patience."

Loy's the boy to watch

Apprentice Brodie Loy picked a perfect time to ride just his second Saturday metropolitan winner, navigating a rails-hugging course to win in a head-bobbing finish in the 2000m benchmark 85 handicap. The three-kilogram claimer only recently transferred his indentures to David Pfieffer and shored up further support when trainer Mike Moroney's Surpass ($7) ghosted along the rails to down mudlark Jo Jo Girl ($17) by a half-head. "It's all about getting on the right horses and getting the right opportunities," Loy said. "Mr Pfieffer, my boss, has done a great job and helped me a lot. It's all about knuckling down and working hard to get the opportunities. He [Surpass] just thrives on the heavy going being a New Zealand horse. He was the fittest horse in the race and Mike has done a great job with him to bring him up here."

with Andrew Garvey