By Maggie Thurber | For Ohio Watchdog

It was a busy lame duck session in the Ohio General Assembly as legislators scurried to pass a host of bills before adjourning.

Lawmakers tackled how districts are drawn, shielded the identity of those who help carry out a death sentence and provide the drugs for that penalty, and they changed vehicle towing laws.

Lawmakers passed controversial restrictions on how municipalities can use red light and speed cameras. Gov. John Kasich is expected to sign the bill, which will effectively end use of the cameras in Ohio.

But you’ve probably heard about all those. Here are a few you may not know about:

You could see more health-care professionals volunteering in free clinics, thanks to House Bill 320. It grants immunity from civil liability to health-care professionals who volunteer to provide services in free clinics to those who qualify for — or are receiving — Medicaid. It also requires the Ohio Department of Health to maintain a directory and information on its website about free clinics.

In case you didn’t know about free clinics, lawmakers named December as “Free Clinic Appreciation Month” and required ODH to promote them by selecting a “free clinic of the year” and a “free clinic volunteer of the year.”

Young adults might not be happy with House Bill 511 because it reduces the age limit for including children as dependents on their parent’s health insurance policies. Current law in Ohio is 28, but the bill sets 26 as the maximum age.

But small business owners might like that the bill increases — from 25 to 30 — the number of hours an employee must work to qualify for small employer health benefit plans.

Cities and townships were happy to hear the bill clarifies the point that a volunteer fire fighter is not an employee for the purpose of the Affordable Care Act.

But the House did not concur on changes the Senate made, but the main points of the bill were amended into a Senate measure.

While they couldn’t pass it in time for back-to-school shopping this year, Senate Bill 243 finally earned enough votes — and compromises — to set a sales tax holiday for 2015.

The bill will exempt sales of clothing, school supplies and instructional materials from the sales tax if purchased Aug. 7, 8, and 9, 2015.

It sets limits on the dollar amount for the exemptions: $75 for each article of clothing and $20 each for supplies and instructional material. And it’s only for 2015. It will take another bill to extend the program or make it permanent.

Since current laws on the use of tanning beds weren’t enough, House Bill 131 was needed to further regulate the consent requirements for minors.

The bill says parents or legal guardians of kids at least 16 but not yet 18 must sign a consent form in the presence of a tanning facility employee. The consent will only be valid for 90 days, and the child cannot exceed 45 sessions during that 90-day time period.

If the child is younger than 16, a consent form must be signed at each visit, and the parent or guardian must be present for the duration of the tanning session.

The State Board of Cosmetology is tasked with adopting rules establishing procedures for tanning facility operators in making reasonable efforts to determine the age of an individual seeking to use sun lamp tanning services.

Failure to make reasonable efforts to determine ages or not obtaining the consent form will result in a $500 fine on the tanning operator for a first offense. Fines for further offenses are to be set by the cosmetology board and could include suspension or revocation of their license or permit.

The bill expands the definition of tanning facility to include businesses that offer chemical applications, also known as spray-on, mist-on, or sunless tans, as well as those that use visible light for cosmetic purposes. Operators of such facilities will have to apply for a permit and renew it every two years.