Longmont Power and Communications to finish installing more efficient LED lights around city this year.

Longmont Power and Communications will finish installing more efficient LED lights around the city this year.

LEDS, or light-emitting diodes, require less energy and give off less waste heat than traditional compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) or high-pressure sodium lights. LEDs don't have to be replaced as frequently as other kinds of lights.

"We've all seen traditional street lights flicker and go out when they reach the end of their life," said LPC Spokesman Rochat in a news release. "An LED streetlight instead begins a slow fade — so slow that even at the end of its 20-year expected life, it's still giving off 90% of its normal light."

LPC has budgeted roughly $75,000 for the light replacements this year and the investment is expected to pay back over 13 years in maintenance and energy costs.

LEDS will be installed in street lights on Third and Fourth Avenues from Main to Kimbark, on Kimbark between Third and Fourth Avenues and along the South Pratt Parkway from Second Avenue to Boston Avenue, according to the release.

This summer, 2,673 of the 6-foot-6-inch to 7-foot tall lamp posts in neighborhoods will have their CFLs replaced with LEDs by the Boulder County Youth Corps.

The Youth Corps program provides summer work opportunities to teens between the ages of 14 and 17 years old who live in Boulder County. The teens work 30 hours per week for between $8 and $9 an hour on outdoor service projects. Longmont has employed Boulder County Youth Corps supervised by city staff every year since 1998.

Advertisement

For the taller street lights along roads, LPC Workers began replacing 160 of those lamps last month and expect to be done by Memorial Day. Street Lights between Main and Martin Street on Ken Pratt Boulevard and from Ken Pratt Boulevard to Longs Peak Avenue on Main Street will be replaced. Replacing a street light takes crews about half an hour and requires a bucket truck, Rochat said via email.

LPC is investigating plans to gradually convert all 4,100 street lights in Longmont to LEDs, according to the release. After this summer's projects, LPC will have replaced roughly 200 of the street light lamps with LEDs.

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci