Jon Stewart’s new bit on the recent measles outbreak that he calls “Les Measlesrables” attacks a pretty easy target, a California native and proclaimed anti-vaxxer, but was he going too far for the sake of comedy?

In the clip below, at about 3:50, Stewart cuts to California mom Tracy Skytt, a woman he identifies as an “affluent California liberal.” When the interviewer asks if she has gotten her kids vaccinated, she replies with, “For the most part.”

Cue the roast by Stewart as he insinuates “for the most part” actually translates to a big fat “no.” When the clip cuts back to Skytt, she describes the reasoning for why she, among many other mothers have decided not to get their kids completely vaccinated. She states, “We live here in Marin County, which is a liberal place … it’s a well-educated group of people, it’s a thoughtful group of people, and I think if parents are choosing not to vaccinate, it’s probably for a reason.”

It’s hard to say after a quote like that, Jon Stewart’s claim to the people of Marin practicing “mindful stupidity” is unwarranted. After all, Skytt is just another one of those hippy liberal Californians, munching down kale, and trying to give the rest of us the measles, right? Stewart seems to think so, telling California, “have all the Fair Trade, organic espresso enemas you want,” but cautioning them to be weary when their decisions affect other people.

Many of us can agree to that. But of course, this isn’t the whole truth.

The Daily ShowGet More: Daily Show Full Episodes,The Daily Show on Facebook,Daily Show Video Archive

In the actual clip released by CNN discussing the vaccinations of a child with leukemia, Skytt’s entire interview can be found at about 1:15 at this link. It turns out “for the most part” does not mean a resounding “no” as Stewart previously determined; in fact, Skytt had her children vaccinated for the measles, the exact virus in question.

According to gawker.com, a quick Google search on Skytt will make you feel bad for judging her so quickly. She runs a company known as TSJ Design Group, which she started with her husband, Johan Skytt, who unfortunately passed away last June of pancreatic cancer. He was 48 years old, and they had two children, ages 6 and 9.

Whether Skytt was the proper face of anti-vaxxers is up for debate, along with the stereotype of California liberals being the main perpetrators. What can be seen, though, is the evidence definitely lies in favor of getting vaccinated, whether some people choose to or not. The recent measles outbreak Stewart seeks to cover is definitely a testament to this.