A 25.6-acre wooded property traversed by a headwaters stream of the Wickecheoke Creek was preserved on July 22 by the New Jersey Conservation Foundation and its partners

A 25.6-acre wooded property traversed by a headwaters stream of the Wickecheoke Creek was preserved on July 22 by the New Jersey Conservation Foundation and its partners. The Davino property, located along Oak Grove Road, is surrounded by preserved open space and farmland, and will be used to extend an existing trail system. (Photo: ~Courtesy of New Jersey Conservation Foundation) Story Highlights The Davino property, along Oak Grove Road, is surrounded by preserved open space and farmland

Preserving the land protects drinking water quality

A 25.6-acre wooded property traversed by a headwaters stream of the Wickecheoke Creek was preserved on July 22 by the New Jersey Conservation Foundation and its partners.

The Davino property, located along Oak Grove Road, is surrounded by preserved open space and farmland, and will be used to extend an existing trail system.

Preserving the land also protects drinking water quality and reduces the amount of stormwater draining downstream. The Wickecheoke Creek flows into the Delaware River, which provides drinking water for more than 1 million Central Jersey residents.

“We’re thrilled to add this property to the Wickecheoke Creek Preserve, a patchwork of preserved open space and farmland along and near the Wickecheoke Creek,” said Greg Romano, assistant director of the New Jersey Conservation Foundation. “(The) New Jersey Conservation Foundation has been working in the region for more than 30 years, permanently saving nearly 4,000 acres with our partners.”

Funding for the acquisition was provided by the state Green Acres Program and Hunterdon County open-space grants to the New Jersey Conservation Foundation and Raritan Township. The New Jersey Water Supply Authority contributed to additional costs, such as the appraisals, survey and environmental assessment.

“Hunterdon County is pleased to support and partner with New Jersey Conservation Foundation to preserve this important greenway connector,” said Hunterdon County Freeholder Director John W. King. “With the proposed expanded hiking opportunities, this acquisition will highlight the natural beauty of our county to residents and visitors alike.”

“We are so pleased to partner with (the) New Jersey Conservation Foundation to preserve this important forest land that protects the headwaters of the Wickecheoke Creek while providing opportunities for our residents to enjoy hiking and nature study,” said Amy Greene, chairwoman of Raritan Township’s Open Space Committee. “This land preservation project is an appropriate use of our Green Acres funding and offers linkages to lands previously protected in partnership with (the) New Jersey Conservation Foundation.”

The New Jersey Conservation Foundation is a private nonprofit that preserves land and natural resources throughout New Jersey for the benefit of all. Since 1960, New Jersey Conservation has protected 125,000 acres of open space — from the Highlands to the Pine Barrens to the Delaware Bayshore, from farms to forests to urban and suburban parks. For more information about the Foundation’s programs and preserves, go to www.njconservation.org or call 1-888-LAND-SAVE (1-888-526-3728).

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1SJP33x