Video: Democrats still criticizing GOP Senate candidates for military service.

posted at 11:31 am on March 22, 2014 by Jazz Shaw

In case you were wondering precisely how desperate Senate Democrats are getting as they watch the poll numbers shift and the pages of the calendar fall away toward November, the answer would appear to be, “a lot.” You can argue the relative merits of policy and legislation all day long and nobody will bat an eye, but who on Earth thought it would be a good idea to criticize your opponent for serving their country in the military? Well, two examples come to mind from recent weeks. The first was Sen. Mark Pryor (D-AR) going after Tom Cotton.

There’s a disgusting pattern emerging of Democrats attacking Republican candidates’ records of service to the nation. Sen. Mark Pryor (D-AR) recently complained that Rep. Tom Cotton (R-AR), his general election opponent, has a “sense of entitlement” because of his military service. “There’s a lot of people in the Senate that didn’t serve in the military,” Pryor, who never served and is the son of a politician, told NBC News. “I think it’s part of this sense of entitlement that he gives off is that almost as like ‘I served my country, therefore elect me to the Senate.’ That’s not how it works in Arkansas.”

A “sense of entitlement” for mentioning your service record? That takes some serious chutzpah. It had the Morning Joe crew shaking their heads in disbelief.

But that’s not the only case to feature. Another advertisement from a group backing Mark Begich (D-AK) went after Dan Sullivan, ostensibly for not being a “real Alaskan” because he lived in Maryland for a while. And what nefarious activity was Mr. Sullivan up to when the Democrats feel he should have been back home on the frontier?

Sullivan moved to Washington in 2002, not long after the 9/11 attacks, to work in an advisory role for the National Security Council and the State Department from 2006 to 2009. During this time, he and his family lived in Bethesda, Maryland, but still maintained their residency in Alaska. It’s worth noting that Sullivan has served in the U.S. Marine Corps since 1993 and has been recalled to active duty on three separate occasions, the most recent of which was in July 2013, when he was deployed to Afghanistan. He also spent 17 months in working in Africa working as a strategic advisor to Gen. John Abizaid.

It’s good to see that the GOP isn’t going to let this one sail over the plate. The NRSC is out with a new ad called “Unacceptable” pointing out the disgusting nature of these attacks. Check it out:

I hope this is already on the air in the states in question. Let us know if you see it in your area.

Related Posts: