Visit to a seminal battle site - in Scotland

Delaware Defense returns following a two-week break that took your correspondent to the Highlands of Scotland, which next year will hold a referendum on becoming independent from the United Kingdom. It’s a transition many in England oppose (as do many Scots – check the polls), although any changes will take place in the voting booth rather than on the battlefield, where England preferred to settle such matters during the 18th century – as students of U.S. history are well aware.

Then, Scots – particularly Highlanders – wanted to end oppressive British rule and restore the House of Stuart to the throne of the two kingdoms. In 1744, the youngest of those Stuarts, Bonnie Prince Charlie, convinced some Highland clan chiefs that he could raise an army with the help of old ally France and take the crown.

Those plans were scuttled, in devastating fashion, at the Battle of Culloden.

The history leading up to this battle easily fills a book and can’t quickly be summarized here. But Bonnie Prince Charlie raised a small army of 1,200 men and publicly announced his intentions on Aug. 19, 1745. His promise of French assistance was an empty one; no such pledge had been made. But victory near Edinburgh boosted morale and raised hopes. French money and weapons began to trickle in, and Charlie’s army grew to more than 5,000.

Six days’ march from London, however, some of his own war chiefs decided an attack with such a force on England’s capital would be madness, and forced a retreat northward, where they might consolidate their now-tired forces.

On Apr. 16, 1746, the two forces met on a treeless, boggy moor just east of Inverness. Charlie’s 5,500 Jacobites and their allies, equipped with muskets and swords and a few cannons, charged toward 7,500 highly disciplined government troops who had trained to counter the fearsome Highland charge with skillful bayonet employment – and whose more highly skilled cannoneers unleashed grape shot as Charles’ forces closed.

The result was carnage.

In less than an hour, around 1,200 of Charlie’s troops lay dead, as many were wounded, and 376 were taken prisoner. A mere 50 government forces died, and less than 300 were wounded.

All lie buried in mass graves on the battlefield. The Highlanders are grouped by clan.

The battle marked the end of the clan system. Many Highlanders, including women and children, were murdered in the battle’s aftermath, as England moved to crush any inclination to rise once again. Homes were looted, cattle stolen. As powerful symbols of the clans, the kilt, tartan and bagpipe were outlawed for decades.

A visit to the site is both intellectually engaging and utterly sublime. The site has been wonderfully preserved. The Visitor Centre is an interactive marvel that provides a clear understanding of events that led up to the battle and a four-minute, Saving Private Ryan-quality film that recreates the clash on four walls, enveloping viewers with a startling sense of being there. The GPS-activated battlefield guide tells – and shows – visitors what happened where as they walk the site’s paths.

If you ever find yourself in Scotland, it is well worth the visit.