Attorneys for the man facing the death penalty for allegedly stabbing five people to death in a Denver bar said Monday they want more information about a fourth man connected to the attack.

Dexter Lewis, 24, is charged with 16 counts, including first-degree murder, in the attack at Fero’s Bar and Grill that left five people dead in October 2012.

Lewis’ attorneys argued on Monday that prosecutors should continue seeking and disclosing information about Demarea Harris. Harris was working as a confidential informant for the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives at the time of the attack.

Harris has never been arrested or charged in the attack, and defense attorneys are seeking more information about the work he did for the ATF and the cases he provided information on.

Prosecutors say they have given defense attorneys all of the information the ATF released to them.

Defense attorneys called ATF Agent Brandy Spasaro, who handled Harris when he worked as a confidential informant. Spasaro received some details about Harris’ work for the ATF, but declined to answer several questions that she said pertained to confidential information.

Harris was recruited by the ATF after he was arrested by Denver police for possessing what appeared to be a small amount of crack cocaine. He continued to work as a confidential informant, completing a number of controlled purchases, until the October 2012 attacks.

In exchange for his work the ATF agree to speak to the Denver District Attorneys office on his behalf about the drug charge, Spasaro said. He was also paid about $3,000 for his work.

After Harris spoke to police about the deaths at Fero’s bar, the ATF gave Harris about $2,500 for temporary housing and relocation fees. Spasaro said Harris is no longer working as an ATF informant.

Spasaro said there were at least five people Harris provided information about to the ATF. She could not discuss details of those cases or the information Harris provided.

In their motion seeking more information about Harris, defense attorneys listed three cases Harris was “involved in.” Those cases involved drug and weapons charges.

About 200 motions have been filed in the case and attorneys are expected to argue several of them during hearings this week. Many of the filings address what evidence will be admitted at trial, including statements by four other men connected to the case.

Two other men charged in the case, brothers Joseph and Lynell Hill, have accepted plea agreements and have received lengthy sentences. Their statements contradict those made by Harris who told investigators Joseph Hill was the first person to start stabbing the victims.

Defense attorneys are also challenging statements made by Lewis’ former cellmate at the Denver jail. Lewis allegedly asked the cellmate to find and kill several witnesses in the case and provided him with a hand-drawn map of the crime scene.

The victims were the bar’s owner, Young Suk Fero, 63, of Aurora; Daria M. Pohl, 21, of Denver; Kellene Fallon, 44, of Denver; Ross Richter, 29, of Overland Park, Kan.; and Tereasa Beesley, 45, of Denver.

Jordan Steffen: 303-954-1794, jsteffen@denverpost.com or twitter.com/jsteffendp