FILE -- Former West Virginia Gov. Joe Manchin talks to reporters during a news conference in Tallmansville, West Virginia in this Jan. 4, 2006 file photo. (REUTERS/Joshua Roberts/File)

3946823

Starting next year, West Virginia University will require all students to be covered under healthcare before they can attend class, and is suggesting that students sign up for Obamacare.

An email circulated by Ken Gray, the university’s vice president for student affairs, and addressed to”WVU Parents, Students, and Families” states:

“Beginning academic year 2014-15, all WVU students will be required to have health care coverage. Many universities around the country use this model to ensure that students are protected against unforeseen and catastrophic medical expenses.”

The email stresses that “Because health problems can interfere with academic success, West Virginia University is in the process of making important changes in the health care of our students.”

The email recommends two options for the 29,466 students enrolled at WVU to use for their healthcare. These are detailed in the email.

The first option suggested is: “Aetna Student Insurance – If your student is in need of health insurance, WVU contracts with Aetna Student Health Insurance to offer an affordable, comprehensive, ACA-compliant policy tailored to student needs. Information can be obtained at www.aetnastudenthealth.com or by calling 304-293-0257. To be certain that your insurance, or any insurance that you choose to purchase for your student, meets the criteria required by WVU, please go to: http://tinyurl.com/kethenf.”

The second option recommended in the email is the Affordable Care Act, and the letter directs students to the the highly dysfunctional online health insurance market place to secure coverage.

“The Affordable Care Act (ACA) – The Affordable Care Act (ACA) offers qualified students who are uninsured with options for discounted or free health insurance. Open enrollment began October 1, 2013, and ends March 31, 2014. For more information call 1-800-318-2596 or visit the website at: marketplace.cms.gov.”

West Virginia Sen. Joe Manchin has been critical of the roll out of the Affordable Care Act and has been one of the most prominent and senior Democrats to voice concerns about the program. His has previously called for a one year delay on the penalties that would be levied against anyone who had not purchased health care coverage.