Obama and Netanyahu Meet Amid a Changed Middle East

Photo

Good Wednesday morning, and welcome to October.

Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu of Israel meets with President Obama in the Oval Office on Wednesday, hoping, perhaps, that a radically altered landscape in the Middle East has eased the pressure on Israel to come to terms with its Arab neighbors.

Like feuding spouses who have decided to stay together for the good of the family, Mr. Obama and Mr. Netanyahu are cordial and usually cooperative, but hardly warm. The last time Mr. Netanyahu was at the White House, in March, he was greeted by a late-winter snowstorm and frosty words from Mr. Obama, who complained in an interview with the columnist Jeffrey Goldberg that time was running out for Israel to make peace with the Palestinians.

Things went downhill from there. When Secretary of State John Kerry’s effort to broker a peace accord collapsed a month later, he and officials pinned much of the blame on Israel for authorizing new settlements in the West Bank. And when Mr. Kerry tried to broker a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas in Gaza, members of Mr. Netanyahu’s cabinet excoriated him, saying he had tilted in favor of Hamas.

A lot can change in seven months. Mr. Obama, who once listed the peace process as one of his top foreign-policy priorities, is now consumed with fighting the Islamic State. Mr. Netanyahu, meanwhile, fears that a nuclear agreement with Iran will leave the mullahs of Tehran too close to a bomb. His best hope may that the talks between the West and Iran remain at a stalemate.

But the biggest change this year, Mr. Netanyahu noted in his speech last week to the United Nations General Assembly, is that Israel is now lined up with Saudi Arabia and other Sunni Arab states in its enmity for Iran and the Islamic State, often referred to as ISIS. That new alignment, he said, might provide a foundation for revived peace talks with the Palestinians.

“To achieve that peace, we must look not only to Jerusalem and Ramallah, but also to Cairo, to Amman, Abu Dhabi, Riyadh and elsewhere,” Mr. Netanyahu said. On Wednesday, he will be able to test his ideas on a weary, preoccupied Mr. Obama.

Will Romney Really Run?

Photo

Mr. Netanyahu perhaps wishes that he was dealing with a different president – an old friend from his days at the Boston Consulting Group, and the 2012 Republican nominee, who has dangled the idea of running again.

This may be the beginning of the protracted political parlor game known as will-Mitt-or-won’t Mitt.

But amid wild rumors, wishful thinking and speculation-stoking by the man himself, there are subtle signs that the last Republican nominee may ultimately choose to sit out the next presidential campaign.

1. He’s still buying houses: Despite being dinged for conspicuous real estate consumption in 2012, he’s building a not-at-all-humble mansion in Utah, with 5,900 square feet of living space, an outdoor gazebo, fire pit and spa. (Another 1 Percent touch: a “secret door” leading to a storage room.) It will be Mr. Romney’s fifth home – or his fourth – details, details – if he manages to sell his $12 million waterfront estate in La Jolla, Calif. (of car-elevator fame).

2. He’s still committing Mittisms: At fund-raiser a few weeks ago, the foot-in-mouth prone Mr. Romney meandered into memories of just how much Italian food he had to buy in preparation for a visit by Governor Chris Christie of New Jersey. “I had enough to feed — well, Ann and I are still eating the food,” he recalled.

3. He’s still a touch wooden: In a man-of-the-people moment, he participated in the A.L.S. ice-bucket challenge. In a full suit and tie.

4. He still has to contend with “47 percent.” Because the Internet never forgets.

5. He’s repeatedly said he won’t run: From the moment he lost in 2012, Mr. Romney has emphatically declared that his second presidential bid was his last. “Oh, no, no, no. No, no, no, no, no. No, no, no,” he told The Times not long ago when asked. (For those counting, that was 11 no’s.) “I’m not running again.”

– Michael Barbaro

Happy Anniversary, Government Shutdown!

It was one year ago today that federal offices began to close, raising the hopes of Democrats who thought Republicans had badly overplayed their hand in the fiscal stalemate.

Facing a difficult midterm election cycle, Democrats lamented the cost of the government shuttering but saw a chance to pummel their opponents in a reprisal of the strategy that lifted the party after the Newt Gingrich-era shutdowns of 1995-96.

The crisis, which coincided with the disastrous rollout of the health care law, ended 16 days later and was almost immediately subsumed by the public reaction – and bungled government response – to the broken insurance website. Democrats saw their opening quickly disappear.

Still, they continue to hammer individual Republicans for backing the shutdown, as in a new ad that began airing Tuesday against Lee Terry, Republican of Nebraska.

“Americans have not forgotten the damage House Republicans inflicted on this country with their manufactured crisis,” said Representative Steve Israel of New York, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

Republicans aren’t buying it. They say that voters view the shutdown as small potatoes compared with issues such as the economy and terrorism. They say that Democrats are groping.

“When you can’t run on the president’s signature health care law, the economy or national security you are left with a spaghetti strategy – throwing attacks against the wall and see what sticks,” said Andrea Bozek, a spokeswoman for the National Republican Congressional Committee.

– Carl Hulse

In Presidential Politics, 70 Is Not the New 40

Hillary Rodham Clinton has said her newest title — grandmother — is her “most exciting yet.”

She has seemed aglow since the arrival of baby Charlotte, and that post-birth glow appears likely to help Mrs. Clinton connect with all the grandmothers and grandfathers who vote.

But lurking in the background is another issue. While Mrs. Clinton’s grandparent status might be an asset among some voters, her age could be an impediment to her increasingly likely presidential run.

Most Americans think the best age for presidents is in their 40s or 50s, according to a New York Times nationwide poll conducted last month. Overall, 42 percent of Americans said a president in the 40s is best, 34 percent chose the 50s, 9 percent chose the 60s, and only 1 percent chose the 70s.

Ronald Reagan was just shy of 70 when his first term began, and George H.W. Bush was 64 at his inauguration. The last three presidents have trended significantly younger – Bill Clinton was 46 at the start of his first term, George W. Bush was 54, and Barack Obama was 47.

If she were to run and ultimately win the presidency, Mrs. Clinton would be 68 when inaugurated – putting her in the same range as Reagan and Mr. Bush, the last two presidents to be grandparents in office.

– Megan Thee-Brenan

What We’re Watching Today

Mr. Obama has a packed schedule on Wednesday. He meets with Secretary of State John Kerry ahead of his session with Mr. Netanyahu and then welcomes Sporting Kansas City, the 2013 Major League Soccer champions, to the White House for a celebration. In the evening, he heads to Chicago.

Debate season is on, with Senator Mark Begich, a Democrat, facing his Republican challenger, Dan Sullivan, in Alaska tonight, and Senator Al Franken, a Democrat, going up against Mike McFadden, his Republican opponent, in Minnesota.

Senator Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts is bringing her star power to New Mexico to help bolster Senator Tom Udall’s re-election effort with a campaign event and fund-raisers.

Former President Jimmy Carter is celebrating his 90th birthday.

Photo

Along with questions of candor, cover-up and competence, lawmakers are raising another question about the Secret Service agents who guard the White House: Are they fit enough?

During a Congressional hearing on Tuesday, Representative Sheila Jackson Lee, Democrat of Texas, seemed astonished that a knife-wielding intruder had been able to elude a half-dozen officers from the nation’s most elite security detail and run into the White House.

“And we have a picture, which you cannot see, of one, two, three, four, five, six uniformed officers – I wonder if there is fitness problem here – chasing this gentleman, who could not capture him,” Ms. Lee said to Julia Pierson, the Secret Service director.

“All six of them in this picture could not capture him.”

There were few answers, but the footage showed those Secret Service agents are unlikely to be confused with Olympians.

Although the Secret Service does have a mandated fitness test intended to ensure that personnel are “capable of performing assigned duties,” the baseline requirements appear relatively lax. Chin-ups, sit-ups, push-ups and a mile-and-a-half run are tested, but according to Secret Service documents, there are no sprints.

Perhaps Ms. Lee was onto something.

– Alan Rappeport

What We’re Reading Elsewhere

John Judis argues in The New Republic that Gov. Sam Brownback’s dream of a conservative utopia in Kansas has gone badly awry.

Ben Smith of Buzzfeed writes that the boomlet of speculation surrounding another Mitt Romney candidacy is a mix of cluelessness and wishful thinking.

The editors at Bloomberg View claim that low morale and insufficient technology are the real problems plaguing the Secret Service.

The Times of India reports that President Obama and Prime Minister Narendra Modi appeared to “jettison all personal, bureaucratic, and diplomatic baggage” during meetings in Washington that put ties between the countries on “a higher plane.”