Topics: american military, commander in chief, Donald Trump, Editor's Picks, Elections 2016, war crimes, Sustainability News, Life News, News, Politics News

Candidate Trump says soldiers would obey his illegal orders. Many defenders of the Armed Forces find this offensive. They point to the work of Colonel Andrew Milburn, who argues that a code of ethics grants the soldier “a moral autonomy and obligates him to disobey an order he deems immoral.”

I am no longer a soldier. But I was one once. When I was a soldier, I broke into people’s houses. I destroyed their belongings. I handed off prisoners to Iraqi Army personnel who I knew did not follow the Geneva Conventions. I fought for an Army that was waterboarding prisoners in hidden bases around me. I fought in a country that had been invaded on specious pretexts. I fought for a country that still has untried prisoners off the coast of Cuba.

I am not alone. Many more were with me. Many fought well. Many were fine women and men. Still, despite this, I can think of very few who reveled in their “moral autonomy.”

It was a war. We were trying to win.

Soldiers follow orders. That’s what soldiers do. They are paid to do what they are told to do. If anyone has been paying any attention over the last 15 years (or 3,000 years), they know this. It stands to reason that if I followed one president’s illegal orders, I would be just fine following President Trump’s as well.

Unfortunately, it seems Trump’s “uneducated” supporters learn from experience. They know what the rest of the world knows: a soldier will do what he or she is told when he or she is told to do it. The ones who do what they are told get awards and accolades. The ones who do not do what they are told get ignominy and shame.

Life is not a Tom Cruise movie. Life is the 18 million Wehrmacht soldiers who did what they were told.

Jennifer Rubin at the Washington Post on Friday:

“A commander in chief who truly respects the troops and looks out for them does not order them to commit war crimes, setting off a constitutional crisis and subjecting American service personnel to court marshal and criminal prosecution. His attitude — I say it, so they will follow — is the thinking of a thug, a proto-fascist and a narcissistic personality. No party can tolerate such a figure, one who is overtly declaring he will not follow the rule of law. No thinking Republican in good conscience can defend such a person.”

She’s right. A commander in chief who truly respects and looks out for soldiers does not order them to commit war crimes. He changes the rules so he does not get blamed for the crimes and then punishes lower-ranking soldiers for doing what he told them to do. He tells the public one thing about the war while he does another. He sends people off to fight in one country and forgets about the ones fighting in other countries. He shortchanges the institution created to care for those soldiers.