Questions about art can seem unimportant in the greater scheme of civic things: picking the proper Shakespeare or Puccini this season a lower priority than choosing a qualified mayor for the next term; less crucial the acoustics at symphony hall than the speed of Internet access at the middle school.

But some cultural issues have everything to do with determining the quality of our collective lives and the economic opportunities in our future, and Denver faces one of them right now: What to do with our great downtown theater campus?

This is a much grander dilemma than the ones we’ve jockeyed with lately over the 4-decade-old Denver Performing Arts Complex, which begins at the corner of 14th and Curtis streets and stretches 12 full acres. Those were about refitting existing theaters to create solid homes for classical music and theater. Those were $30 million questions.

This week, a 29-member committee, loaded with movers and shakers, begins a bigger task of deciding how the problems of a few aging venues — still functional if past their prime, no longer drawing a wide swath of citizens — can be transformed into a catalyst for an urban revival that keeps downtown the center of life in a city where large segments of the population have grown indifferent to its charms.

The Executive Leadership Team, appointed by Mayor Michael Hancock, has an expanded geography in its scope, looking for ways to tie the complex into the massive, city-owned Colorado Convention Center next door. It will consider incorporating the adjacent Sculpture Park into the arts mission, ways to leverage streets, outlying buildings — even air rights over the complex — with the potential of adding hundreds of thousands of square feet of new construction.

“There’s a lot of material to work with, real estate-wise,” as co-chair Marilee Utter from the Urban Land Institute puts it.

The committee has representation from the philanthropic community, developers, concert promoters and tourism officials as well as the downtown business association and the massive 150-acre Auraria campus just across Speer Boulevard. That puts a parcel many times the size of the current complex in play.

The committee is likely headed toward some sort of public-private partnership that could dwarf the recently completed Union Station renovation 10 blocks away. Who knows what it will come up with, perhaps something less ambitious, but one supposes the cost of the question will go up considerably.

A changing downtown

The goals for an improved DPAC are many, but one sits squarely in the center: keeping downtown a cultural hub, and by extension, keeping the urban core a place that welcomes all of Denver. That’s become a challenge in a city that’s increasingly young and nearer every year to a minority-majority population.

It’s not just that DPAC has traditionally catered to fans of Euro-centric art forms that are gradually losing appeal. It’s also that things have turned increasingly expensive in the area.

It would be inflammatory to say downtown has become the playground of the wealthy. There are still plenty of good burgers around, a free bus shuttle, a Gap. But it’s certainly fair to suggest things are headed in that direction. Consider: Rents for one-bedroom condos at the Spire high-rise across the street list for $2,500 a month. Dinner entrées at the Oceanaire restaurant on the corner hover above $30. Tickets are pricey and so is parking (and so are parking tickets).

Steadily, our downtown is transforming from a land of opportunity and accessibility — great concepts that defined what it means to live in the West; the reason so many of us moved here — to a place where new arrivals can hardly afford to live or play. Thanks to commercial and residential development, our downtown is safer, cleaner, healthier and decidedly more handsome, all things to celebrate. But it’s also become more exclusive.

Could a reimagined cultural plan — on the massive scale possible here — reverse the trend, or at least balance it? Could art lead the way to a more democratic Denver?

The need for DPAC to evolve into something more relevant to the 21st century is pressing. Art options have blossomed in the suburbs, and cultural centers in Lone Tree, Parker, Lakewood and, soon, Longmont have become serious competitors. At those places, the parking is free.

The fun part

Remaking the arts complex will mean hammering out some difficult technical and financial details but it’s also a chance to indulge our imaginations. How will the making and consumption of art change over the next four decades? The possibilities seem endless, even if the dollars to pay for them are not.

There are basic requirements. Theaters will have to be reconfigured to accommodate both big ballets and small contemporary dance ensembles, chamber music and comedy shows. Diversity, in everything from programming to price, is key. The current setup, dominated by 2,500-seat venues, will need to give way to flexible spaces, fully ready to convey art in the digital age.

The formal and the casual will have to coexist because demand will continue for both. Denver Arts & Venues Executive Director Kent Rice talks up a giant outdoor screen that would allow opera to be enjoyed inside while picnickers watch a broadcast on a giant lawn next door.

There might be a small amphitheater that could host a touring mariachi band one night, a poetry slam the next.

But the thinking can go further, connecting Denverites, with their particular habits, to the arts in new ways. The complex, expanded to include neighboring sites, would be sizable enough to weave in a hiking trail, volleyball or basketball courts, video games, swings, yoga studios, day-care, shopping of all sorts.

What if we really invested and came up with a plan that diminished Speer Boulevard as the great divide of downtown and built the orchestra hall on the Auraria Campus, connecting it to the Metro State College music school. What if we carved in a bike path that crossed a bridge over Champa Street and ended at a velodrome inside one of the convention center’s large rooms? Bands could play in the middle.

The dreaming is more fun than the doing, of course. Any large idea will require compromise and deal-making to attract investment. A large, privately funded hotel over the Buell Theatre would do much to activate DPAC 24 hours a day, but government would have to relinquish control of its own property.

Still, the city controls real estate worth millions of dollars downtown and the chance to build tall over swank theaters would be attractive. We could take developers’ money, especially if their swank new apartment buildings were architectural showpieces and they gave over their first floor for a black box theater. Entrepreneurs are more creative than bureaucrats: Let’s get some good, profit-driven ideas on the table.

The key is to make deals in the public good. Not just in the interest of those who frequent the arts complex now, but those who might. Not just for those who can afford to hang out in a trendy downtown, but for anyone who wants to make the arts part of their life. The questions start with the arts, but they end in a more practical place, a city where everyone who lives here feels at home on every corner.

Ray Mark Rinaldi: 303-954-1540, rrinaldi@denverpost.com or twitter.com/rayrinaldi