I am responding to Mr O'Neill's opinion that we progressives complain loudly about global warming and yet eschew possible solutions like nuclear energy ("Climate: What about nuclear deniers?" Daily Camera Open Forum, March 5). I like nuclear power, but a conservative implementation of it scares me silly and I land on the side of those who think it is a bad idea.

Everyone has misgivings about nuclear power and, yes, some of those are overblown, but they all connect to the fact that there is risk associated with the process. If we could reduce the risk, it would be a viable option for energy. However, our present social and economic culture is completely at odds with that possibility.

On the economic side, we have this Darwinian capitalism that emphasizes profit at all costs. Nothing can ever be done without everybody slurping at the trough, somewhat of an unstated mandate to always put the risk on the other guy and not pay for it ourselves, and the disastrous need for short-term profits. This would force the operators and owners to cut corners on maintenance and safety, use low-cost unqualified labor, try to circumvent the rules, and pull the profit out in terms of money early in the endeavor so as not to put the profits at risk. This is probably an OK way to produce toilet paper where the large scale risks to people and society are low and market forces will probably work fairly well. This is not a good business model for nuclear power.

Advertisement

What we need for nuclear power is to have strong regulations, a maniacal culture of maintenance and safety, well-educated workers that would be adept at heading off problems before they become serious, and a true concern for people and society. The stakeholders in this process should be the folks who would get low-cost power in return for accepting the risk of having a nuclear plant in their neighborhood. The wealth should be extracted by having inexpensive power that would then enable people to build other products more cheaply, while paying only the cost of operation and upkeep for the nuclear plant. We have to cut the link between short-term profit and risk.

The prevailing economic thought does not handle risks to society as it should. The main culprit is this idea that the "purpose of business is to make money." What should scare everyone upon hearing that is what the adage omits. There is nothing there about risk or hurting other people and society. Everything is good as longs as it makes money. From a societal point of view the purpose of business is to support society in its enterprises and reward those that further society's and the people's interests.

On the cultural side, we have an astounding amount of individualism that reacts adversely to pointing out the risks associated with pursuing various goals. Some folks seem to think it is a personal attack on their ability to make money or use their property, while others just don't like being told what to do. We are labeled as whining do-gooders or elitists trying to make you feel stupid, when all we are really saying is that you are putting us at risk without our consent or without a share in the profits even if we do give you our consent. You see it every time people bring up the regulatory function of the government for ridicule. We need regulation, pure Darwinian capitalism has a lot of blood in the water and it comes from us. Fracking is another excellent example. Most progressive people are not anti-power or anti-making-money, we are pro-safety and pro long-term environmental sustainability. Don't poison our children just so you can make a little bit of extra money now and leave us with the cleanup.

The U.S. Navy sails a nuclear reactor into almost every port in the world. It does so safely, because it has different goals, methods and culture than a business. If we want to adopt nuclear power, we will need to become far more like the Navy than Enron.

Glenn Bennett lives in Boulder.