Indian Health Service programs on the Flathead Indian Reservation ST. IGNATIUS — The Indian Health Service (IHS) provides two types of health care services on the Flathead Indian Reservation: Direct Health Care Services and Contract Health Services (CHS), now entitled Purchased and Referred Care (PRC) services. On the Flathead Reservation, the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) Tribal Health Department (THD) manages all the Indian Health Service (IHS) programs — except one — under the auspices of the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act of 1975. The lone IHS program presently not managed by the THD is the IHS CHS/PRC. The CHS/PRC program is staffed and managed by federal IHS employees completely separate from THD. The CHS/PRC program decisions are made autonomous of the Tribal Health Department. The CSKT have filed intent to compact the IHS CHS/PRC program and is presently in negotiating with IHS over the details. The IHS is not an insurance program and thus does not have an established benefits package. The two types of services available on the Flathead:

• Direct Health Care Services are provided by an Indian Health Service (IHS) facility (hospital or clinic) on Indian reservations; or at facilities managed by tribes’ tribal health departments under contract/compact with IHS, such as the CSKT THD. The compacting option allows beneficiaries to access outpatient health care providers outside tribal health department managed facilities as well as at Tribal Health clinics. On the Flathead Reservation that means access at the five THD clinics, located in Arlee, St. Ignatius, Ronan, Polson and Elmo as well as the non-THD clinic in Hot Springs. • Contract Health Services/Purchased and Referred Care program is for physician-referred health care procedures provided at a private sector health care facility away from an IHS or tribal health care facility. The CHS/PRC is not an entitlement program like Medicare and Medicaid consequently an IHS CHS medical referral does not imply the referred care will be paid for. The program is paid for by appropriations by the U.S. Congress, and is chronically underfunded thus unable to meet the demonstrated need; present funding meets less than half of the need. The result of the chronic underfunding is the present approval-only of loss of life or limb categories within the CHS rating primary system. Eligibility requirements for CHS/PRC are also stricter than for Direct Health Care Services. Patients are required to exhaust all third-party coverage available to them, such as Medicaid, Medicare, Healthy Montana Kids, Affordable Care Act and private insurance.

• It is very important — and is policy — that people contact the IHS CHS/PRC program before accessing referred care because a referral does not mean the referred care will be paid for. They also must call the IHS CHS/PRC program within 72 hours of receiving emergency care for serious injuries sustained.

• For more information about the IHS CHS/PRC program, contact Spina Grant at 745-2411, ext. 5053. Grant’s office is located in the Neil Charlo Administrative building in St. Ignatius. Once again the IHS CHS/PRC program is an Indian Health Service program autonomous from the Tribal Health Dept. Building Quality Health Care.