New York's Capital Gun Group opens Bennington Trading Post

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

» Bill DiNunzio assists Dustin Lynds, of Bennington, with his purchase of a gun on Wednesday afternoon at the Bennington Trading Post. The Trading Post, which newly opened on Northside Dr. in Bennington, offers guns for self defense, as well as hunting and ammo. (Holly Pelczynski — Bennington Banner)

BENNINGTON &GT;&GT; Now five weeks in business, the Bennington Trading Post, 201B Northside Drive, has exceeded its new business projections, and is fulfilling a need in Bennington.

Since the closing of the last gun shop on Northside Drive, the only other shooting sports stores have been in Pownal and on Harwood Hill Road. Now, New York's Capital Gun Group has branched out into Vermont

"We are really thrilled with how welcoming the community has been," said the store manager, Michael Bucci. "We haven't done any advertising, but people are coming in. Word of mouth has been incredible, and people have been so friendly and welcoming."

Bucci said that the store is in a prime location for business growth as Northside Drive continues to develop.

The Capital Gun Group has stores in Albany, Troy, East Greenbush, Schodack, Latham and Rotterdam, as well as two bow shops: One in Amsterdam and one in Albany.

"The reason we were looking here, is because it was a good market and we thought it was underserved. There was also the passage of the New York State SAFE Act. A lot of the guns we have in this store cannot be sold in New York now, but can be sold in Vermont."

The Bennington Trading Post carries semi-automatic rifles with detachable magazines, which are no longer legal to sell in the state of New York.

The new store will be entering the local gun market that includes Marty's Sporting Goods in Bennington, which specializes in archery and gunsmithing, and Lost Target Sports in Pownal, which specializes in reloading supplies, deer tags, environmental compliance and gun sales, but is open with restricted hours.

Advertisement

Bucci said he thinks of "our relationships as complementary, rather than competing. I think there are aspects of the shooting sports that we all touch on: Some overlap and some are distinct."

Prior to officially moving to Vermont, the Capital Gun Group administered transfers and background checks on gun sales for the local Ducks Unlimited chapter for previous auctions.

The owner of Capital Gun Group, Brian Olesen, is slowly starting in a whole new state, so the company may look to work with Vermont conservation groups and sponsor events in the future.

Because the Bennington Trading Post just opened, it was not able to register as a license vendor for this deer season, but it will likely offer hunting licenses and firearm safety courses in the future.

Olesen is in the process of opening an indoor shooting range in Green Island, N.Y., as well, so safety classes and open shooting will be available soon.

"We believe gun safety is an incredibly important aspect to the industry," Bucci said. "We will always run our customers through how a gun operates, and make sure that they have the manuals and documentation to know how to clean, maintain, store and use them in a safe manner."

The Bennington Trading Post opened 5 weeks ago on Northside Dr. in Bennington The Trading Post offers guns for self defense, as well as hunting and ammo. (Holly Pelczynski — Bennington Banner)

Bucci said the business in the the process of gauging the interests of the community to determine the inventory he will carry. The Capital Gun Group works with large wholesalers, and offers a wide selection of ammunition, pistols, hunting rifles and sport shooting supplies.

"We are trying to be that all-encompassing neighborhood gun store that has the ability to draw on chain buying power to really serve the community, and provide the best service, product selection and price possible," Bucci said.

The Bennington Trading Post also maintains a steady supply of .22 ammunition, though it doesn't always have enough to put out for sale on the general floor. There is often a shortage of ammunition due to people hoarding it, or to people buying it up and flipping it for a profit.

"We pretty much sell it at our cost or slightly higher, just to make sure shooting is still an affordable family activity," Bucci said. "We make sure we have at least enough supply to sell it along with a gun, but when we have a bigger supply, we try to limit quantities to make sure that nobody is coming in to buy it up, which prohibits other people from enjoying shooting sports."

Questions, help selecting a gift, help selecting a self defense or hunting firearm Bucci continued, "that's what we are hoping to bring here, is that personal-level of customer attention."

Bucci operates the store with retired Bennington Police Department Officer Bill DiNunzio

"Bill is an encyclopedia of gun knowledge," Bucci said. "That is something that you can't get at a big chain. Bill has been hunting this area for decades. You ask him a question about a particular rifle from the 1950s, he'll tell you how many were made, the caliber and when they stopped manufacturing it."

The Bennington Trading Post is open from Tuesday through Friday, 11 a.m. to 7 p.m., and Saturday from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Find the store on Facebook.

Call Tom Momberg at 802-447-7567, ext. 118.