[Editor’s note: This item will be updated throughout the day.]

Thanks to freezing rain that fell into the wee small hours of Saturday morning, the snow that fell Friday is now covered in a thin layer of ice; the roads too, which is why the Texas Department of Transportation and National Weather Service are asking people to stay off the slippery concrete until temperatures rise above freezing. That may not occur until 2-3 p.m. — and not before another round of freezing precipitation arrives in Dallas-Fort Worth.

“Stay home if you can,” says Jesse Moore, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Fort Worth. “It’s going to be very bad out there for a while. Fortunately it’s a weekend. But the roads are slick. Even the sidewalks. It’s tough to even walk, much less drive.”

The freezing precip moving into Dallas-Fort Worth this morning is now between Austin and Waco, slowly crawling up Interstate 35. Moore says it should be in North Texas between 9 and 10 a.m.

KXAS-Channel 5 meteorologist Rick Mitchell notes the slowly rising temperatures: “At 2 a.m. the temperature at DFW was 26. At 9 a.m. it is 28, so temperatures are slowly rising.”

The TxDOT cameras show there are plenty of people out and about this morning. But as you can see from the traffic map below it’s slow going; our media partners at KXAS-Channel 5 are reporting closed roads and spin-outs all over the skating rinks currently passing for area highways.

Ryan LaFontane, a TxDOT spokesperson, says crews are out using salt and sand and blades to clear the roads. But “we’re continuing to urge folks: If you don’t have to be on the road, stay home.”

The North Texas Tollway Authority says roads are passable, but occasionally “challenging.”

The road conditions also impacted bus service in the region.

DART was running on its normal Saturday schedule, but officials said delays were possible.

About 11 a.m., the Denton County Transport Authority announced it had suspended its operations “until further notice.”

Bus service in the Fort Worth area was suspended until 1 p.m. The Trinity Railway Express was operating as usual, said Joan Hunter, a spokesperson for the Fort Worth Transportation Authority.

And the weather, of course, continues to impact operations at Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport, where an FAA-imposed ground stop holding inbound traffic at their originating airports was lifted just after 8 a.m., then reinstated minutes later when the airport ran out of gates due to de-icing delays.

The FAA lifted the ground stop just after 9 a.m. Check here for the latest.

As of 9:30 a.m., airlines serving DFW had cancelled more than 350 departures scheduled for Saturday, airports spokesman David Magana said. The cancellations constituted 35 percent of the airport’s full schedule, which includes arrivals and departures.

But, Magana adds, “Airlines plan to have their operations resume a near-normal state of flight operations by early this afternoon.” That is, when we get above freezing. And that could take a while.

Dallas Love Field is reporting delays, but nothing as significant as a ground stop. And Dallas Area Rapid Transit says buses and light rail are running as scheduled.

Just warn the kids before they go out this morning: In case of snowball emergency, break ice.

And in case you were wondering, the Dallas Zoo is closed today, but the Dallas Arboretum just sent word that it’s opening at noon. Or you can just watch this.

Staff writers Naheed Rajwani and Diane Jennings contributed to this report.