The city of Longview might begin charging employees — and possibly retirees — premiums to help offset health insurance costs in the upcoming fiscal year or find another way to fund a projected $300,000 shortfall.

The news comes less than a week after City Manager David Willard forecast heavy revenue reductions in fiscal year 2017, which begins Oct. 1.

Within the next two months, Longview health plan trustees must decide whether to keep the plan unchanged, ask employees to being shouldering up to 5 percent of the premiums burden or make more significant changes to the plan, which likely would remove its grandfathered status under the Affordable Care Act.

The city operates a self-funded health plan for employees, retirees, their spouses and dependents.

There are 1,860 people on the plan, including 790 employees and 166 city retirees.

It will cost the city $7,286,470 to maintain the plan without charging employee premiums, according to consultants with Employer Plan Services of Houston.

A 2 percent payroll deduction from employees would reduce the city's cost by $317,135, and a 3 percent deduction from employees would reduce municipal costs by $346,160.

Raising premiums for employees and retirees would cut city costs at least $417,000.

The city could generate an additional $150,000 in savings by making more significant changes to the plan. However, it would lose its grandfathered status, meaning the city would be required to provide preventative care coverage, and the end result of the changes would be a net loss.

That preventative care coverage would include contraception for women without employee cost-sharing; all deductibles and all co-pays for medical and prescription care to count toward out-of-pocket maximum expenses; expanding claims and appeal requirements; covering out-of-network emergency rooms the same as in-network emergency rooms; and covering routine costs associated with clinical trials.

LaRea Albert, vice president of self-funded plans for Employee Plan Services, said those preventative care changes would cost the city an additional $305,502 in estimated claims.

She said many health plan operators face similar difficult decisions because of rising health costs.

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, the national long-term average annual increase in medical costs is 5.42 percent.

The city has seen its medical costs increase on average 11.25 percent since 2011, with prescription drug costs more than doubling in that time, Albert said.

Complicating the matter is that employee claims have exceeded the city's budget forecast annually the past four years, said Director of Administrative Services Mary Ann Miller. It's resulted in the health plan fund balance dwindling by more than $1 million.

At this past week's City Council meeting, Willard said the city could see its general fund revenues decrease as much as $6 million. Budget Director Angela Coen said she based that estimate on a $6.9 million spending plan for health insurance.

Willard said he intends to present a draft 2017 budget to the council in mid-to-late July.

While health plan trustees and administrators decide how to reconcile the deficit estimates, Albert said Employee Plan Services will search for savings to the city's prescription drug plan.