EASTON — Chrys Kefalas, the 36-year-old conservative Republican running in a highly contested race for Barbara Mikulski’s U.S. Senate seat in Maryland, spent a day on the Eastern Shore Friday, March 11.

Kefalas made a stop at a business in Easton and then headed south to make more rounds at businesses in Salisbury. But beforehand, he went to The Star Democrat for a one-on-one interview, in which he spoke of his biggest areas of focus as a hopeful senator.

In addition to being the vice president of executive communications for the National Association of Manufacturers, Kefalas was formerly an attorney with Gov. Bob Ehrlich's administration, and later an attorney with the U.S. Justice Department.

One of his biggest areas of concern is job creation.

“We’ve got to get Washington working again with someone who knows how to create a job and move our state and our country towards prosperity,” Kefalas said. “That’s what I know how to do. That’s what I’ve done, and I think you obviously need a candidate and a leader who’s willing to stand up to party leadership, to any interest group and put the people of Maryland first.”

He said that at 14 years old, he started an online sports company that employed 20 people within four years.

Kefalas plans to spend time in every Maryland county and Baltimore City during his campaign.

“I’ve visited a lot of Main Streets,” Kefalas said, adding that the ones that most stuck with him on the Eastern Shore have been hammered by a loss of jobs. Cambridge, for instance, has lost a lot of manufacturing jobs and small businesses, he said.

He sees small manufacturers, those that employee 50 people or less, as the engines of economic growth in Maryland and the nation.

There are some fixes on the federal level that can brings jobs to Maryland and grow its current business climate, he said.

“First, we need to reform our taxes. We need fairer taxes for the businesses and individuals who create the jobs that are going to drive the economy forward,” he said. “We need regulatory reform — a comprehensive overhaul of regulatory reform so that businesses are not overburdened by either unproductive, inefficient or duplicative regulations that hamper their potential to invest and to hire new workers.”

Kefalas said the average small manufacturer in the U.S. and Maryland pays $35,000 per employee in regulatory costs. “That’s not sustainable,” he said. “That’s why businesses shutter.”

Kefalas called for free and fair trade to other nations, to benefit not just manufacturers, but the Shore’s agriculture industry, too. He said a priority of his would be to fight for the future of the multibillion-dollar agriculture industry in Maryland.

But when farmers are adjusting to state environmental regulations, Kefalas said Congress and the federal government can’t make it any harder for the agriculture industry to prosper. On that point, he referred to Gov. Larry Hogan’s ideology to lift barriers that might hamper business growth.

With the global economy, particularly in Asia, looking poor, Kefalas said, the significant economic headwinds likely will not go away unless the United States finds new markets for its products and increases its economic growth, “which is what the U.S. needs to fulfill its jobs obligations.”

On partisan gridlock between political parties in Congress, Kefalas said he brings a record of working across the aisle. He said he is willing to stand up to party leadership and do what’s right for Maryland — a trait he said people are seeking in Maryland’s replacement for Mikulski, who was known to fight for her constituents’ interests.

With an ongoing and heated 2016 presidential race, Kefalas said he would like to see another principled conservative in the Oval Office and work with that person to lower taxes and create economic activity.

“But regardless of who the next president is, he or she — one United States senator from the state of Maryland, whose vote is going to be required to move every piece of legislation that the next president will need to further their agenda, gives me the leverage and the opportunity to actually get things done for the people of Maryland,” he said.

One partisan and ongoing conversation in Congress is health care and the Affordable Care Act. Republican leaders over the years have repeatedly voiced strong opposition to the legislation with calls to repeal it.

Kefalas committed, if elected as a Maryland senator, to put forward a plan that he said will bring substantive changes to the Affordable Care Act, which he said only managed to get more people insured under a broken system.

“It did not do enough to lessen costs. We’ve actually seen in some instances costs rise,” Kefalas said. “It certainly has provided a lot of new mandates on small businesses that have made it harder to grow.”

Kefalas’ plan includes repealing an excise tax on medical devices, which he said stifles innovation and investment in the health care system.

He said another excise tax that can be repealed is on what he and others call “Cadillac plans.” According to Cigna, a global health insurance services company, the Cadillac tax under the ACA is a 40 percent tax starting in 2020 on high-cost, employer-sponsored health coverage plans.

“You’ve got to have a plan that is going to fix the system, provide certainly for businesses, transparency, and continue to create an environment where you have research and development and investment in the system, but also do something finally to lower the spiraling costs of health care,” Kefalas said.