The answer, of course, is LeBron James.

The question: How will the Cleveland Cavaliers find their way out of the muck and into the light of championship-contending status?

The answer is James. But that answer doesn’t necessarily encompass the issues you would think it does.

Widely regarded as one of the world’s most innovative coaches, David Blatt arrived with the credentials that suggested he could handle the Cavaliers as a rookie NBA coach. And yet there are levels at which James, at least now, believes he knows more about what needs to happen than the guy who is supposed to be calling the shots.

Blatt and James viewed a piece of their team’s loss to the Nuggets in November through different lenses.

“We just didn’t come with the proper mind-set and with the energy that we had the other night and have had the last several games,” Blatt said.

James thought the energy was fine.

“I didn’t feel it,” James said. “It’s easy to say that after the fact.”

Blatt’s and James’ postgame news conferences have a Jerry Jones-Jason Garrett feel to them. Sure, you want to hear from the coach. But what really matters is what the guy with the power has to say.

In Dallas, that’s Jones.

In Cleveland, that’s James.

Two nights after their loss to the Nuggets, the Cavaliers played the Spurs close but lost. James’ assessment? “This is a game I’m happy about,” he said. “I hate to lose, but I’m happy about the progress we made tonight.”

Blatt’s thoughts were barely published.

The Cleveland situation is as much about trust as it is anything else. James, out for a while because of injuries, has to trust that Blatt knows what he’s doing enough to let him coach without constantly second-guessing his moves. James has to allow himself to be coached, without strings attached.

Earning the respect of James can be difficult. He is the best player on the planet. He also is one of the most cerebral players on the planet. He doesn’t blindly follow if he believes there is a better way.

In Miami, Erik Spoelstra lived it. He was a young coach who inherited a superstar, and the superstar needed to be shown that the young coach knew how to coach. But when public comments started to get nasty and the vultures started to circle in anticipation of the Heat making a coaching change, Spoelstra had an ace in the hole: Pat Riley.

Riley was the type of executive not even James could question. Riley’s résumé was too good. Too many wins. Too many titles. Too much respect across the league. James respected Riley, and Riley empowered Spoelstra. He made sure that James understood he needed to allow himself to be coached, without push back. Spoelstra made it stand up, leading Miami to four trips to the NBA Finals and two championships.

Which brings us back to Blatt. His general manager with the Cavs, David Griffin, was right to squash rumors that the coach’s job was in danger. But what he can’t do is make LeBron listen anymore than he already has.

James has won a ton in the NBA, but even he knows there’s more than one way to get to, and win, a championship. The Spurs reminded him and everyone else of that last season.

If the Cavaliers are to get there, James and Blatt are going to have to see things through the same eyes.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost

Spotlight on …

Arron Afflalo, shooting guard, Nuggets

When: Arron Afflalo’s season has built up to this: a week full of stellar contributions when his team has needed it the most, which has earned the Nuggets shooting guard The Denver Post’s player of the week honor.

What’s up: In three games, all Nuggets victories, Afflalo averaged 24.0 points, 3.3 rebounds and 2.8 assists. He shot 54.8 percent from the field, 43.8 percent from 3-point range and 87.5 percent from the free-throw line. Afflalo was plus-14.8 during the span, which was tied for the third-best plus-minus in the NBA among players who averaged 30 or more minutes per game.

Background: Afflalo has worked his way up to this point, his best week of games back in a Nuggets uniform. As recently as a few days ago, he said he was still learning the team and his teammates and continuing to get comfortable within the system. This was a breakout week for him in his first year back with Denver after an offseason trade.

Dempsey’s take: Afflalo did the bulk of his damage of shooting from midrange, which is normal for him. He is good at getting past the first level of defense and then taking the best shot available. The offense has also tilted to free him up more often with screens. He has also become more comfortable with his post-up opportunities, and that has probably been the biggest reason for his offensive surge, because it’s such a significant part of his game.