Dearborn is a terrific city and we need to keep it that way. With a healthy business community, global manufacturing, two downtowns and a university, where else will you find a more productive tax base?Of the 20 cities in Michigan with a population of 70,000 or more, Dearborn levies the highest property tax rate with the exception of Detroit and Warren, according to the 2014 Michigan Treasury Property Tax Report.The high taxes were always justified based on the value we received. We've always had outstanding Police and Fire departments, good services and ample recreation.Times are changing.Five years ago the Building and Safety Department was reduced and reorganized with divisions split among residential services, public works and economic development. According to the mayor's 2016 proposed budget personnel report, public works employed 87 full-time employees in 2010. In 2014, that number was 57. These cuts are beginning to affect our neighborhoods and some services. This is no fault of our city workers. How they keep our city as nice as they do is beyond me.I've gotten to know quite a few of these folks and some tell me they're underpaid and underappreciated. Many are limited to working less than 30 hours per week, as to avoid receiving benefits under the Affordable Care Act. One city worker I know hasn't seen a raise in 10 years. The 2014 Dearborn financial report affirms this notion. The report says pay rates for (non- police or fire) employees increased just 3 percent since 2003. Regardless of reductions, I've always had professional and courteous interactions with those behind the counter, out in the field and at the supervisory level. You won't find a more dedicated staff.The problem is we don't have enough of them. Many of these talented folks have left for more lucrative positions with better pay and benefits. Communities like Monroe, Allen Park and Canton have recognized their talent and hired them to spearhead their building and safety departments. These communities also recruited our counter staff and plans examiner. Many of these positions are left vacant.Why chase away top talent? To privatize? Critical building and safety operations shouldn't be trusted to individuals with no vested interest in our city. Look what happened with privatizing street sweeping.This is a decisive time in our history.Dearborn has approximately 33,000 houses. More than 5,500 are rental units, twice as many as in 2009. These are only units "registered" with the city, the actual number is likely much higher. To paint a more accurate picture, one in every six homes in Dearborn is now a rental. It doesn't take a Ph.D. in public administration to recognize wherever rental units increase, property values decrease. Why aren't there any inspectors driving my neighborhood? An official from residential services confirmed that due to lack of manpower, they cut a violator's grass only when you or I call to complain. A source from public works says: "Businesses are supposed to be inspected annually, but we are lucky if they are inspected every three years." The city financial report states 28,231 commercial inspections were conducted in 2005. Just 12,250 were done in 2014. Fortunately the overwhelming majority of Dearbornites take great pride in their homes and businesses. Continued...

Today, Dearborn is in the midst of an economic resurgence. We need to hire more inspectors and officials than ever before.I know home values and city revenue diminished, but don't tell me there's no money. We aren't buying it anymore. Diminishing revenue wasn't an issue in 2011, when seven appointed department chiefs saw lucrative raises. It wasn't an issue for the mayor when he accepted a 10 percent raise this year. And money wasn't an issue for City Council when they voted 6 to 1 (Tafelski voted nay) to spend millions on a state-of-the-art Administration Center. Come to think of it, the only time money seems to be an issue is when it's time to hire more workers or maintain a swimming pool. Let me be clear, I'm not suggesting the mayor, his appointees and agendas aren't deserving. I'm suggesting we need to take care of our workers and neighborhoods first.Make no mistake, our city makes a fortune off us taxpayers; more than any other city in Michigan besides two. Dearborn generated $85 million from property taxes alone in 2014. Let's put that into perspective. Livonia (population nearly identical to Dearborn) earned $55 million. They also operate five city pools and employ 187 police officers. By the way, their mayor makes about $40,000 per year less than ours.The bottom line is we need to take care of our city employees so they will take care of our city, no excuses. To all of the dedicated city workers, we thank you.Regan Ford is the president of the Southwest Outer Drive Neighborhood Association and sits on the board of the Dearborn Rotary. Contact him with questions or comments at rford@vividclean.com

Dearborn is a terrific city and we need to keep it that way. With a healthy business community, global manufacturing, two downtowns and a university, where else will you find a more productive tax base?Of the 20 cities in Michigan with a population of 70,000 or more, Dearborn levies the highest property tax rate with the exception of Detroit and Warren, according to the 2014 Michigan Treasury Property Tax Report.The high taxes were always justified based on the value we received. We've always had outstanding Police and Fire departments, good services and ample recreation.Times are changing.Five years ago the Building and Safety Department was reduced and reorganized with divisions split among residential services, public works and economic development. According to the mayor's 2016 proposed budget personnel report, public works employed 87 full-time employees in 2010. In 2014, that number was 57. These cuts are beginning to affect our neighborhoods and some services. This is no fault of our city workers. How they keep our city as nice as they do is beyond me.I've gotten to know quite a few of these folks and some tell me they're underpaid and underappreciated. Many are limited to working less than 30 hours per week, as to avoid receiving benefits under the Affordable Care Act. One city worker I know hasn't seen a raise in 10 years. The 2014 Dearborn financial report affirms this notion. The report says pay rates for (non- police or fire) employees increased just 3 percent since 2003. Regardless of reductions, I've always had professional and courteous interactions with those behind the counter, out in the field and at the supervisory level. You won't find a more dedicated staff.The problem is we don't have enough of them. Many of these talented folks have left for more lucrative positions with better pay and benefits. Communities like Monroe, Allen Park and Canton have recognized their talent and hired them to spearhead their building and safety departments. These communities also recruited our counter staff and plans examiner. Many of these positions are left vacant.Why chase away top talent? To privatize? Critical building and safety operations shouldn't be trusted to individuals with no vested interest in our city. Look what happened with privatizing street sweeping.This is a decisive time in our history.Dearborn has approximately 33,000 houses. More than 5,500 are rental units, twice as many as in 2009. These are only units "registered" with the city, the actual number is likely much higher. To paint a more accurate picture, one in every six homes in Dearborn is now a rental. It doesn't take a Ph.D. in public administration to recognize wherever rental units increase, property values decrease. Why aren't there any inspectors driving my neighborhood? An official from residential services confirmed that due to lack of manpower, they cut a violator's grass only when you or I call to complain. A source from public works says: "Businesses are supposed to be inspected annually, but we are lucky if they are inspected every three years." The city financial report states 28,231 commercial inspections were conducted in 2005. Just 12,250 were done in 2014. Fortunately the overwhelming majority of Dearbornites take great pride in their homes and businesses.Today, Dearborn is in the midst of an economic resurgence. We need to hire more inspectors and officials than ever before.I know home values and city revenue diminished, but don't tell me there's no money. We aren't buying it anymore. Diminishing revenue wasn't an issue in 2011, when seven appointed department chiefs saw lucrative raises. It wasn't an issue for the mayor when he accepted a 10 percent raise this year. And money wasn't an issue for City Council when they voted 6 to 1 (Tafelski voted nay) to spend millions on a state-of-the-art Administration Center. Come to think of it, the only time money seems to be an issue is when it's time to hire more workers or maintain a swimming pool. Let me be clear, I'm not suggesting the mayor, his appointees and agendas aren't deserving. I'm suggesting we need to take care of our workers and neighborhoods first.Make no mistake, our city makes a fortune off us taxpayers; more than any other city in Michigan besides two. Dearborn generated $85 million from property taxes alone in 2014. Let's put that into perspective. Livonia (population nearly identical to Dearborn) earned $55 million. They also operate five city pools and employ 187 police officers. By the way, their mayor makes about $40,000 per year less than ours.The bottom line is we need to take care of our city employees so they will take care of our city, no excuses. To all of the dedicated city workers, we thank you.Regan Ford is the president of the Southwest Outer Drive Neighborhood Association and sits on the board of the Dearborn Rotary. Contact him with questions or comments at rford@vividclean.com