As the United States population ages and healthcare costs skyrocket, many national agencies have called for quality improvements in healthcare.Our current healthcare system responds rapidly to acute illness or injury, but it lacks the ability to routinely incorporate preventive care for chronic illness management. For patients affected by a chronic disease, this reactive method of providing care is no longer acceptable in terms of disease management, quality of life (QOL) and financial burden. The method chosen to deliver healthcare can impact organizational design and improve patient quality of life.

Nurse practitioners earnestly seek methods to improve patient outcomes. The manner chosen to deliver healthcare provides a foundation for introducing or enhancing patient self-management support (SMS). The purpose of SMS is to aid and inspire patients to become informed about their health conditions and take an active role in their treatment.3 Working as a collaborative partnership, the NP and chronically ill patient work toward achieving common goals of improved patient outcomes and health-related QOL. While the nurse practitioner provides oversight about the chronic illness, the motivated patient demonstrates evolving self-management skills that produce positive outcomes. As a partner in the relationship, the nurse practitioner has the enormous responsibility of choosing a practice model that will encourage patients to become more involved in their own care.

Delivery System Redesign

Currently, most primary care practices use the medical model for patient care. In a mere 15 minutes, the patient must present his or her medical concerns and the provider must identify and treat the illness. This leaves little time for preventive education and health maintenance.

This delivery method has many flaws. Providers are often rushed, do not utilize current guidelines for treatment, and fail to offer education about how to self-manage the chronic disease. The nation's healthcare system currently lacks the ability to incorporate routine preventive care for the management of chronic illness.4

The Affordable Care Act calls for the testing of new healthcare delivery system designs that improve patient QOL and reduce healthcare costs. The Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality states that healthcare system redesign involves "making systematic changes to primary care practices and health systems to improve the quality, efficiency and effectiveness of patient care." Frameworks such as the Chronic Care Model (CCM) and the Patient-Centered Medical Home (PCMH) can be used independently or together to reorganize care delivery to improve patient outcomes.1

SEE ALSO: Role Expansion

The CCM and the PCMH have many similar elements, but the PCMH may not be as widely applicable as the CCM. A 2011 study reported a lack of evidence about whether the medical home model makes sense for all types of patients or just a subset of patients, such as high-risk patients with multiple chronic diseases. Chronically ill patients may require longer appointment times and the care of many specialty providers. These circumstances can affect productivity and make the coordination of care time consuming, producing subpar reimbursement (compared to time invested) for the primary care provider.5

The Chronic Care Model

The CCM is a framework designed to take a proactive approach to the health management of chronically ill patients. The model promotes interaction between an informed, motivated patient and a highly skilled and resourceful provider. The CCM is an evidence-based, multifaceted recommendation package that seeks to improve care in categories that are viewed as determinants for adequate care of chronic conditions.4,6,7 The CCM identifies the following six categories:

1. Healthcare organization: This is a healthcare practice dedicated to implementation of the CCM, in an effort to improve chronic care and transform from typical reactive healthcare to a more proactive, comprehensive care system.8 The effective healthcare organization strives to exemplify care coordination, communication and data sharing.

2. Delivery system design: An efficient design should provide individual instruction based on the patient's educational level and cultural background; it invites the use of an interdisciplinary team for case management to promote patient engagement.9,10 The multidisciplinary team utilizes health coaches, evidenced-based protocols and community support services.

3. Decision support: This involves the sharing of guidelines with patients and has demonstrated an increased participation in decision making, improved self-care management skills and reduced hospital readmissions. Guidelines should be presented to each patient based on the patient's educational level, cultural background and preferences for care.11,12

4. Clinical information systems: This improves the delivery of patient care by providing opportunities for safe coordination of healthcare between collaborating entities, the development of population-specific registries, and the collection of quality improvement information.8,11,13

5. Community: The nurse practitioner may utilize the CCM's component of community in the plan of treatment. The NP's knowledge of local, state and national resources can be shared with patients, helping to reduce gaps in care that often occur in chronic care management. Resources may include community-based support groups, community clinics, prevention programs and/or online resources.14,15

6. Self-management support (SMS): This is the empowerment of a chronically ill patient to make improved health-related choices. SMS requires a cooperative and shared relationship between the patient and his or her provider, resulting in an approach that will help the patient establish control and mastery over the illness. Patients involved in self-care management are actively engaged in managing the daily challenges of their chronic disease and are the change agent in a healthcare system that is unresponsive to the needs of this growing population.12 A well-informed, engaged patient will demonstrate improved self-care management skills.6,11,14

Implications for Practice

Incorporating a new practice model can augment self-care management support and enhance patient QOL while reducing healthcare costs. Implementing all six components of the CCM may not seem feasible for smaller practices, but utilizing one or two components of the CCM can be effective in building self-care management support for patients with chronic disease.14,16,17 The utilization of the CCM elements of decision support, community and self-management support would result in little cost to the organization and improve the provider's delivery of care. Often, identifying simple changes in healthcare delivery can improve office communication, coordination of care and QOL for chronically ill patients.

NPs can provide motivation for change that can influence healthcare delivery design. An NP can facilitate discussions about current policies, guidelines and patient educational needs in an effort to bring about the acceptance of necessary organizational changes. Choosing and implementing a healthcare model, such as the CCM, promotes a partnership between a well-informed provider and an actively engaged patient and is a priority for enhanced self-care management support.

References

1. Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. Health Care/System Redesign. http://www.ahrq.gov/professionals/prevention-chronic-care/improve/system/index.html

2. National Association of Insurance Commissioners. Patients Protection and Affordable Care Act Section-by-Section Analysis. http://www.naic.org/documents/index_health_reform_general_ppaca_section_by_section_chart.pdf

3. Institute for Healthcare Improvement. Partnering in Self-Management Support: A Toolkit for Clinicians. http://www.ihi.org/resources/pages/tools/selfmanagementtoolkitforclinicians.aspx

4. Riley T, Janosky J. Moving beyond the medical model to enhance primary care. Popul H Manag. 2012;15(4):189-193.

5. Berenson RA. Will the Patient-Centered Medical Home Transform the Delivery of Health Care? http://www.rwjf.org/en/library/research/2011/08/will-the-patient-centered-medical-home-transform-the-delivery-of.html

6. Wagner EH, Austin BT. Improving chronic illness care: translating evidence into action. Health Aff. 2001;20(6):64-78.

7. Markun S, Brandle E. The concordance of care for age related macular degeneration with the Chronic Care Model: a multi-centered cross-sectional study. PLoS One. 2014;9(10):e108536.

8. Dancer S, Courtney M. Improving diabetes patient outcomes: framing research into the chronic care model. J Am Acad Nurs Pract. 2010;22(11):580-585.

9. Allen K, et al. The after discharge care management of low income frail elderly (AD-LIFE) randomized trial: theoretical framework and study design. Popul Health Manag. 2011;14(3):137-142.

10. O'Toole R, et al. Applying the chronic care model to homeless veterans: effect of a population approach to primary care on utilization and clinical outcomes. Am J Pub Health. 2010;100(12):2493-2499.

11. Koh H, Brach C. A proposed 'health literate care model' would constitute a systems approach to improving patients' engagement in care. Health Aff. 2013;32(2):357-367.

12. Stellefson M, Dipnarine K. The chronic care model and diabetes management in US primary care settings: a systematic review. Prev Chronic Dis. 2013;10:E26.

13. Solomon M. Information Technology to Support Self-Management of Chronic Care. Dis Man Health Outcomes. 2008;16(6):391-401.

14. Chen E, Bodenheimer T. Applying the Chronic Care Model to the Management of Obesity. Obesity Manag. 2008;4(5):227-231.

15. Schauer G, et al. Applying the Chronic Care Model to an employee benefits program. J Occup Environ Med. 2013;55(12):1456-1462.

16. Jacobson D, Gance-Cleveland B. A systematic review of primary healthcare provider education and training using the Chronic Care Model for childhood obesity. Obes Rev. 2011;12(5):e244-e256.

17. Adams S, Smith P. Systematic review of the chronic care model in chronic obstructive pulmonary disease prevention and management. Arch Intern Med. 2007;167(6):551-561.

Rebecca J. Simmons practices at Athens Neighborhood Clinic in Athens, Ga.