Buy Photo Clark Memorial Hospital CEO Martin Padgett speaks before the board of commissioners in Jeffersonville, Indiana on a possible merger with Norton Hospital. October 9, 2014 (Photo: LUSTER, By Bill Luster , Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

Clark County leaders raised concerns Thursday about potentially losing a voice on the board that oversees Clark Memorial Hospital and county taxpayers remaining on the hook for more than $50 million in hospital bond debt if county leaders sign over the hospital to Norton Healthcare.

Clark Memorial officials have said the merger is needed as its patient revenues have declined amid increased challenges for independent community hospitals due to healthcare reform, economic uncertainty and increased competition from neighboring providers.

Hospital officials expect a final vote during a joint meeting next month, though it could depend on how quickly details can be ironed out between all involved.

On Thursday, Clark Memorial CEO Martin Padgett fielded questions from Clark County commissioners and others, including how the new board would be formed.

“Clark County’s still on the hook for the $50 million bond even though Norton says they’ll pay the payments on it?” asked Commissioner Rick Stephenson.

“Correct,” answered Padgett.

Stephenson said the problem could be compounded by the possibility of the county losing representation on the hospital board.

Padgett assured Stephenson and the two other commissioners that the county would have representation because existing board members will be invited to join the new board. And a provision of the proposed contract would require Clark County representation, he said.

Clark Memorial would be separate 501(c)3 organization — Norton Indiana LLC, doing business as Norton Clark Memorial — with a separate board formed initially from the existing seven-member hospital board. As terms expire, new board members would be appointed by Norton and the existing board, who self-appoint through a nominating committee, Padgett said.

The hospital bond’s first call is 2019, Padgett said.

Stephenson said he doesn’t doubt the conviction of Norton but he feels the county’s 110,000 residents need a voice in hospital matters to avoid the possibility of it falling on taxpayers’ backs in the future if Norton couldn’t make the bond payment and hospital assets didn’t yield enough.

“Don’t get me wrong, I think it’s a great partnership. I think merger will be fine,” Stephenson said, but it will depend on the contract details. “And that’s one very important detail.”

Clark County Councilman Kevin Vissing also raised a concern of one of his constituents, who told him Clark Memorial hurt itself financially several years ago through buying out several doctors.

“We did not buy any doctors,” Padgett said. “That’s a common mistake that the public has. We do not purchase physicians, purchase their goodwill, those types of things. We employ doctors, but those doctors were independent business men and women prior.”

Padgett said hiring physicians is a common “business strategy” that it and other area hospitals have used, noting about 80 percent of area physicians are employed by someone.

Commissioner John Perkins said after the meeting Thursday he’s not voting to approve the merger until either officials are able to make board appointments or Clark County taxpayers are relieved from the debt.

Perkins pointed out that Clark Memorial would be in much better financial shape if Indiana leaders expanded Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act rather than seeking a waiver to expand its Healthy Indiana Plan.

Clark Memorial has a 241-bed acute care facility located on a 22 acres in Jeffersonville, as well as two medical office buildings and an outpatient surgery center. Clark Memorial also owns an urgent care and diagnostic imaging center eight miles north of the hospital and manages physician offices through the Clark Physician Group.

Clark Memorial has about 1,600 employees, 55 employed providers and more than 200 medical staff members who treat nearly 82,000 patients each year.

The commissioners approved hiring the law firm Ice Miller LLC to help county attorneys negotiate the asset transfer agreement by the hospital board, Clark County commissioners and the Clark County Council.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at (812) 949-4026 or on Twitter @c_write.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1xyEKkt