PR Web

Clearwater, Florida (PRWEB) July 06, 2014

Dolman Law Group Partner Christian Myer, Esq. , has been named, for the second year in a row, a 2014 Florida Super Lawyer by Super Lawyers Magazine .

Super Lawyers Magazine selects Super Lawyers from a national pool of lawyers nominated by their peers in practice. The nominees are then subject to research from an independent panel of lawyers, along with a formal evaluation from their peers. They are scored on 12 areas of peer recognition and personal achievements, with those in the top five percent of scores earning the title of Super Lawyer.

Mr. Myer is a personal injury lawyer who has earned himself a reputation of working tenaciously for his clients. After receiving his Bachelor's Degree from the University of South Florida , Mr. Myer went on to attend Stetson University College of Law . During his tenure there, Mr. Myer interned for the Office of the Public Defender for the 6th Judicial Circuit of Florida. Here, Mr. Myer began to show his outstanding potential as a lawyer. He conducted the most jury trials by an intern, winning all of them.

Once admitted to the Florida Bar , Mr. Myer continued to work for the Office of the Public Defender for the 6th Judicial Circuit of Florida, where he continued his success in the courtroom. In 2006, he founded his own criminal defense practice. Now, Mr. Myer focuses on advocating for individuals who have suffered injuries from accidents and wrongful death suits for the Dolman Law Group . Mr. Myer is also an avid boxing enthusiast and active in the local boxing community, owning a non-profit boxing gym in the Tampa Bay area. Further, he is an Adjunct Professor of Trial Advocacy at Stetson College of Law .

Dolman Law Group is personal injury and civil trial law firm based in Clearwater, Florida . They fight for those injured as a result of an accident by either a negligent individual or corporation. Dolman Law Group strives to show their clients the proven track record: personal attention from the attorneys, legal work handled only by members of the Florida Bar , and only working for the consumer, never an insurance company. All clients are able to reach the attorney handling their case on their personal cell phone.

Dolman Law Group

800 North Belcher Road

Clearwater, FL 37765

727-451-6900

Read the full story at http://www.prweb.com/releases/2014/07/prweb11997714.htm