A string of recent studies have revealed that radiation from cellphone use leads to significant sperm damage. The Cleveland Clinic states: “Use of cell phones by men is associated with a decrease in semen quality. The decrease in sperm count, motility, viability, and normal morphology is related to the duration of exposure to cell phones.” And RadiaShield Men’s Boxer Briefs are here to save male sperm count by protecting testicles from the radiation given off by cellphones and laptops.

French researchers recently revealed that sperm count among the average 35-year-old man has dropped from 73.6 million per milliliter in 1989 to 49.9 million per milliliter in December 2005. It’s no coincidence that this sudden drop in sperm concentration has occurred following the advent of regular cellphone use. Further research performed by the Cleveland Clinic in 2008 suggested that a man only needs to be 2.5 centimeters away for cellphones to cause damage to sperm count.

"We believe that these devices are used because we consider them very safe, but it could cause harmful effects due to the proximity of the phones and the exposure that they are causing to the gonads," said lead researcher Ashok Agarwal, the director of the Center for Reproductive Medicine. "Perhaps the cell phone radiation is able to affect the gonads through a thermal effect, thereby increasing the temperature of the testes and causing damaging effects in the sperm cell."

A recent study conducted by the Environmental Working Group (EWG) analyzed 10 studies testing changes in sperm after being exposed to cellphone radiation. Carrying a phone in a hip pocket or on a belt rather than any other part of the body led men to have 11 percent fewer mobile sperm. Men who carried their cellphone on their belt and used it regularly throughout a five-day time period lost 19 percent of their highly mobile sperm. Surprisingly, just talking on their cellphone for more than an hour a day led to a 17 percent reduction of highly mobile sperm.

The technology found in RadiaShield’s boxer-briefs reduces radiation exposure to male reproductive organs from the front and the back. FCC-certified independent laboratory testing found that RadiaShield boxer-brief protects male sperm with 99.9 percent Shielding Effectiveness. Belly Armor will release this light-weight, breathable undergarment on Oct. 15 for $49.