Gov. Steve Beshear (Photo: AP )

The state will retain outside consultants to study the costs and benefits of the Affordable Care Act after its first year of operation.

At a press conference in the Capitol where he announced improvements in Kentucky's health-care exchange, called kynect, when open enrollment resumes Saturday, Gov. Steve Beshear said the study will revisit projections made a year ago that convinced him to fully embrace The Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare.

Part of that study, he said, will estimate the added cost to Kentucky taxpayers beginning in 2017 of the significant expansion of Medicaid rolls that has occurred under Obamacare.

"Now that we are coming up on the end of a year's worth of data, we're going to ask outside sources to again take a look at this and evaluate where we are," Beshear said.

The governor said that study, which he expects to be finished in early 2015, will speak for itself. But he cited last year's report of a strong economic impact due to the flood of additional federal dollars into Kentucky's health care system offsetting additional costs to Kentucky. "I was confident after that initial report that we could certainly afford down the road over the next eight years to expand Medicaid and stay within our budget. I'm still confident," Beshear said.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government is paying 100 percent of the cost to cover people eligible under the expanded Medicaid rules for three years. But states must pay for a small percentage beginning in 2017 that will grow to 10 percent in 2020 and years after.

Beshear said he had no estimate of that future added cost to the state budget. But Republican state legislators have warned that it will be substantial and will crowd out state spending for other programs.

The governor said uninsured Kentuckians need to visit https://kynect.ky.gov and sign up. But he said those who signed up for private insurance in the past year should also visit the website.

"If you do nothing, you will miss out on possibly finding a better plan because increased competition has widened the options," Beshear said. "Many of the costs have changed as well. Some premiums have gone up, some have gone down."

More on ACA: Obamacare changes for 2015

Related: Kentucky's neighbors hope for smoother Obamacare

Kentuckians enrolled in Medicaid do not need to go back to kynect, he said, unless their income has changed or they want a different managed care organization.

Kentucky has created a new, free, mobile app for kynect this year, improved the front page of the website to let visitors determine any subsidy before they apply, and increased from 185 to 400 the number of representatives at the kynect call centers, and increased from 1,400 to 2,800 the number of insurance agents selling plans.

Reporter Tom Loftus can be reached at (502) 875-5136. Follow him on Twitter at @TomLoftus_CJ.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ugFNGl