With Fox News and CNN using polls to determine inclusion in the early Republican debates, pollsters are taking on a significant role in the primary process — especially in the eyes of third-tier candidates vying for inclusion in the top 10. Exclusion from the first debates is widely seen as the death-knell for any GOP hopeful.

Fox News, the sponsor of the first Republican debate, on Aug. 6, will average the five most recent approved national polls to determine which 10 candidates appear on stage. (Fox has not specified exactly which polls it will consider.) CNN, the sponsor of the second GOP debate, on Sept. 16, will do the same with all approved polls released between July 16 and Sept. 10, but will invite the remaining candidates to debate in a separate segment. (CNN has specified the polls that it will use.)

But as Time's Zeke Miller reports, polls could be an imperfect tool in such a populated field:

[P]ollsters warn that the current methodology is ill-equipped to accurately measure such a sprawling field of potential candidates. The difference between the 9th and 13th place finishers in polls, where several candidates get less support than the margin of error, can be arbitrary. Candidates, meanwhile, have begun to complain that national polls mainly measure name identification, and national televised media exposure, ignoring the crucial role that early primary and caucus states play in the selection of the nominee.

“I think it’s strange that they aren’t taking early state polls, since that’s where candidates are placing their resources,” said an aide to one Republican candidate who does not yet qualify for the first debate. “In terms of the [Republican National Committee], they wanted to have this process, but I think it’s funny that they didn’t want the media picking candidates anymore except they are allowing media companies to do exactly that.”

“You can’t use polls to make very fine distinctions among candidates—such as who is in 10th place vs. 11th place,” says John Sides, a George Washington University Professor and co-founder of the popular political science blog Monkey Cage. “Even an average of several polls will have enough underlying uncertainty that you won’t be able to clearly distinguish who should be in and out.”