Kathryn Tomaino/Special to the Town Crier

The National Law Journal’s Marcia Coyle offers insight on the workings of the U.S. Supreme Court at a recent Morning Forum presentation. Coyle has covered the court for the past 28 years.

Marcia Coyle, chief Washington correspondent for the National Law Journal, discussed “The Impact of Recent Supreme Court Decisions” at the Morning Forum of Los Altos Nov. 17.

Coyle has covered the U.S. Supreme Court for 28 years. She regularly appears on “The PBS News Hour” and has received many awards for her work, including the George Polk Award, the Investigative Reporters and Editors Award and the Scripps Howard Foundation Award.

“The Supreme Court is an institution of government that despite deep ideological differences never shuts down and gets the job done on time,” she said. “Then, it comes back the next year to do it all over again. Obviously, this is not the United States Congress.”

Coyle’s most recent book, “The Roberts Court: The Struggle for the Constitution,” provides candid insight into the court and its nine justices.

Chief Justice John Roberts and justices Antonin Scalia, Anthony Kennedy, Clarence Thomas and Samuel Alito make up the conservative majority, while justices Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Stephen Breyer, Sonia Sotomayor and Elena Kagan represent the liberal minority.

One justice said the high court should be named after the president who appointed the most recent justice rather than after the chief justice.

“This would make this court ‘The Obama Court,’” Coyle said. “This would surprise the president, because even though there have been victories for the president in upholding major parts of the Affordable Care Act and in legalizing gay marriage, there have been serious defeats in contraception health insurance coverage for women, campaign finance, union rights, the environment and voting rights.”

Ideological lines

The media focus on the Supreme Court’s cases of major significance and high drama, which often result in 5-4 decisions.

While the court routinely splits along ideological lines, the last term proved that the voting blocs are not always monolithic.

Each justice would deny practicing politics, according to Coyle. Indeed, many times the court found consensus – for example, in cases concerning social media, free speech, employment discrimination and religious freedom in prisons.

Coyle said nearly all significant questions in the U.S. are ultimately resolved judicially. Since 2005, conservative and libertarian lawyers have made concerted efforts to move cases onto the Supreme Court’s docket because they think that they will have a better chance to change the law than in Congress.

Liberals have also used the Supreme Court to change the law. The process, she said, is called “cause litigation.”

“The court is facing new challenges in cases about law and technology and its implications for personal privacy, and in cases concerning international relations and the roles of Congress, the president and the Court,” she said. “These cases require knowledge of other countries’ laws and customs as well as our own. There are no easy cases in the Supreme Court. The most insignificant case can be the toughest.”

The Morning Forum of Los Altos is a members-only lecture series that meets at Los Altos United Methodist Church, 655 Magdalena Avenue. New members are invited to join. For more information, visit morningforum.org.