Infogix Logo Infogix's comprehensive package of automated rules and reports will provide visibility and financial insight to the health plan, long before the final reconciliation and submission process each April.

SelectHealth, a not-for-profit health insurance organization serving clients in Utah and Idaho, has selected Infogix, a leader in helping companies provide end-to-end data analysis across the enterprise, to manage Cost Sharing Reduction (CSR)—a provision of the Affordable Care Act (ACA). Infogix will provide a software solution that includes claims re-calculation, shadow accumulator calculation, monthly financial reporting, and an annual CSR report.

The CSR provision introduces a process to subsidize member out-of-pocket costs depending on income for variant plans. SelectHealth reconciles these payments with the actual cost incurred based on their members’ claims experience using the standard methodology.

“Finding an organization that was capable of correctly processing and reporting on CSR claims was imperative during our search for a data analysis partner. We needed a solution to assist us in preparation for an upcoming CMS reconciliation audit,” said Bob Heitman, chief actuary for SelectHealth. “We’re excited to partner with a strong organization like Infogix who we believe will understand and meet our needs.”

“We’re thrilled that SelectHealth has partnered with Infogix on our CSR solution to address the ACA regulation,” said Paul Skordilis, executive vice president at Infogix. “We believe our comprehensive package of automated rules and reports will provide visibility and financial insight to the health plan, long before the final reconciliation and submission process each April.”

To learn more about Infogix, visit http://www.infogix.com.

About Infogix, Inc.

Infogix helps solve business challenges by analyzing data as it moves through complex business environments to improve the customer experience, corporate profitability and operational efficiency. The Infogix Enterprise Data Platform improves data quality, ensures effective transaction monitoring, provides balancing and reconciliation, identifies and predicts fraud and customer behavior. Infogix provides best-in-class solutions that seamlessly integrate into operations and allow clients to manage highly complex, data intensive business environments. By analyzing, processing and monitoring 100 percent of data in real-time or in batch, Infogix is able to provide proactive and actionable intelligence to manage operational workflows and steps. To learn more visit http://www.infogix.com or @Infogix.

About SelectHealth

SelectHealth is a not-for-profit health insurance organization serving more than 830,000 members in Utah and southern Idaho. As a subsidiary of Intermountain Healthcare, SelectHealth is committed to helping people live the healthiest lives possible. In addition to medical plans, SelectHealth offers dental, vision, pharmacy benefit management, and life and disability coverage to its members. SelectHealth plans are available for Medicare and Medicaid enrollees. SelectHealth is also a carrier for the state’s Children’s Health Insurance Program. For details, visit selecthealth.org.