On LBJ Day remember opportunity



















































Photo: GEORGE TAMES /New York Times Image 1 of / 14 Caption Close Image 1 of 14



Click through to gallery to see photos of LBJ's visit to San Antonio less than a week before he died. less This 1966 file photo shows President Lyndon B. Johnson in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington. His legislative milestones in helping others are being chipped away by conservative policymakers.



Click ... more This 1966 file photo shows President Lyndon B. Johnson in the Oval Office of the White House in Washington. His legislative milestones in helping others are being chipped away by conservative policymakers. Photo: GEORGE TAMES /New York Times Image 2 of 14 Lyndon Johnson visited San Antonio on January 16, 1973, less than a week before he died. Lyndon Johnson visited San Antonio on January 16, 1973, less than a week before he died. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 3 of 14 Lyndon Johnson visited San Antonio on January 16, 1973, less than a week before he died. Lyndon Johnson visited San Antonio on January 16, 1973, less than a week before he died. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 4 of 14 The body of former President Lyndon Johnson is placed in an Army ambulance at the San Antonio International Airport January 22, 1973. The body of former President Lyndon Johnson is placed in an Army ambulance at the San Antonio International Airport January 22, 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 5 of 14 The front page of the January 23, 1973 edition of the San Antonio Express announces the death of President Lyndon Johnson. The front page of the January 23, 1973 edition of the San Antonio Express announces the death of President Lyndon Johnson. Photo: Express-News Image 6 of 14 The casket of Lyndon Johnson is carried by an honor guard past Billy Graham and former Texas governor John Connally during services in January 1973. The casket of Lyndon Johnson is carried by an honor guard past Billy Graham and former Texas governor John Connally during services in January 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 7 of 14 Members of the honor guard at Lyndon Johnson's fuenral fold the American flag during burial services in January 1973. Members of the honor guard at Lyndon Johnson's fuenral fold the American flag during burial services in January 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 8 of 14 Lady Bird Johnson is escorted during her husband's funeral service in January 1973. Lady Bird Johnson is escorted during her husband's funeral service in January 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 9 of 14 Family members of Lyndon Johnson attend the President's funeral in January 1973. Front are son-in-law and daughter Charles and Lynda Robb, at the back is Johnson's other daughter Luci Nugent. With them are Johson's grandchildren. less Family members of Lyndon Johnson attend the President's funeral in January 1973. Front are son-in-law and daughter Charles and Lynda Robb, at the back is Johnson's other daughter Luci Nugent. With them are ... more Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 10 of 14 The Rev. Billy Graham greets mourners during the services of President Lyndon Johnson on January 25, 1973. The Rev. Billy Graham greets mourners during the services of President Lyndon Johnson on January 25, 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 11 of 14 Former Texas governor John Connally and singer Anita Bryant at the funeral of President Lyndon Johnson in January 1973. Former Texas governor John Connally and singer Anita Bryant at the funeral of President Lyndon Johnson in January 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 12 of 14 Lydon Johnson's grandchild Lyn Nugent, 5, salutes the casket of the President during sevices in January 25, 1973. Lydon Johnson's grandchild Lyn Nugent, 5, salutes the casket of the President during sevices in January 25, 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 13 of 14 Flowers and wreaths decorate the burial site of President Lyndon Johnson who died January 22, 1973. Flowers and wreaths decorate the burial site of President Lyndon Johnson who died January 22, 1973. Photo: Express-News File Photo Image 14 of 14 On LBJ Day remember opportunity 1 / 14 Back to Gallery

Today, Lyndon Baines Johnson Day, Texas honors a great American with a state holiday.

The irony is that, on the policy front, Texas has for many years been distancing itself from the logic inherent in the 36th president’s signature accomplishments.

In launching the Great Society, historians say native son LBJ had in mind some of what he experienced as a young school teacher to Mexican and Mexican-American youth in Cotulla.

He remembered the deprivation — somewhat alleviated since then — and the cruel peculiarities of life still with us that dictate that children, born with the same gifts, aren’t all blessed with the same level of opportunities. How he must have railed at the notion that the intelligent boys and girls he taught and whose school he led for a time would not reach their potential without meaningful intervention.

His brand of intervention — the Civil Rights Act, the Voting Rights Act, Medicare, the War on Poverty, urban renewal and Great Society efforts generally — has fallen on hard times, victim to the widely accepted contemporary fiction that government is bad and that the more of it there is, the worse it is.

The size and role of government should always spur serious debate. Seemingly gone, however, are some underlying sensibilities that should never be out of fashion. These have to do with help — real solutions, whatever your notions on the size of government — for those genuinely in need.

But a hand up is somehow construed these days as purely a handout in too many important quarters in Texas. The government, when it does help, is thought to enable dependence and dysfunction.

Not so. Johnson pushed for a Medicare amendment to the Social Security Act in 1965, which featured a program that has decreased poverty among seniors — added to a New Deal program that had already put a dent in such poverty.

Pushed and signed by his administration, the Civil Rights Act of 1964 and the Voting Rights Act of 1965 were the two most consequential legislative accomplishments to advance equality under the law in this country since the Emancipation Proclamation and the 14th Amendment.

Yet, in voter ID, redistricting and restrictions on third-party voter registration drives, Texas is seemingly intent on disputing government’s role in even securing this basic fairness.

And the state, with the most uninsured residents in the nation, has rejected all that has been legally allowed in the Affordable Care Act. There has been no expansion of Medicaid in Texas, an option under the ACA. And there has been a refusal to set up a marketplace exchange to connect residents to affordable health care coverage. And the state’s alternative plan? There hasn’t been a serious one.

Johnson assumed the presidency after John F. Kennedy’s assassination in 1963. Vietnam ended his presidency. He declined to run for a second full term. But even with Vietnam, his legacy will mostly be one of government as an enabler of opportunity, not of dependency.

It’s not that any of the programs launched in the Johnson years couldn’t stand improvement. But in this quest for “improvement” over the years, we’ve noticed a preference for helping fewer, with less — need is not enough of a factor with modern policymakers. Education is widely accepted as a valid government role in giving Texas children a shot at opportunity, but meaningful follow-up has been absent.

The state is again in court defending a clearly unconstitutional method for funding schools, seeking court approval once again for doing it on the cheap, with a system that begets have and have-not school districts.

Johnson, were he alive today (he died in 1973) might have recognized some of the inequities in what he called his “Welhausen Mexican School” in some school districts today.

This would sadden him. On this LBJ Day and on all others, it should sadden us all.

Whether you believe the answer is smaller or bigger government, or whether the government has a role at all, the work of providing opportunity is undone. We’re grateful for the difference that LBJ made.