Hal Higdon (Photo: File photo)

Full-time employees at Ozarks Technical Community College will make more money next year.

The OTC Board of Trustees recently voted to give the college's nearly 550 full-time employees a 2 percent pay increase for the 2016-17 year.

"That is what we hoped for," said OTC Chancellor Hal Higdon. "It sends the message that we realize you work hard."

The board also approved a new salary schedule, updated to reflect the raise, showing the pay range available to employees. The pay range starts at $31,254 for new employees with a bachelor's degree or professional certificate to $69,777 for a veteran employee with a doctorate.

OTC was able to provide the 2 percent pay raise — the same amount given this school year — because of generating additional revenue.

"We had to have some increase from the state and we knew we'd do some tuition increase," he said.

Higdon said the pay hike was designed to help the college stay competitive so it can attract and keep employees.

"OTC is a young institution and a smaller institution in a lot of ways. Our employees are incredibly productive," he said. "Your job may be A but you may also do B and C."

Higdon said the 2 percent raise does not extend to a "small cadre of part-time workers" or the 600 adjunct faculty, who are paid based on the number of courses they teach.

He said the pay for those employees will stay the same next year.

"We did raise them a couple years ago," he said.

He said the college also created a new position after the federal health care law was approved a few years ago. Under the law, the college had to limit how much it worked each adjunct faculty member or provide coverage.

"After the Affordable Care Act came in, we had a lot of adjuncts that were going to be disproportionately affected because the new law said they could only teach a certain number of hours. It reduced their hours," he said. "We instituted the position of lecturer and we took long-term adjuncts, let them teach five classes a semester and we gave them health insurance and retirement."

Higdon said the college wants to slowly move key adjunct faculty into lecturer positions. Right now, there are roughly 18.

"We saw that as a pathway to full-time instructor positions," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://sgfnow.co/1SAJfEf