“She Kills Monsters,” which uses the fantasy role-playing game Dungeons & Dragons as a starting point for a story about sisterhood, identity and dealing with all sorts of demons, will return to the ATC Studios for three additional performances.

American Theatre Company debuted its production of Qui Nguyen’s play earlier this month at the company’s new headquarters, ATC Studios.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

The show proved popular enough that the company decided to extend the run — taken a week off so as not to conflict with last week’s Center of the Universe Festival.

In addition to the play, the ATC Studios will also have on display an exhibit of photographs by long-time ATC member Greg Roach.

Performances: 8 p.m. Thursday-Saturday, at ATC Studios, 308 S. Lansing Ave.

Tickets: $10-$15, 918-596-7111. myticketoffice.com

BRADY ARTS DISTRICT

First Friday

The Brady Arts District was filled to the brim last week with all the music and madness of the Center of the Universe Festival.

This weekend, the area returns to relatively calm chaos that is the First Friday Art Crawl.

Art venues, restaurant, bars and shops will be open extended hours Friday to allow visitors to the district to enjoy new exhibits, sample the neighborhood food and drink and enjoy an Oklahoma summer evening.

Living Arts of Tulsa, 307 E. M.B. Brady St., will open two exhibits in conjunction with First Friday. One is “Harmless,” a video installation by University of Arkansas art instructor John Kelley that deconstructs the familiar story structure of film to, Kelley’s words, “create works that live between narrative and abstraction.”

The other exhibit, curated by Living Arts director Steve Liggett, is titled “Chandeliers and Other Luminous Objects.”

Thirty-six Oklahoma artists were challenged to take the basic form of the chandelier — a branched, decorative fixture designed to hold a number of illuminating objects that is suspended from a ceiling — and use it to explore the whole concept of light.

The works included in the exhibit range from ceiling, wall and floor-mounted objects, to pieces that will be incorporated into a dance work by Rachel Bruce Johnson that will be performed during the First Friday event.

“Chandeliers” will be on display through Sept. 25.

Tulsa artist John Bryant, one of the seven artists featured in a recent Tulsa World Weekend cover story, will open his exhibit, “An Exhortation and a Revelation,” at the TAC Gallery Friday.

Of his work, Bryant said, “My artistic practice is driven by two intertwined desires: the need to make things, and the impulse to use the things I have crafted to communicate.

“Art is a chance to get inside someone’s head, for an image I’ve made, or a situation I’ve created, to change someone, to persuade them to see things my way, to see or feel differently than they have before.”

Bryant’s exhibit will be on display through Aug. 30.

Most galleries and shops in the Brady Arts District will be open to 9 p.m. Friday, with the restaurants and bars staying open later.

For more information: thebradyartsdistrict.com

TULSA COMMUNITY COLLEGE

‘The Little Mermaid Jr.’

Tulsa Community College will present its first Tulsa Children’s Summer Theater program, when it performs Disney’s “The Little Mermaid Jr.,” this week at the VanTrease PACE.

Mark Frank, director of TCC’s Theater Department, said, “There is something magical about a child getting to sing and act on stage, and there are so many benefits to help them develop as young adults.

“We let the children explore their creative minds on stage, learn movement and characterization, and have seen terrific results as children flourish and gain self-confidence,” Frank said.

The cast for this stage musical adaptation of the popular animated film is made up of 40 area youngsters ages 5 to 14, selected from auditions.

The show itself is a version designed especially for young performers.

Proceeds from ticket sales will go toward theater scholarships for TCC students.

Performances: 7 p.m. Wednesday-Saturday, 2 p.m. Aug. 3, at the VanTrease PACE, 10300 E. 81st St.