A police officer stands guard outside the new Planned Parenthood clinic in Richfield the morning of Monday, June 30, the day of the clinic’s opening. (Sun Current staff photo by Andrew Wig)

A new Planned Parenthood clinic opened in Richfield Monday, June 30, as protestors again gathered on the sidewalks outside.

Having moved into the Lyndale Station commercial center, located at 66th Street and Lyndale Avenue, the new clinic will offer services including birth control, testing for sexually transmitted diseases and abortion referrals. No abortions are planned to take place in the clinic itself.

As a press conference and ribbon-cutting took place inside, the protestors lined the sidewalks around Lyndale Station. It was at least the second time the protestors, organized through local churches, had converged on the intersection in opposition to the clinic. Their leader, Brian Gibson, president of Pro Life Action Ministries, has promised continued demonstrations.

As the crowd outside held their placards high, clinic supporters touted the virtues of Planned Parenthood. Joining Sarah Stoesz, president and CEO of Planned Parenthood Minnesota, North Dakota and South Dakota, was Rep. Linda Slocum, D-Richfield; Rep. Jean Wagenius, D-Richfield and U.S. Rep. Keith Ellison, D-Minnesota. Angie Schaefbauer, president of the Richfield Chamber of Commerce, was on hand for a ribbon-cutting ceremony.

Stoesz noted that in opposing Planned Parenthood, the demonstrators were also opposing access to birth control and cancer screenings, a point echoed by Ellison.

“An abortion won’t even be performed here,” he said.

The Richfield clinic opened following the closure of a Planned Parenthood location on the 1900 block of Chicago Avenue South in Minneapolis. The closure was due to a mutual agreement between the clinic and the property owner, who intended to convert the site into a “technology center,” according to Jennifer Aulwes, communications director for Planned Parenthood’s regional branch.

That now-shuttered clinic carried the name Centro de Salud, marking its focus on the Latino community. The sign at the Richfield clinic says “Planned Parenthood,” although the emphasis on reaching Latinos is still part of its mission.

Many of the staff from the Minneapolis location have transferred to Richfield, while the clinic’s bilingual emphasis remains.

Richfield was chosen due its growing Latino population and its central location relative to Minneapolis and Bloomington – cities from which the clinic intends to draw, Aulwes said.

Patients at the closed Minneapolis clinic were among Planned Parenthood’s most impoverished, Stoesz said, adding that no one is turned away due to an inability to pay.

“Imagine what life is like for people that don’t speak the language and are unsure of how to access the health care services that they need,” Stoesz said. “We were much more than a doctor’s office to them.”

Slocum, who teaches in Minneapolis, praised Planned Parenthood for its educational efforts.

“I know you’ve been in the schools. I know the good work you do. Heck, you got me through college,” she said in a joking tone.

Although this is its first clinic in Richfield, Planned Parenthood has already been working with Richfield Schools, Stoesz said.

Supreme Court decisions

The clinic opening came the morning of a high-profile United States Supreme Court decision affecting employers, employees and their insurance coverage for contraception. In Sebelius v. Hobby Lobby, the court ruled 5-4 that it violated employers’ religious freedom to require employers to provide contraception coverage as part of the Affordable Care Act.

Speaking at the Planned Parenthood news conference, Stoesz called it a “deeply disappointing and very troubling decision.”

The Richfield opening came less than a week after another high-profile U.S. Supreme Court decision, this one regarding clinic protests. The court ruled that protestors’ rights were violated by a Massachusetts law barring them from 35-foot buffer zones surrounding clinics. While protestors stood on the sidewalks lining Lyndale Station, at least 50 feet from the clinic’s police-patrolled doors, Ellison condemned the court’s decision.

“How does it hurt someone’s First Amendment rights to be 35 feet away so that a young woman who may be nervous and afraid, and maybe even alone, has to run through a crowd of people shouting at her? Incredible,” Ellison lamented, incredulous as the tenor in his voice rose.

Regarding the protestors outside the new clinic: “They are within their rights; it’s fine,” Aulwes said. “We are here to make sure women in the area – and men – get the healthcare that they need.”