The Affordable Care Act is a misnomer.

In Alaska, health insurance companies — the ones not leaving the state or dropping their health insurance arm— predict premiums will increase between 24 and 38 percent on average in the next renewal period.

Advertisement

That’s after double digit increases in the most recent prior year.

Alaskans can’t afford ACC or Obamacare. While the intent of insuring the masses is admirable, it is the middle-class who are being asked to pay for it and at higher prices. Add this to increased costs of utilities, groceries and other life necessities, and the situation is unsustainable for Alaskans. It’s likely to push more people to government assistance, and the middle class toward delayed health care. If a patient has to pay high premiums and a high deductible, that’s enough incentive to put off medical care.

The U.S. Supreme Court in the King v. Burwell case upheld Obama Care subsidies this week. The federal subsidies are secured for eligible Americans in all states.

If Obamacare had been what it was promised to be and do, by now it’s opposition would have had to change its tune or simply not comment. But that isn’t the case.

Sen. Dan Sullivan says “Obamacare has failed to deliver on its promises. ... Premiums for Alaskans are skyrocketing. ... Thousands (of Americans, including Alaskans) have lost their plans and lost their doctors. ... when the so-called ’Cadillac Tax’ kicks in, thousands of Alaskan workers will be paying even more in taxes” — that’s increased premium prices of their own, plus increased taxes to pay for government employees increases. Some governments have insurance plans that the federal government deems of Cadillac quality.

Sen. Lisa Murkowski points out that “only 11 percent of Americans see (Obamacare) as succeeding.” (Eight-nine percent of Americans cannot be wrong.) “In Alaska we continue to see the promise of affordable care move further and further away as our costs skyrocket,” she adds.

Congressman Don Young sums up the delegation’s intent: “I will continue to work with my colleagues to repeal this law and replace it with patient-centered reforms that allow for freedom and flexibility” instead of overregulation.

Obamacare overregulation and costs are hurting Alaskans. In health care, the idea isn’t to hurt, but to heal.

No wonder the act got it wrong in name and effect as well.

-The Ketchikan Daily News (A.K.)