In recent years, the national debate over the Affordable Care Act has drawn the attention of more Americans to our health care system and its problems. But for all the debate over Medicaid and Medi-care, a major area of health care has been largely neglected: dental care.

Many Texans don’t realize how much dental care affects overall health care, or that in many areas of our state it can be difficult to gain access to dental care — especially for those on Medicaid. More than 4 million Texans are enrolled in Medicaid and yet about a third of our counties have no dentists who accept Medicaid patients.

This access problem isn’t just confined to Medicaid. A majority of our counties are designated by the federal government as dental health professional shortage areas, and nearly a third of Texas counties have either no dentists or only one dentist.

When people can’t find a dentist — or can’t afford one — they will seek care in the emergency room, which in practice can only offer them pain relief, not the kind of clinical dental care they need. In 2013, more than 50,000 Texans enrolled in Medicaid visited an ER because of dental problems.

As a result, every year dental-related visits to the emergency room cost Texas taxpayers millions of dollars.

There is, however, a safe, efficient, free-enterprise policy solution to these problems.

In recent years a handful of states have expanded access to dental care by creating a new, licensed midlevel dental provider. Similar to the role a nurse practitioner plays in a dental practice, these midlevel dental providers, called dental therapists or dental hygiene practitioners, work under the supervision of a dentist and are trained and licensed to give routine and restorative care, like filling cavities, administering local anesthesia and extracting primary teeth.

Like nurse practitioners, these midlevel dental providers have a defined scope of practice that matches their education and training. Compared to dentists, dental therapists or practitioners require less education, perform fewer procedures and have lower salaries.

Working with a team of midlevel providers, dentists are able to focus on procedures and treatments only they can perform. The result is a highly efficient and productive dental office that’s able to increase patient volume and hence, improve access to care.

This is what’s happening in Minnesota, where lawmakers in 2009 passed a law creating two levels of dental therapist practice, the dental therapist and the advanced dental therapist, and required these providers primarily to serve underserved patients.

These results should come as no surprise. Alaska, which like Texas has a large rural population with limited access to dental care, has been using midlevel dental providers for 11 years with great success, increasing access to dental care in 81 rural communities across the state for tens of thousands of Alaska native residents.

The trend is catching on. In 2013, Maine passed legislation creating its own version of dental midlevels, and about a dozen states are considering similar measures, including Texas, where a House committee recently heard testimony on HB 1940, a bill that would authorize dental hygiene practitioners.

Contrary to the claims of special interests, such reforms are not experimental or unsafe. Earlier this year the Commission on Dental Accreditation (CODA), the accrediting body of every dental program in the country, approved national accreditation standards for dental therapy education programs.

By removing government barriers and allowing dentists to hire trained and licensed midlevel providers, Texas lawmakers can expand access to dental care without spending taxpayer dollars. If ever there were a free-market, Texas-style policy solution to a persistent health care problem in our state, this is it.

John Davidson is the director of the Center for Health Care Policy at the Texas Public Policy Foundation.