Topics: From the Wires, News

BEIJING (AP) — The indictment of China’s former security boss Zhou Yongkang marks the latest chapter in the Communist Party’s history of purging itself of leaders who’ve fallen out of favor politically or whose alleged crimes appear too serious to go unnoticed.

Zhou is charged with corruption and the leaking of state secrets. As a former member of the party’s all-power Politburo Standing Committee, he would be the highest-ranking Chinese official, sitting or retired, to go before a court since the 1980-1981 treason trial of Mao Zedong’s wife and other members of the “Gang of Four” who persecuted political opponents during the 1966-76 Cultural Revolution.

Many other purged officials have been pushed out without trial, sometimes with fatal consequences.

___

LIU SHAOQI __ Once considered the anointed successor to communist leader Mao Zedong, Liu Shaoqi was swept from power at the beginning of the Cultural Revolution. Formerly upheld as the model of a proper communist, Liu was vilified as a traitor and the party’s chief enemy, leading to his death in detention in 1969 following years of physical mistreatment, medical neglect and constant interrogation. He was later formally vindicated.

LIN BIAO __ Another putative heir-apparent to Mao, former star general Lin Biao died in a plane crash following his last-minute flight from China in 1971 after allegedly plotting a coup against the party leadership. Lin emerged after Liu’s downfall, but fell out of favor amid the constant infighting and swirling intrigues of the Cultural Revolution.

JIANG QING __ Mao’s third wife and leader of the radical Gang of Four that guided the Cultural Revolution, Jiang Qing was arrested after attempting to seize power in the inner-party struggle that followed Mao’s death in 1976. Jiang was accused of persecuting political enemies and causing the suffering of millions, but claimed at her 1980 trial that she had only been doing Mao’s bidding. Sentenced to life in prison, she committed suicide while on medical release in 1991.