Gov. John Kasich, using item-vetoes, in effect rewrote Ohio's new two-year, $71.2 billion budget last Tuesday night. On the upside, Kasich protected his praiseworthy expansion of Medicaid, an expansion made possible by the Affordable Care Act. Budget wording legislators had proposed could have fettered the expansion.

Also in the public interest, Kasich vetoed a bid by lawmakers to force the Ohio Lottery Commission to offer certain games, and to buy and install new gaming machines, at some liquor permit premises. The commission, not legislators, should run the lottery. And legislator-mandated purchase of gaming machines could be a lottery jackpot all its own – for a vendor.

The governor also vetoed a tax break, sought by American Electric Power Co., that could have let electric utilities more easily shift certain tax costs into customers' bills.

About our editorials Editorials express the view of the Editorials express the view of the editorial board of The Plain Dealer and Northeast Ohio Media Group -- the senior leadership and editorial-writing staff. As is traditional, editorials are unsigned and intended to be seen as the voice of the newspaper. • Talk about the topic of this editorial in the comments below. • Send a letter to the editor, which will be considered for print publication. • Email general questions or comments about the editorial board to Elizabeth Sullivan, opinion director for the Northeast Ohio Media Group.

But Kasich was mistaken in vetoing two school-funding items supported by both the Ohio House and Senate that tried to ensure that no school district would be penalized financially in this budget. One of those vetoes targeted longstanding state reimbursement for discontinued tangible personal property taxes. The House and Senate wanted to guarantee that no district would get a smaller TPP reimbursement in the second budget year than in the first.

Kasich vetoed the Year 2 guarantee, even though, at current levels, that reimbursement represents 5 percent to 25 percent of the budgets of the 87 most impacted districts in the state, according to a coalition led by Solon schools treasurer Tim Pickana. Many affected districts are in Northeast Ohio.

Given chronic deficiencies in state funding for public school education in Ohio, Kasich's vetoes were misguided.

All told, Kasich vetoed 44 items in the budget bill, a record for him, but he failed to veto some things he ought to have lined out. Among them: a provision barring journalists' access to what should be public records on concealed-carry gun permits and a punitive revenue-cut to cities with traffic cameras.

Two new restrictions on access to abortion aimed narrowly at forcing Ohio abortion clinics to close didn't belong in the budget and deserved -- but didn't get -- a veto. Trying to limit Ohio women's legal right to safe abortions is wrong and could imperil their health. Kasich should have acted.