Buildings are seen across a river in Ho Chi Minh City. CVC Capital Partners, long a presence in Southeast Asia, is making a push into Vietnam with the hire of a former Citigroup and Deutsche Bank AG banker. Reuters/Kham

CVC Capital Partners has taken a big step toward doing its first deals in Vietnam with the hire of a former Citigroup Inc. and Deutsche Bank banker to lead its efforts.

The London-based buyout firm has hired Pete Vo, a former partner at Ho Chi Minh City-based private equity firm Vietnam Investment Group and a former banker at Deutsche Bank and Citi, as a managing director in CVC’s Singapore office, a spokesman for CVC confirmed.

Mr. Vo will look for investment opportunities for CVC in Vietnam, a country where the buyout firm has yet to do a deal, the spokesman said. But CVC has no plans to open an office in Vietnam, the spokesman added.

While smaller than many of its Southeast Asian neighbors in terms of the size of its economy, Vietnam boasts a large, young population and a growing middle class that has attracted the attention of some of the world’s biggest private equity firms. TPG Capital has done two private equity deals in the country in the last decade with stakes in fish sauce maker Masan Group and technology company FPT Corp., while Warburg Pincus and Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co.-a more recent investor in Masan-have also made investments in the country in recent years.

One banker focused on the Asia-Pacific region said that opportunities for private equity firms to invest in Vietnam’s financial institutions are opening up, particularly in the country’s banking sector, which is weighed down with bad debt following years of rapid expansion.

But Vietnam isn’t without its issues. Last month the country’s central bank doubled the width of the Vietnamese dong’s trading band against the U.S. dollar to 2% from 1%, in what industry participants describe as a defense mechanism in response to China’s abrupt devaluation of its own currency.

The big uncertainty is the fallout from China’s economic problems, a private equity investor said. “There are a lot of people in Vietnam, but it’s a very small economy which has had a turbulent macroeconomic past, with very high inflation, which seems to have fallen. We’re likely to see some potential deterioration in fundamental economic activity if the slowdown in China is sustained. We’re going to see more of that affect the local region, and the small economies are going to be more affected, all things being equal, than the larger ones.”

Private equity investment in Vietnam hit a high of $429 million in 2013, but has been under $200 million every other year for the last 20 years for which data provider Dealogic Ltd. has been tracking deals.

Mr. Vo most recently spent five years with VI Group, where he worked as a director and partner. VI is the third-largest private equity firm based in Vietnam behind PENM Partners, the largest, and Dragon Capital, according to data provider Preqin.

Before working at VI Group, Mr. Vo covered Vietnam equity capital markets for Deutsche Bank and worked for Vietnam Partners, another private equity firm.

Before that he spent nine years with Citi in New York, where he was most recently a director doing structured credits and securitization deals.

CVC is no stranger to Southeast Asia. The firm currently has investments in Indonesia, Malaysia and the Philippines, and has earmarked a portion of its fourth Asia fund to doing deals in the region. The fund closed last year at $3.5 billion.

(This article also appears in Private Equity News, a U.K.-based trade publication of Dow Jones & Co.)

Write to Alec Macfarlane at alec.macfarlane@wsj.om