One in 10 come off benefits after losing spare room subsidy thanks to 'bedroom tax'

Freedom of Information requests show thousands who were stripped of tax have been encouraged to find work



Ten per cent of claimants have stopped receiving benefits altogether



The change has given people 'reward for working' which wasn't there before, says Tory councillor

One in ten claimants stripped of the £15-a-week spare room subsidy have come off benefits altogether, figures show.

The scrapping of the subsidy caused protests by Left-wing activists, who called it ‘the bedroom tax’ and claimed it would inflict misery on less well-off families.

But Freedom of Information requests show that, in tens of thousands of cases, the move encouraged people to find a job.



The scrapping of the subsidy caused protests by Left-wing activists who called it 'the bedroom tax'

As a result, they no longer require any state support – delivering a huge saving for the taxpayer.

Ministers had estimated that by removing the subsidy, paid to social housing tenants who have a spare room, the bill would be cut by around £500million a year.

But, by encouraging people to stop claiming benefits such as jobseekers’ allowance altogether, this figure doubles to around £1billion-a-year.

The new rules apply to housing benefit, typically worth between £50 and £100 a week. Since April, claimants of working age with a spare bedroom have received a reduced payment.

The figures were revealed by Harry Phibbs, a Tory councillor, in an investigation for the ConservativeHome website. He surveyed councils across the UK and 141 responded.

In their areas, 25,238 of the 233,732 people stripped of the spare bedroom subsidy – or nearly 11 per cent – were no longer claiming any benefits.

Figures show the move has encouraged thousands to look for work

Mr Phibbs said that extended across the UK, it would be the equivalent of 71,000 out of the 660,000 claimants predicted to be affected stopping claiming benefits.



‘Before this change it wasn’t rewarding for people to work,’ he said. ‘This is giving people a reward for working – they are able to stay in their homes rather than downsizing into a smaller home.

‘Because work is now being rewarded, many people are coming off benefits altogether and getting full-time jobs.

‘I would expect you will see far more people coming in to jobs in the coming months.’



The ending of the subsidy means that if tenants have one spare room, the amount of rent eligible for housing benefit is cut by 14 per cent. If they have two or more spare rooms, the reduction is 25 per cent.

On average, claimants receive £15 a week less from the taxpayer. Council tenants get about £14 a week less, while those in housing association properties get £16 a week less.



The savings to the taxpayer from removing the subsidy are an estimated £505million in 2013-14, and £540million the year after.

Figures obtained by Mr Phibbs show that in Tower Hamlets, East London, 948 out of 3,000 people (32 per cent) stopped claiming housing benefit, but in Liverpool only 300 claimants came off, out of 11,600.

Bromsgrove in Worcestershire saw 178 out of 605 come off benefits (29 per cent).

The responses do not give the reasons why individuals came off housing benefit, but any suggestion that the policy is helping families back into work is a huge boost for the Government.

Left-wing politicians and campaign groups repeatedly said the ‘bedroom tax’ would inflict misery on thousands.