The Colorado Dragon Boat Festival, an annual celebration of the state’s Asian communities, kicked off Saturday with big crowds, colorful performances and food from around the world.

The two-day festival at Sloan’s Lake is expected to draw 150,000 guests with more than 70 dragon boat teams competing.

“The whole idea behind this is to really bring the Asian community to the spotlight,” said Ding-Wen Hsu of Denver, who co-founded the festival and two others in 2001. “We’re part of the whole American culture, but today we’re still considered foreigners.”

Hsu, 67, immigrated to the U.S. from Taiwan when she was in her 20s. The festival, which drew about 15,000 in its first year, has grown more diverse. She said it has met her goal of bringing attention to Colorado’s robust Asian communities.

“I just felt like this is a dream come true,” she said of the swelling crowds each year. “I want to do this and I want to do it well.”

Aside from the main event — the races — crowds were treated to performances, cultural exhibits and plenty of food. Cuisine ranged from an extremely popular Korean barbecue stand to more traditional American favorites such as hot dogs and deep-fried Oreos.

For a young couple from China, the Denver festival was their first time seeing dragon boat racing live. Yongbin Zhuang and his wife, Yue Jing, both 29, sat in the shade of a tree overlooking the lake. Originally from a province in northern China, they had seen the sport only on television until Saturday.

“The performances are really good,” said Zhuang, who is earning his Ph.D. in biology in South Dakota but living in Denver this summer. “It’s exciting.”

Jack Greene, 21, and Scott Yanagihara, 48, were competing at the festival for CH2M, an Englewood-based engineering firm.

“First of all, racing in the boats is fun,” said Yanagihara, the team captain who was participating for the seventh time.

But the benefits of the festival go well beyond fun, he said.

“It’s very inclusive, promoting not just Asian culture,” he said. “It promotes an understanding and develops relationships” between the co-workers-turned-boatmates.

“It was like something I’ve never done before,” said Greene, an intern with the firm. “It is a great experience. I’m happy to be a part of it.”

The festival also drew about 100 participants on teams with Adaptive Adventures, a nonprofit that organizes outdoor activities for children, adults and veterans with physical and other disabilities. The group first sent a team of 22 in 2014 and ended up on the medal stand, according to Chris Wiegand of Adaptive Adventures.

The festival concludes at 5 p.m. Sunday.

Matthew Nussbaum: 303-954-1666, mnussbaum@denverpost.com or twitter.com/MatthewNussbaum