Buy Photo Augusta Community Care Building (Photo: Traci Moyer/The News Leader)Buy Photo

FISHERSVILLE —About 70 people attended a meeting Tuesday to watch a demonstration on the types of information Augusta Health plans to gather during for its Community Health Needs Assessment.

“The assessment will be completed in approximately three months,” said Bruce Lockwood director for community health for Professional Research Consultants Inc. PRC, located in Omaha, Nebraska, has been contracted to complete the assessment.

Lisa Schwenk, director of public relations and community outreach for Augusta Health, said there will be two surveys that comprise the information in the assessment. One is for community stakeholders involved in public health, education and through not-for-profit agencies. The second survey will include members of the public selected at random based on certain criteria.

“They will give us an accurate portrayal of those served by Augusta Health,” Lockwood said. “Today we introduced what the survey is going to look like for the community stakeholders and talked about their role and the information they will provide based on the populations they serve.”

Lockwood said there is a wealth of knowledge they hope to tap into for the assessment, and approximately 400 people will be used to complete the survey.

Buy Photo Augusta Health Hospital, taken on the hospital's campus near the Community Care Building. (Photo: Traci Moyer/The News Leader)

“They will give us an accurate portrayal of those served by Augusta Health,” Lockwood said. "Today we introduced what the survey is going to look like for the community stakeholders and talked about their role and the information they will provide based on the populations they serve.”

Lockwood said there is a wealth of knowledge they hope to tap into for the assessment and approximately 400 people will be used to complete the survey.

Buy Photo Bruce Lockwood, director, community health for Professional Research Consultants, Inc. (Photo: Traci Moyer/The News Leader)

The Community Health Needs Assessment (CHNA) is required by law for tax-exempt hospitals as part of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Three years ago, the hospital performed a similar assessment by a different research company.

Schwenk said the information from that assessment has been used by other agencies to obtain grant funding.

“Anyone can use it,” she said.

Lockwood said the telephone survey will begin Wednesday and last about eight weeks. Anyone could be contacted by the agency which is not bound by do-not-call lists because they are not selling anything — they are simply gathering information, Lockwood said.

“They will keep calling until they have someone who meets the criteria they need for the assessment,” Schwenk said.

“I’m not saying it’s easy,” Lockwood said of the survey process, “but ultimately it is going to look like the population in terms of gender, age and income.”

Read or Share this story: http://www.newsleader.com/story/news/local/2016/03/22/augusta-health-prepares-health-assessment/82138944/