MONTGOMERY, Alabama --- Alabama’s health insurance program for public education employees faces a $220 million shortfall for the fiscal year that starts Oct. 1, 2014, officials said Monday.

Employees could face higher premiums and co-pays in some cases because the Legislature is not expected to be able to fully close the gap.

Funding that has been essentially flat for seven years and mandates of the Affordable Care Act are factors in the shortfall, officials told the Public Education Employees’ Health Insurance Board of Control.

Rising medical costs and prescription drug costs are also factors, as well as an increase in the number of retirees and dependents covered under the plan relative to the number of active employees.

Retirement Systems of Alabama officials presented the board ideas for changes to PEEHIP that could help reduce the deficit, but did not ask the board to take action on most of the ideas.

Unless changes are made, the shortfall in fiscal year 2015 would be about $370 million.

“That will give you the magnitude of the problem we’re facing,” RSA Chief Executive David Bronner said.

The Public Education Employees’ Health Insurance Plan, PEEHIP, provides health insurance for 97,000 active employees and 81,000 retirees.

Just five years ago, the gap between those numbers was much wider, with 103,000 active employees and 66,000 retirees.

The program is funded mostly by state tax dollars appropriated by the Legislature and premiums paid by employees.

The state appropriation is based on the number of active employees, which means the relative increase in retirees contributes to the shortfall.

The Legislature will consider the fiscal year 2015 budget during the session that begins Jan. 14. The Education Trust Fund is not expected to have enough growth to fully cover the PEEHIP shortfall.

Diane Scott, chief financial officer for RSA, gave a presentation to the PEEHIP board Monday on examples of ways to close the gap.

Among the examples: higher premiums to cover spouses who are not members, higher co-pays for office visits and higher co-pays for some generic drugs and specialty drugs.



The board took no action on those ideas.

The board approved a new tiered structure for premiums but with no dollar amounts attached to the tiers. The tiers would be: member only, member plus children, member plus spouse and member plus children and spouse.

Currently, there are only two tiers. Active employee members pay $15 a month for individual coverage and $162 a month for family coverage.

Officials said it was necessary to begin setting up the new tiers now with the possibility of setting premiums for those tiers next year.

The board approved a recommendation by the staff to remove Walgreens from the PEEHIP network unless it agrees to lower some drug costs.

RSA Deputy Director Donald Yancey said Walgreens charges significantly more for some drugs than other pharmacy chains. Yancey said dropping Walgreens from the network would not cause a hardship to members because the network includes the other large pharmacy chains.

Scott outlined some of the changes in PEEHIP mandated by the Affordable Care Act:



--- Coverage extended for adult children up to age 26.

--- Removal of the $1 million lifetime maximum on the hospital medical plan.

--- No pre-existing condition waiting period for children younger than 19; no pre-existing condition waiting period for any member beginning Oct. 1, 2014.

--- No deductible, co-pay or co-insurance for some preventive services.

--- No deductible, co-pay or co-insurance for FDA-approved contraceptives.

Scott said ACA mandates already implemented are costing PEEHIP about $20 million a year. She said the annual cost could go much higher, although she said there are many variables that could affect that, including changes the board could make to adjust to the new law.

Board member Bill Newton, who is the state finance director, asked what would be the annual cost of ACA mandates to PEEHIP if no changes are made. Scott said she would compile that number and report it to board members.

In September, the State Employees' Insurance Board increased some premiums and made other changes to help close a funding shortfall in that insurance program.