Duluth, MN (NNCNOW.COM) --- Republican presidential candidate Rand Paul says he is the candidate who will leave you alone.

The U.S. Senator from Kentucky is pushing for a smaller federal government that he says will leave "you alone" when it comes to your personal and economic life choices.

That message was well received by the 300-plus UMD students who packed the Kirby Rafters on Monday. Paul's first speech of the day attracted around a 1,000 people in Minneapolis.

When talking about health care costs, Paul took a shot at President Obama's Affordable Care Act. Paul said the health care law limits people's ability to choose their doctor and buy inexpensive health insurance.

The Republican said he would like to try market based solutions like private health savings accounts.

The President wasn't the only Democrat Paul took jabs at. Paul also criticized Democratic presidential candidate Bernie Sanders for pushing for free public college tuition.

"There is no free lunch," Paul said. "You just can't see the people who you are asking to pay for it. You pay for it a couple of ways. You either take money from somebody else, someone who either doesn't have kids or doesn't go to college, or you are taking money by borrowing from China."

"Or you are talking about printing more money," Paul continued. "When you print the money it devalues our currency and prices go up. So who gets hurt? The poor gets hurt by rising prices."

Paul is trying to appeal to young voters, especially in Minnesota. Paul believes he has a good shot at winning Minnesota because it is a caucus state.

Minnesota's caucus will be held on March 1st.

Rand Paul's father, Ron Paul, did well in Minnesota's 2012 caucus. At the National Republican Convention in 2012, nearly all of Minnesota's delegates voted for Ron Paul over Mitt Romney.

Paul has received criticism from fellow Republicans, like U.S. Sen Lindsey Graham, when it comes to his stance on military funding.

Paul said he is for a strong U.S. military.

Last week, Paul introduce a budget amendment that would pump-in $190 billion to the defense budget over the next two years.