Responding to a request from Gov. John Hickenlooper, the House speaker introduced a bill late Wednesday that would revamp the state budget process.

House Bill 1389, sponsored by Speaker Dickey Lee Hullinghorst, D-Boulder, would exempt the $689 million in fees paid by hospital providers from the state’s revenue collections. The accounting change would have vast effects on state spending, boosting lawmakers ability to spend on transportation and education. But it would also negate the refunds anticipated under the Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights in 2018, which are expected to range from $50 to 682 for single filers.

The proposal, discussed in private for most the session, came to the forefront April 16 when the Democratic governor issued a letter urging lawmakers to take action before the May 6 adjournment. Democratic and Republican lawmakers raised serious questions about the proposal and any opposition may not let it reach the finish line before lawmakers leave town. The toughest critics accuse the governor of trying to weaken TABOR, a third-rail in Colorado politics.

House Democrats downplayed the far-reaching effects of the bill, casting it as “only a technical change.” They asserted that no one’s taxes will change, but didn’t mention that TABOR refunds would be far less likely in the future if the hospital provider fee money was taken out of the revenue equation.

Like Hickenlooper, Hullinghorst focused on the tight budget year ahead if no action is taken. Next session’s budget bill will need to reserve $435 million for TABOR refunds, according to early fiscal forecasts, and three out of every four new dollars in the bill will need to go to education to keep spending on track.

“It is highly likely that Colorado’s economy will continue to grow,” Hullinghorst said in a statement. “But unless we pass this bill, next year we will have a budget crisis. We will face deep cuts to essential state services like education, transportation and health care for the most vulnerable Coloradans. This makes no sense to anyone. In a growing economy, we should be investing in our state, not slashing our budget to ribbons.”

The House assigned the bill to the Health, Insurance and Environment Committee, which will try to rush it to the floor in coming days in the hopes the Senate will advance it before the May 6 adjournment.