Topics: American foreign policy, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, Paris, Paris Attacks, Ted Cruz, Terrorism, Media News, News, Politics News

If you spent any time in front of your television or the Internet this weekend – and good for you if you shut it all off and sat in a field full of quiet and dandelions instead – you could be forgiven for thinking you were living in an updated version of a World War II newsreel trying to get you pumped for war. Jerry’s on the march! Time for our boys to meet force with force! Buy war bonds!

Or maybe you just thought you had woken up in the fall of 2001, when every idiot with even the remotest connection to the government or the national security establishment was all but wetting their pants into their panelist’s chairs on “Meet the Press” as they warned us that Al Qaeda was coming to kill us all in our beds.

Of course we have seen mass casualty terrorist attacks by jihadis since then – the Madrid train bombings in 2004, London in 2005, Bali, Mumbai, and dozens of others in cities like Baghdad and Beirut all come to mind. But there are a few differences that made the Paris attack a little more frightening for those of us watching our leaders and would-be leaders react and wondering if this was the one that would send us the country careening deeper into the Middle Eastern abyss.

One was the rise of social media, especially Twitter, which gives these sorts of events a real-time immediacy and amplification that leaves you feeling even more overwhelmed with the flow of information than if you were relying solely on the sonorous tones of Wolf Blitzer blaring from your old cathode-ray television to tell you what’s going on.

There are two other factors, both of which are related. They are the 2016 presidential election, and the GOP’s continuing devolution from a political party into a loose collection of screeching reactionary head cases animated almost solely by utter hatred of President Obama and progressivism in general, and lacking even the most tenuous grip on reality or basic humanity.

Those two strands came together this weekend as the Republican presidential candidates flopped all over themselves proclaiming themselves tougher and more ready to lead the fight against ISIS than the next. But their policies are both nonsensical and irrelevant, or already being pursued by the Obama administration. It was as if each of them spends all their downtime asleep in hyperbaric chambers, trucked from one appearance to the next, thawed out, shoved in front of a camera or a cheering crowd to spout nonsense fed through an earpiece by handlers, and then put back in stasis until the next event.