U.S. House of Representatives, District 3

Larry DiChiara

Larry DiChiara is a Republican candidate for the U.S. House of Representatives, District 3.

He said, "Like many Americans, I am extremely frustrated by what is happening in our country and the lack of leadership being shown in Washington, D.C., by our representatives. Like many Americans, I believe we need new leadership from people of character and integrity. I am a career educator, not a career politician. I have spent my entire career helping kids, schools and communities. I will do the same for our country."

The former Lee County Schools administrator and superintendent is a resident of Auburn. He and wife Gina are the parents of a teenager and two young adults. DiChiara grew up in Gulf Shores but has lived in this district for 39 years.

Mike Rogers

East Alabama's proudly conservative Congressman Mike Rogers (R-AL) filed for re-election with the Alabama Republican Party, saying if re-elected he would keep up his fight against Obamacare, work to cut excessive and wasteful spending and support common sense solutions for helping create good paying jobs across the Third District:

"East Alabama's hard-working families want Congress to fight against the job-crushing policies of Obamacare and cut the excessive spending and debt that threatens our economy.

"They're fed up with an out-of-control federal bureaucracy that has spread into every corner of our lives, where unelected bureaucrats pass costly regulations that hurt Alabama's small businesses.

"Nothing less than the future of our country is at stake. Our elected representatives in Washington must work tirelessly to help restore our nation and fight for our conservative values. That is exactly what I will continue to do if again given the honor by the voters of Alabama's Third District."

Rogers is a fifth generation East Alabamian and the son of a retired textile worker and fireman. He and his wife Beth have been married for more than 30 years and have three children. They live in Calhoun County and attend Saks Baptist Church.

District Attorney, Fifth Judicial Circuit

Bill Harris

"Over the past year, I have spoken with many people throughout the Fifth Circuit and have listened to their thoughts and concerns regarding the office of the district attorney. I believe that my work experience of over 25 years in law enforcement and the past 10 years as a practicing attorney along with proven management skills, afford me a unique perspective as to what it takes to be an efficient district attorney," Bill Harris said in announcing his candidacy.

He is running as a Republican for district attorney for the Fifth Judicial Circuit, which comprises the counties of Chambers, Macon, Randolph and Tallapoosa.

"During my law enforcement career, I have investigated and prepared hundreds of cases for prosecution in both state and federal courts. As a practicing attorney, I have handled cases in numerous jurisdictions, resulting in favorable outcomes for our clients," he said.

"Some of the issues that I intend to address are:

• Accessibility - As district attorney I will make myself available to ALL citizens of the Fifth Judicial Circuit.

• Efficiency - No case should linger for years waiting for trial. With proper preparation and effective management, cases can be brought to a conclusion in a timely manner.

• Taking a fresh look at 'Cold Cases' - "There are far too many unsolved homicide cases in our circuit that have been forgotten or ignored. I will strive to find answers for the families of these victims and bring closure to these cases," he said.

• Remove all politics from the district attorney's office - All cases should be handled on the merits of the case, without any political motives.

• Strengthen the relationship with law enforcement agencies. - The district attorney's office should stand ready to assist law enforcement in the investigation and preparation for trial of any crime occurring in their jurisdiction.

• Professionalism - If elected, I can assure you the staff of the district attorney's office will always exhibit the highest standards of professionalism. All citizens will be treated with courtesy and respect.

"I look forward to meeting with people of the Fifth Judicial Circuit and discussing how we can improve the district attorney's office. I pledge to conduct our campaign with the highest standards of professionalism and decency. Please keep my family and I in your prayers as we enter into this effort to make the Fifth Circuit a safer and better place for all. I sincerely ask for your vote and support on March 1," the Chambers County resident said.

Damon Lewis

Damon Lewis is the chief assistant district attorney for Chambers, Macon, Randolph and Tallapoosa counties and has served in this position since August 2005. He was hired as assistant district attorney for the district attorney's Dadeville office in 1998. In 2004, he chose to open his own private practice and in 2005 had the opportunity to came back on board with the promotion to chief assistant district attorney.

As the chief assistant, he has tried numerous capital murder cases in EVERY courthouse of the circuit, has prosecuted hundreds of cases, including felony drug, sexual abuse and child abuse cases in EVERY courthouse in the circuit and is the only candidate that has tried this range and number of criminal cases.

Damon states, "With each case, I seek justice for our victims and the maximum sentence allowed by law for the crimes. As a prosecutor, I pride myself on the knowledge, experience, professionalism, honesty and fairness that I bring to this office."

Damon, with the help of the circuit judges, has initiated a more aggressive approach in collecting the restitution for victims and court-ordered fees. He helped develop and implement a Pre-Trial Diversion Program for first-time offenders all with the hope that victims could see justice sooner and has worked with the state-ordered drug courts and the multiple court referral offices throughout the circuit. He is president of the board of the Tri-County Child Advocacy Center, another vital victim service program, and has served in that voluntary capacity for many years. Over the last 18 years, Damon has worked with all law enforcement officers and agencies within the 5th Circuit and feels that these professional relationships based on his education, knowledge and experience are important to the effectiveness of this office.

"I am the only candidate that has a true working knowledge of our budgets, dockets and programs (current and future)," said Lewis, who is running on the Republican ticket. "While managing the day-to-day issues of the office with over 20 employees and prosecuting cases, I know the areas in our offices that need to be strengthened. As your elected district attorney, I will make the district attorney's office an example of how hard work and experience can shape a better future for our communities. I have the experience, knowledge and work ethic that you as a citizen of our circuit demand."

Damon is married to Kathy, his wife of almost 22 years, and they have three teenage children. He is a youth leader at Rocky Creek Baptist Church in the Cowpens community. "We have an awesome responsibility to keep our families and our children safe, and I will do my part as your district attorney to bring justice to anyone that threatens the safety or wellbeing of our communities. Please visit our website for more information about me and

our campaign www.DamonLewis4DA.com."

Randolph County Commission District 3

Doyle Allen

Doyle Allen is a Republican candidate for Randolph County Commission, District 3.

The candidate has lived in the district for 21 years and is self-employed with Daystar Enterprises, which includes Rock Mills Daycare and Preschool Center and Manna Properties.

He and his wife, the former Anita Sims, have married daughters and two grandchildren.

Allen has a bachelor of arts in administration, a bachelor of theology and a master of religious education. He has completed requirements for Alabama County Commissioners, with additional studies in finance and marketing, as well as the Alabama Local Government Training Institute at Auburn University and Leadership Randolph County.

Allen has served on the: United Way Advisory Board; Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors; United Way (campaign chairman, board of directors); Relay for Life steering committee; County Commission (2000-2004 and 2008-2012); Cooperative Extension Advisory Board; Leadership Randolph County Steering Committee; and Governor's Council on Children's Policy. He is a member and Sunday school teacher at Woodland Church of God.

"We all agree Randolph County is one of the most beautiful places in the world to live and raise a family; however, our past is only a small indicator of what our future can and should be," Allen said. "Like a majority of you, I have become discouraged and disillusioned with the seeming lack of progress and meaningful results now reflected by our county and our district. I wholeheartedly agree with many of you that it is once again time for 'Leadership ... Vision ... Results!'

"I will not make empty, hollow promises one man cannot keep; however, I will promise all the citizens of Randolph County, and especially District 3, I will serve you with hard work, honesty, integrity and effectiveness as your commissioner. Just as I have demonstrated before, I will get results."

Stacey Richardson

Republican Stacey Richardson is a candidate for the 3rd District commission seat. She resides in the Omaha community near Woodland.

After graduating Woodland High School, Stacey attended: Southern Union, Jacksonville State University's College of Criminal Justice, Clayton Regional Law Enforcement Academy, the Federal Bureau of Investigation Supervision School and Leadership Randolph County. She served as treasurer for Alpha Lambda Epsilon, which is the affiliate to Northeast Alabama Police Academy responsible for continuing education for law enforcement. She has served as a police officer for the past 20 years in the Atlanta area. Within that service, Richardson has also trained with the Department of Homeland Security, Georgia Bureau of Investigation and Department of Immigration.

Now she serves the Randolph County Republican Party as secretary and on the executive committee. Stacey's goals for Randolph County and District 3 include the rebuilding of the farmers' market.

In order for old and new money to circulate, she supports hiring a county manager to write grants for state and federal funding. These grants would hire contractors to resurface roads and to reconstruct dirt roads where the residents would have better driving conditions.

Richardson said, "Our roads are in horrible shape, and I want to work at funding to upgrade the transportation for District 3. Along with building better relationships with small business owners, promoting Randolph County and building up the workforce, where the citizens will be able to work at home."

She supports law enforcement, volunteer fire departments and safer schools. These entities of government will be trained in active shooter and terrorism. Randolph County will be prepared if any violent acts like these were to occur, she said.

"Given my public administration skills as a police officer, I have seen how cities and counties are run," said Richardson. "They are given the opportunity to seek funding in order to keep money circulating. I believe I have the ability to incorporate and maintain goals for our government and a part of these goals would be delegated to Randolph County Economic Development to build and seek jobs for the industrial park. It takes money to spend money, and when a government entity spends money, there should be a return of investment. New business keeps small business open. My plans are to market Randolph County and meet with Gov. Bentley to bring in better quality incentives for small business.

"Other goals are to fund our senior citizens because they are the backbone of America. They've worked hard and helped shape America. When their monthly checks are sacrificed to pay for medical bills, utilities and prescriptions and can't afford groceries, I want proceeds from concerts to be given to the food bank, where individuals over 60 should be able to get what they need," she said.

"Randolph County needs leadership for the future and leadership for progress. I believe I have the ability to lead District 3 and Randolph County for the future."

Bryant Whaley

As a lifelong resident of Randolph County, I take pride in our district, and I understand the concerns that face our residents. I am a conservative Republican with Christian values who seeks to serve our community, vowing to lead transparently and ethically. As your commissioner, I will work to improve our county's roadway conditions in an effort to ensure safer travels on both city roads and rural routes alike.

Upon graduation from Handley High School, I attended Jacksonville State University, where I earned my bachelor's and master's degrees. Since then, I have worked in both the public and private sectors. From washing dishes to working for former Gov. Riley, I value hard work, and I would like to work for you--my friends and neighbors of District 3.

I ask that you will join me! March 1 is the Republican Primary, and I humbly ask for your support. Together we can make Randolph County greater than ever before