North Metro Fire's charity shave yields over $10,000 in donations

On Saturday afternoon, in a corner of The Exchange Tavern in Westminster, Cindy McConnell beamed as her husband, Joe, sacrificed his remaining locks for the annual St. Baldrick's Shave-a-Thon to raise money for childhood cancer research.

About 60 others would go bald, too, during a daylong affair that, at last estimate, brought in more than $10,000 in donations.

McConnell was not of those 60. She's battling breast cancer, and chemotherapy long ago deprived her of the luxury to even consider a charity buzz. But, on Saturday, she was more than content watching her husband and so many others show solidarity.

"This one of the most important things — to help the families going through it," she said. "Because you've got your good moments and your bad moments, and the bad moments well outweigh the good moments."

Blake Barnes, 8, takes a photo of his dad Casey of the Louisville Fire Department having his head shaved by as part of the St. Baldrick's Day effort to raise money to support childhood cancer research at the Exchange Tavern in Westminster on Saturday. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

Even prior to her own diagnosis, McConnell was more than familiar with the lows of cancer; she worked for 20 years as a nurse at Children' s Hospital in Denver, tending to families coping with the exact affliction St. Baldrick's aims to squelch with more than 1,300 head-shaving fundraisers across America each year.

Last year, those events brought in more than $27 million combined.

"We just shouldn't have kids getting cancer, so I'm for anything we can do to try and figure out how to get rid of it and cure it with the minimal treatment," McConnell said.

Advertisement

"For the families of these kids, you wonder how you're going to continue going on. You want to see your kid smile, but you don't have the money necessarily to go take him to a basketball game or something like that. All of the fundraisers like this help with those kinds of things, and give the families a little bit of a good time that they can remember."

Caleb Larson, of the North Metro fire department (covering Broomfield and Westminster), organized this year's Shave-a-Thon. Joining North Metro were firefighters from Louisville and Brighton, many of whom brought their kids along for a shave.

Larson found a special joy in committing to such a tangible act of charity.

"By shaving your head, it's a way of saying, 'It's cool to be bald. I'm with you,' in a different way than giving money," he said. "That's important, too, but it's an actual physical thing, something you can talk about when people ask. It's an active role that shows friends and families that it cuts you to the heart."

Brighton's Terrin Lewis, 10, was one in a contingency of sprouts to go full Bruce Willis on Saturday, and he felt just fine with that decision.

"It's a little tough just thinking about other people, what they're having to go through," said Lewis, post-shearing. "But just knowing you can pray for them, it makes you feel a little bit better. And knowing that you can maybe save a life, just by donating even a dollar."

The thousands raised through this event came mainly from participants' individual efforts in the months leading up to the day of shiny-headed reckoning. But, money aside, the most significant offering of the day, hair-wise, likely came from Louisville Fire's Robert Haberer, who gave up a breathtaking set of mutton chops that he claimed to have grown out for an entire year.

"I like to go for the Elvis Presley look," he said, "but the cause wins out every time."

Alex Burness: 303-473-1389, burnessa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/alex_burness