Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share A medical professional explains the signs to look for when your child may have the flu.

Buy Photo Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield's Omnia plan has proved popular with buyers. (Photo: FILE PHOTO)Buy Photo

In the fight with New Jersey lawmakers over its new health insurance plan, Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey has one thing going for it: Consumers are buying Omnia in droves.

Nearly 189,000 individuals signed up for Omnia, including 41,258 who previously didn't have insurance, Horizon said Thursday. That likely would make it the most widely held individual insurance plan in the state.

Newark-based Horizon is the state's biggest health insurer with 3.8 million members. And its release of its enrollment data likely will add fuel to what has turned into a huge political fight in Trenton.

MORE: Christie administration OKs Horizon plan

Horizon has promoted Omnia as a way for consumers to find better quality, more affordable health care, in line with the goals of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

The catch: Consumers need to visit health care providers in what the insurance company calls Tier 1. They can visit providers in Tier 2, but they would pay more. (In Monmouth and Ocean counties, hospitals owned by Barnabas Health and Meridian Health are in Tier 1, CentraState Healthcare System in Freehold Township is in Tier 2.)

MORE: CentraState, others sue Horizon over Omnia plan

Hospitals in Tier 2 cried foul. They noted Horizon sprung the tiered network on them without giving them a chance to make their case to be included. They feared they would take a financial hit, given Horizon's giant market share. And many state lawmakers, regardless of party affiliation, have been sympathetic. They have introduced a slew of bills to slow Horizon and tiered insurance networks.

"Horizon has a responsibility to its subscribers to inform them of the criteria, scoring and methodology it used to develop Omnia's tiered ranking system," Steven M. Goldman, an attorney representing 17 hospitals designated Tier 2 that have sued Horizon, said after the insurance company released its enrollment figures. "Horizon’s continued secrecy denies consumers the ability to make informed healthcare decisions. Once again we ask; what is Horizon hiding?"

It prompted Senate President Stephen M. Sweeney, D-Gloucester, to tell Senate Commerce Committee members at a hearing earlier this week that his colleagues were losing sight of the employers and consumers that benefited from Omnia's lower costs.

MORE: Sweeney sticks up for Horizon's Omnia plan

Consumers appear to be gravitating to tiered network plans. AmeriHealth New Jersey introduced tiered network plans in seven counties statewide, including Monmouth and Ocean. Its enrollment increased 200 percent for 2016. And two out of three of its customers chose a tiered network plan, spokeswoman Jill Roman said.

Horizon's figures released on Thursday showed a total of 245,713 chose Horizon Omnia and non-Omnia plans. That's a 40 percent increase from the third quarter of last year, according to figures from the New Jersey Department of Banking and Insurance.

Horizon also has lined up supporters of its own. "These high enrollment numbers in Omnia for the uninsured are especially impressive given that many of the remaining uninsured have barriers to enrollment," said Raymond Castro, senior policy analyst for New Jersey Policy Perspective, a left-leaning research group.

Michael L. Diamond; 732-643-4038; mdiamond@gannettnj.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1piGDDu