The John Kasich and Chris Christie contrasts continue. And gun control takes center stage in the 2016 campaigns. Read more in today's Ohio Politics Roundup ...

New this morning on cleveland.com: What to watch for from Ohio Gov. John Kasich in the coming weeks as he fights for his survival in the Republican race for president.

"This is a time to start comparing records and vision," says chief Kasich strategist John Weaver, teeing up a critique of New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie.

Weaver argues Christie, a top Kasich rival in the Feb. 9 New Hampshire primary key to Kasich's candidacy, "is trying to reinvent himself as a fiscal conservative."

My full preview of Kasich's critical month ahead.

A Kasich super PAC is taking aim at Christie, too. From the National Journal's Adam Wollner: "'How will Re­pub­lic­ans de­fend his failed re­cord?' the mail­er from New Day for Amer­ica reads be­fore list­ing sev­er­al news clip­pings from over the past two years un­fa­vor­able to Christie. The mail­er con­cludes: 'His budget isn't bal­anced. His cred­it rat­ing is drop­ping. His eco­nomy is fail­ing. Chris Christie: Tough talk. Weak re­cord.'"

See the mailer here.

The Christie camp responds: "With a Demo­crat­ic-con­trolled le­gis­lature fight­ing him every step of the way, not only has Gov­ernor Christie been a lead­er in se­cur­ing land­mark re­forms to the pen­sion, ten­ure and bail sys­tems, but New Jer­sey just re­por­ted the strongest private sec­tor job growth the state has seen in 15 years with the un­em­ploy­ment drop­ping nearly in half since Christie came in­to of­fice to 5.3%. We'll de­fend that re­cord any day of the week," Christie spokeswoman Samantha Smith says via email.

And there's this, from Christie himself, in an interview with the Washington Post's Philip Rucker and Robert Costa: "Kasich. John Kasich? He's attacking me from the right? Okay. From the right? I mean, come on. Please."

Hey, big spender: Kasich and his super PAC allies (mostly his super PAC allies) have spent more on advertising than all but two other GOP hopefuls – former Gov. Jeb Bush and Sen. Marco Rubio, both of Florida, NBC News' Mark Murray reports.

Pretty much all of Team Kasich's $9.9 million has been spent in New Hampshire. So what does Kasich have to show for it? Roughly fifth place in the polls. But there's no question that early New Day ads helped build Kasich's credibility in the state. Without that initial spending, Kasich might never have become a contender there.

New Day is up with another New Hampshire ad, the Cincinnati Enquirer's Chrissie Thompson reports. This one is a positive spot encouraging a fresh look at Kasich.

Post profiles Kasich: Dan Zak, chronicling Kasich for the newspaper's "Deciders" series, focuses on the governor's push for Medicaid expansion. "His decision, he knows, is a radioactive credential for a Republican seeking the endorsement of a base that wants to repeal the Affordable Care Act," Zak writes. "As he would observe in a GOP debate several weeks later, 'People have accused me of, at times, having too big a heart.'

"Why Kasich approved the Medicaid expansion – and how – forecasts the type of president he would be: sometimes compassionate and often cunning."

Front-and-center on the 2016 campaign trail: The debate over gun rights. President Barack Obama's new executive actions geared toward more gun control stands as a major political issue in an election year. Obama, the Associated Press reports, "wiped tears from his cheeks as he spoke emotionally about the victims of gun violence."

As they say, all politics is local ... and cleveland.com's Stephen Koff looks at how this plays in Ohio's closely watched Senate race: "Southeast Ohioans are sensible. They don't want criminals getting guns. They don't want people with mental illnesses to buy semi-automatic weapons. So they'll vote for the next Democratic presidential candidate and the next Democratic U.S Senate candidate in November – right? Ted Strickland, who will likely be that Senate candidate, is betting on that. It is not a safe bet by any means. ...

Republican incumbent Rob Portman weighed in with this: "I am disappointed that the Obama Administration seems determined once again to bypass Congress and enact new regulations in an area where they have not tried to find common ground."

Primary concerns: Strickland's underdog rival for the Democratic nomination, Cincinnati City Council member PG Sittenfeld, "has pushed Strickland the hardest on the gun issue, criticizing Strickland for refusing to buck the NRA in the past," Koff observes. "Sittenfeld campaign staffers and supporters ... noted [Tuesday] that Strickland consistently opposed closing background checks when he served in the House."

More from Koff: Some of Obama's proposals were in the works for years.

Another local angle: "The only member of Congress who has prosecuted a school shooter – Ohio GOP Rep. Dave Joyce of Russell Township – on Tuesday declared that gun control measures pledged by President Barack Obama would 'trample on the rights of the American people,'" cleveland.com's Sabrina Eaton reports.

Meanwhile ... During a Tuesday appearance in Columbus, Ohio's senior U.S. senator, Democrat Sherrod Brown, called for a bill banning gun sales to those on the federal government's no-fly list, the Columbus Dispatch's Randy Ludlow reports.

Kasich's view: Campaigning in New Hampshire, Kasich accused Obama of "'poisoning the well' with his executive actions today on gun control," the Union Leader's Dan Tuohy reports. Kasich, who hadn't yet fully reviewed the plan, "said the mental health component sounds like it has merit. But, he argued, Obama is erring in acting like a dictator, rather than a [president working with the legislative branch to enact law."

In other news ...

Sittenfeld super PAC raises $733,000: "It demonstrates Ohio Democrats want new leaders with new ideas and not the same old politicians," Paul DeMarco, chairman of New Leadership for Ohio, tells the Columbus Dispatch's Michelle Everhart.

Fresh Start Act heads to Ohio General Assembly: Secretary of State Jon Husted has certified the voter-initiated statute, which backers of last year's marijuana legalization measure have pushed to help expunge marijuana-related convictions.

Legal pot failed by a huge margin, but Fresh Start could yet live. Now, the Dispatch's Alan Johnson notes, "the legislature now has four months to enact the proposal. If that doesn't happen, Fresh Start Act supporters will be able to gather a new batch of 91,677 signatures to put the issue on the November 2016 ballot for voters to decide."

Christie adds a Josh Mandel alum: Nicole Sizemore, who worked on the Ohio treasurer's failed U.S. Senate bid in 2012, is joining Christie's campaign as press secretary, the Post's Philip Rucker reports. Sizemore previously had worked for Christie's administration and for the New Jersey Republican Party.

'Forbes' recognizes State Rep. Christina Hagan ... in its "30 under 30" for law and policy. The write-up notes how the Alliance Republican, now 27, won her seat at age 23.

Tips or links? Send here. Follow along on Twitter: @henryjgomez.

To subscribe to our Politics Newsletter: Sign up here.