When U.S. Rep. Shelley Moore Capito returns to Washington, it will be with a new title: senator-elect.

The seven-term Republican congresswoman’s landslide victory over Democrat Natalie Tennant led a Republican sweep of House and Senate races in West Virginia.

The results send a “loud and clear” message that President Barack Obama’s “failed agenda doesn’t work for West Virginia,” Ms. Capito told supporters at her victory party Tuesday night.

The win makes Ms. Capito the first woman to represent the state in the U.S. Senate. She’ll also be the first Republican to represent West Virginia in the Senate since 1958.

“This election marks a true turning point in our state’s history,” Ms. Capito said.

Republicans also swept West Virginia’s three U.S. House races. Republican Rep. David McKinley easily survived a challenge from Democrat Auditor General Glen Gainer, but Democratic U.S. Rep. Nick Rahall couldn’t hold off state Sen. Evan Jenkins. Meanwhile, former Maryland state Sen. Alex Mooney beat former state Democratic chairman Nick Casey in an open race to fill Ms. Capito’s House seat.

The campaign of Ms. Tenant, who is West Virginia’s secretary of state, was not enough to keep Sen. Jay Rockefeller’s seat in Democratic hands. She lost to a better known candidate who took a calculated risk by giving up her House seat to run for the upper chamber. The risk paid off.

Ms. Capito dominated the field all cycle, according to political polls. True to predictions, on Tuesday she handily defeated Ms. Tennant along with Libertarian John S. Buckley, who came in a very distant third; Mountain Party candidate Bob Henry Baber who came in fourth, and Constitution Party candidate Phil Hudok who came in fifth.

“It was a Republican year, and Capito ran a stronger campaign, a bit more well-defined campaign,” said Neil Burch, associate professor of political science at West Virginia University.

The GOP’s incessant messaging about the administration’s anti-coal policies helped Ms. Capito in a state where mining is part of the economy, the culture and local lore. So did funding from the mining, oil and gas industries, which pumped more than $500,000 into her campaign, helping her to spend $7.3 million, more than twice as much as Ms. Tennant.

The defeat of Mr. Rahall, ranking Democrat on the powerful House Transportation Committee, leaves West Virginia with no representation in congressional leadership. That’s an unaccustomed position for a state whose delegates not so long ago presided over the Senate, ran its Appropriations Committee and held the ranking minority seat on the House Ethics Committee.

Some attribute Mr. Rahall’s showing to anti-Obama sentiment that prevailed in West Virginia, even as a disproportionate number of state residents benefit from the Affordable Care Act, the president’s signature domestic policy and a target of Republican critics.

Mr. Jenkins is a former Democrat who changed his party affiliation last year. During the campaign he pledged to be a thorn in the president’s side by working to repeal the Affordable Care Act and to oppose the administration’s environmental regulations that affect the coal industry.

Mr. McKinley easily survived a challenge from Mr. Gainer, an accountant, who spent election season criticizing the incumbent’s support of his party’s relentless efforts to repeal Affordable Care Act.

Mr. McKinley, a businessman who founded an architectural engineering firm, campaigned on a promise to help the coal industry stave off Democrats’ efforts to reduce carbon emissions. He also said he would work to protect Medicaid and Social Security, to create jobs and to help veterans access the benefits they deserve.

Mr. Casey and Mr. Mooney were evenly matched fund-raisers, each bringing in about $1.7 million, but Mr. Mooney was better able to convert those dollars to votes. He peppered the airwaves with ads promoting himself as pro-life, pro-gun and pro-coal and promising to stand up to Mr. Obama.

He carried that message through his victory night speech.

“We West Virginians are fighting back,” Mr. Mooney said late Tuesday. “President Obama – I hope you are listening – because tonight, West Virginia has sent a message to you and your administration.”

Washington Bureau Chief Tracie Mauriello: tmauriello@post-gazette.com, 703-996-9292 or on Twitter @pgPoliTweets.