East Orange, NJ, February 4, 2016 – The Communications Workers of America, Local 1077 and the City of East Orange announced completion of a ratified Contract Agreement that will benefit East Orange municipal workers and the residents of East Orange. The contract runs until Dec. 2018 and includes some innovative provisions.

“This contract agreement proves that collective bargaining results in creative solutions to complex problems,” said Mayor Lester E. Taylor III. “CWA brings fresh ideas to the table as alternatives to cost-shifting and I am anxious to see what we will be able to do together.”

The contract includes the creation of an innovative Labor-Management Committee to explore how provisions in the Affordable Care Act can reduce overall healthcare costs, such as developing robust primary care using Direct Primary Care Medical Homes.

“We are very pleased with the results,” said Bennie Brantley, President of Local 1077. “When we were deadlocked, the Mayor came to the table himself and helped to move everyone closer to settlement.”

The agreement provides for flat across the board increases the first two years, of $500 and $750 respectively, and then 2%, 2.25% and 2.5%. “It’s not a rich deal, but it’s a fair deal,” added Brantley.

“One of the best features of this agreement,” added Hetty Rosenstein, NJ CWA Director, “is the provision that phases in a minimum wage of $15 an hour by the end of the contract. There aren’t a lot of workers who fall into this category, but for those who do, this provides them with a living wage. CWA applauds the Mayor for his foresight in making sure that people who live and work in East Orange are paid a living wage.”

The new CWA contract puts East Orange in the forefront of a labor movement that is progressively gaining momentum locally, statewide and throughout the nation,” said Mayor Taylor, referring to Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto’s (D-32) and Assemblyman John Wisniewski’s (D-19) introduction of legislation that calls for increasing New Jersey’s minimum wage to $15 an hour. “East Orange has already demonstrated support for this increase and we will continue to support smart legislation that provides long-term benefits to strengthen working families in our communities.”