Wallace Parrish (Photo: ~File photo) Story Highlights Wallace Parrish was one of two defendants in the case

The two men allegedly planned to rob a taxi driver

The robbery involving Isidro Leonardo turned violent, and he was shot in the head and died

A 23-year-old man has been sentenced to 30 years in state prison in connection with the 2010 robbery and murder of a Plainfield taxi driver.

Wallace Parrish, of Plainfield, one of two men convicted in the case, must serve the entire 30 years before becoming eligible for parole, according to acting Union County Prosecutor Grace H. Park.

Parrish was sentenced Friday by state Superior Court Judge William Daniel, sitting in Elizabeth.

On Sept. 28, 2010, members of the Plainfield Police Division rushed to the 200 block of Spooner Avenue, where they found Isidro Leonardo, 44, suffering from a gunshot wound to the head. He was taken to a hospital, where he died.

Following a joint investigation by the Union County Homicide Task Force, the Plainfield Police Division and the Union County Sheriff's Office, Parrish, also known as "Wawa," and Jonathan Morgan, 28, also known as "J-Rummy," both members of Plainfield's Sex Money Murder set of the Bloods street gang, were identified as suspects, according to Union County Assistant Prosecutor Caroline Lawlor, who prosecuted the case.

Parrish was arrested in October 2010 and convicted following a five-week trial in April 2013. Morgan turned himself in to police in June 2011.

The investigation was spearheaded by Union County Prosecutor's Office Lt. Jorge Jimenez and Sgt. Kevin Grimmer. They determined that Parrish and Morgan called several Plainfield cab companies that morning with the intent of robbing a driver.

Leonardo, an employee of Plainfield's United Taxi and father of two young sons, was the driver dispatched to pick up Parrish and Morgan before a robbery attempt turned violent, after which both men fled the area.

Parrish testified at Morgan's trial. Morgan was convicted by a jury in March 2015 and a month later was sentenced to 45 years in state prison, with at least 38 years of that term to be served before the possibility of parole.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1SiDOLA