Good morning,

Friends of Bill

We report that a $2 million commitment arranged by the nonprofit Clinton Global Initiative in 2010 went to a for-profit company part-owned by people with ties to the Clintons, including a current and a former Democratic official and a close friend of former President Bill Clinton. The commitment was placed on the agenda for a September 2010 CGI conference at Mr. Clinton’s urging, and the former president also personally endorsed the company, Energy Pioneer Solutions, to then-Energy Secretary Steven Chu for a federal grant. Meanwhile, Energy Pioneer Solutions, whose business plan was to insulate people’s homes and let them pay via their utility bills, has struggled to operate profitably. In other political news, Congressional Republicans and Donald Trump began the process of narrowing their differences as the presumptive nominee met with party leaders yesterday, including House Speaker Paul Ryan, who stopped short of endorsing Mr. Trump but delivered his most positive assessment to date.

Health Scare

The battle over Obamacare shows no sign of abating. A federal judge dealt a blow to the Obama administration’s health law yesterday, ruling the government improperly reimburses insurers to cover discounts to low-income consumers. The decision by U.S. District Judge Rosemary Collyer came in a lawsuit filed by House Republicans challenging the law’s implementation, and introduces significant new legal uncertainty for President Barack Obama’s signature legislative achievement. The ruling blocked certain government payments to insurance companies, a key part of the law’s attempts to reduce out-of-pocket insurance costs for very low-income individuals. The judge, who was appointed by President George W. Bush, stayed her ruling to allow the administration an opportunity to appeal. If the White House ultimately loses the case, it would be a major financial challenge to insurers, who are required to offer the cost reductions even if they don’t get funding from the federal government.

Life Over the Hedge

Under the weight of years of underperformance and an uptick in client defections, the mood was anything but festive in Las Vegas this week at the annual celebration of the hedge-fund industry. The slump—highlighted by the largest exodus of investors since the financial crisis—damped interest in the SkyBridge Alternatives Conference, commonly known as SALT. At the conference, longtime hedge-fund manager Leon Cooperman openly questioned whether it made sense to continue on after redemptions from his firm, Omega Advisors. Major hedge-fund clients, including China’s sovereign-wealth fund, also aired doubts, positing that 90% of hedge-fund managers probably weren’t skilled enough to navigate the markets. The annual desert confab is famous for attracting heavyweight investors, celebrities and politicians, but the relative strain on the industry this year was evident: tips at the shoe-shining station a few feet from the main ballroom were down more than 50%.

Call of the Wild

A combination of beautiful views and rugged recreation is luring the most adventuresome land buyers off the grid—to ranches, mountain ranges and secluded lakes that lack the basic infrastructure most people take for granted. But building a backwoods retreat with the amenities of a luxury home can become a multimillion-dollar exercise. An inaccessible building site means a live-in construction crew. Helicopters or barges may be required to deliver bulldozers, cement and Viking stoves to wilderness locales. And natural disasters come with the territory. Still, despite the myriad challenges, those with pockets deep enough to buy a big chunk of land often like it on the raw side. One ranch owner in Texas paid $8 million for his property and has spent $3 million on improvements. Now all he needs to build is a place to stay.

Today’s Video Insect Anniversary ENLARGE Depending on the species, cicadas spend either 13 or 17 years of their life underground before emerging by the billions. The 17-year Brood V is emerging soon in parts of the northeastern U.S. Here’s what you need to know.

Number of the Day $1 billion Apple’s investment in Didi Chuxing, China’s $25 billion homegrown competitor to Uber. In China’s fast-growing market for ride-sharing, Didi and UberChina are locked in a fierce battle to attract riders and investors.

Quote of the Day ‘It’s like there is no safe place left...We want to move, but where? Once I get out of the hospital, I will not dare to leave the house.’ —Amina Assani, a Syrian refugee from Aleppo, on living in Kilis, a small Turkish city on the Syrian border. Ms. Assani was injured in an Islamic State rocket strike on the border haven.

Today’s Question Going back to our story above, what are your thoughts on the Affordable Care Act ruling? Send your comments, which we may edit before publication, to 10point@wsj.com. Please include your name and location.

—Compiled by Margaret Rawson

Reader Response Responding to yesterday’s question on private lenders reshaping the home-mortgage market, Mike Carmichael of Virginia said: “The probability of buyers being able to meet higher mortgage payments with eight or nine percent interest rates is problematic at best...If you support payday lending than you should love private mortgage lenders.” Jay Davidson of Colorado wrote: “Congress wanted to make it easy to get a new home and created sub-prime lending and thus, unknowingly created the Great Recession. Federal regulations are so onerous now, they threaten conventional mortgage underwriting. Private capital identified the need and provides a solution. That solution threatens the homeowner with totally unregulated borrowing. Next, Congress and regulators will step in...the cycle continues.” And Gopalan Ramachandran of India commented: “Private lenders have correctly seized the opportunity and have gone about rebuilding their business with zeal and genuine acumen that can be found only among principals. The emergence of private lenders is very good for America, its society and its economy...The rising demand for loans from private lenders is proof that these lenders are doing a good job.”

This daily briefing is named "The 10-Point" after the nickname conferred by the editors of The Wall Street Journal on the lead column of the legendary "What's News" digest of top stories. Technically, "10-point" referred to the size of the typeface. The type is smaller now but the name lives on.