Consul General Deputy of France in New York Bernard Faro and Mrs. Faro attended for Consul General of France in New York Bertrand Lotholary, who was called out of the country. (Photo: Courtesy of Skylands Photography) Story Highlights The French Alliance Ball on May 16 benefited the historic Jacobus Vanderveer House in Bedminster, which played a pivotal role in the American Revolutionary War.

Honored guests arrived at the elegant event by horse and carriage met by actors dressed as Gen. Henry Knox and Gen. George Washington, who greeted and danced with guests.

Honored guests included Col. Jack Jacobs, Medal of Honor recipient, and Consul General Deputy of France in New York Bernard Faro.

The ball's ultimate purpose was to kick off the organization's capital campaign to expand and add gardens to the historic home.

The crystal glistened, the candles flickered, the canons roared, and even Mother Nature conspired to add drama to the French Alliance Ball on May 16 to benefit the historic Jacobus Vanderveer House in Bedminster, which played a pivotal role in the American Revolutionary War.

Honored guests arrived at the elegant event by horse and carriage met by actors dressed as Gen. Henry Knox and Gen. George Washington who greeted and danced with guests — twirling around the dance floor in the stately mansion at Trump National Golf Club in Bedminster.

Hosted by the Friends of the Jacobus Vanderveer House (JVH), honored guests included Col. Jack Jacobs, Medal of Honor recipient, military analyst for NBC/MSNBC News and a resident of Far Hills who attended with his wife, Susan, and Consul General Deputy of France in New York Bernard Faro and Mrs. Faro.

With the ultimate purpose of kicking off the organization's capital campaign to expand and add gardens to the historic home, the Friends of the JVH also wanted their guests to have a chance to step back in time.

"We wanted guests to experience a taste of the Grand Alliance Ball held in 1779, hosted by George and Martha Washington, to celebrate the newly established alliance with France and the birth of our freedom," said Robin Ray, president of the Friends of the JVH Board of Trustees.

While the British may not have been on the horizon at the French Alliance Ball, Mother Nature added an element of drama when the horizon turned dark bluish purple at approximately 7:45 p.m. just as the carriage was arriving with honored guests and the canon display was about to begin. The Club's warning sirens blared to warn of an impending storm — which guests soon found out was a tornado warning.

Fortunately, the storm passed and the portended tornado never formed, and guests were able to enjoy safe passage into the world of yesterday.

Value of history

For Jacobs, the value of history cannot be ignored.

Quoting the philosopher George Santayana, Jacobs, said, "Those who ignore history are doomed to repeat it."

Jacobs also said the preservation of historic sites is important because they also embody the essence of who we are, and once they are gone, they are gone forever.

Jane Alcoff, a resident of Whippany and a member of the Washington Association, said she was thrilled with the opportunity to attend the French Alliance Ball, not only because she loves dancing, but at a very early age developed a love of history — particularly the Revolutionary War era.

Leslie Reith, a resident of Berkeley Heights who is an accomplished ballerina and competitive ballroom dancer, dances at the French Alliance Ball. (Photo: Courtesy of Skylands Photography)

"I grew up on a very historic street and also when I visited Jockey Hollow National Park, I just developed a deep interest in this period of history," Alcoff said. "We are very lucky to live in an area with so much history and historic buildings like the Jacobus Vanderveer House."

To create an experience that would include as many elements of the past as possible, Nancy Schechter, trustee and event coordinator, enlisted the help of many including members of the U.S. Army Honor Guard; West Jersey Artillery; American Historical Theatre Interpreters who portrayed Gen. Henry Knox and Gen. George Washington; Elan Artists, a Julliard trained quartet; Four-In-Hand Carriage; The Scott Ragsdale Orchestra; and Garden State Fireworks.

An opening waltz was performed by Sergei Bedroznov, a Russian champion dancer, national competitive judge and proprietor of Ballroom Dance of New Jersey, and Leslie Reith, a resident of Berkeley Heights who is an accomplished ballerina and competitive ballroom dancer.

A future vision of the past

Ray said the capital campaign will support the next step in realizing the Friends' mission to establish a small but important museum complex with outbuildings and walkways that complement the restored house.

The Guest of Honor at the French Alliance Ball was Col. Jack Jacobs, Medal of Honor recipient, military analyst for NBC/MSNBC News and a resident of Far Hills, who attended with his wife, Susan. (Photo: Courtesy of Skylands Photography)

The initiative was launched by a lead gift from the Peter R. and Cynthia K. Kellogg Foundation — to implement Phase II of the Friends' long-range strategic plan that would include the building of a kitchen garden, historic walkways, an orchard and several 18th-century-style outbuildings.

Ray said, "The plan will include a large Dutch Colonial barn and barnyard that will provide much-needed space for our rapidly growing education and leadership programs."

For more information about the Jacobus Vanderveer House, visit: www.jvanderveerhouse.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1S8gukD