Freshman Matthew Serafin uses an iPad to take a quiz in his "introduction to economics" class at Silver Creek High School on Wednesday morning. Students at half of the St. Vrain Valley School District's high schools received iPads this fall. The rest of the high schools will distribute iPads next school year. ( Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer )

St. Vrain Valley learning technology plan As part of the St. Vrain Valley School District's learning technology plan, iPad minis will be distributed to all schools and most students on the following schedule: 2014: Coal Ridge and Westview middle school students piloted the program; all middle school teachers received iPad minis 2014-15: All middle school students and all students at Lyons Middle/Senior High; all preschool and kindergarten teachers; teachers at Frederick, Longmont, Mead and Silver Creek high schools 2015-16: Students at Frederick, Longmont, Mead and Silver Creek high schools; teachers at Erie, Niwot, Olde Columbine, Skyline and St. Vrain Online Global Academy 2016-17: Students at Erie, Niwot, Olde Columbine, Skyline and St. Vrain Online Global Academy; all elementary teachers 2017-18: All elementary school classrooms receive a set. To learn more, visit tinyurl.com/svvsdtechplan. For resources and information for parents, go to tech.svvsd.org/family.

Silver Creek High School environmental science students used their new iPad minis to answer a warm-up question and start reading "The Tragedy of the Commons," with instructions to finish the article at home if necessary.

Advertisement

Next class, they'll use the devices for an aquatic species lab to take pictures of the insects they collect and to record data.

"For my kids, the iPads are my most valuable tool," said teacher Barbara Keith. "It gives them one more piece of technology they can work with and become proficient on. We just have to figure out the best ways to use it."

Students at half of the St. Vrain Valley School District's high schools — Silver Creek, Longmont, Frederick and Mead — received iPads this fall. The rest of the high schools will distribute iPads next school year.

Students use their iPads to take a quiz in an economics class at Silver Creek High School on Wednesday. (Lewis Geyer / Staff Photographer)

The iPad high school distribution is part of the district's four-year technology upgrade, which is now in its second year.

The learning technology plan, funded through a 2012 mill levy override, allocates $2.2 million a year for all students in sixth through 12th grades to have their own iPad minis over three years.

Altogether this fall, the district distributed 4,475 high school student iPads and 6,750 middle school student iPads.

In the fourth year, each elementary classroom will get a set of six iPads for students to share. The plan also includes updates to computer labs, distributing Chromebook "carts" to schools that will serve as mobile computer labs, and updates to classroom desktops.

Phasing in the distribution creates a sustainable program by staggering when the devices need to be replaced and gives time for teachers to attend training sessions, district officials said.

A district committee of about 30 parents, teachers and administrators also continues to evaluate the technology rollout, talking over issues and making recommendations.

At Silver Creek, learning technology coach Beth Cerone said she's focused on troubleshooting now. Next, she said, she plans to offer workshops to teachers to help them use the pre-loaded apps, along with giving demonstrations to students during classes.

Schoology, a learning management system, and iMovie are both already getting a lot of use, she said. Silver Creek also is working on going paperless, with several departments trying digital textbooks this year.

"The big goal is to help teachers in classrooms use the iPads to enhance lessons," she said.

Teachers say the iPads make it easier for students to keep track of assignments — and eliminate the excuse that they lost their homework, since it's all done online. There's also more individualization.

Brian McGee, a business teacher, recently used the iPads to give his students a short quiz before asking them to work in groups to research solutions to the problem of four high schools using the same football stadium.

"You have a lot of resources available to you for research," he said, adding that students could choose to present their solutions using anything from programs like Prezi and PowerPoint to the old standby, posterboard.

"As with any technology, there's a little bit of a learning curve for students and teachers," he said. "But it's not as daunting as it might seem. The biggest thing is the iPads will allow our students to have access all the time to do research and get help and to collaborate with other students."

For Peter DeFilippo, a language arts teacher, the iPads are most useful for reading assignments, while laptops still work better for writing — and require scheduling time in one of the highly used computer labs or reserving a laptop cart that's shared schoolwide.

For reading, he said, it's much easier to find books or articles online than making paper copies, with all the older texts like Shakespearean plays available free because they're in the public domain.

He's also providing students with online resources, including writing tips and grammar help.

Students generally were excited about getting iPads, though a few said they still prefer more low-tech tools or that the Internet connection sometimes lags, creating frustration.

"It's better to access information, but I'm so used to writing with pencil and paper," said senior Frida Gutierrez. "For me, I would rather take notes with pencil and paper."

But junior Max Browne said he finds the iPad easier to use.

"I love them," he said. "It's super tiny and fits right in your backpack."

Freshman Isaias Pineda also gave his new device a good review. He said he likes that all his homework assignments are listed in one place and are turned in online.

"You don't have to find all your papers," he said. "You don't have as many textbooks. You can do homework when you're absent. It's an overall good thing to have."

Added classmate Keira Hook, "It's more interactive."

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa