SCOTTSDALE, Ariz.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Magellan Health, Inc. (NASDAQ: MGLN) today announced that John Littel has joined the company as senior vice president of government affairs and communications. In this role, Littel will lead the government affairs strategy for the enterprise, while strengthening federal and state relationships across its business units. Littel will also help Magellan navigate the evolving healthcare marketplace, particularly opportunities and requirements under the Affordable Care Act, and enable new market entry in support of overall growth objectives. In addition, Littel will lead Magellan’s enterprise communications strategies to both internal and external audiences.

“John comes to Magellan with a significant understanding of federal and state policy matters, healthcare issues and strategies, health plan operations and corporate communications,” said Sam K. Srivastava, chief executive officer of Magellan Healthcare. “He uniquely understands the intersection of policy and practice, and will help us navigate through the legislative, regulatory and compliance environments in support of growth and expansion within our healthcare and pharmacy initiatives. In addition, he will take our communications strategies to the next level in support of business growth and development.”

“It is exciting to be part of a company that is making a measurable contribution in healthcare, especially to individuals with serious behavioral and physical healthcare needs, as well as veterans and people with disabilities,” said Littel. “Magellan’s mission-driven culture and emphasis on innovation allows us to look at old problems in new ways with the goal of improving healthcare quality and affordability for customers and members.”

Prior to joining Magellan, Littel served as interim senior vice president of government affairs for WellPoint, where he reorganized their public affairs efforts and led the integration of their newly-acquired Amerigroup team. For the preceding 12 years, he served as executive vice president of external affairs for Amerigroup, where he developed and managed a national public affairs program at the federal and state levels, and led the company’s growth and business development functions, including sales and marketing, eBusiness and corporate communications. Earlier in his career, he served as senior counsel at the U.S. Office of Personnel Management, and as the deputy secretary of health and human services in Virginia. He currently serves on the Board of Visitors for the College of William and Mary.

About Magellan Health: Headquartered in Scottsdale, Ariz., Magellan Health, Inc. is a leader in managing the fastest growing, most complex areas of health, including special populations, complete pharmacy benefits and other specialty areas of healthcare. Magellan develops innovative solutions that combine advanced analytics, agile technology and clinical excellence to drive better decision making, positively impact health outcomes and optimize the cost of care for the members it serves — all within a customer-first culture. Magellan’s customers include health plans and other managed care organizations, employers, labor unions, various military and governmental agencies, third-party administrators, consultants and brokers. For more information, visit MagellanHealth.com.