Updated at 9:45 p.m.: Texas Health Resources CEO Barclay Berden released a community letter Saturday night that admitted the hospital made mistakes in caring for Thomas Eric Duncan. The letter is running in Sunday’s Dallas Morning News as a full-page ad.

Read the full text below.

Texas Health's "Letter to Our Community" by The Dallas Morning News

Updated at 5:15 p.m. by Julie Fancher: The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said Saturday that 14 people who had come in contact with country’s first Ebola patient have been cleared.

The CDC said out of 11 people who had direct exposure to the virus, four have completed surveillance.

The first patient believed to have come in direct contact with Thomas Eric Duncan completed his 21-day surveillance Friday.

Jenkins called this weekend “critical” as those 48 people being to complete their surveillance.

“If we don’t see new patients this weekend then we will see the remainder of those 48 we were tasked with following come off the list,” he said. “We will see Louise and three young men come off the list and we will be statistically less likely to see more cases.”

Duncan’s fiancee, Louise Troh and three of her family members are under quarantine through Sunday, Dallas County Judge Clay Jenkins said at a news conference Saturday.

Jenkins also addressed Saturday’s DART situation at the news conference.

“I don’t know a whole lot about that, but I know she is not a disease contact that we are monitoring,” he said at the news conference at Texas Health Presbyterian Hospital. “The CEO of DART tells me she is the sixth person that has thrown up on a DART facility today and that is just a part of public transportation that I was unaware of, but that it does happen.”

DART officials said the White Rock Station reopened shortly after 5 p.m.

Updated at 3:45 p.m. In other statement, Lyons said the person being treated at White Rock Station is not a resident of the Ivy Apartments but had stayed there for a few days “some time ago,” retracting information DART officials previously gave.

Here is a rest of the statement:

We have also confirmed she did not vomit, she spit on the platform.

She will be taken to a local hospital for additional medical evaluation or treatment as needed.

Once she has been transported the station will be cleaned and put back in service. Although she did not vomit on either the platform or the vehicle, we are removing the railcar from service out of an abundance of caution and inspect it. We already had additional rail cars in service today to support customers attending the State Fair.

We will send a final update once White Rock Station has resumed service.

Dallas Fire-Rescue spokesman Jason Evans said the woman told medics she had lived at the Ivy Apartment complex and had been under ordered quarantine.

Evans said the woman was feeling ill, possibly from a spider bite on her hand.

She has been transported to an area hospital for evaluation.

Updated at 2:54 p.m.: DART spokesman Morgan Lyons sent the following email statement to The Dallas Morning News about the White Rock station closure:

The person being treated by Dallas Fire Rescue at White Rock Station is NOT on any Ebola watchlist. She is being treated by DFR as a person who is ill. Updated reports indicate she got off a northbound train at the station and vomited on the platform. There are no indications of any biohazards or spills on any vehicle she has used. We are inspecting the train and the platform and will clean the facility and vehicle as needed consistent with our protocol.



Original post at 2:28 pm.: The White Rock Station is closed to bus and rail service while Dallas Fire-Rescue responds to a report of a sick passenger, according to DART officials.

Trains can go through the station, but cannot stop there.

In a news release, officials said they do not know when the station will re-open.

WFAA reports the individual was being monitored for possible exposure to the Ebola virus.

DART officials, however, said the individual reportedly lived in the same apartment complex as Thomas Eric Duncan, the Liberian man who died earlier this month after contracting Ebola.

The train used by the customer will be removed from service and cleaned, DART spokesman Morgan Lyons said in an email.

Mayor Mike Rawlings and Dallas County Health Director Zach Thompson said they had not heard about anyone on the Ebola watch list getting sick at the DART station.

“We’ve got to tone it down to where we’re reporting on facts and not rumors,” Thompson said. “There’s enough panic already.”