To hear the cries of many conservatives in Mississippi, one would think this country’s greatest enemy is not the Islamic State, but the federal government. Lately, many conservatives in my home state have been expending their energy fighting various provisions of the Affordable Care Act, resisting gun control, objecting to Department of Education guidelines for local schools, opposing national immigration reform, frowning upon gay rights and doggedly refusing to recognize government-granted abortion rights.

What explains Mississippi’s—and much of the South’s—abiding antipathy toward Washington? In a way, it’s in their genes. The Tea Party, which nearly swiped Thad Cochran’s Senate seat in the state’s GOP primary this summer, is just the latest manifestation of a strange brew of resentments dating back to defeat in the Civil War and such U.S. Supreme Court decisions as Brown v. Board of Education and Roe v. Wade. President Obama’s skin color may be an issue for some on the far right, but in fairness, they would have opposed Obamacare had it been Hillarycare.

Story Continued Below

Anger at Washington has been a part of the politics of the American South for its entire history—one of its earliest imports, you could say. Buried near the end of Albion’s Seed, his classic study of the settling of America by immigrants from the British Isles, the historian David Hackett Fischer writes that as early as the First Congress in 1789, “the backcountry did not support the federal government.” He was referring to territory that eventually included the states of the Confederacy. Ever since the first waves of Scots-Irish newcomers arrived in the Southern colonies in the 18th century, the white population in the American South has been dominated by a people with an ancient history of rebellion and resisting central authority. They fought monarchs in the old countries, and they disapproved of the concept of a strong central government when their new country was established nearly 240 years ago.

Their bloodline in the South, as a result, is rich with defiance. After declaring “give me liberty or give me death,” Virginia statesman Patrick Henry moved on to become an ardent critic of the Constitution and the institution of the presidency. South Carolina’s John C. Calhoun served as a prototype for modern Southern demagogues by championing states’ rights and slavery in the years before the Civil War. And to some modern Southerners, of course, the outcome of the war is still regarded as the ultimate indignity suffered by the region at the hands of the “federals.” In the 1800s, the name of an obscure settler and militia captain from the upper South, William Lynch, was attached forever to the practice of executing alleged miscreants as soon as they were apprehended, rather than rely on the due process of law guaranteed in the Constitution.

The descendants of Calhoun & Co. have kept this antipathy toward federal law alive, though historically they have preferred to pick and choose among their Constitutional amendments. They were never enthusiastic about the 13th, 14th or 15th amendments that granted rights to blacks following the Civil War. The Tea Party would probably like to move elections to April 15 in order to exploit hatred for the 16th amendment, which permits the federal government to collect an income tax. Yet Southern conservatives heartily embrace the 2nd amendment, which speaks of the right to bear arms, and the 10th amendment, which grants states’ rights. In 1948, the segregationist Dixiecrats who broke away from the national Democratic Party, ran under the banner of the “States’ Rights Party.” For years afterward, Southern leaders fighting federal powers cited “states’ rights” in their struggle to maintain segregation in the region. (Curiously, many rural counties across the South continue to maintain prohibition, imposed by the 18th amendment, even though it was repealed by the 21st amendment.)

Although the Scots-Irish stock has been diluted a bit as the South became more cosmopolitan, their spirit still prevails in the 21st century. In large part, the dissidents are members of a tribe celebrated by Jim Webb, a Democratic former Virginia senator, in his 2004 book, Born Fighting, which praised the Scots-Irish for their warrior ethic and instinctive distrust of government. Today, that distrust is distinctly allied with the political right.