I always knew that their lies would one day backfire on them. I have gotten the most pleasure from witnessing my liberal co-workers (whom I have been fighting with on a daily basis for over a year) completely come unglued when I walked by their desk and showed them the U.S. House map that showed all of the seats (a sea of red) that Republicans won. It was pure gold! I have also been laughing uncontrollably when I replay the montage of liberal pundits’ and journalists’ meltdowns on election night.

Although it feels like it was a long time coming, the Democrats have finally gotten their just deserts, and I must admit that it is a guilty pleasure to witness their meltdown.

What is amazing is how this election revealed how disconnected the Democrats and their media lapdogs are from the American people. They really did not expect to lose that many seats. How could they not know that the wheels were coming off when the American people realized that President Obama had lied to them about Obamacare? Obamacare is the Democrats’ and the left-wing media’s Waterloo. It is human nature for people to not support anyone or anything that adversely affects them or their family (regardless of political party, race, or gender). The Democrats’ own Senate majority leader, Harry Reid, called a cancer patient who complained of losing her doctor due to Obamacare and others who had similar horror stories liars from the Senate floor and later claimed he did not say it. Did that not give pause to anyone in the Democratic Party?

Did the Democrats and President Obama not think that the black community would finally get tired of being ignored while other groups seem to get the first black president’s attention? How long did Democrats think that they could use race- and fear-mongering to rally black Americans while ignoring their high jobless rate?

More importantly, the Democrats and President Obama should have known that his most loyal constituents would see his amnesty stance as betrayal. A black man called the Rush Limbaugh show and had the following to say about President Obama and the black community:

CALLER: Okay, good. Well, first of all, what I want to say is, thank you for everything you've done and everything you're doing, because you're doing this for the black people, too. Big time for the black people. And I want to say this. And, you know, I wish they would stop calling this man -- I can't call him no president -- this man in the White House, the first black president, because he's not the first black president. He does not have the same bloodlines that blacks in America have. His bloodline is totally different from ours, in the way he is going about California, I'm talking about like Riverside, San Bernardino, Fontana, Ontario, LA, Bakersfield, everywhere blacks, no work, 'cause all the jobs he gave to illegal immigrants. They got the jobs, and they got the money. RUSH: You know, I have been waiting for somebody like you to say something like this. And the idea -- what you're basically saying is that he's not got a civil rights linkage in his life, the civil rights coalition or past, he's not down for the struggle. He comes from a different experience. CALLER: That's right. RUSH: And he's taken jobs away from you people by opening up immigration, and that's gonna lower wages for everybody, for illegal immigrants, and you're basically saying he's got no loyalty to us. CALLER: He don't. You know, they want to say in Washington that we took impeachment off the table because he's the first black president. Well, he's not the first black president 'cause the first black president is yet to come, and he is not. And impeachment is what black people want. They want him out of the White House.

This election reveals that the relationship between the black community and Democrats has been damaged. This is not to say that blacks are turning toward Republicans, but they are simply staying home and not voting Democrat. Relationships damaged by betrayal are difficult to repair. This is a great opportunity for Republicans to take our message of education (school choice for the children), job training, and jobs to the black community.