If Obama were really serious about his temporary fix, he would have reached out to his own party members for their cooperation. Instead showing how little comment there is in the White House to a fix that was only proposed to head off Congressional bills on ObamaCare, six Democratic Party governors and their associated bureaucrats have decided not to let people keep their health insurance.

New York's perpetually angry Andrew Cuomo has gotten the most headlines for slamming the idea of letting people keep their health plans, but joining him is the duplicitous Lincoln Chaffee, who pretended not to be a Democrat, before admitting that he is a Democrat, the sleazy Jay Inslee, Vermont's inept Governor Shumlin, who is sticking to his guns despite the state health care disaster there that almost equals what is happening nationwide, Minnesota Governor Mark Dayton and Massachusetts' Obama wannabe, Deval Patrick.

Only one Republican state has demonstrated similar obstructionism and that's Indiana, where Insurance Commissioner Stephen Robertson ranted that letting people keep their health plans would destabilize the insurance market.

The six Anti-Choice Dem governors aren't really obstructing Obama. They're just doing what he did. Obama did not want even that limited fix. He was forced into it by public opinion. These blue state governors are arrogantly assuming that they are above public opinion.

Inslee, along with Governor Steve Beshear of Kentucky and Governor Dannel P. Malloy wrote a Washington Post op-ed claiming that ObamaCare is working great in their states. Despite that, Beshear, who isn't exactly running for office in Massachusetts, has agreed to maybe let people keep their health plans. Malloy in Connecticut has yet to decide.

The op-ed is the usual hilariously insane, "Bill McBill found a great deal on health insurance at our exchange" complete with claims that Medicaid expansion had created tens of thousands of jobs.

In Washington, the legislature authorized Medicaid expansion with overwhelmingly bipartisan votes in the House and Senate this summer because legislators understood that it could help create more than 10,000 jobs, save more than $300 million for the state in the first 18 months, and, most important, provide several hundred thousand uninsured Washingtonians with health coverage. In Kentucky, two independent studies showed that the Bluegrass State couldn’t afford not to expand Medicaid. Expansion offered huge savings in the state budget and is expected to create 17,000 jobs.

Medicaid. It saves money and creates jobs. So why not put everyone on Medicaid? Think of all the money we'll save and the jobs we'll create.

But while the Dems pander to the welfare voters, they screw the middle class by refusing to let people who actually work for a living keep their health care.