In 2011, The Choctaw Tribe made history by electing Chief Phyliss J. Anderson as the first female chief of The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. Saturday she announced her candidacy in her re-election bid as tribal chief.

"I am running for the re-election of the office of the tribal chief, so i ask for your support," Chief Anderson stated.

Dozens of supporters came out early Saturday morning, in support of Choctaw Tribal Chief Phyliss J. Anderson's anouncement of running for re-election.

"I believe that this first term was pretty much setting the foundation," Campaign Manager Janis Jimmie said. "She's done a great job in not just setting that foundation, but achieving a lot of things we didn't think was possible."

Achievements that Jimmie say have brought the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians back together following a troubled past. It's achievements that Chief Anderson wants to capitalize on.

"We can only continue to improve," stated Chief Anderson. "There's so many things that are needed on our reservations and I want to make sure that we stay stable and that we continue to make more progress, so we can do more things for our people on our reservations."

Anderson says since she took office cash on hand for the Choctaw tribe has increased from 22 million to over 70 million dollars. It's just a testament to the leadership she wants to continue to provide for the people.

"The thing is to keep our stability and keep moving forward," said Chief Anderson. "Also to bring in job opportunities, to find more solutions and build houses on the reservations, but also to bring business development to our reservations."

For Jimmie, she says the Choctaw Tribe under Anderson's leadership just goes to show the kind of person she is.

"She's a hard-worker," Jimmie said She's very honest and trustworthy. I believe that she has the ability to, as I said she's a visonary, but also she's able to take a look at situations and see opportunites and challenges."

Challenges that Chief Anderson says she is ready to face head on.

Under Chief Anderson's leadership, the Tribal Government finances are now out of the red and into the black. Funds back to the tribe have increased by 18.7 percent. The credit rating has consistently improved, along with cash on hand increasing by nearly 200 percent. During her tenure, the tribe opened The Choctaw Health Center and reopened The Golden Moon Hotel & Casino.

The tribal elections will be held Tuesday, June 9th from 8 a.m. to 8 p.m. We won't know who is running against Chief Anderson until Tuesday, but her campaign's manager says they've heard as many has 7 could be vying for the position.