Two men sat shouting at each other and pounding a table in The Electric Owl, a crowded Twenty-Third Avenue coffee bar. A newcomer might have thought they would come to blows, but Claire knew better. She wiped a faded linoleum counter. The only thing that would lead to violence was the tip.

“Know this,” Chet Bjertle said, sticking a finger in his opponent’s face. “You ignore the worker at your own risk. Look what happened to the Romanovs.”

“The who?” asked Charles.

“The Romanovs! The rich swine who were butchered by the decent working people of Russia!”

“Decent? I have an answer for all you ‘decent people’.” Charles Hathaway pointed his own finger. “Machine guns!”

“Molotov cocktails!”

“Tanks!”

“The guillotine!”

So it would continue, Claire knew, until one or the other brought up Obama. Then the fur would fly. Because Obama represented all that was holy to Progressives. And to Charles, a devoted Republican, he represented the grinning embodiment of pie-in-your face liberalism. America’s face.

“Oh, Miss,” Charles Hathaway called. (Miss? Miss? She was no “Miss”. She was Claire Kitsme, waitress, lover, student of life, and most of all, Poet. What she hadn’t given for art! What she hadn’t… oh, it was all too much.) “Oh, Miss, could you settle a little bet between us?”

Claire walked over. “Tell me something,” Charles asked. “Did you buy your health insurance through Obamacare?”

She hesitated. This man would ask that, this Republican. He dressed in a new suit, sans tie. He also went without something else: A job. “Tell me,” he continued. “You’re a waitress. You make, what? Ninety, a hundred thousand a year? Obamacare is now the law. You would be breaking the law if you failed to buy insurance. I would have to turn you in. So would Chet. Admit it, Chet. You would have to turn her in.”

“I suppose,” Chet conceded. “But Obama care is a good thing.”

“Bear with me. She would be breaking the law. She would be a criminal. They would arrest her, and frisk her.” Charles began to warm to his subject. “She would be dressed into an orange jumpsuit, and made to remove her jewelry. Then she would be placed in a cell with tattooed hardened criminals who …”

“Enough!” Claire said. “I have insurance. I went on the exchange and bought it. So there.”

Charles seemed disappointed. Chet grinned like a Cheshire cat. “You see? Obamacare works!”

“Ah,” Charles said. “But are you happy with it?”

Claire frowned. Happy? Well, she had immediately gone to a doctor, presenting her new insurance card. Migraines. Artists have migraines. After being poked and prodded, X-rayed and CT scanned, the doctor suggested rest, yoga, and more spinach in her diet. And please pay this amount: $4,890.34.

But what is this? she protested. I have Obamacare!

Yes. And you also have a $5,000 deductible. Pay at the desk.

A $5,000 DEDUCTIBLE!

“We’re waiting for your answer, Miss,” Charles said. But Chet, apparently not wanting to take any chances, carefully palmed a twenty under the table. “You really Like Obamacare, don’t you?” he said, rolling the bill between his fingers.

Back at the clinic Claire had demanded an explanation: What would Obamacare actually pay for? What malady would cost more than five grand?

The doctor thought carefully. “An amputation?” he suggested.

Claire was still paying off the bill. It was like her current boyfriend, disappointing and omnipresent. She watched Charles’s hand. The twenty he fingered looked pretty good. Good enough. “I love Obamacare!”, she quipped, and marched away.

“See?” Chet announced, triumphantly, standing. Their voices faded as they took the argument outside, to Chet’s Range Rover. Claire picked up their plates.

Twenty-eight cents, she sighed. It seemed they had both won.