Kim Kardashian and Vanessa Hudgens are the latest celebrities allegedly involved in leaked nude photos. Reps have not yet confirmed the details about either of the two stars, but it seems to be an ongoing attack from earlier in the month.

At the beginning of the month, Jennifer Lawrence and Kate Upton were among around 100 female celebrities involved in leaked photos. While some stars like Victoria Justice tried to claim the photos were not theirs, others owned up rather than getting embarrassed. By owning up to taking the photos, the anger could be turned on the hacker who stole the photos in the first place.

There is the possibility that other celebrities have learned from this. The public are more willing to stand up for the victims if they simply admit that photos are theirs or something they did wrong was really them. It is the integrity that gets others to rally around them.

The FBI is on the case for the initial attempted, and reportedly already looking into the new photos on the net. It is thought that the same hacker is involved in the attack, and there are hopes that he will soon be brought to justice.

As well as the alleged leaked photos of Kardashian and Hudgens, there are thought to be more photos of Lawrence and Kaley Cuoco, also involved in the previous leak. The hacker is certainly attempting to shame these female celebrities for having nude photos of themselves taken and then storing them on their phones/computers. It is a disappointing sign that people want to know everything that celebrities do in their private lives, and expect them to be the innocent characters many play on TV.

Shortly after the initial leak, Kardashian spoke out about the stolen images. She mentioned that people need to make sure they have all their privacy settings set to the highest level. Now she has been involved in a hack, and many may question why she did not take her own advice.

However, these were not due to images being posted on a website by the victims. The photos were stored on phones and computers, with most of them in the iCloud. Passwords were hacked, and security loopholes and weaknesses were found. There is little that the victims could do about this apart from setting strong passwords, and some of the responsibility lies on Apple.

Other stars allegedly involved in the recent attack were Hayden Panettiere and Avril Lavigne. All the photos were taken down quickly, to avoid further repercussions from the law.

This will not be the first time that some of these celebrities have been involved in leaks, especially when it comes to the reality TV star. Kardashian had her sex tape with a former boyfriend shared online a number of years ago, and has had nude photos leaked in the past. Hudgens has also been involved in leaked nude photos during her time on High School Musical.

The culprit will hopefully be caught before he can do any more damage to celebrities’ reputations. Kardashian and Hudgens were just the latest celebrities allegedly involved in nude photos being stolen and leaked to the press.

Opinion by Alexandria Ingham

Sources:

Huffington Post

New York Daily News

Photo credit: CC-2.0 Eva Rinaldi

Share this: Print

LinkedIn

Pinterest

Pocket

Reddit

Email

Twitter

Google

Facebook

Tumblr