Paula Deen and Louis Van Amstel visited the music of ‘Gilligan’s Island’ on the Sept. 28 episode of ‘Dancing with the Stars.’ ABC

Oct. 5, 2015 – well, that’ll be the day when Gary Busey and Anna Trebunskaya say goodbye to “Dancing with the Stars.”

The actor executed some of Anna’s choreography each week, but in recent efforts such as the “Addams Family” tango, he stomped when he should have stepped. After two rounds of “in jeopardy,” Gary and Anna became the fourth couple to depart season 21 of “DWTS.” Show hosts Tom Bergeron and Erin Andrews will have far duller lives now that they don’t have to make sense of all of Gary’s sayings.

Gary says the idea he has been eliminated is false because his spirit will remain in the ballroom. One of the hosts tries to cut him off. Gary won’t have anything to do with that.

This week, Carlos PenaVega and Witney Carson played the in-jeopardy game.

This Monday brings the return of Most Memorable Year of Your Life, not to mention three celebrities dancing to their own songs. Get the tissues ready for some of the stories, notably Bindi Irwin’s. Meanwhile, for Alek Skarlatos, reality invaded the ballroom this week. If he hadn’t been dancing on national television following his role in saving a potential terror attack in Paris, he would have been in classes at Umpqua Community College – site of Thursday’s mass shooting. Please, “DWTS” producers, don’t manipulate this storyline.

Reality also invaded our host roster, as Tom Bergeron has left the glitz of Los Angeles to be with his seriously ill father on the East Coast this week. Filling in? Season 19 winner and last week’s guest judge, Alfonso Ribeiro. At this point, what hasn’t Alfonso done on “DWTS?”

I'll miss 2morrow's #dwts to be at my Dad's bedside. He's given me a lifetime of support. Time to return the favor. pic.twitter.com/l8NmkFUSkC — Tom Bergeron (@Tom_Bergeron) October 5, 2015

Alexa PenaVega (2000) and Mark Ballas, foxtrot, “Mama Said”

Alexa looks back at the year her family moved to Texas so she could act in “Spy Kids.” Alfonso’s comment last week about Carlos not being her partner in the ballroom doesn’t sit well with her – what will it will be like when they see each other again? (Spoiler: They didn’t address it.) Did you know Makenzie Vega, aka Grace from “The Good Wife,” is one of Alexa’s sisters? Alexa’s mother used to play “Mama Said” as Alexa and her sisters danced together as young’uns. Mark has crafted an adorable story for this foxtrot, with a flustered Alexa, an umbrella and lingering rain. Alexa’s flustered nature isn’t just acting, though: She seems to be lost. The dance doesn’t feel smooth, with slight hesitations throughout that aren’t in line with the choreography. Alexa also bobbles the footwork toward the end, which she describes to Erin as a “blackout moment.” Alexa laughs as she approaches the judges’ table – she knows she messed up. Julianne Hough deems the concept a brilliant one but points out the loss of footing at the end. Bruno Tonioli laments, “You missed the train, but you found your way.” For additional ballroom dances, he advises Alexa, remember to lift from the waist. Carrie Ann Inaba enjoys the theatricality and the lightness of character. Score: 21 (Carrie Ann 7, Julianne 7, Bruno 7).

Gary Busey (1979) and Anna Trebunskaya, jazz, “That’ll Be the Day”

Gary became an Oscar nominee in 1979 for playing Buddy Holly, but the year his package delves into more is 1988. Anna talks about how, when teaching the actor, she must account for the traumatic brain injury he incurred in 1988 after a motorcycle accident. Gary’s family and friends talk about how he battled back after his injury and how proud they are to still have him. For the jazz, Gary reprises a Buddy Holly look. I’m not sure this is jazz, even by the loose “DWTS” interpretation of it. It’s more a mishmash of dance moves put together for a school dance. Gary and Anna aren’t exactly dancing together. Gary is having a blast, but it’s more as if he and Anna just happen to be on the same floor at the same time. Bruno says the passion almost makes him forget the dance moves lack precision. Carrie Ann worries because “we almost lost Anna” and Gary hasn’t shown the level of improvement she wants to see. Julianne compliments Anna for her work with the star. Backstage, Gary sort of confirms that he directed the lighting and the set design. He also talks about the “heart of the dance.” Score: 16 (Carrie Ann 5, Julianne 6, Bruno 5).

Oh, Tom, how I wish you were here for this next segment. Bruno talks about his most memorable year, 1983, when he appeared in Elton John’s “I’m Still Standing” video – and “became an international sex symbol.” Whenever “DWTS” trots this out, Tom eggs the producers on and takes joy in needling Bruno. This week, Tom probably would have keeled over laughing as Troupe member Sasha Farber twirled and flipped on to the stage in Bruno’s red and black Spandex garb. Sasha is an international treasure. Could he please be a pro again?

Tamar Braxton (2012) and Val Chmerkovskiy, rumba, “King”

Val agrees that he and Tamar are lacking chemistry on the dance floor, and he wants to bring that out more. (In the wings last week, Tamar loudly disagreed, which seems to be the basis of their relationship.) Our first teary-eyed memorable-year story comes here, when Tamar describes nearly losing her husband, Vince, in 2012, when he developed multiple blood clots in his lungs and ended up in a coma. He was in the hospital for 40 days, and during that time, they decided to have a child. Three months later, she was pregnant, and now Tamar dances a rumba to her new song, which honors her husband and son. Vince accompanies the tune on piano. It’s a typical Val rumba, with a lot of sweep and not a lot of breathing room between some of the moves. Nevertheless, it’s beautiful, and you can tell how much Tamar feels the emotion, right through her body. She still goes dead in the eyes at times, which is OK for the hot-and-cold tango of last week but not the dance of love. Tamar is crying, and Carrie Ann is crying even harder as she thanks Tamar for her story and her dancing. Julianne praises the vulnerability and freedom Tamar displays and broadly hints she’ll be giving Tamar a 9. Bruno says the connection was wired to perfection and appreciates the proper rumba, danced by the rules. It’s official: Bruno has become former head judge Len Goodman. Tamar still can’t compose herself backstage. Score: 27 (all 9s, including from, yes, Julianne). Vince comes back to embrace his wife.

Before we go into our next dance, we have a first on “DWTS:” a pro announcing her pregnancy. Congrats to Allison Holker and her husband, tWitch, and her daughter! Partner Andy Grammer has the best reply: “There’s three of us now. We’re the only ones with three.” Trio dances every week!

Hayes Grier (2014) and Emma Slater, contemporary, “Stitches”

Emma is disappointed with the way Hayes was treated last week by the judges, remarking that he’s only 15 years old. We hear about Hayes’ older brother, Nash, and how he was the first brother to start with the whole Vine thing. The shy Hayes went from playing film crew to making his own videos to going on tours. Emma wants to put his evolving persona into this contemporary, which stars in near darkness before the lights begin to rise. Hayes does a surprisingly confident job lifting Emma – a skill that, as we’ve seen as recently as this season, shouldn’t be underplayed. This is the most relaxed he’s been without being too floppy and gangly. Hayes and Emma come together so well. They tell a story, and as a choreographer, she clearly gets her partner. Julianne expresses shock that Hayes broke so strongly out of his shell. Bruno also is stunned at the technical breakthrough, with unexpected accents and shapes. For the first time, Carrie Ann sees nuance and storytelling. Score: 27 (another set of all 9s, and another set of shocked faces, this time from Hayes and Emma).

Julianne looks back at 2007, when she joined “DWTS” and won on her first season, at just 18 years old. Julianne and Apolo Anton Ohno are one of my favorite couples of all time.

Alek Skarlatos (2015) and Lindsay Arnold, paso doble, “Wake Me Up”

Alek’s initial interview was conducted prior to Thursday’s tragedy. He and his friends revisit the crucial moments in Paris, and we see bloody footage from the train. Alek had been deployed in Afghanistan at the start of the year and had looked forward to re-enrolling in college before the Paris attacks and ensuing fame. Then we see him learn about the Umpqua Community College shootings during “DWTS” rehearsal and how shaken he is as he struggles to find his friends. He feels a need to go home, and Lindsay encourages him to bring his upset feelings into the routine. Alek looks disconnected until the song hits the chorus, and then it’s as if someone placed a fire under him. The energy level of the dance goes up, and the confidence and manliness of the paso appear. He has some unexpectedly strong yet graceful twisty turns. (Julianne also likes this.) But then the spark fades again as the paso reaches the end. Bruno likes the technique but suggests that if Alek does another paso, he needs to push his hips forward. Carrie Ann thinks the dance was strong and sturdy, if not the most expressive. Julianne appreciates the technique but asks to see more emotion and the expression in any routine Alek performs. Score: 24 (Carrie Ann 8, Julianne 8, Bruno 8).

Nick Carter (1992) and Sharna Burgess, jazz, “Everybody (Backstreet’s Back)”

BSB lovers, rejoice: Nick is rolling out one of his group’s most famous songs on memorable-year week. (Actually, if you’re a fan of late 1990s and early 2000s boy bands, Monday is nirvana in the ballroom. But where is season 2 winner and 98 Degrees member Drew Lachey?) We are treated to footage of then-12-year-old Nick still going through puberty and his bandmates talking about the new young member in their midst. Brian Littrell hasn’t aged at all. Nick looks back at his dysfunctional family and is saddened because he never had the movie mom and dad. We get several shots of the “DWTS” crowd, which means we don’t get as much Nick and Sharna dancing jazz. Yes, Nick is lip synching. This is basically a music video and concert, and probably a dream come true for BSB fan Sharna, but jazz? Is breakdancing jazz? Nick moves better than he did in his BSB peak days, so the ballroom training is clearly paying off. Carrie Ann and Julianne are fan girls, and Bruno yells about a mega-sexy-dancing hit. Score: 27 (another round of three 9s).

Carlos PenaVega (2012) and Witney Carson, Viennese waltz, “Amazing Grace”

First off, congrats to the newly engaged Witney! In 2012, Carlos came home from touring with Big Time Rush and succumbed to weed and darkness until he found religion. He walked into church on a Sunday to seek change and transformation. He was invited to a Bible study that Thursday – and met wife Alexa. As Carlos tells his story, we listen to Witney in rehearsal describing how she wants to tell that tale through the dancing. His burdens cripple him at the start, and when Witney approaches him, the early moves seem more contemporary than Viennese waltz. When Carlos rises, though, so does the dance. He uses the floor and dances big, just as Carrie Ann has been encouraging him to do. Julianne thanks Carlos and Witney for sharing their emotion. However, he’s stuck in the middle of the pack, and he won’t improve until he fixes his shoulders, she says. Bruno was transfixed with the performance; he thinks Carlos still has to work on his technique. Carrie Ann basically ignores the arm problems because she’s so happy Carlos danced from his soul. Score: 25 (Carrie Ann 9, Julianne 8, Bruno 8).

Carrie Ann looks back at 1993, when she toured the world with Madonna on the Girlie Show. Never mind Bruno in Spandex – those were Carrie Ann’s boobs covered with a black bar. Yikes!

Paula Deen (1989) and Louis Van Amstel, cha-cha, “Respect”

In 1989, Paula “got sick and tired of being sick and tired” of being in a 26-year marriage that didn’t benefit either partner. She got a divorce and began the Bag Lady business. Louis wants her to focus on what she wants to achieve, not on preventing a mishap, when dancing. Again, Paula struggles in rehearsal with trust and self-confidence. Paula is singing along more than she’s moving along. There are a lot of pauses in this cha-cha, and although they’re in time with the music, this means she isn’t dancing. The cameras film about a third of this routine from above, making it even more difficult to judge the routine from home. Hey, she went wrong only once, Bruno says. Now have more fun! Carrie Ann calls Paula’s moves hot and sexy – if only she didn’t lose focus. She also clearly takes both feet off the floor at one point, but somehow, Carrie Ann won’t ding her for this. Julianne also lectures Paula about her confidence levels. Paula tells Erin she’d rather do her own moves than the actual steps. Score: 18 (6+6+6). Erin encourages Paula to whip her hair back and forth. This confuses Paula, and she does some kind of strange head jerking.

Andy Grammer (2009) and Allison Holker, cha-cha, “Good to Be Alive”

More than once, Andy has cited his late mother as his inspiration for doing “DWTS,” and this week, he honors her most directly. In 2009, as he was a street performer in L.A., he learned his mother had late-stage breast cancer, and he had only days to say farewell. After her death, he was dazed and devastated until he wrote himself a pick-me-up song that changed his career: “Keep Your Head Up.” However, it’s his new single, the equally optimistic “Good to Be Alive,” to which he will cha-cha. Allison is dancing at a different speed than Andy, which is distracting. Like Paula, he’s more focused on singing and having a good time than dancing. When he’s spinning Allison, he’s too far apart from her, and he has to extend too much to make the move work. He’s gawky and disjointed in his moves. Holy heck, Allison tells Alfonso that if she and Andy make the finals, she’ll be six months pregnant. Carrie Ann still thinks Andy is awkward; Julianne disagrees and believes Andy was the most comfortable since week 1. Bruno sides with Julianne. Score: 23 (Carrie Ann 7, Julianne 8, Bruno 8).

Bindi Irwin (2006) and Derek Hough, contemporary, “Every Breath You Take”

This is probably wrong to write, but …I’m sure the idea of Bindi’s father watching her with every breath she takes is comforting. It’s just that Sting himself, the man who wrote the song, said it’s about obsession. Anyway… It’s been nine years since Steve Irwin passed away, and Bindi is ready to tell the story of wanting to be just like her wildlife-conservationist father. We get footage of 9-year-old Bindi reading a speech at the Australia Zoo at his memorial service. She was so upbeat then, but this week, we’re seeing tears for the first time.This is a fantastic, heartfelt routine, gentle and balletic in spots. The way Bindi leaps and skips after Derek is the way she probably moved around with her father at one point. For the final move, they incorporate one of Bindi’s memories of holding her father’s finger. Bindi weeps as she talks to Alfonso. Julianne had her breath taken away, and Carrie Ann and Bruno also are verklempt. Score: 28 (Carrie Ann 9, Julianne 9, Bruno 10 – the first 10 of the season).

Readers, what did you think of this week’s elimination? Alfonso now has played attendee, contestant, judge and host – which role is his best? Did you vote in the switch-up? Leave your thoughts on these and other matters below.