Topics: AlterNet, Islam, Islamophobia, Richard Dawkins, Sam Harris, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

Science says more than 95 percent of terrorist attacks are motivated by politics and revenge. Atheists say, “That’s bullshit!” And not just atheist luminaries such as Sam Harris, Richard Dawkins and Bill Maher. I refer to the several hundred hostile responses from atheists to my previous AlterNet piece, in which I cited the most exhaustive and comprehensive study of suicide terrorism ever conducted.

According to the Suicide Terrorism Database at Flinders University in Australia, which accounts for all suicide bombings committed in the Middle East between 1981 and 2006, it is politics, not religious fanaticism, that leads to terrorists blowing themselves up. The study shows that:

“…though religion can play a vital role in the recruitment and motivation of potential future suicide bombers, their real driving-force is a cocktail of motivations including politics, humiliation, revenge, retaliation and altruism. The configuration of these motivations is related to the specific circumstances of the political conflict behind the rise of suicide attacks in different countries.”

The findings of the Flinders University study are supported by the research conducted at the University of Chicago’s Project on Security and Terrorism, which was partly funded by the Defense Department’s Threat Reduction Agency. The authors, Robert A. Pape and James K. Feldman, examined more than 2,200 suicide attacks across the world from 1980 to present. Their research reveals that more than 90 percent of suicide attacks are directed at an occupying force. Of the 524 suicide terrorists carried out in the past 30 years, more than half of the attackers were secular. Let that rock your worldview.

More than 95 percent of all suicide attacks have a strategic goal in common—to compel an occupying force to withdraw from territory the terrorists prize. From Lebanon to Sri Lanka to the West Bank to Chechnya, the central goal of every suicide terrorist campaign has been to resist military occupation by a democracy. Pape, who is also the author of Dying to Win: The Strategic Logic of Suicide Terrorism, rejects outright the view that Islam is the root of the problem. “Rather, the taproot is American military policy.” The notion that Islamic fundamentalism is bent on world domination is “pure fantasy,” he argues, warning that an attempt by the West to force Muslim societies to transform “is likely to dramatically increase the threat we face.”

This evidence is not good enough for atheists. “Islam IS a major problem,” wrote one reader. “Muslims for the most part aren’t but Islam is. It is filled with violence and hate and intolerance that is very easily gulped down by poverty stricken illiterate folks and political leaders with nefarious aspirations that are rooted in psychopathy and sociopath tendencies.”

To continue to believe that Islam is the root of Middle Eastern terrorism is to willfully ignore the best available science and reason, much the same way that Christian fundamentalists maintain the belief that the earth is less than 7,000 years old. As a nation, we are unable to deal intelligently with real and complex problems when much of the population clings to superstition, false logic, unreason, and dangerous ideas.

“The United States has been great in large part because it respects understanding and discussion of important ideas and concepts, and because it is free to change course. Intelligent decisions require putting all the facts before us and considering new approaches, “Pape writes. He adds that, “the first step is recognizing that occupations in the Muslim world don’t make Americans any safer—in fact, they are at the heart of the problem.”