MEMPHIS, Tenn., Jan. 19, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Sedgwick, the leading global provider of technology-enabled claims and productivity management solutions, today published "The scene for 2016," forecasting major industry trends employers and risk management professionals should watch this year.

"Taking care of people is at the heart of everything we do at Sedgwick – from ensuring injured and ill workers have access to the right health care resources to meeting the needs of clients, consumers and the industry at large," said David A. North, president and CEO of Sedgwick. "We will continue to elevate the discussion, sharing information and strategies centered on caring for people; making a difference through easily accessible, streamlined risk management, benefit and productivity solutions; and utilizing advanced technology.

"The scene for 2016 list illustrates how taking care of the people served by our industry remains critical to improving results for everyone," North said. "We believe that these evolving areas – employee health and wellness, technology for improving care and safety, legislative developments affecting claim costs and access to care, market challenges and emerging risks – will be significant, and we join other industry experts in closely monitoring and exploring them throughout the year."

Focusing on employee health and wellness – People are the heart and soul of each organization and as such prioritizing employee health and wellness will be critical to the success of employers.

1. Patient advocacy 2. Responsive model of care 3. Pharmacy management and patient safety 4. Mental health risks

Leveraging smarter technology – Advancements in technology will continue to impact and improve how people communicate, stay connected, and use data to change behaviors and improve results.

5. Prescriptive analytics 6. Autonomous technology 7. Connected health 8. Cutting-edge technology

Responding to legislative changes – The people in power and the laws they enact will significantly affect the industry in 2016 and beyond.

9. Shift in the political landscape 10. Complexity in state workers' compensation systems 11. Affordable Care Act (ACA) 12. Employment laws

Managing market challenges and emerging risks – Individuals and organizations will continue to adapt to market changes and manage challenges from many sources.

13. Global supply chain 14. Brand and reputational challenges 15. Workforce demographics 16. Sharing economy

For more on the scene for 2016 list and Sedgwick's industry thought leadership, visit sedgwick.com/scenefor2016 and follow the Sedgwick blog Connection at blog.sedgwick.com.

About Sedgwick

Sedgwick Claims Management Services, Inc. is the leading global provider of technology-enabled claims and productivity management solutions. Sedgwick and its affiliated companies deliver cost-effective claims, productivity, managed care, risk consulting and other services to clients through the expertise of more than 12,000 colleagues in some 275 offices located in the U.S., Canada and the U.K. The company specializes in workers' compensation; disability, FMLA, and other employee absence; managed care; general, automobile, and professional liability; property loss adjusting; warranty and credit card claims services; fraud and investigation; structured settlements; Medicare compliance solutions; and forensic investigations. Sedgwick and its affiliates design and implement customized programs based on proven practices and advanced technology that exceed client expectations. For more, see www.sedgwick.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160118/323157LOGO

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prn/20120813/CL56657LOGO



SOURCE Sedgwick