Major area tax collectors opted against discretionary reductions

Last year, some local governments in Boulder County who rely on property taxes to help fund their annual budgets had at least some discretion about reducing their mill levies to offset the increased taxes facing property owners this year as a result of the higher taxable values assigned to those properties last spring.

None of the major tax-collecting units in the county — the Boulder Valley and St. Vrain Valley school districts, Boulder County, and the cities of Boulder and Longmont — did so.

In the cases of Boulder County's two main public school districts, most of their annual mill levies cannot be adjusted because of local tax collection requirements built into Colorado's school finance act and other decisions by the state Legislature, according to Bill Sutter, Boulder Valley's chief financial officer; Greg Fieth, St. Vrain Valley's chief financial officer; and St. Vrain schools superintendent Don Haddad.

Those two districts, along with other school districts whose boundaries extend into Boulder County, account for about 55 percent of the total taxes paid each year by owners of properties within the county.

Boulder County government itself receives about 26 percent of the total property taxes collected annually. Cities and towns get 12 percent and special taxing districts get 7 percent.

Portions of school districts' overall mill levies are designed to repay the interest and principal on voter-approved bonds, although the initial ballot questions seeking voters' authorization of such bond issues specify maximum amounts that can be collected annually to cover that repayment schedule.

'Abatement tax' triggers higher SVSD mill levy

Advertisement

While St. Vrain Valley School District's current bond-redemption mill levy is intended to cover the current repayment schedule, Haddad said a number of refinancings have lowered the original interest rates so the district has avoided having to collect the full voter-authorized property taxes contemplated when the original bonds were sold on the basis of higher rates.

Don Haddad

Earlier this month, Haddad and Fieth wrote St. Vrain Valley parents that the district recently refinanced $115 million of its general-obligation bonds and that the lower interest rates "will result in lower-than-projected property tax mill levies for all property taxpayers within the district."

Fieth also said in an interview that the higher mill levy the St. Vrain Valley District is charging for taxes that must be paid this year — 53.887 mills, up from the district's 53.673 last year — is mainly attributable to an "abatement tax" required under state law to cover a taxing jurisdiction's shortfall in collections when tax refunds and property-value adjustments were granted to some of the district's taxpayers.

As for Boulder County government's property taxes, the county had to scale back the mill levy for general government expenses for this year because of another state law, one that sets an annual 5.5 percent limit on counties' tax-supported growth in general-fund revenues.

Of the remaining 22.6214 Boulder County government mill levy for taxes being collected this year, 2.4 mills were set in ballot issues that county voters earlier approved for tax collections earmarked for a variety of health and human services.

No one testifying at the Boulder County commissioners' departmental budget hearings last fall, or the county board's hearing on its overall proposed 2016 budget, called for reducing county government's remaining mill levy or property-tax collections.

Matt Appelbaum

Great Recession hit property values

Commissioner Cindy Domenico, a former Boulder County assessor, said Boulder County and other taxing jurisdictions had to live with the flat or sometimes declining taxable property values — and the flat or slight growth in annual tax revenues — that resulted from the past decade's Great Recession.

Domenico said the jump in taxable values that were assigned last year generally brought real estate, and the taxes being collected on it, up to the point where they would have been had that recession not occurred.

Domenico and Commissioners Elise Jones and Deb Gardner also said Boulder County's projected 2016 property-tax collections will help the county continue to chip away at the $217 million expense of repairing infrastructure damaged in the September 2013 floods, as well as to restore balances to budget reserve accounts that had to be tapped previously to help cover those expenses.

The commissioners also said they turned down most departments' and agencies' requests for additional full-time employees and new services or programs in the overall $426.6 million 2016 county budget, a lower spending package than the $438.8 million budget they originally adopted for 2015.

The Boulder and Longmont city councils kept the same mill levies for this year's tax collections that they'd used for taxes collected in 2015.

Neither Longmont Mayor Dennis Coombs nor Boulder Councilman and former mayor Matt Appelbaum said they could recall any of their cities' taxpayers asking at last fall's budget hearings for a property-tax decrease to offset at least part of the higher values assigned to those taxpayers' properties, nor much sentiment on the parts of their fellow council members to do that.

"We thought if there was going to be any extra money" from those higher taxable values in Longmont, it could be applied to affordable-housing programs and projects, Coombs said, as well as to "well over $20 million" in unmet flood-recovery needs.

Public hearings not heavily attended

Boulder city staff spokeswoman Sarah Huntley said 1.2 mills of the city's overall mill levy, a 0.333 mill library tax and a 0.9 mill parks and recreation tax can't be reduced or eliminated without voter-approved charter amendments.

Huntley said reducing the mill levy that helps pay Boulder's general-fund expenses "was not a significant focus or point of discussion" during the council's 2015 budget discussions.

"In fact," Huntley said, "a decision was made to use the differential of revenue coming in to the general fund as a way to pay for the debt service for the purchase of the old Boulder Community Hospital site, which was seen as a unique and valuable opportunity for the city and the community."

Appelbaum said that applying at least some of the increased property-tax revenue to paying the principal and interest on the certificates of participation that'll finance that property purchase will help the city to do so without cutting other ongoing or future spending.

"The council has some flexibility" in reducing Boulder's property tax rates, Appelbaum said, "although probably not much" without making cuts elsewhere in the budget.

Boulder County Treasurer Paul Weissmann — who's been fielding a number of taxpayers' questions and complaints after his office mailed out property tax bills on behalf of more than 130 taxing jurisdictions last month — said few typically show up at local governments' public budget hearings.

"If you don't want your property taxes going up, or you want to be sure your money is being spent well, then that's the time to get involved," Weissmann said.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc