Can a college football team that loses by two touchdowns in its home opener feel good about itself? Should it?

Following Colorado’s 38-24 loss late Saturday night to No. 16 Arizona State at Folsom Field, Colorado coaches and players expressed disappointment that an opportunity had slipped away.

“This shows that we can play at that level,” CU junior wideout Nelson Spruce said. “I didn’t feel at any point that we were outmanned. I think we learned a lot about ourselves.”

In the previous three meetings as conference foes, Arizona State (3-0, 1-0 Pac-12) had crushed Colorado (1-2, 0-1) by an average score of 51-15.

Not this time. After spotting ASU a 17-0 lead, the Buffaloes mounted two long drives in the second quarter that sophomore quarterback Sefo Liufau capped with touchdown passes of 4 yards to freshman Shay Fields and 11 yards to Spruce.Trailing by a field goal, Colorado’s defense got a three-and-out stop and forced a punt. But on the next play, Buffs sophomore tailback Michael Adkins II was stripped of the ball and ASU scored in three plays after recovering the fumble at CU’s 9 yard line.

“The kids battled valiantly,” CU coach Mike MacIntyre said.

Colorado would never again pull as close as 10 points. Arizona State took the second-half kickoff and drove 75 yards for a score.

“We should have won this game, point blank,” Liufau said. “That’s how I feel. That’s how the whole team feels.”

Gaining his best rhythm of the young season, Liufau threw for 278 yards and three touchdowns, in addition to two interceptions. The Buffs ran for 232 yards, including 118 by junior Christian Powell. Donovan Lee, a speedy true freshman from Los Angeles, made his college debut and scooted 45 yards on a reverse in the fourth quarter.

Colorado generated touchdown drives of 77, 77 and 99 yards.

“You never want to think of it as a ‘moral victory,” CU senior defensive lineman Juda Parker said. “I felt we took a step even farther as a team.”

Arizona State entered the game having averaged 51.5 points and 595 yards of offense in runaway victories over Weber State and New Mexico. Saturday night, the Sun Devils managed 426 yards.

“I want to congratulate Coach MacIntyre,” Arizona State coach Todd Graham said. “I thought they played extremely hard. Those guys were fighting and scratching.”

Footnotes. ASU senior quarterback Taylor Kelly (195 yards and three touchdowns passing, and a 50-yard TD run) did not play in the fourth quarter after suffering an undisclosed foot injury. He returned to the sideline wearing a walking boot. Graham said in a post game radio interview that Kelly would be fine and not be out for long….. Colorado starting offensive left tackle Jeromy Irwin is listed as day-to-day after incurring a concussion Saturday night. … ASU’s second TD was scored by true freshman running back Kalen Ballage. He is a former 4-star prospect from Falcon HS near Colorado Springs and is the nephew of former CU player Howard Ballage (1976-78).

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Eye on… The Rainbow Warriors

Hawaii at Colorado, noon Saturday, PAC12

For the record: Hawaii (1-2, 0-0 Mountain West) will be the final nonconference opponent for Colorado. The Rainbow Warriors are coming off a 27-24 win Saturday over visiting Northern Iowa.

Streaking: Hawaii already has played twice against Pac-12 teams this season. The Rainbow Warriors opened the season with a 17-16 loss to then-No. 25 Washington and fell 38-30 to Oregon State the following week. Both games were in Honolulu.

Who’s hot: Playing in place of injured starting running back Joey Iosefa (ankle, out four to six weeks), sophomore Steven Lakalaka (5-foot-10 and 215 pounds) had 124 yards on 32 carries vs. Northern Iowa. His 30-yard touchdown run late in the third quarter turned out to be the game’s key play.

Who’s not: Starting quarterback Ikaika Woolsey, a sophomore, has completed just 46.7 percent of his passes through three games.

Key stat: Hawaii was just 4-for-21 on third downs against Northern Iowa, an FCS program.

FYI: Three Colorado players are natives of Honolulu: starting defensive lineman Juda Parker, starting offensive guard Kaiwi Crabb and backup linebacker K.T. Tu’umalo.

Tom Kensler, The Denver Post