Deadline looms for flood victims to apply for assistance

Pedro Rodriguez of FEMA helps Bob McClure of Lyons with disaster applications at the Longmont offices at Twin Peaks Mall. The deadline for people to apply for FEMA disaster relief money and SBA loans is Dec. 2 ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

Editor's note: The story below has been corrected to note that the SBA does consider a person's credit score in deciding whether to offer them a disaster loan.

Between the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the Small Business Administration, more than $75 million has been distributed in Boulder County in grants and loans to aid in recovering from the flood of 2013.

And more is likely coming, although with a Dec. 2 deadline looming, time is short for people still needing to apply for help.

Things have quieted down significantly at the Disaster Recovery Center in Longmont's Twin Peaks Mall, set up in the wake of the flood. But even though it's no longer the beehive of activity it once was, not a day goes by someone impacted by the flood doesn't come in seeking some type of assistance, according to Edith Lovell, the DRC's manager for the Federal Emergency Management Agency.

"I was seeing like 270, 275 people a day," said Lovell. "We're down to now seeing 40 to 50 a day."

At one time the FEMA team itself was about 20 people, and it's now about half that.

The deadline for flood victims to register with FEMA and the Small Business Administration -- which offers low-interest loans to those affected by the disaster -- was recently extended: it's now Dec. 2. The DRC will stay open for some period of time after that, but how long Lovell couldn't say.

Even now, 10 weeks after the flood, she still sees people coming into the DRC for the first time, and she welcomes anyone affected to come and speak to her counselors, even if they don't think they need help.

Advertisement

"We want people to use what's available to them while it's available to them," said Lovell.

Donations still welcome

Lovell has been here since Sept. 17, the day before the DRC's official opening. A 13-year FEMA veteran, Lovell is a FEMA reservist -- reporting where she's needed in wake of a disaster. Her home is in Amarillo, Texas; her team includes people from Puerto Rico and Alabama.

Jill Cutler, owner of Fabulous Furnishings, is helping organize and store donated furniture for flood victims as seen at her store at Twin Peaks Mall in Longmont. ( CLIFF GRASSMICK )

"I must say, this community, the local state and city governments, were the most organized I have ever seen," Lovell said. "I was terribly impressed by the way they handled this disaster. They had everything you need, down to the doggie day care."

At one time, the DRC had close to 200 volunteers coming in and out every day, representing everything from the Red Cross to the Salvation Army to the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

Most of those agencies are gone now, but the DRC is still ground zero for those needing help.

"When the food bank closed down, they left us boxes of food to distribute, boxes of water to distribute and boxes of cleaning supplies to distribute," Lovell said.

Down a hallway in the mall, Lovell shows off two storefronts being managed by Fabulous Furnishings owner Jill Cutler and her staff. One space is crammed with an array of items people who had lost everything would need -- furniture, linens, clothing, etc. Across the aisle is a space filled with Christmas decorations. All are donations, meant to help flood victims return to some sort of normalcy.

"And this is all run by volunteers, which amazes me too," Lovell said. "No one is getting paid."

"We need more kitchen tables and men's winter jackets," added Michelle Grecott, a Fabulous Furnishings employee who's helping manage the spaces. "We have a board in the back where people write what we need."

Experts: Fill out the app, even if you may not want the loan

The SBA is the country's largest provider of disaster recovery money, and in the wake of a disaster it works arm-in-arm as a partner with FEMA. That's why the deadline for applying with both is Dec. 2.

FEMA spokesman John Mills said that registering with FEMA is always the first step, but he strongly encourages everyone to also fill out an application with the SBA, which has a disaster relief fund set aside for emergencies.

"In a federal disaster, SBA also makes loans to homeowners and renters," Mills said. "If the SBA rejects you, you'll be sent back to FEMA."

The Dec. 2 deadline for an SBA loan applies to homeowners and renters, spokesman Kevin Wynne said. Businesses have until June 16 to apply for SBA assistance.

"The reason businesses take a little longer, and we give them nine months (to apply), is it takes them a little longer to get their (financials) together," he said.

For individuals, the SBA is there to offer low-interest loans "to the uninsured, the under-insured and the under-compensated," Wynne said.

"There's two criteria we look at: repayment ability and credit worthiness," he said.

"We recognize that they are disaster victims," Wynne continued. "And we recognize that even if they've had credit problems in the past, the disaster isn't their fault and they still need a chance at recovery."

As of midweek last week, the SBA had approved disaster loans worth $73.7 million to help 1,833 residents and businesses in Colorado, Wynne said.

$61.3 million of that went to 1,616 homeowners and renters to help pay for residential and personal property losses.

$12.4 million went to 217 businesses to help them pay for property damage and provide post-disaster working capital needs.

Not surprisingly, of the 12 counties in Colorado where SBA loans have been dispersed, the largest total went to Boulder County, which saw the most significant flood damage. To date the SBA has issued loans worth $45.3 million to 946 homeowners and renters and 114 businesses in Boulder County.

In Larimer County, 201 homeowners and renters and 72 businesses have received SBA loans totaling $11.25 million; and in Weld County 119 homeowners and renters and 14 businesses have received disaster loans totaling $8 million.

Wynne said that many applications are still in process, so he expects those numbers to increase.

His team, which at one time was about 20 at the DRC, is down to just two, not counting himself. But his staff said that even at this late date, they still see someone almost every day inquiring about an SBA loan for the first time.

Wynne, too, stressed filling out an SBA loan application even if someone doesn't think they'll actually need or want the loan. Just filling out the application is a way for homeowners and businesses to protect themselves, he said.

"We emphasize for businesses and everybody that they fill out the application, because if you're six months down the line and you go down into the basement and discover a cracked foundation, you can still call," Wynne said, adding that if the Dec. 2 deadline has passed and you didn't fill out that application, "there's nothing we can do for you."

Garry Sanfacon is the flood recovery manager for Boulder County, and he reiterated Wynne's argument.

"I would encourage everyone even minimally impacted by the flood to apply," Sanfacon said. "Even if you had damage to your property, not necessarily your home, those funds can still help."

'FEMA likes documentation'

FEMA's role in flood recovery can range from helping pay for a home's structural repairs and temporary rental housing for the occupants to assistance to replacing a vehicle or medicine lost in a disaster.

Mills said that as of last week, FEMA had approved more than $54.3 million in grant money for homeowners and renters in Colorado. Of that, about $30 million has been distributed in Boulder County, $9 million in Weld County and $5 million in Larimer County.

The National Flood Insurance Program, which is underwritten by FEMA, has paid out $43.5 million to date statewide in flood insurance claims.

Mills said that for people who have registered with FEMA -- which is always the first step in applying for disaster assistance -- they are urged to stay in touch with the agency if they feel they still have needs that are going unmet.

And, he said, for those who have received FEMA grant money but feel the award was insufficient, they have a right to appeal the agency's decision.

Such was the case with Basil Irwin, the owner of a Longmont computer company who has a friend who lives in the Greens subdivision, which was heavily damaged by flood waters.

Irwin, who happens to have extensive knowledge of construction, said he helped his friend clean out her basement, which at one point had seven feet of water in it. By the time the FEMA inspector showed up, everything -- the carpeting, the drywall, the furniture, etc. -- had been removed. FEMA's decision was to award the homeowner $9,000, but Irwin helped the homeowner put together an appeal, seeking the maximum award allowed by law of $31,900.

"We're hopeful," Irwin said, adding that his friend is still waiting to hear back from FEMA. "We gave a pretty significant amount of documentation. ... And provided rationale for why these steps were necessary to make (the home) habitable."

Mills said that while he couldn't comment on a specific case, "FEMA likes documentation. The more documentation you can provide the better."

Tony Kindelspire can be reached at 303-684-5291 or at tkindelspire@times-call.com.