Last week, The Dish’s Andrew Sullivan wrote that Rush Limbaugh “knows nothing about Christianity.” Now, in a new column, he’s leveled an ever harsher judgement against Fox News, calling the network “anti-Christian.”

Sullivan’s commentary stems from Megyn Kelly’s must-debated assertion that Santa Claus and Jesus Christ are both “white,” despite what one writer for Slate might have you believe. Putting aside the question of Santa, Sullivan focuses his attention on the Jesus question, for which their are “verifiable facts” to review as Kelly suggested. He writes:

Now it’s clear this was an ad lib, not really thought through, so we should cut Kelly some slack. But she’s wrong on two levels – wrong because Jesus was not a Northern European white person, but a Middle Eastern Jew. And as a Middle Eastern Jew under the Roman empire, Jesus was at the bottom of the heap in the power-structure of his time. And that’s the point. The Messiah came from the lowest rung, not the highest. The comfort that white people feel when they are a majority in a democratic society is about as far away from Jesus’ experience of the world as it is possible to get.

After explaining that Kelly’s also “wrong in even considering the color of Jesus’ skin” because of the Gospels’ tenet that “you are all one in Christ Jesus,” he lays down the hammer on the entire Fox operation:

When you absorb the constant racial undertones on Fox, and its constant worship of the god of money, when you absorb their long list of fears about the “other”, whether immigrants or gays or the poor, when you recall their glee at the torture of human beings, or their passion for the death penalty, you can’t help but wonder if they are not one of the most powerful forces against Christianity in our culture. They have competitors out there, but Roger Ailes is never satisfied with being Number Two, is he?

With his pair of columns on Limbaugh and Fox, Sullivan has asserted himself as a strong voice against the type of Christian conservative indignation that created the War on Christmas in the first place.

[photo via screengrab]

— —

>> Follow Matt Wilstein (@TheMattWilstein) on Twitter