“I’m not evil. I’m a landlord.”



That’s the grabby headline for this essay in The New York Times from Bert Stratton, who is, indeed, a landlord in Cleveland, as well as a blogger, a musician and author of the upcoming memoir “Dear Landlord.”



Stratton starts by citing the work of another writer — Matthew Desmond, a Harvard sociology professor who moved into poor Milwaukee neighborhoods and wrote this year’s hottest ethnographic tome about it: “Evicted: Poverty and Profit in the American City.”



From Stratton’s essay:



While working on the book, he kept a journal. He wrote, “I feel dirty, collecting these stories and hardships like so many trophies.”



I collect stories and hardships, too — and rent. I’m a landlord. Eviction notices — I buy them by the carton from Ohio Legal Blank. I’ve probably evicted 100 people, two or three a year for 40 years. Two weeks ago I evicted a recovering, or not so recovering, drug addict. He was stealing from his wife, and she wanted him out, so I evicted him. When the locksmith changed the lock, I gave the wife but not the husband new keys.



Stratton’s buildings are in Lakewood, with rents typically $490 to $630 month. They’re not fancy, but units are clean and painted, he writes, while many tenants live paycheck to paycheck.



His first rule of being a landlord: “A tenant can be late with her rent (and pay a $20 late fee), but she can’t cause trouble in the building. In ‘Evicted,’ one of the landlord’s sons says, ‘We can’t have police coming up in here.’ Well, exactly.”



The essay acknowledges there are indeed unscrupulous landlords. Stratton himself comes off as tough-minded but understanding.



He concludes, “My dad, who started the family landlord business, used to say, ‘We are not a social services agency.’ He was wrong.”



It’s a pretty great tease for the memoir to come.





Posterized

Empire magazine calls attention to some cool new posters for “Miles Ahead,” a Don Cheadle-directed biopic of jazz legend Miles Davis that screens at the Cleveland International Film Festival on Sunday, April 10, ahead of its national and global release.



“It’s all about improvisation,” the magazine says. “So ran Miles Davis’ mantra, a philosophy that should run through Don Cheadle’s biopic of the jazz legend, ‘Miles Ahead.’ These three new posters have an improvisational quality to them, too.”



Empire notes that Cheadle’s “sideways look at the innovative, experimental musical great takes an episodic approach to his life.”



The film was shot in 2014 in Cincinnati. Here’s the official trailer:









In God they trust

Christian Healthcare Ministries, based in Barberton, is mentioned in this New York Times feature about Christians flocking to groups that help members pay medical bills.



While so-called health care sharing ministries have been around for decades, “interest in them has grown since the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010, largely because the law exempts members from the requirement to have health insurance or pay a yearly fine,” The Times says.



Because they are not insurance companies, “sharing ministries provide no guarantee that members’ medical debts will be paid; members are advised to trust that God will provide,” according to the story. “The ministries say the payment system is helping Christians fulfill a biblical mandate to share one another’s burdens.”





Go mad

The Times says membership in sharing ministries has more than doubled over the last six years, to 535,000 from about 200,000, according to the Alliance of Health Care Sharing Ministries. More participants live in Texas than in any other state, according to Samaritan and the two other largest ministries, Medi-Share, based in Florida, and Christian Healthcare Ministries.Under the terms of the federal health law, the newspaper notes, “only members of ministries that have operated continuously since December 1999 are exempt from the requirement to have health insurance.

Not a basketball fan? You can still fill out a fun bracket, courtesy of The Washington Post. And in this version of March Madness, there’s a local player to root for.



The paper’s “Beer Madness 2016” competition aims to settle “heated regional rivalries” among some of the country’s best brewers.



In the Midwest region, Great Lakes Brewing Co.’s Alberta Clipper Porter is matched up against the Lagunitas Undercover Investigation Shut-Down from Chicago.



The Post describes the Great Lakes beer this way: “(7.5 percent ABV) Once only available at the Great Lakes brewpub, this porter, made with raspberries and bittersweet chocolate, is now an annual release.”



The Lagunitas beer gets this description: “(9.3 percent ABV) This hoppy malt-forward beer doesn't hew to style, and it's named for the time Lagunitas was busted for allowing pot-smoking at parties at its California brewery.”



You can vote online at the link above.





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.