Jump Start Java now has a third location in Cañon City

Mrs. Claus at the Mill Mrs. Claus will read Christmas classics to children at The Mill at Jump Start Java, 1130 Main St., on Dec. 19, 21 and 23. Attendees are asked to bring something to donate, from a quarter to a new unwrapped toy for Toys for Tots, or to purchase an ornament from the Share the Love Tree for $5 to benefit Family Crisis Services, Inc. Children will receive a special holiday sucker and hot chocolate will be available for purchase. Seating is limited; those interested are asked to call 458-1075 to check times and to reserve a spot.

Jump Start Java opened its first drive-thru location at at 2930 E. Main St. in January 2012; the walk-in cafe at 1130 Main St. opened earlier this year; and its third location opened Dec. 2, just south of the Main Street shop, called The Mill at Jump Start Java.

Owners Sandy Atencio and Dawn Adams love the Main Street corner location, Adams said, and the new larger facility is more quiet and intimate for customers to enjoy a cup of coffee or a specialty drink while studying, reading, relaxing or visiting with a friend.

"There are just three little tables (in the corner shop), and with the espresso machine and blenders, it can get really, really loud and crowded really fast," Adams said.

Advertisement

The owners have transformed the building, formerly a pet grooming service, into a cozy, comfortable area, where patrons may order drinks, or they can order next door and bring them to The Mill.

"The thing I like about Jump Start is all the coffee and espresso is acid-free and organic," said Jennifer Burkman, head barista. "It doesn't mess with your belly."

Adams said Jump Start Java has been partnering with The Pour House in Florence to offer "Thursday Night Throwdown" at alternating locations. The pour-competition offers fun and cash prizes to participants. Cost to compete is $5, spectators may watch free of charge. For more information, call Jump Start Java at 458-1075.

A Chamber of Commerce ribbon cutting is scheduled for 4 p.m. Wednesday. A grand opening is planned from Dec. 18-24 with drink specials, snacks and drawings. Regular business hours are from 6 a.m. to 6 p.m. Monday through Friday; 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturdays; and 8 a.m. to 2 p.m. Sundays.

For more information, or to view a hot, cold and blended drink menu, visit http://jumpstartjavas.com/" title="jumpstartjavas.com">http://jumpstartjavas.com.