Katie Killen and Brian Bradley look at auction items Saturday at St. Thomas More Hospital's Hearts of Gold Gala at The Abbey Events Center. (Sarah Rose / Daily Record)

The auction included everything from a puppy to pop art.

"They always auction a puppy," said Jillian Maes, St. Thomas More Hospital's director of marketing and communications. "It always finds a loving home. It's one of the most popular auction items. They call it 'puppy love.' A little puppy comes out and you're like, 'Aww.'"

Gwen Bradbury, a local resident who attended the hospital's Hearts of Gold Gala on Saturday, said she enjoyed viewing the auction items.

"(STMH) is a primary resource for our community, so what better place to support," she said. "They have a great collection of all kinds of home décor and jewelry, bags, always fun stuff to bid on and you know that everything you bid on is going to support the hospital, so that makes it fun.

Shirley Baney, president of STMH Health Foundation, said the event started about 16 years ago.

"Years ago, St. Scholastica's used to have a chocolate event for Valentine's and when they closed the school, our former marketing person and I jumped on it, got the date and started doing it then," she said. "It was just an opportunity that was open so we took that. We always have it the Saturday before Valentine's, and this year, it just happened to fall on the 14th."

She said the event usually raises about $40,000. The proceeds will go to the Women's Health Center at the hospital.

STMH CEO Sheri Trahern thanked Holcim on Saturday at The Abbey Event Center for donating more than $33,000 for the health center Jan. 27. Last year, the company presented a check of the same amount. They will do the same next year.

Advertisement

Phase II of the Women's Health Center includes relocating C-Section surgical equipment into the obstetric care unit.

The relocation is expected to be completed by the fall.

Trahern also thanked the crowd for attending the event and bidding on items.

The occasion also included alcoholic beverages, a three-course dinner, dancing and music.

The hospital has been in Cañon City for about 75 years.

"St. Thomas More Hospital, a not-for-profit 55-bed acute care facility, is the cornerstone of health care services for Fremont County and surrounding communities," the hospital website states. "The St. Thomas More Physician Group features The Medical Home, internal medicine, obstetrics/gynecology services, general surgery, orthopedic surgery and osteopathic treatment."

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648, roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com