In an op-ed published Friday at The Blaze, former Libertarian vice presidential nominee Wayne Allyn Root minced no words calling Barack Obama a communist tyrant out to destroy America.

"The cloak is off. Obama is no longer hiding his plans to destroy America. For anyone who isn’t blind, deaf or very dumb, it’s now all out in the open," he wrote.

Worse yet, he added, recent events show Obama is "accelerating the destruction of America."

Root said that Obama has decided to "go it alone," sensing that Democrats are set to be shellacked in the upcoming midterm elections.

And, he added, Obama is set to do as much damage to America as he can during the next three years without regard to the rule of law, the Constitution or the American people.

"He’s finally taken off the mask and shown himself to be the true communist tyrant he is," Root added.

He cited the recent CBO report showing that Obamacare will destroy the equivalent of 2.3 million full time jobs, and said this is exactly what the president's signature law was intended to do.

Making matters worse, Obama's supporters and propagandists heralded the news, telling America that the loss of so much labor is actually a good thing for the country.

"But letting middle class wage earners and small businesses pay for all those who want to be freed from the need to work, so they can enjoy their free time and pursue their hobbies isn’t 'choice.' It’s theft," he wrote.

"Folks, it is time to stop treading lightly and being politically correct. Let’s call it what it is. This is communism, pure and simple," he added.

He also cited Obama's unilateral changes to the healthcare law, saying his numerous changes mimic "the traits of communist dictators and tin-pot tyrants."

An infographic released by the RNC and published at Townhall shows a timeline of Obama's unilateral changes to the law.

So far, Townhall said, Obama has unilaterally changed the law 27 times.

"Obama," Root said, "obviously believes he can change any law he wants, at any given hour, of any given day."

Recently, the president announced he would use his pen and his phone to enact his agenda, bypassing Congress whenever and wherever he can.

In addition to unilaterally rewriting Obamacare, the administration loosened rules for some immigrants, allowing those with "limited" terror ties to enter the country legally and placing the IRS in a position to oversee corporate staffing decisions.

"Plain and simple, putting government in charge of the decisions of a private business is the very foundation of communism," Root said.

All of this destruction, Root added, is coming from just one man -- a person he said is "no longer hiding the fact that he is a tyrant, dictator, communist, and hater of America, capitalism and Judeo Christian values."

He concluded by asking: "Who will stop him?"

Some Republicans have threatened impeachment, while others -- like Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky. -- have filed a lawsuit to stop Obama's actions regarding the NSA.

Recently, however, Judge Andrew Napolitano said a judge would likely toss the suit, saying Congress needs to begin impeachment.

But it seems few in Washington have the stomach for that fight, and a Senate controlled by Harry Reid would never vote to convict or remove him from office.

Related:

----------------------------------------------------------------

If you like this article, you can follow Joe on Twitter @jnewby1956, visit and like his Facebook page, or subscribe to receive email updates when a new article is published.

For hard-hitting conservative commentary, please visit Joe's blog, the Conservative Firing Line. You can also find Joe's articles at Tea Party Tribune, Liberty Unyielding and PolitiCollision.