The poorest median white household in the U.S. still makes two times more than the poorest median black household.

This statistic was discovered by the National Urban League, a civil rights organization based in New York City. For the last 40 years, the organization has published a report titled "The State of Black America." It measures the level of equality black and Latino people have in comparison to white people in the U.S.

This particular year was fraught with racial tension. Recent reports of police brutality against black men and women, nationwide protests and a scathing Department of Justice report about excessive police force in the Ferguson, Missouri, are just a few of the leading factors of poor race relations in the U.S.

See also: 100% of the women of color interviewed in STEM study experienced gender bias

In New York City, the Black unemployment rate is 14%; Latino rate is 10%; and White rate is 6.7%. This is clearly a crisis. #SaveOurCities — Natl Urban League (@NatUrbanLeague) March 25, 2015

The annual report has an "equality index" that measures how African-Americans and Latinos are faring in economics, health, education, social justice and civic engagement, compared to white Americans.

"Whites are used as the benchmark because the history of race in America has created advantages for whites that persist in many of the outcomes being measured," the report says.

The report is based on data compiled by IHS Global Insight, a premier analytics and information company. In 2005, the overall equality index was 72.9%. Ten years later, it's hasn't improved at all — it's decreased. The new figure measures 72.2%. The overall equality index for Hispanic America is 77.7%.

Image: Vicky Leta/Mashable

The report uses averages to measure equality, but recognizes that method can "mask class differences within each group." To make up for that, the report delves into regional differences, such as metro area unemployment and state level education disparities.

"On many fronts, Black America remains in crisis — and we see justice challenged at every turn," NUL president Marc H. Morial writes in the report.

According to the report, the equality index is broken down into five separate categories. The percentages show the amount of equality black people have in comparison to white people in the U.S., who here represent 100% in all areas: economics (55.8%), health (79.8%), education (76.1%), social justice (60.6%) and civic engagement (104%).

Household income

Specifically, researchers tackled the median household income for black and white families. In order to paint a clear picture, the study analyzed the areas with the highest and lowest median household incomes for black and white families. The area with the highest for both groups was the Washington-Arlington-Alexandria-DC-VA-MD-WV area. Black families made $64,663, while whites made $108,254.

The area with the lowest median household income for blacks was Toledo, Ohio, where the figure was $21,699. The area with the lowest median household income for whites in the country was Lakeland-Winter Haven, Florida, where the figure was $46,512 — still more than two times the amount for black households.

Image: Vicky Leta/Mashable

Overall, the median black household has $0.71 for every dollar of median white household income.

Education

In the field of education, the study looked at high school graduation rates for 2009-2010, as well as the math and reading proficiency of kids in fourth through eighth grade. As far as graduation rates, the largest gap between between white and black high school students was found in Nebraska. About 56.7% of black freshmen graduate, while 88.8% of white freshmen graduate.

Image: Vicky Leta/Mashable

The smallest graduation gap was in Vermont, where 100% of black freshmen graduated from high school, compared to 89.9% of whites.

Social justice

This category measured the "equality before the law" black people have in the U.S. It included various examples, such as being stopped while driving, the average sentence for incarceration and homicide rate. Social justice was a prescient aspect of the report, increasing to 60.6% compared to last year's 56.9%. The increase was the result of "fewer Blacks being victims of violent crimes and fewer Black high school students carrying weapons," the report found. In contrast, it's a drop from 10 years ago, when the figure was 67.5%.

Health

The health index also increased from 78.2% last year to 79.8% this year.

"[It] resulted from increased health care coverage for Blacks since the Affordable Care Act went into effect and a decline in binge drinking among Blacks, while the rates for whites continued to climb," the report states.

These findings alone paint a pretty clear picture: 2015 was a tough year to be black in America. Considering the report's decline from last year, next year's equality gap could potentially widen before it starts to shrink. Those who believe we live in a post-racial society should take a good hard look at the report's findings — equality in America has yet to be achieved.

The entire report is available on the National Urban League's site.

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.