WASHINGTON — Can Republicans win the hearts and votes of Hispanics? Is Sen. Ted Cruz, son of a Cuban immigrant, a candidate who can make a breakthrough with that crucial segment of the electorate?

Texas, Cruz noted at a forum with the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, “is the only majority-minority state in the country that is solidly Republican.” And he added, “It’s not rocket science that if Republicans continue to get clobbered in the Hispanic community it won’t stay solidly Republican.”

Javier Palomarez, president and chief executive of the chamber, teed up the issue by noting that President Barack Obama won 72 percent of the Hispanic vote, and asserting that no future president will be elected without courting — and winning a substantial share of — that segment of the population.

Cruz said faith, family, patriotism and hard work are core values both for Hispanics and for Republicans.

“When was the last time you saw an Hispanic panhandler?” Cruz said, emphasizing the work ethic. “In our community, it would be shameful to be begging on the street.”

It’s a line Cruz has used many times before, but now that he’s running for president, it caught some attention and drew some gasps from the pundit class in his quest to paint Hispanics as “fundamentally conservative” and ripe for courting by the GOP.

Cruz asserted that Mitt Romney, the party’s 2012 nominee, drew an anemic 27 percent support among Hispanics nationally because he didn’t project empathy with working families.

“Where he got clobbered was ‘47 percent,’” Cruz said, referring to Romney’s estimate of the number of Americans who depend on government handouts and would never vote Republican. “I cannot think of a statement in all of politics that I disagree with more strongly. … Republicans are and should be the party of the 47 percent.”

He accused Democrats of holding out for unacceptable “amnesty” provisions in the immigration fight, in order to keep using the issue as a “political cudgel” to scare Hispanics into voting against Republicans.

He shrugged off the idea that his Spanish-language ads were tailored to airbrush stances that are unpopular with Hispanic voters. Palomarez noted that his first such ad omitted any reference to his fight against Obama’s health care law, which his first English ads emphasized.

“We’re going to have lots of ads,” Cruz said, adding that his views are no secret. “I’m not sure there is a voter, Hispanic or non-Hispanic, who is confused about my views on Obamacare because I have not been ambiguous. … I intend to make 2016 a referendum on repealing Obamacare.”

And, he added, “I give the same speech down in the Valley that I give anywhere else in Texas.”

In more than two years as a senator, Cruz has visited the Rio Grande Valley three times.

Cruz on Sanders

On Bloomberg Politics on Thursday, host Mark Halperin asked Cruz what he thought of Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, who is challenging Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

Cruz professed respect for Sanders — a self-proclaimed socialist — because he embraces a label other Democrats with similar views run from. The challenge, Cruz said, will force that party to choose “what degree of socialism they’re willing to embrace.” After all, he said, “Hillary’s economic policies often end up close to Bernie Sanders’.”

Halperin later prodded Cruz to welcome Sanders into the race en español.

The senator declined; his Spanish skills are minimal, and apart from a few words here and there he never speaks Spanish in public.

“I’m going to stick to English, señor,” Cruz said.

Cruz acknowledged that when he applied to Princeton and to law school at Harvard, he identified himself as Hispanic.

“Oh sure. I’ve listed myself as Cuban American,” he said. “That’s my heritage and my background.”

Halperin pressed him repeatedly to say whether he would repeal Obama’s orders allowing “dreamers” — immigrants who were brought to the United States illegally as children — to avoid deportation.

He couldn’t get a direct answer. But it sure sounded as though the answer was yes.

“If I’m elected president, on the first day I intend to rescind … every executive action the president has taken that exceeds his constitutional authority,” Cruz said.

Halperin tried again. And again, Cruz argued that progress on immigration requires focusing not on divisive policies but on areas ripe for consensus, such as border security.

“I understand you want to talk about that, but I’m telling you what I want to talk about,” Cruz shot back.

Follow Washington Bureau chief Todd J. Gillman on Twitter at @toddgillman.