One day, two hospital mergers. How has a Clinic or UH partnership affected medical care in your community? Tell us in the comments.

CLEVELAND, Ohio -- Samaritan Regional Health System has finalized a deal to join the University Hospitals network, in yet another merger in the region's rapidly consolidating health care industry.

The two organizations announced the agreement Friday after directors of both systems signed off on the deal. Samaritan, located in Ashland County, will benefit from UH's deeper base of funding and technology, while UH will further expand its market share.

Samaritan is the fourth regional hospital to join with UH in the past two years, part of a broader consolidation trend driven by growing financial pressures on smaller hospitals.

Founded in 1912, Samaritan's health system includes a 55-bed acute-care, inpatient hospital, as well as satellite offices throughout Ashland County that offer access to radiology and laboratory services, in addition to urgent care, pain care, occupational health and sleep medicine.

In a press release, Samaritan chief executive Danny Boggs said the hospital had many suitors, but UH stood out as the best fit for his organization. "UH has a high-performing, high-compassion culture that aligns with Samaritan's, and it has the resources and expertise to help us build on our 103-year tradition of community care."

UH pledged to invest in Samaritan and find cost efficiencies that will benefit the communities served by the hospital. According to the release, the deal will result in upgrades to the facilities, equipment and technologies, although no specifics were disclosed.

"Samaritan is a vital anchor institution in Ashland," UH chief executive Thomas Zenty III said in a statement. "We look forward to growing and enhancing their services and programs to continue their long-standing tradition of providing patient-focused, superior-quality health care close to home."

The deal was announced just hours after the Cleveland Clinic reported that it had finalized a merger with Akron General. Both mergers were in the works for some time, but their announcement on the same day underscores the breakneck pace of mergers and acquisitions in the health care industry.

Last year was a record-breaker for M&A activity in health care, with 1,307 deals nationwide accounting for $387.5 billion in total spending, according to the research firm Irving Levin Associates.

That's a 25 percent increase from 2013, when there were 1,045 deals accounting for $163.7 billion in spending.

Several factors are behind the rapid uptick in mergers and acquisitions, said Lisa Phillips, editor of Irving Levin's M&A report. She said the federal Affordable Care Act has resulted in more Medicare and Medicaid patients for hospitals, but it has also instituted service-related reimbursement cuts that have squeezed their bottom lines.

The law encourages a so-called "value-based" system where hospitals and other providers are paid based on the quality and effectiveness of their care, rather than the sheer volume of tests and other procedure they perform.

In addition to those changes in the industry, private equity firms are investing in urgent care clinics and other hospital systems, and independent community hospitals are finding it increasingly difficult to meet record-keeping requirements and afford technology improvements needed to offer top-quality care.

"It's really all kinds of things started to take hold at once," said Phillips. "Smaller hospitals are looking for partners so they can tie into their electronic records and manage other costs."