Topics: Andrew Sullivan, cdC, Condoms, Dan Savage, Editor's Picks, FDA, Gay, healthcare, HIV, Larry Kramer, LGBT, medication, truvada, Politics News

As a gay man who came of age at the tail end of the AIDS crisis — at age 31, I’m young enough to have missed living through it, yet old enough not to have escaped its ethos — contracting HIV has long been one of my biggest fears. So much so that I would have a minor panic attack each time I took the blood test, and have trouble sleeping until the results came in a week later. Even when rapid HIV testing became widely available, yielding results in 20 minutes, I would still approach the doctor’s office with a sense of impending doom.

I think it’s hard for those outside the gay community, or health-care providers who experienced the AIDS crisis up close, to understand the hold AIDS continues to have on the gay psyche. An inert arrangement of molecules until it comes in contact with human cells, the HIV virus is no more capable of consciousness or intentionality than the flu — it’s not even alive. But however much I’ve come to accept my sexuality and be proud of who I am, in some dark billiard room of my subconscious always lurked the conviction that AIDS was the price I’d have to pay for being gay.

Which has made the three days since I began taking Truvada dislocating. Long used in the treatment of HIV, Truvada was approved by the Food and Drug Administration in 2012 to prevent infection with the virus. When taken daily, the drug has been proven to be 100 percent effective in blocking transmission of HIV. For the first time in my life, I have as close to a guarantee as anyone can have of never catching the virus.

But if Truvada has, as the headline of New York magazine’s cover story in July put it, made it possible to have “sex without fear,” why have only a few thousand people signed up to take it in the two years since it was approved? And, more pressingly, why have public-health organizations not launched a massive campaign to get at-risk groups on the drug, which is covered by most insurance plans as well as Medicaid and Medicare?

“I’ll be sending you a Facebook invite to my bareback orgy this weekend,” I’ve joked to a number of close gay friends since filling the prescription. In truth, I don’t plan on changing my sexual habits — I’ll continue to use condoms even while on Truvada, which is what the Centers for Disease Control recommends.

But the fear that, Truvada prescription in hand, gays will go on to have bareback orgies en masse is exactly the reason some public-health advocates and organizations — including the AIDS Healthcare Foundation, which launched an ad campaign against the drug — have discouraged Truvada’s use in the fight against the epidemic. They fear the availability of the drug will lead more gay men to have sex without condoms. Combined with inconsistent use of Truvada, which must be taken daily to be fully effective, they warn that a lapse in same-sex practices could cause a public-health catastrophe.

It’s hard to miss the fatal flaw in Truvada skeptics’ argument: If you don’t trust gay men to adhere to the regimen for taking the drug, how much more sense does it make to rely on them to use condoms when passion strikes?

Let’s be frank: While the public-health campaign for safe sex has helped reduce infection rates, it has failed to halt the spread of HIV. Advances in treatment — which at least in developed countries have made infection with HIV a chronic disease rather than a death sentence — along with “condom fatigue” have led an increasing number of gay men to engage in unsafe sex. Because of this, infection rates have begun to soar, particularly among those younger than 24. Public-health officials should continue to push for condom use, but it is highly irresponsible for them not to employ Truvada as an additional tool in combating the epidemic.