Topics: 2016, 2016 Elections, benevolent sexism, Harry Reid, Hillary Clinton, subtle sexism, Politics News

Harry Reid is retiring at the end of this term, and he’s doing a lot of thinking about the future of the Democratic Party as he inches closer to sweet, sweet retirement.

Looking ahead to 2016, Reid told the New York Times this week that Hillary Clinton is his favorite to lead the ticket because, “This is the time for a woman to run.”

“Women and some men, like me, if they are anything like me, they have come to the realization that women have qualities that we’ve been lacking in America for a long time, to be the leader of the country,” he continued. “Women are much more patient. They can be, if they are pushed the wrong way, combative, but they are not combative. A lot of we men are combative just by nature.”

The majority leader, like so many other people who are probably well-meaning and genuinely want to see women better represented in leadership roles, seems to think women’s supposedly innate niceness is the reason why we should be given a turn at the wheel. He’s reducing the chain of events that have led us to this moment — not just the gains of the feminist movement but the decades-long political marathon Clinton has run to be positioned where she is right now — to some Mars/Venus pop psychology about the country badly needing a woman’s delicate touch.

Now taking issue with this kind of “compliment” is, I’d say, among the top 5 reasons that I get angry emails telling me to lighten up and how I am the reason that men are afraid to say anything at all and have to cower in terrified silence all day every day. The general gist is something like, You can’t even say something nice about a woman anymore without someone jumping down your throat!

But as I’ve written before, though there is evidence to suggest that women have better track records on working collaboratively, listening to viewpoints different than their own and having a stomach for debate and compromise — that I totally agree would well serve the country — that doesn’t make the traits biologically determined. In fact, research suggests that women may be more effective leaders because, with so few represented in positions of power, the risks of failure are much higher. Put frankly, they simply have more to prove.