Minnesota’s major health plans lost money last year, and the red ink was driven by a small section of the market.

The individual market provides health care to about 6 percent of Minnesotans, and insurers there lost more than $350 million in 2015, according to the Minnesota Council of Health Plans.

The council makes up the seven biggest insurers operating in Minnesota: Blue Cross and Blue Shield, HealthPartners, Medica, Metropolitan Health Plan, PreferredOne, Sanford Health Plan of Minnesota and UCare. Together those plans account for more than 95 percent of the entire insurance market in the state. Related Articles Major tax form issue resolved, MNsure says

MNsure has more to worry about than just politics

Metro hospital profits fell in 2014, while outstate earnings rose

All the other segments of Minnesota’s health market — the roughly 56 percent of Minnesotans who get insurance through an employer and the 34 percent who have state or federal health insurance — were in the black last year. That’s on average — some particular providers may have lost money, but overall group insurance and public insurance were profitable markets in 2015.

The seven council insurance plans combined for an operating loss of $158.5 million on $25 billion in premium revenue, which includes losses in the individual market and profits in other sectors. About half of the losses were offset by investment income.

INDIVIDUAL MARKET ‘VERY VOLATILE’

The small size of the individual market might contribute to its volatility. With more people in a market, there’s more healthy people to balance out high-cost individuals.

“The individual market in Minnesota is still very volatile, still very unstable, which is, I think, a cause for concern,” said Allan Baumgarten, a Twin Cities health industry analyst.

Jim Schowalter, the council’s president, said health plans expected some volatility in the individual market but didn’t expect it would take this long.

“That’s the sorting out that we would all hoped would take just a year or two, but obviously it’s going to take a little longer,” he said.

Minnesota is unusual in having such a volatile, money-losing individual market. Baumgarten said some states have seen competitive, profitable individual markets emerge. But Minnesota isn’t one of them.

The highest-profile part of the individual market is MNsure, the state-run health insurance exchange. In 2015, MNsure accounted for about one-sixth of Minnesota’s individual market — among the lowest shares in the nation. The remaining five-sixths bought their insurance directly from health insurers.

A MNsure spokesman declined comment Friday on the council’s announcement.

Schowalter said it was too early to say what specific factors drove expenses last year. He identified one likely culprit as prescription drug costs but said data to establish that won’t be available until May.

RESULTS DON’T NECESSARILY PREDICT 2017 PREMIUMS

The fact that insurers had profitable years in the group and public insurance markets but lost money in the individual market doesn’t necessarily say anything about what premiums will do in 2017.

Partway through 2015, preliminary data about losses led most health insurers to propose big premium increases as high as 50 percent.

By law, insurers are allowed to raise rates only to account for expected future costs, not to recoup past losses.

Insurers maintain reserve funds to cover down years, such as many providers experienced in the individual market in 2015.

Baumgarten cautioned that insurers have good reason to downplay any profits and play up losses.

“There’s this sense that Minnesotans have this expectation that not-for-profits should literally be making small profits. So that’s how they’re trying to present their results,” he said.