Last week, Jack Ma, the CEO of Alibaba, became the richest man in China. Hours after he rang the bell to start trading Alibaba stock on the New York stock exchange, the company was valued at $231bn and Ma himself was worth more than $19bn.

Ma didn’t grow up privileged. What’s the secret to his success? It’s the one you hear from so many CEOs: hard work and dedication, according to his speech at the Clinton Global Initiative.



“We don’t have a rich father or a powerful uncle. We only have the customers that support us,” Ma told Chelsea Clinton earlier this week, noting that Alibaba is a proof that “80% of the people in China can be successful”.

Ma is not the only one to believe that the way out of poverty is through hard work. The self-made success, who pulled himself up by his own bootstraps, is at the heart of the American dream.

“Liberals talk about circumstances; conservatives talk about character,” writes Paul Krugman in a recent column, adding that for conservatives and the rich, “it’s all about not trying hard enough”.

Questioning the narrative of the bulletproof work ethic is a bit like questioning mom and apple pie.



But it is true? Is a will to succeed and work ethic the primary ingredient that separates those who rise economically and those who don’t?



There are reasons to be skeptical. Hard work will only get you so far if circumstances aren’t amenable. The US economy is sputtering, barely motoring along. Unemployment is high, and job opportunities are rare. In a recent HuffingtonPost/ YouGov survey, 44% of them said that they believe that low-income Americans are poor due to lack of opportunities. About 47% said that poverty has to do with the fact that good jobs are not available. Just 28% said it’s because poor Americans lack a work ethic.

A recent hoax highlighted the resentment many feel against the perceived condescension of rich CEOs when jobs are unavailable and student debt is high.



Ma’s speech at the Clinton Global Initiative took place around the same time that a fake op-ed, allegedly written by Ma, began circulating on the internet.



“If you’re still poor at 35, you deserve it,” the piece declared.



“We can confirm that the article was not written by Jack,” an Alibaba spokesperson told the Guardian.

There are, however, a few millionaires who agree that most people should just be working harder and whining less. Herewith, a few instant classics.



‘Woe is me. Woe is us. Woe is this’

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Bud Konheim to 99%: Enough with the ‘woe is me’ narrative. Photograph: KeystoneUSA-Zuma/ Rex Features

That is what Bud Konheim, co-founder and CEO of fashion company Nicole Miller, said in February when he appeared on CNBC’s Squawk Box.



“We’ve got a country [where] the poverty level is wealth in 99% of the rest of the world. So we are talking about ‘Woe is me. Woe is us. Woe is this,’” he said. “So here we are, incredibly wealthy. Nobody has to suffer. There it is, money is all over the place and the guy that’s making – ‘Oh my God, he’s making $35,000 a year.’ Why don’t you try that out in India or some countries we can’t even name? China, anyplace, the guy is wealthy.”

While Konheim might be right and globally $34,000 a year would put you into the top 1%, in the US that’s barely enough to get by because it’s more expensive in raw dollars to buy food and consumer products in the US.



‘I succeed because I am driven and I take the risks. Deal with it’

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Sam Zell walks on Capitol Hill in Washington, Tuesday, June 12, 2007, following a meeting with the Senate Democratic leadership. Photograph: Lawrence Jackson/AP

Clearly, poor people just need to be motivated. However, instead of providing them with opportunities, the government with the help of things like tax credits and unemployment insurance has contributed to the state of “learned helplessness” among America’s poor, Sam Zell, founder of Equity Group Investments. said when he appeared on CNBC’s Squawk Box in 2012.

The reality is as follows: the whole focus has been on how the 1%-ers, the 10%-ers – whatever these top earners [are] – have moved ahead of everybody. I wonder if there’s any correlation between while they were moving ahead, the rest of the government was subsidizing more and more people and disincentivizing them. Why is it always assumed that somebody doesn’t succeed because he can’t, as opposed to he doesn’t want to, or isn’t incentivized to.

“I think that they are disincentivized by, in effect, if you don’t have to pay for your health care, that’s another thing you don’t have to worry about,” he added. “For every step contributing to the progress at the top, there’s an additional step on the bottom to increase the earned income [tax credit], to extend unemployment insurance for 28 years.”

His final words to host Andrew Ross Sorkin: “The world is not a zero-sum game. If I succeed, it doesn’t mean that you don’t. I succeed because I am driven and I take the risks. Deal with it.”

This wasn’t the last time that Zell made such statements, either.

‘The 1% work harder. The 1% are much bigger factors in society’

Tom Perkins, who has said that the wealthy should get more votes in elections. Photograph: Eric Risberg/Associated Press

Earlier this year, after Tom Perkins compared the war on the rich to holocaust, Zell jumped to Perkins’ defense.

In a letter to the Wall Street Journal, Perkins wrote:

I would call attention to the parallels of fascist Nazi Germany to its war on its “one percent,” namely its Jews, to the progressive war on the American 1%, namely the “rich.”

“I perceive a rising tide of hatred of the successful 1%,” he added.

Few weeks later, Zell told Bloomberg TV that he agreed with Perkins.

“I guess my feeling is that he’s right,” he said. “The 1% are being pummeled because it’s politically convenient to do so.”

The problem is that the world and this country should not talk about envy of the 1%. It should talk about emulating the 1%. The 1% work harder. The 1% are much bigger factors in all forms of our society.

Zell is not the only one to think that everyone envies the rich.

‘Spend less time drinking or smoking and socialising’

Facebook Twitter Pinterest Gina Rinehart was the first woman to top Forbes Asia’s list of Australia’s richest people. Photograph: Bloomberg/Getty Images

That’s according to Australian billionaire Gina Rinehart. Her advice? Stop socializing and get to work.

“There is no monopoly on becoming a millionaire,” she wrote in a 2012 column for Australian Resources and Investment magazine.

If you’re jealous of those with more money, don’t just sit there and complain. Do something to make more money yourself — spend less time drinking or smoking and socialising, and more time working. Become one of those people who work hard, invest and build, and at the same time create employment and opportunities for others.

We’re opening the comments section to debate. What do you think is the secret ingredient to climbing out of poverty? Hard work? Luck? Or a little bit of both?