IT Lessons to be Learned from the Banking Industry

As the healthcare and finance sectors provide similarly important services in a highly regulated environment, physicians and financial advisers play similar roles in guiding clients through numerous decisions so that disease and debt may be avoided.However, where the two sectors differ is with their use of technology. IT systems have revolutionized financial services allowing the banking industry to save billions of dollars while offering consumers numerous conveniences, such as the ability to pay bills and make purchases online and via mobile devices.Many in the healthcare sector are advocating for more robust IT solutions. As the Affordable Care Act continues to transform the industry by rewarding providers for positive outcomes, effective self-service tools and services are greatly needed.Recently the Office of the National Coordinator for Health Information Technology (ONC) released its interoperability roadmap with the goal of national interoperability for core data by the end of 2017. While it’s a definite step in the right direction, throughout the course of this initiative, stakeholders would do well to take a cue (or two) from the banking industry.While some may argue banking is not as complicated as healthcare, the clearing and settlement of stocks, bonds, and commodities are among the most complex, high-volume, secure inter-organizational processes performed in any industry. The banking industry has developed a common set of transactions that go through a central banking facility and are then transferred to others. While individual banks aren’t told what software they have to use, they are required to follow a certain set of IT rules.As the ONC moves toward similar developments in healthcare, it needs to build a standard set of transactions. This will allow a ‘central system’ to move critical data around to all providers, who would be operating in the same format.Ultimately, the financial sector has been securely exchanging complex, real-time transactions for decades, and the lessons learned by those in the industry would benefit healthcare.Before we take a look at some specific software offerings in each sector, let’s first look at some things medical technology vendors can learn from the banking industry.Banks discovered a long time ago that, typically, the biggest usability issues are the easiest and quickest to fix, and can offer the greatest return on investment.Healthcare IT vendors would see measurable increases in client satisfaction if they focused on making small improvements on a regular basis.The modern pace of change is simply too quick for a five-year, or even three-year, development cycle. The finance sector has done well to offer banks and consumers robust IT solutions when they became in demand – not a year or two down the road.Healthcare software developers must design their process to make quick, incremental improvements, while including end users in their testing.When mobile banking became all the rage, a plethora of products flooded the market. The ones that succeeded focused on human behavior and needs more than fancy bells and whistles.As wearables become prominent in healthcare, vendors should remember to think about human motivations as well as robust technology.Both banking and healthcare deal with highly sensitive consumer information. Today’s consumers are beginning to expect the same level of security in their healthcare experiences as they do their banking experiences.Consider ATMs – they first arrived on the scene in the 1970s. These are to banking what EMRs are to healthcare. While more consumers are comfortable banking online, that same trust and satisfaction is not seen with EMRs. In fact, a 2012 survey conducted by Harris Interactive found that 85% of Americans have anxiety over EMRs. Half of respondents worried their health data would be lost, damaged or corrupted.These concerns are not unfounded, as the top six data breaches in 2011 all involved healthcare organizations. More consumers are demanding electronic access to their healthcare data, but this demand can only be met when security issues have been met.