A new report published by Marsh urges policymakers to enact meaningful reforms to the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) to strengthen its role in the U.S. flood insurance market.

The report’s findings were announced by Marsh President and CEO Peter Zaffino, who met with members of Congress and NFIP leaders in Washington, D.C. (Scroll down to access report)

Congress is expected to address the reauthorization of the NFIP before its expiration on Sept. 30, 2017.

“Flood disasters represent the number one natural catastrophe in the US, and the NFIP plays a critical role in helping Americans recover from these events,” said Zaffino. “The report presents suggestions on how policymakers may capitalize on this opportunity to enact meaningful reforms and greatly improve this important program.”

Marsh is a a global provider in insurance broking and risk management. Zaffino also serves as chairman of the Risk & Insurance Services segment of Marsh & McLennan Cos.

Marsh’s report, Reforming the National Flood Insurance Program, is a collaborative effort of Marsh & McLennan subsidiaries Marsh, Torrent Technologies, Guy Carpenter, and Oliver Wyman. It offers policymakers recommendations on how to improve customer experience, lower costs, reduce debt, and strengthen engagement among the relevant parties.

Program recommendations include:

Increase the risk community size: Increase the participation in flood coverage by simplifying the homeowners’ documentation process, increasing oversight of the mandatory purchase of insurance in high risk zones, providing greater transparency into the compensation structure of all program participants, and improving training requirements for agents who sell NFIP coverage and advise consumers about the NFIP.

Share the risk community with the private industry: Reduce the federal government’s exposure to flood risk by increasing private insurer participation and adopting reinsurance transfer mechanisms to deliver more predictable results.

Adopt more advanced technology: Upgrade technology and revise business practices in order to streamline the application, risk assessment, and claims process.

“By upgrading technology, increasing transparency, and harnessing the capital of the primary and reinsurance markets, policymakers can enable the NFIP to better serve communities and individuals for decades to come,” Zaffino said.

Access Marsh’s Reforming the National Flood Insurance Program report here.