Former White House counsel Kathryn Ruemmler at an installation ceremony for FBI Director James Comey in October 2013. Associated Press

President Barack Obama‘s third White House counsel, Kathryn Ruemmler, is rejoining Latham & Watkins LLP, her third stint at the firm over a career that also includes time as a federal prosecutor and a legal adviser to President William Clinton.

Ms. Ruemmler, 43 years old, is President Barack Obama’s longest-serving counsel and was tapped for the job in 2011. She previously held significant roles at the Justice Department, and was co-lead trial counsel in the securities fraud prosecution of former Enron CEOs Ken Lay and Jeff Skilling.

“I’m really excited about getting back into court,” Ms. Ruemmler told Law Blog in an interview on Tuesday. Her last trial was in 2008, she said, adding, “I love doing trials, so that’s something that I’m very enthusiastic about.”

Starting in July, Ms. Ruemmler will be a partner in Latham’s litigation department and a member of the firm’s white-collar defense and investigations practice group. She was previously a partner there from 2007 to 2009, when she rejoined the Justice Department and served as the Deputy Attorney General’s primary adviser.

Ms. Ruemmler said her government experience has also provided insights into the significant challenges that face top lawyers in charge of big companies. “The president would often say to me, ‘I need you to be looking around corners,’” she said. “I think I can help clients in the private sector by playing that same role.”

At DOJ she assisted in managing various components of the sprawling agency, including the FBI and the U.S. Attorneys. And investigations into the Enron matter offered a unique vantage point on how various decisions the company made help lay the groundwork for the later actions of some executives, she said.

As White House Counsel, Ms. Ruemmler oversaw a staff of 25 lawyers—“like managing a boutique law firm”—and advised the President on everything from national security to implementation of the Affordable Care Act and judicial nominations. She also managed the Administration’s response to Congressional investigations, litigations and crisis management.

“The White House really sees everything, and you touch everything,” Ms. Ruemmler said. “My job was to defend the interests of the president and the presidency, to ensure that the office and the officeholder were protected and also that he had the information that he needed to make decisions. Any problem or challenge that hits the President’s desk is one that doesn’t usually have an easy answer.”

Ms. Ruemmler’s predecessor as White House Counsel, lawyer Bob Bauer, left that job in 2009 to return to private practice at Perkins Coie LLP. President Obama’s first counsel was Greg Craig, who landed at Skadden Arps Meagher & Flom LLP.