CONWAY, SC (WBTW) 595 students graduated in two separate ceremonies this weekend at Coastal Carolina University.

The events were held at the HTC Student Recreation and Convocation Center on campus.

Three students received the President’s Award for Academic Achievement, which recognizes students with the highest cumulative grade point averages. The recipients of the award all had perfect 4.0 grade point averages, graduating summa cum laude: Danielle Erin Hennessy, a recreation and sport science major and business administration minor from Falling Waters, W.Va.; Sarah Carlisle (Carley) Mills, a communication major and health promotion minor from Pawleys Island; and Kathryn Marie Smith, a marine science major and Spanish minor from Baldwin, Md.

South Carolina Superintendent of Education Molly Spearman was the commencement speaker. She advised the Class of 2015 not to forget their roots as they go forward in their lives and careers.

“Your journey in life may never take you back there to live again, but you need to do what you can to support and uplift the people who have made you what you are today. Don’t forget them,” Spearman said. “So whether you become a teacher, a scientist, a CEO of a company, a health care professional — in later years when you are reminiscing, the relationships you had with the people along the way will be what matters the most.”

Spearman summarized the highlights of her career, from her rural upbringing near Saluda, S.C., her education at Lander University, her career as a public school music teacher and election to the S.C. House of Representatives, to her present position as the 18th superintendent of education in the state’s history.

“I’m blessed to have this moment, and I have a large responsibility,” she said. “and that is to reach a vision that when every student in South Carolina finishes high school that they are ready for success.” She encouraged the CCU graduates to work hard and set goals but not to be devastated if they don’t work out, “because there may be something better, that you had not imagined, in store for you.”

Spearman was awarded the honorary degree Doctor of Public Service.