This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.

... so Hillary Clinton ran into some rough waters in Vienna last week when the inspectors general of the State Department intelligence community suggested that the Justice Department that the open investigation classified material that was transferred in Hillary Clinton's personally email accounts where she was secretary of state ... but there were that's going to go but every time one of these the little rough patches arises for Hillary Clinton a lot of Democrats ... I look each other and ask the same question well if she gets into trouble Mike Joe Biden the vice president Brian for the Democratic presidential nomination in twenty sixteen ... nobody knows the answer that question probably not even Vice President Biden ... this summer here this family obviously been traumatized by the death of his oldest son Beau Biden ... been hard for him I think that to get his arms around a question this pig in that environment people around him say ... he probably will make this decision until September or so ... but let's look of the reasons he might and the reasons he might not because that's the problem and right now ... he still with us or reasons consider doing this one is that because he's been a ... national politician for a long time he's got a network of supporters in advisors that would be ready to go ... um he's he's the only person of stature in the party that probably really challenge Hillary Clinton ... aam and as the as a consequence of things that happen this summer ... I've that the Supreme Court cementing Obamacare in place gay marriage being approved of the Supreme Court the economy looking better ... the Obama record looks pretty good and you have to run heavily on that Obama record as the incumbent vice president ... so why might he not one to do this well ... though he doesn't know this of course is ready to go it's probably a little rusty its lead in the game ... you'll be hard to work out of that kind of political momentum even for Joe Biden has laid a September a lot of that Alan has gone elsewhere lot of money has been committed elsewhere ... secondly why people are worried that his age seventy two now five years older than Hillary Clinton ... would be seventy three when he was sworn in that would be a question that would be on people's minds if he ran ... and finally he really would have to live with the Obama record for better and worse even more than a Tory Clinton has two ... of because he is the incumbent vice president and in some ways that would be an advantage ... some was ill be a disadvantage ... the key here is though I don't think there's any way to know for sure I think we have some weeks of the speculation a live with a decision most likely I would think in September ...