If only Margaret Drabble's wish (When it's time to go, let me go, with a whisky and a pill, 2 January) could be realised, but not only for the old, although that is now my personal, selfish concern. My son was forced to starve himself to death two and a half years ago, a long, drawn-out process which took determination and courage and which was particularly harrowing for his family. He had suffered from a particularly aggressive form of MS for several years, a disease which is progressive and incurable. When he could no longer move himself from his bed to his wheelchair he decided that we had all had enough.

His doctor was sympathetic but could do nothing to help and it was too late to get Seamus to Switzerland had he not wanted, anyway, to die in his own bed. Margaret Drabble is right that we treat people with less humanity than we do our animals. I had been able to put a much-loved dog out of her suffering a few months before I had to watch my son end his own life. It would surely be a sign of an adult and civilised society to be able to do for our loved ones what we can do for our pets.

Primrose Kirkman

Warminster, Wiltshire

• Margaret Drabble says that, when it comes to euthanasia, "the politicians won't let us, the bishops won't let us and the health professionals aren't allowed to let us". We cannot speak for politicians or bishops, but we can say that the majority of practising doctors have no wish to be licensed by law to kill their patients or to supply them with the means to kill themselves. That is not why we became doctors, and the suggestion that it is only the law that is preventing us from practising euthanasia is totally groundless.

Ms Drabble trundles out the well-worn argument that "you wouldn't let a dog suffer". She seems unaware that people sometimes take their pets to be put down for other reasons than suffering. Her idealised picture of dying with "a nice glass of whisky and a pleasing pill" may appeal to the well-heeled and self-possessed, but as doctors we have to care for a much wider range of people, many of them vulnerable. We have laws to protect us, especially those among us who are less able to speak up for themselves, not to oblige the strong-willed and self-confident.

Dr Idris Baker Consultant in palliative medicine, Prof Rob George Vice-president, Association for Palliative Medicine

• Margaret Drabble suggests that the medical profession will not be allowed to be involved in assisted dying even though the majority of the public would now like to see this available to those who are terminally ill. In fact the BMA (which represents all UK doctors) made binding policy against assisted dying at its recent AGM. Given the importance of the issue, the RCGP and RCN have already surveyed their wider membership, but the BMA has not. Why is this so on a topic of such vital importance? If the majority of doctors are indeed against the concept then the BMA's position will be strengthened. If the majority are neutral or in favour of assisted dying then it is only fair that this fact is made known to the wider public.

Interestingly, a recent poll of GPs (Pulse, 20 November 2013) found that only 31% of respondents felt that their own Royal College should be opposed to legalisation of assisted dying.

Dr David Wrigley Carnforth, Lancashire, Dr Jacky Davis London

• Margaret Drabble obviously did not read Chris Huhne's article (Someone needs to fight the selfish, short-sighted old, 23 December) that was heavily criticised (Letters, 27 December). How can a free decision concerning euthanasia be arrived at in the context of deep-seated age discrimination against older people, as exemplified by Huhne? While commentators such as him falsely accuse the older population of being a burden on the young, it is impossible to have a balanced discussion about the right to die. Contrary to Margaret Drabble's no doubt sincere wish, legal euthanasia would not grant each person the power to choose, because that freedom would be subject to societal and possibly family pressures. Before we debate euthanasia, let's abolish age discrimination.

Alan Walker

Professor of social policy and social gerontology, University of Sheffield

• Dignity in dying, of course. But what about dignity in living? This issue affects not just the frail elderly, but anyone whose destiny is to become very old or chronically infirm, and of course their beleaguered families and amateur carers. Margaret Drabble is right that sections of the NHS fail hopelessly to understand the best interests of older people. It's also true that the way in which support is delivered to elderly people in their own homes is a scandal, and that much of the tragedy of dementia is hidden, barely comprehended outside the walls of care homes. The whisky-and-pill option is of no service to most of those old and ailing, whatever the ethical rights and wrongs. The time is never right – until it is, and then it's too late for informed consent.

But the peace of mind of knowing that when we require dignified care and support, it's there, and proportionate, and affordable, and takes account of the specific needs of ageing people – now that would be an end worth campaigning for.

Dr Gill Cookson

Castleton, North Yorkshire

• I agreed with everything Margaret Drabble said in her article. I am now 75, so old age is close up and personal. From the mid-1990s to 2005 I was nurse, carer and mourner for my father, my sister-in-law, my brother-in-law and my beloved husband. I saw (and felt) what dementia, cancer and heart problems do to otherwise strong and balanced people. Their final months were painful and undignified, and I had not the strength of mind or character to help them out of a life which had become a burden. I feel that there is a time to die, and if we are kept alive beyond that point we should be able to say when enough is enough. Vegetative breathing is not living.

Diana Lord

Cranfield, Bedfordshire

• I was delighted to read Margaret Drabble's polemic on physician assisted suicide in today's Guardian. It is a welcome start to the year 2014.

I would not agree with every suggestion she makes, but she raises the problem that the present cruel and anachronistic law poses. A change in this law is supported by a great majority of the population but is consistently blocked by a religious minority, by fearful politicians and, most sadly, by many members of the so-called caring profession of medicine.

Most of the fears raised by the opponents of change have been shown to be unwarranted. In those jurisdictions where assisted suicide is legal, the numbers seeking the facility remain small. The major effect is the increased comfort and relief given to those with progressive disorders who would know that if palliative care did not remove unacceptable suffering (as is not uncommon), the final way out of the situation was available. The fact that the option was possible would probably delay proceeding with extreme decisions such as opting to go to Switzerland while it is still possible.

Given my own disability, a change in the law in 2014 would be the best present that I could be given, even though it is not needed yet.

Dr Clive Tonks

London

• At last, someone who speaks my language! Nearing 80 and with failing faculties, I wish rational suicide (see the website of the Society for Old Age Rational Suicide) could be acknowledged as a sensible step to avoid one's own decline into helplessness and heartbreaking worry for one's children. But the means of release are hard to come by.

One friend wrote: "Personally, I think that everyone at the age of 75 should be issued with a small velvet box with the necessary pill for them to be able to use when they wish." What a wonderful idea!

Of course, giving everyone such a pill would offend some mightily, but I do think we should be issued with a prescription to be "cashed" without questions when we think the time is right. This would avoid the terrible heart-searching which doctors have to go through for each and every would-be suicide who asks for their help. My own GP objects strongly to being thought of as "doctor death" with the power to dispense such pills.

Marion Bolton

Middlesbrough

• I agree wholeheartedly with Margaret Drabble that the individual's wishes should be paramount when it comes to the process and timing of one's death. But many people find that, when the moment of approaching death actually comes, something in them – be it their mind, their body, or their spirit – seems to urge them to hang on. The moment passes and they wander into some kind of limbo. Then a half-life drags on for months or years, with all its expense for the health and care services, not to mention family and friends.

What can we do to take our chance to die when it presents itself? I think there are several things we can do. Firstly, we can complete an advance directive (also known as advance decision), discuss it with our family and friends, have it countersigned by our GP, and lodge it with a solicitor. Secondly, we can bring this intention into general conversation, so that those around us get used to the fact that at some point we may refuse medical intervention, and may ask their support in doing so. Lastly, we can keep our intention in the forefront of our own minds, practise the words to be said at the crucial point, and prepare ourselves to be firm and clear when the time comes.

Alison Leonard

Chester

• Margaret Drabble rightly raises the fraught issue of the impact of medicine on old age, and how it can lead to artificial prolongation of life when this may not be to the best (or even any) advantage for those concerned. In that light, it is difficult to understand why she wishes to replace one artificial procedure with another, the taking of one's own life using an appropriate drug.

Both aspects of this debate would benefit from taking artificiality out of the equation entirely, and understanding better the natural end-of-life processes that our bodies go through. In doing so, we can learn to better define what is appropriate and valid medical intervention to assist with dealing with these, and also prepare people for their own death without the terrors that Ms Drabble highlights that result from artificial intervention. Medicine and politicians seem remarkably reluctant to give this the serious attention it deserves.

The reasoning given by Ms Drabble for wishing a change in the law seem also to highlight one of the main reasons why it should not be changed. The way in which she experiences and observes negative reactions to elderly people suggests to her that she and others be given a legal way of dealing with this by being able to choose to die. This is a terrible damning of how society views its elderly members. Changing the law to allow people to take their own lives will only make this worse, and Ms Drabble's view seems to reinforce the case that any such law could drive people to make a decision that is itself artificial.

Christopher Awre

Hull

• On my 81st birthday, I read with heartfelt recognition Margaret Drabble's article. For some, a long life, irrespective of the quality of that life, may be acceptable, even welcomed. For others it may well be a nightmare of helpless indignity. With Drabble, I feel the choice should be mine and mine alone. If I knew with certainty that I could step out of life when I wished, I might view the years ahead with pleasure rather than apprehension.

BJ Cairns

London

• The New Year's gift from which an ageing population would most benefit is not "the right to die" as Margaret Drabble suggests, but an end to the damaging ageism that unfortunately her article promotes.

Tricia Cusack

Birmingham

• Margaret Drabble quite rightly reminds us of the importance of choice when it comes to dying, but perhaps misses the opportunity to highlight the importance of choice when it comes to the act of living for older people. Increasing amounts of loneliness, poverty, alcohol and prescription abuse, and a sense of purposelessness, are increasingly the experience of many older people, and would indicate a stark absence of choice. It could be suggested that a decent quality of life, and a sense of wellbeing, during an older person's "last decade", as Margaret Drabble puts it, should be a fundamental right, and our concern should focus on why this is not appropriately present right up to the point of dying. Perhaps our attention will be jolted by the large increase in the numbers of us soon to be arriving at old age.

Jon Bowra

Assistant director, Living Well Dying Well

• I enjoyed Margaret Drabble's article, and I agree about the widespread fear of not being allowed to die in peace. I would like to make a small correction about "their archaic Hippocratic oath". This was read out to us when we qualified in medicine in 1957, clearly stating that "thou shalt not kill, but need'st not strive officiously to keep alive". In those days death was often eased by the gradual, gentle readjustment of the dosage of drugs with the agreement of the family. This is now almost impossible with the very real threat of misunderstanding and litigation. What we aimed for was to cure sometimes, to relieve often and to comfort always.

Patricia Tomlinson

Retired GP, Alton, Hampshire