Donors who contributed $1 million or more to the Lincoln Center redevelopment campaign. Sean Carroll

Leaders at Lincoln Center for the Performing Arts were in a triumphant mood on Monday as they celebrated the complex’s $1.2 billion overhaul with a roaming party across the 16-acre campus.

First stop: alfresco cocktails by the reflecting pool on Hearst Plaza, named for the media company, Hearst Corp., whose former and current chief executives – Frank Bennack, Jr., and Steven Swartz, respectively—were the guests of honor at the spring gala. Mr. Bennack was Lincoln Center’s chairman from 2005 to 2010, and Mr. Swartz is chairman of the center’s corporate fund. Other guests included philanthropists Adrienne Arsht, Ann Ziff and Laurie Tisch, and as well as music executive Clive Davis and Broadway song-and-dance man Tommy Tune.

As the sun went down a troupe of young dancers and a brass band led guests over to Alice Tully Hall for a performance by Natalie Cole. She slinked in in sequins and sang a mix of standards, newer material and of course “Unforgettable,” a video-enabled duet with her father, the late Nat King Cole. Dinner followed in a tent on Damrosch Park decked out with enough white blossoms for a society wedding.

Lending an extra frisson to the evening: the publication this week of a tell-all memoir by former Lincoln Center president Reynold Levy, who stepped down in 2014 after leading the redevelopment project.

The book, “They Told Me Not to Take That Job: Tumult, Betrayal, Heroics and the Transformation of Lincoln Center,” details how the money got raised and also skewers some former leaders of cultural organizations that reside on the campus, including the New York Philharmonic and the now-defunct New York City Opera.

On Monday, there didn’t appear to be any hard feelings—at least not on the Lincoln Center side.

Chairwoman Katherine Farley and others thanked Mr. Levy—who attended the event with his wife—for his role in the transformation of the campus. Trustee David Rubenstein, co-founder of the Carlyle Group and founding chair of the Lincoln Center redevelopment campaign, has called the book a must-read for “anyone who cares about how great cultural organizations operate and grow.”

In remarks before Ms. Cole’s set, Mr. Rubenstein also singled out Mr. Bennack for his role in the long haul to raise money for the renovation—the largest fundraising campaign of any performing arts center, according to Lincoln Center.

“He never failed to get a yes,” said Mr. Rubenstein.

That night Mr. Rubenstein also announced an additional gift of $5 million to Lincoln Center that pushed the total money raised at the gala to $10.4 million—a record for the organization. The money, which follows a prior $15 million donation by Mr. Rubenstein, will be used to support the nearby atrium and visitor center on Broadway between 62nd and 63rd Streets that bears his name, where people can purchase discount tickets and take in weekly free performances.

“Everybody here deserves to have their names in lights on Broadway,” he joked.