State archaeologists are analyzing the oldest Maryland-built shipwreck found on the lower Eastern Shore.

E.E. Cummings is quoted, "Whatever we lose, it's always ourselves we find in the sea." In the historic, tiny town of Vienna, Dorchester County, Maryland's former self has been found buried in sediment and has come to the surface to answer long-held questions.

"The day you find a shipwreck in Maryland waters is a momentous occasion. It doesn't get much better than this," said Julie Schablitsky, chief archaeologist with the State Highway Administration.

On the other side of Maryland's shore, scientists have made a home for an 18th-century shipwreck in an above-ground swimming pool in St. Leonard, Calvert County.

The husband-and-wife team of Schablitsky and Navy underwater archaeologist Bob Neyland has been studying the structure all summer since it was found during repair work under the U.S. Route 50 bridge in Vienna.

"They began to notice that some of the long pieces of wood looked to be old, perhaps shipwreck-like, and so, at that point, the inspector called and said, 'Listen, I think we have something special here,'" Schablitsky said.

The shipwreck was actually discovered in the spring on the Nanticoke River, but state officials kept it quiet until they knew what treasure they had found.

Officials have dated the structure back to late 18th-century Maryland, likely built at a small shipyard or plantation. They believe it was a cargo ship fastened with wooden pegs and may have measured 45 feet long.

A study of the timber shows the ship was made mostly from oak trees gathered somewhere between Annapolis and Potomac. A visible charring of the wood may indicate it was burned at the hands of British sympathizers in the 1780s.

A small number of artifacts have been recovered, and the shipwreck itself will be vacuum freeze-dried in the Maryland Archaeology Conservation Lab.

"It's kind of like the sponge on the sink, it warps and shrinks, and we lost the information which is so important to archaeologists," said Nicole Doub, head conservator.

In Vienna, resident Tom Bradshaw heard the big news at his general store. With English ancestors dating back 300 years, he is nothing short of tickled.

"It gives us more pieces of the puzzle to find out what was going on, what life was like," Bradshaw said.