By Elliott Jones, Treasure Coast Newspapers, Stuart, Fla. McClatchy-Tribune Information Services

Aug. 05 -- VERO BEACH -- A former bank wealth management adviser has pleaded not guilty in the death of his former girlfriend, whose body was found in a car trunk in Melbourne in June, according to court records.

Michael Jones' public defender filed the not guilty plea July 29 . The courts have sealed post-arrest investigative records and reports in the case, including his cellphone calls.

His case is next scheduled in Indian River Circuit Court on Sept. 3 for review. Neither State Attorney Bruce Colton nor the public defender assigned to Jones' case could be reached Tuesday for comment.

Meanwhile Jones, 31, remains in the Indian River County Jail without bail on a charge of first-degree murder in the death of Diana Duve , 26, a Sebastian Medical Center nurse from Vero Beach . Prosecutors allege that Jones strangled Duve at his Vero Beach townhome on 42nd Square, and then drove her car to Melbourne with her body in the trunk.

The June 20 death occurred while Jones was on probation on an unrelated charge of aggravated stalking of a woman in Broward County , dating back to 2012 with Davie police. The woman told police she worked with Jones at a bank and had dated him for several months -- claimed he was "very controlling" and, during a final breakup, repeatedly texted her phone, threatening to kill her with a gun and then shoot himself. Court records show a judge in 2012 renewed a domestic violence injunction against Jones on behalf of the victim every two weeks until a final order extended it through 2015.

Police began searching for Jones and Duve in June shortly after her parents became concerned about her not coming home one night as usual.

Jones and Duve were last seen together in Vero Beach as they left the What-A-Tavern restaurant during the early morning hours of June 18 . From there they allegedly went to Jones' town house.

On June 22 he was found in a hotel in Fort Pierce and charged with a probation violation for being out of county without permission.

Shortly afterward, Duve's body was found, leading to his June 26 arrest.

During early June he notified probation officials that he planned to travel with Duve on June 13 and 14 to a friend's wedding in Alabama . But her stepfather, Bill Andrews , said she didn't go on that trip.

Probation records also show that he notified probation officials in April that he was going on a fishing trip in South Florida . In May he said he was spending a weekend at a bed-and-breakfast in Key West .

Jones, who at one time earned $5,000 a home as a PNC bank employee, was appointed a public defender after saying he has $500,000 in debts and financial liabilities. He lists his occupation as an attorney and that he was born in North Carolina .

WHO IS MICHAEL JONES?

Information about the Vero Beach resident has been sketchy. Here's what we know:

--Graduated from University of Georgia , Athens on Aug. 6, 2005 , with a bachelor's degree in business administration and on May 12, 2007 , with a master's degree in public administration.

--Attended the St. Louis University School of Law in Missouri , but spokesman Bill Ford wouldn't confirm when Jones attended or if he graduated.

--A marriage license between Jones and a woman, who were Missouri residents at the time, was filed in Miami-Dade County on Aug. 27, 2010 . Two months later, she sued Jones for divorce, and court records show a final judgment was entered April 28, 2011 , dissolving the childless marriage. Jones' ex-wife declined to comment while the investigation is ongoing.

--After working at a Wells Fargo branch on Las Olas Boulevard in Fort Lauderdale , Jones got a job in legal services at PNC Wealth Management in Vero Beach .

--He served as an advisory member for the Indian River Estate Planning Council , the Martin Estate Planning Council , the Indian River Community Foundation and the Visiting Nurse Association's Planned Giving Council .

--He listed himself as an attorney with some councils, but Florida and Missouri Bar officials confirmed he isn't licensed to practice law in Florida or Missouri . It's unclear if he's licensed in another state.

--His birth certificate shows he was born in Charlotte, North Carolina , but Broward County sheriff's deputies listed his birth place on a 2012 arrest report as Cincinnati, Ohio .

Sources: Vero Beach Police Chief David Currey , Broward County Sheriff's Office , Florida Bar ; University of Georgia Office of Registrar, Florida public records.

___

(c)2014 Treasure Coast Newspapers (Stuart, Fla.)

Visit the Treasure Coast Newspapers (Stuart, Fla.) at www.tcpalm.com

Distributed by MCT Information Services

Wordcount: 765

[jetpack-related-posts]