Trump voters handed more victories to the leading candidate last Tuesday night. Donald Trump now has 15 wins to Ted Cruz’s seven and Marco Rubio’s mere two. The media has spent much talk and text characterizing these Trump voters. Everyone agrees that they see Trump as the anti-Republican establishment candidate. Another image that appears is that this voter is undereducated, mostly white, low-wage and very angry.

Does the Trump voter have a basis for his anger in diminished present and future prospects? Should we look at this voter with some sympathy, rather than at the image presented by pollsters’ demographics?

The Trump voter is correct that the government hasn’t been working for him or her. Senator Mitch McConnell famously said seven years ago that he wanted to make President Obama a one-term president. How do you do that? You pour sand in the gears of government at every opportunity. The Republican-led Congress has utterly failed to do anything worthwhile to improve this voter’s status — no jobs bills, no reeducation or training for better work, no funding for our crumbling infrastructure, which in itself would create jobs, and meager assistance to veterans.

Why shouldn’t these voters be angry?

Former Secretary of Defense Robert Gates writes in his recent book, A Passion for Leadership, that “not once … did Congress approve our appropriations before the beginning of the fiscal year in which the money was supposed to be spent. In a couple of instances, we did not know how much funding would be available until mid-way through the year, and once (and several times since I retired) Congress never did approve our annual appropriations. And when you toss in mindless acts of congressional misgovernance — such as shutdowns, furloughs and sequestration — and micromanagement masquerading as oversight, just keeping the doors open is a challenge.” And he is talking about just the defense budget, which the Republicans prioritize before anything else. Sand in the gears of government.

The Republican establishment has been talking lofty principles for ages, but down here on the ground with the voter, things have not been so grand. In order to halt the expansion of medical insurance under the Affordable Care Act, Cruz was crucial to engineering the 16-day 2013 shutdown of the government which cost the economy between $12-24 billion. That is a significant opportunity cost for the furloughed, undereducated and low-wage worker, but it’s pocket change to the high rollers who subsidize this year’s Republican candidates, all of whom say it is in their DNA to cut taxes for the rich and cut spending for everyone else. Sand in the gears.

As the citizens of Flint, Michigan, found out, the focus on money alone means not focusing on people and not focusing on their health. The state of Louisiana is a larger example of mindlessly cutting budgets and not caring about people. An article in last week’s Washington Post goes into great detail about how Republican Governor Bobby Jindal, over eight years, cut taxes for the rich, created subsidies to lure business, gutted university spending, drained the rainy day fund and cut 30,000 employees, including those working in foster care. Yet the economy tanked and the nation’s second poorest state now needs nearly $3 billion over the next 16 months just to maintain what services are left. The future looks grim because 18 percent of the population lives in poverty and the median income is 20 percent below the national average. Sand in the gears.

So maybe those Trump voters have a point. The good news is that these voters are fed up with “the government” throwing sand in the gears and bringing the country to a grinding halt. The bad news is that they haven’t actually figured out that it is Republicans in the Congress, primarily the establishment including people like McConnell, Paul Ryan, Cruz and Rubio, but also the Freedom Caucus, including our very own Dave Brat, that are actually throwing the sand.

Having created the conditions for an angry electorate, stomachs are churning in the Republican establishment as they frantically trying to contain the Trump phenomenon and right the GOP ship in this storm.

Mitt Romney, “Mr. 47 percent,” recently railed against the electorate: “You, the Trump voter, are being conned.” This voter may not appreciate the suggestion that he is naïve and foolish. He knows he’s a victim. He’s being told the government sent his job overseas, when in fact this is a business decision in which he has no say. Similarly, the government isn’t telling companies to park trillions of dollars overseas so they don’t have to pay taxes. This is a business decision in which neither he nor the IRS has any say.

Perhaps his anger at the corporations and the establishment are well placed. If so, where will the Trump voter go after the Republican Party succeeds in blocking Trump’s candidacy? Who will they choose? Another Republican sand-thrower?