ITAI YANAI was named the inaugural director of the Institute for Computational Medicine at NYU Langone Medical Center, effective May 1.

The Institute for Computational Medicine will act as the hub for multidisciplinary efforts to reveal patterns in medical data to aid in diagnoses and the design of new treatments.

Yanai will also hold the academic title of professor in the Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Pharmacology at NYU School of Medicine. He comes to NYU Langone from the Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, where, since 2008, he served as a research leader in the study of gene regulation. Using experimental approaches in embryology, molecular biology, and computational biology, he has explored the principles by which developmental pathways evolve.

DEBRA PATT was named editor-in-chief of JCO Clinical Cancer Informatics, a new publication of the American Society of Clinical Oncology.

Patt, who specializes in medical oncology and hematology, is a vice president of Texas Oncology, and medical director of outcomes research and the pathways task force for The US Oncology Network. She was formerly medical director of healthcare informatics for McKesson Specialty Health. Her primary research interests are in health services research, health economics outcomes research, and health policy.

JCO CCI will be a peer-reviewed, interdisciplinary journal publishing clinically relevant research covering policy, healthcare services delivery, and clinical insights based on biomedical informatics methods and processes applied to cancer-related data. The first issue of the journal is scheduled to be published later this year.

“We are pleased to have Dr. Patt overseeing this new ASCO journal which is focused on one of the most promising new fields in health care,” said ASCO Chief Executive Officer Allen Lichter. “Her unique qualifications and expertise make her the ideal physician editor to take this journal from a concept to a world-class publication.”

JENNIE CREWS was elected president of the Association of Community Cancer Centers during the association’s 42nd annual meeting, in Washington, D.C.

Crews brings more than 18 years of experience in advancing quality oncology care, currently as the medical director for cancer services in the PeaceHealth Northwest Network, which includes cancer centers in Washington state and Alaska. Crews hopes to build on her predecessors’ contributions with a theme focused on patient-centered care titled, “Empowering Patients, Engaging Providers.”

Crews has been an active member of ACCC, serving as president elect for the past year, and previously as ACCC treasurer. Crews serves as a member of the task force for the ACCC Oncology Drug Database and on the Advisory Committee for the Institute for Clinical Immuno-Oncology, an institute of ACCC.

Previously, Crews was the medical director of the Marion L. Shepard Cancer Center, and held appointments as a consulting associate in the Department of Medicine at Duke University, and as an affiliate associate professor in the Department of Medicine at East Carolina University.

She is a fellow in the American College of Physicians and is board certified in internal medicine and medical oncology. Crews has served as the president of the North Carolina Oncology Association and as the NCOA Legislative Liaison to the North Carolina General Assembly. She is a reviewer for the Journal of Oncology Practice and co-chair of the ASCO Practice Guidelines Implementation Network.

CHARLES SERHAN received the Ross Prize in Molecular Medicine from the Feinstein Institute for Medical Research.

Serhan is director of the Center for Experimental Therapeutics and Reperfusion Injury at Brigham and Women’s Hospital, the Simon Gelman Professor of Anaesthesia at Harvard Medical School and professor at Harvard School of Dental Medicine.

Serhan’s research focuses on structural elucidation of bioactive molecules that activate the resolution of acute inflammation. His laboratory’s mission is to identify novel mediators, pathways, and cellular targets critical in promoting resolution of inflammation and reperfusion tissue injury and their relation to human disease.

The Ross Prize is awarded through the Feinstein Institute Press’s peer-reviewed journal, Molecular Medicine. The prize, which includes $50,000, will be formally presented June 13 at the New York Academy of Sciences, followed by lectures from Serhan and other researchers.

“Charles Serhan’s multidisciplinary approach to science enabled his discovery of resolvins,” said Kevin Tracey, Feinstein Institute president and CEO, who also serves as editor emeritus of Molecular Medicine. “These molecular mechanisms hold promise for developing novel approaches to treating inflammation.”

THE AMERICAN SOCIETY OF CLINICAL ONCOLOGY published The State of Cancer Care in America: 2016, in the Journal of Oncology Practice—ASCO’s third annual assessment of national trends in cancer care delivery. The report was also presented at a Congressional briefing in Washington, D.C.,

The report highlights many promising cancer care developments, including new drugs and technologies, declining mortality rates, expanded access to healthcare generally, and a shift towards value-based care. But ASCO also highlights major challenges for patients and physicians, including uneven health insurance coverage, rapidly rising costs, and other barriers to accessing new treatments.

“Continued scientific and medical progress is urgently needed to improve cancer care, but treatment advances will only be as good as our ability to deliver them to patients,” said ASCO President Julie Vose. “If we hope to achieve Vice President Biden’s goal of doubling the pace of progress, the work of strengthening cancer care delivery has to be pursued just as aggressively as the cancer research agenda.”

The ASCO report highlights the continued decrease in cancer incidence and mortality rates for key cancers. This progress can be attributed in part to the growing number of novel drugs and technologies, fueled by the nation’s investment in cancer research.

In 2015, the FDA approved 15 new cancer drugs, as well as the first biosimilar to an existing biological product. FDA also approved several screening and diagnostic tests to help better identify cancers at an early stage, target treatments, and improve outcomes for patients.

The nation is also recommitting significant resources to cancer research after a ten-year period of stagnant funding: Congress took an important first step by increasing FY2016 federal cancer research funding by 5.34 percent over the previous year; and the government’s moonshot initiative would commit over $700 million and pursue new collaborations to accelerate progress.

Although patients face better treatment prospects than ever before, the report cautions that cancer care may be compromised due to the growing complexity of care delivery, inadequate healthcare access and affordability, and other external practice pressures.

The report highlights a number of issues:

● Increasing complexity of care delivery—The evolving scientific evidence around individual risk of developing cancer and frequent revisions to screening guidelines, the rapidly advancing field of precision medicine, and an aging U.S. population with changing treatment and other chronic health needs pose new challenges for physicians as they work to deliver consistently high-quality care.

● Remaining gaps in insurance coverage—The Affordable Care Act has enrolled 17 million Americans, and includes a number of provisions that benefit people with cancer. However, approximately 35 million non-elderly adults remain uninsured, 31 million more are underinsured, and Medicaid expansion is still incomplete. A survey of clinical trial sites also found persistent denials of coverage for the routine costs of clinical trials, despite the Affordable Care Act coverage requirement.

● Rising cost of cancer care—The escalating cost of cancer care is having an enormous impact on people with cancer and their families. Some estimates suggest that 10 to 20 percent of patients with cancer may not take prescribed treatments because of cost, putting them at risk for poor cancer outcomes and making them more likely to declare bankruptcy than those without cancer.

● Looming access issues—Three noted trends may impede future access to high-quality cancer care, including: an imbalance between the number of U.S. oncologists practicing in and number of Americans living in rural areas (5.6 percent and 11 percent, respectively); a dramatic increase in the number of cancer patients, a 45 percent increase from 2010 to 2030, largely due to the aging of the U.S. population; and an aging oncology workforce, with 20 percent of oncologists now over the age of 64, and the expected growth in the number of oncologists by 2030 not expected to match the growth in patients.

● Inconsistent adoption, lack of interoperability of health IT—With the potential to significantly improve the quality of cancer care, the integration of electronic health records (EHRs) has led to significant administrative burdens that reduce physicians’ available time for patient care, research, teaching, and other professional activities. In fact, nearly half (45 percent) of oncology practices surveyed by ASCO cited EHR implementation as the leading practice pressure, surpassing all other pressures in 2015. Further, the common incompatibility of different health IT systems used by providers inhibits the sharing of information that is needed for optimal cancer care.

The report recommends expanding publicly funded insurance programs to offer consistent and adequate benefits to people living with cancer; testing multiple payment and care delivery models to identify effective solutions; improving value in cancer care by working with stakeholders to develop alternate payment models, as well as clinical guidelines and resources that can help reduce waste and avoid inappropriate treatment; and advancing health information technology that supports efficient, coordinated care, such as electronic health records.

THE V FOUNDATION for Cancer Research and the WWE announced a multi-year partnership to support cancer research nationally through funds raised by Connor’s Cure.

The announcement was made at Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh, where Connor’s Cure was originally established, with representatives from the hospital, the WWE and The V Foundation. In 2014, Connor’s Cure was created by WWE Chief Brand Officer Stephanie McMahon and WWE’s executive vice president of talent, live events and creative, Paul “Triple H” Levesque, as a fund within Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh Foundation to support pediatric brain and spinal cord cancer research.

The new partnership will expand Connor’s Cure outside of Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh Foundation and support top research centers and hospitals nationwide. Connor’s Cure was established in honor of 8-year-old WWE fan Connor Michalek, a patient at Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC who battled medulloblastoma, a rare tumor that affects the brain and spinal cord. To date, Connor’s Cure has raised nearly $1 million and assisted more than 100 families around the world.

As a result of the new partnership, funds raised by WWE will support Connor’s Cure through The V Foundation’s grant-making process. In addition, funding will continue to support the research being done at Children’s Hospital of Pittsburgh of UPMC.

PROVIDENCE HEALTH & SERVICES and the Institute for Systems Biology announced an affiliation focused on personalized medicine.

Leroy Hood, will serve as senior vice president and chief science officer of Providence Health & Services, a five-state, not-for-profit health system, and continue as president of the Seattle-based ISB.

Providence and ISB will establish a number of joint research projects in scientific wellness, employing the approach of dense, dynamic personalized data clouds, including: following and understanding early transitions from wellness to disease; analyzing patient populations longitudinally that are at risk for Alzheimer’s; helping breast cancer patients recover from illness following debilitating therapies; and utilizing novel approaches to successfully treat glioblastoma, an inevitably fatal type of brain tumor.

ISB’s goal is to develop metrics to quantify scientific wellness and identify the earliest markers of transition for all common diseases. ISB will remain a separate legal entity with its own brand and identity and board of directors.