Carrie Underwood and Brad Paisley MOCK Obamacare during Country Music Awards skit



Country music stars Brad Paisley and Carrie Underwood treated an approving crowd to a mocking skit about Obamacare during Wednesday night's Country Music Awards broadcast.

The hilarity began with Paisley saying he had sustained a 'twerking injury,' and his co-host Underwood suggesting Obamacare as the solution.

Before the bit was over, the two performed a parody of George Strait's country music anthen 'Amarillo by Morning':

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Co-hosts Brad Paisley (L) and Carrie Underwood (R) performed a raucous send-up of Obamacare during the 47th annual CMA Awards in Nashville 'Why is it smoking?' Paisley asked, as Underwood made a show of trying to sign up on the healthcare.gov website

Hemorrhoids if I sit here till dawn: The Obamacare song

Obamacare by morning, why's this taking so long? I'm going to wind up with hemorrhoids if I sit here till dawn. Well, I have cataracts and dementia, this is getting on my last nerve. Obamacare by morning: over six people served!

Underwood had suggested that Paisley get Obamacare covered for his twerking-induced back pain.

'It's great! It's great!' she exclaimed. 'I started signing up last Thursday and I'm almost done.'



'Let's go to the website and get you signed up.... It can't be too hard, right?

Looking at a laptop screen, a puzzled Paisley asked, 'Why's it spinning?'

'Oh, it does that,' Underwood replied.

'Why's it smoking?' he asked.

Later in the night, Paisley and Underwood thanked Taylor Swift for 'never once humping a teddy bear,' a dig at wild child Miley Cyrus' legendary and cringe-inducing performance at this year's Video Music Awards.

The Obamacare website, healthcare.gov, has been plagued with slow response times and complete shutdowns since its October 1 launch.

Meeting notes from inside the Obamacare technical team's 'war room,' released by the Republican-led House Oversight Committee, showed that only six Americans had signed up for Affordable Care Act coverage during the website's first day of operation.



'Over six people served!' The duo's mischievous mini-anthem poked fun at Obamacare's miserable record signing up Americans for new health insurance coverage