By Colorado State’s second offensive series in its 31-17 come-from-behind victory over Colorado on Friday, it was clear the Rams were going to give Alabama transfer Dee Hart an early shot at proving he could be their featured running back.

It also was apparent that Hart would be running behind an offensive line that at least for the rest of the game would be without its only holdover starter, senior left tackle Ty Sambrailo.

Sambrailo suffered a right knee injury on Hart’s 11-yard run with 10:22 remaining in the first quarter. The 6-foot-5, 315-pound lineman was done for the night and CSU coach Jim McElwain said after the game that Sambrailo had a medial collateral ligament injury, wouldn’t require surgery, and would be out “at least three weeks.”

Sophomore Nick Callender, from Hayward, Calif., replaced him.

The Rams opened up front with Sambrailo, senior guard Mason Myers, redshirt freshman center Jake Bennett, sophomore guard Fred Zerblis and sophomore right tackle Sam Carlson. So Sambrailo’s exit left the Rams with a senior, three sophomores and a freshman up front.

That’s the line that was entrusted to both create running room for Hart and his relief, junior college transfer Treyous Jarrells, and to give quarterback Garrett Grayson time to throw. Ultimately, Hart (22 carries, 139 yards) and Jarrells (17 carries, 121 yards) combined for 260 yards while sharing the running back duties, as CSU rebounded from a 17-7 deficit to take the Rams’ second victory over CU in Jim McElwain’s three seasons as head coach.

“I can’t tell you how proud I am of our offensive line,” McElwain said. “I think they took the game over. Let’s give credit to Nick Callender, who came in for Tyler Sambrailo, who’s a great player, and we didn’t miss a beat.”

In what seemed to be an acknowledgment that he was the only running back among the Rams’ top four to go through spring ball and he was listed as the starter in the preseason depth chart, converted defensive back Jasen Oden Jr. started in the running back spot. But before he had a carry, Hart came on for the Rams’ third play and gained seven yards on a third-and-14.

By halftime, Hart — already an Alabama graduate but still only in his junior season of eligibility — had provided hints of what was to come. He had 58 yards on 10 carries, including an 8-yard touchdown run.

CSU didn’t completely abandon the plan to spread the workload, though, also using Jarrells to spell Hart. And it worked.

Hart and Jarrells “were pretty good,” McElwain said. “I thought Dee maybe missed a couple where he should have picked his legs up and finished, which I’ve seen him do before. … I felt really good about our running back situation, and they didn’t disappoint.”

McElwain called the win “huge … I can’t tell you how happy I am for the people of Colorado State University and those kids in that locker room.” Yet he seemed surprisingly somber or at least low-key about the win. Asked about that, he said, “I’m excited. This is great. It’s the way it should be.”

Hart said of he and Jarrells as a two-man running back combination: “I played against Trey in high school and to compete against him and then have him come here as a one-two punch against Colorado, that was great. That was a great victory.”

Hart also was impressed with the Rams’ offensive line. “Nick stepped up,” he said. He added that the win “gives us a lot of confidence. We have a lot of young guys up front that stepped up and they did a great job. Just for the CSU program as a whole and for the school, it was just a great start for the 2014 season.”

Jarrells said, “Me and Dee have been talking about this since camp. We’re both from Florida and I feel like he’s an older brother for me. He’s coached me up for a lot of things and we said we were going to make it happen this year.”

Jarrells also praised the offensive line. “We’ve got some good guys up front,” he said. “And they’re nasty.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei