Q: I am a U.S. citizen and I filed U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services form N-600, Application for Certificate of Citizenship, for my 15-year-old daughter. That was in August 2013. I want her to get U.S. citizenship. I received a filing receipt and USCIS cashed my check. How long until I hear again from USCIS?

Parbattie, Bronx

A: If your daughter is a permanent resident (green card-holder), she is already a U.S. citizen. She derived U.S. citizenship automatically from you. The Certificate of Citizenship provides her proof, but she is a U.S. citizen even without the certificate.

It could be more than a year before your daughter gets her certificate. USCIS in New York is just now working on N-600 applications filed on November 30, 2012. If your daughter needs proof of citizenship more quickly, she can get a U.S. passport. Just take her birth certificate, green card, photos and proof that you are a U.S. citizen to any passport acceptance facility. She can get the passport in just a couple of weeks or more quickly if she has an emergency need. If they tell you that your daughter needs a Certificate of Citizenship, ask to see a supervisor. Some clerks at U.S. post offices think that a Certificate is required. That’s just not true.



Q: If my wife and I get a subsidy for Obamacare health insurance, we will have a hard time becoming U.S. citizens? My wife and I are permanent residents. We recently submitted our naturalization applications. My wife is working part-time and I am unemployed. We just applied for health insurance, with a subsidy request, under the Affordable Care Act. Does getting the subsidy mean we will have become public charges, hurting our chances to naturalize?

Norman, Fairfax, VA

A: Your getting a health insurance subsidy will have no impact on your and your wife’s right to naturalize. Unlike for most permanent residence applications, financial stability or the ability to show outside support is not relevant to an immigrant’s eligibility for U.S. citizenship. Further, getting a subsidy does not make a person a public charge.

Q: I came to this country legally with a P-3 visa three years ago, but stayed longer than allowed. I recently married a U.S. citizen. Will I need to apply for a waiver as a condition of getting my green card?

David, Staten Island

A: No. USCIS will not punish you for having overstayed. A person who entered legally (with the exception of those entering with transit or crew member visas), who marry U.S. citizens, can interview in the U.S. without concern with having overstayed. No waiver is required. Individuals who overstay and then leave the United States sometimes need a waiver to get a visa to return. That rule does not apply to those who don’t leave and interview here.

For readers not familiar with the P-3 visa, it is available to artists or entertainers coming to the U.S. as part of a culturally unique program. Unlike some other visas for artists and entertainers, the person need not be outstanding in their field, if the program meets the “culturally unique” criteria.

Allan Wernick is an attorney and director of the City University of New York’s Citizenship Now! project. Send questions and comments to Allan Wernick, New York Daily News, 4 New York Plaza, N.Y., 10004 or email to questions@allanwernick.com. Follow him on Twitter @awernick.