Read Part One

The campaign to defeat a proposal for a single-payer health insurance system in Colorado is kicking off Thursday with some high-profile leaders. Walker Stapleton, the Republican state treasurer, and former governor Bill Ritter, a Democrat, will co-chair what is being billed as a bipartisan campaign to oppose Amendment 69. The opposition strategy will be outlined during a morning news conference at the Denver Metro Chamber of Commerce, which also is contributing campaign leaders.

One prominent target: the cost. In a news release, opponents call the initiative “a risky and untested state-run health insurance system” that would raise taxes by $25 billion in its first year.

So begins a January 27, 2016 Denver Post article written by reporter David Olinger, noting the roll-out of a campaign committee with the rather unimaginative name ‘Coloradans for Coloradans.’

I visited the Coloradans for Coloradans website over the weekend and found a general dearth of hard facts there. I was unable to locate, for example, the actual language of Amendment 69. The website did offer a number of speculative options, however, including a short quote from Colorado governor John Hickenlooper:

Our reforms are just starting to bear fruit, and it would be premature to dramatically remake our healthcare system at this time.

I’m not sure what “reforms” the governor is referring to, or what type of fruit, exactly, they have borne? Maybe I should read the newspapers more carefully.

The website also featured a prominent attempt to compare the ColoradoCare proposal to a ‘single-payer’ health plan proposal that fell apart in Vermont back in 2014. But the most recent “News” on the website dates back to January 27.

Meanwhile, Club 20, a conservative group that represents Western Slope communities, businesses and individuals, voted overwhelmingly to oppose Amendment 69 at their biannual meeting this month in Grand Junction. That vote was celebrated on the Americans for Prosperity website, in an article that quoted Club 20 Board of Directors alternate Brian Ahern:

“We pay some of the highest insurance premiums in the country, and that’s just not right. We have a very healthy demographic and so for us to pay such high health insurance premiums is out of whack. It needs to be fixed, but Amendment 69 is not it,” Ahern said after the meeting.

We can probably all agree with Mr. Ahern, that America’s healthcare system is broken and deserves to be fixed. We might also agree that ObamaCare was a poorly conceived and generally unsuccessful attempt to repair that system.

A question that might pose itself is, “Could ColoradoCare possibly be worse than ObamaCare?”

That question can be answered in two very different ways: as a political question, or as a societal question. It appears to me that ColoradoCare takes that long step into ‘single-payer’ socialized healthcare that ObamaCare was politically unable to take, and would push Colorado into the same realm of universal healthcare currently practiced in most European countries.

Politically, ColoradoCare is socialism. But so are many other cherished American government programs, including Social Security and Medicare. Considering that ColoradoCare would be directed by an elected board of directors — similar to the way our local electric cooperative, LPEA, elects its board of directors, for example — and considering that ColoradoCare would replace the federal Affordable Care Act in Colorado, could it actually be an improvement on the disaster known as ObamaCare?

Then, we have the societal answer. Would ColoradoCare improve healthcare for Coloradans? That depends largely, I suppose, on which end of the economic spectrum you’re standing on, when you view the potential effects of ColoradoCare.

Earlier this month, I had a medical emergency, and was driven to the emergency room at the Pagosa Springs Medical Center, by my friend Greg. The medical emergency, although acutely painful, turned out to be a simple matter to address. The doctor took less than 30 seconds to adjust my hernia and relieve the pain. I was also treated to an abdominal x-ray and had my blood pressure checked, twice.

The total time for all of these minor (and seemingly routine) operations was less than 30 minutes.

The bill arrived a few days ago. from the Pagosa Springs Medical Center — a public agency extensively supported by taxpayer subsidies, we might mention. The bill shows an amount due of $1490. This, for less than 30 minutes of service. According to my pocket calculator, that comes to about $3,000 per hour.

I believe the average wage in Archuleta County is about $12 per hour. The cost of health care appears to be at a slightly higher rate. Does anyone perceive a problem here?

According to a recent report by the Commonwealth Fund, the United States far surpasses all industrialized nations in one particular area of healthcare: overall cost. America spends about 17 percent of its Gross Domestic Product on healthcare; in Europe and Asia, the average is about 10 percent.

In 1980 — as we see above — the U.S. share of its GDP spent on healthcare was less than 9 percent; that share has basically doubled in the past 36 years.

Meanwhile, the U.S. has fewer practicing physicians, per capita, than any European nation. Our life expectancy is lower than any developed nation in Europe or Asia, and we have more people over 65 with two or more chronic conditions — in some case, nearly twice as many people. Our obesity rate is higher than any other nation included in the report — more than triple the rate, compared to some countries.

The U.S. death rate from ischemic heart disease (heart attacks) in 2007 was three times the rate in Japan and France.

Why would Bill Ritter and Walker Stapleton — and Colorado voters — want to keep things the way they are?

Read Part Three…