A street art installation in progress at 250N10, a rental building in Williamsburg. LCOR

The artist known as Mr. Brainwash, best known from the 2010 Banksy documentary “Exit Through the Gift Shop,” has designed an outdoor mural that is being installed in the Brooklyn neighborhood of Williamsburg.

In the latest example of corporate real estate owners upping their buildings cool factor by hiring graffiti artists, LCOR has enlisted Mr. Brainwash to design a piece for 250N10, a new rental building in Williamsburg.

The mural faces Roebling Street and features a tribute to John Augustus Roebling, an architectural pioneer and the designer of the Brooklyn Bridge, and his son Charles Roebling.

Mr. Brainwash will also add his signature motto “Life is Beautiful.”

While Mr. Brainwash has designed the piece, others are installing the work, which is expected to take two weeks to be completed.

Mr. Brainwash is a French-born but Los Angeles-based street artist whose first show in New York was held in the Meatpacking district in 2010.

A street art installation at 250N10 in Williamsburg. LCOR

In 2009, he was commissioned by Madonna to design the cover of her 2009 greatest hits album “Celebration.”

“Mr. Brainwash’s work tends to be a more about celebrities, but we wanted to make a bit of a local statement,” said David Sigman, Executive Vice President of LCOR.

Mr. Sigman said LCOR purchased the site from a private owner and developer for $21 million in 2011. Company officials are paying for the installation, including the cost of labor, stencils, materials and paint. LCOR chose to incorporate the art in an attempt to add to the eclectic landscape of the neighborhood, which is already home to street art by notable artists including Icy + Sot and Blanca\Valbuena.

Mr. Sigman said the 250N10 building, which will include 234 rental apartments, contains a lot of glass and is colorful, but there was a very large blank stucco wall on Roebling St. that building officials thought would lend itself to art.

When commissioning Mr. Brainwash for this art installation, LCOR worked directly with Chris Seriale of New World Group. Mr. Seriale is a collector of street art and has pieces from Shepard Fairey, Kaws and Mr. Brainwash.

Mr. Sigman said he had not met Mr. Brainwash. “I think he’s in the Hamptons right now,” he said.