San Francisco-based Allay, an human resources services and employee benefits start up, has raised $3.4 million in seed funding. The investors included BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, Sandbox Industries, 500 Startups and Arnold Capital. In addition to the funding, Anna Haghgooie, managing director of Sandbox Industries, will represent BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners on the board.

PRESS RELEASE

SAN FRANCISCO, CA (October 26, 2015) — San Francisco-based Allay today announced a $3.4 million seed round led by BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners with participation by Sandbox Industries, 500 Startups, AngelPad’s Thomas Korte, Ryan Holmes, Geoff Entress, Arnold Capital and others.

Today’s U.S. health insurance industry is comprised of more than 500,000 health insurance brokers, collecting roughly $32.5 billion in health insurance commissions yearly. Many of these brokers are still operating in a fairly manual, offline way, with limited opportunity to scale. At the same time, commissions are being squeezed and end customers are demanding far more from their brokers, including increased benefits expertise due to complex regulations, compliance, HR task automation and knowledgeable customer service.

“Brokers play a really important role in the employee benefits realm and have actually become critical in helping sort out the complexities of the Affordable Care Act, HR regulations and supporting benefit plans that are often from multiple insurance carriers and third-party administrators,” says company co-founder and CEO, Julien Emery. “And, while there’s no question that the number of brokers will likely decrease over time, due to commissions being squeezed and the emergence of more efficient service delivery models, there is also a solid opportunity for good brokers to evolve and expand.”

Emery continues, “Brokers today must help their customers do far more with less, and this often creates a scaling problem for your typical broker trying to not only grow their business, but also provide great service and strategic advice. Allay is the platform partner that helps brokers to scale and ultimately provide more value for their customers.”

Allay was started in 2014 and has been in private beta with companies and select broker partners since January of this year. The new funding will allow the company to expand more aggressively in the U.S. health insurance market.

Allay provides an all-in-one HR platform, which enables employers to more easily onboard new hires, sign important documents, select and enroll in the most relevant benefit plans for each individual and/or group, and provide full HR and benefits administration and compliance. Allay can work with any broker that an employer wants, but the company is also building out its own preferred partner broker network to ensure employers are getting the most knowledgeable, trustworthy, and helpful broker/advisors.

“We have no doubt that brokers will continue to play a strong role in the healthcare landscape, but the reality is that they need to evolve as their customers demand more,” said Anna Haghgooie, Managing Director of Sandbox Industries, who will represent BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners on the Board. “Allay is the platform that broker partners can use to meet these demands and ultimately grow their business.”

Prior to this round of funding, Allay previously took part in the fall 2014 AngelPad cohort.

About Allay

Founded in 2014, Allay offers an option to the 500,000 insurance brokers and agents for a customizable, all-in-one solution for benefits, HR management, on- & off-boarding, compliance and reporting. The company works directly with companies and through broker partners. Founders Julien Emery and Andrew Draper met at Hootsuite, where Emery was an early employee. Both have founded companies before where they became frustrated with the HR and benefits problems they now are seeking to solve.

About BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners

BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners, L.P. is a corporate venture fund licensed by the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association, an association of Blue Cross and Blue Shield companies. The fund invests in promising, emerging companies of strategic relevance to Blue Cross and Blue Shield Plans. Sandbox Industries is the exclusive provider of investment management services to BlueCross BlueShield Venture Partners. For more information, please visit www.bcbsvp.com