As a practicing physician who has diagnosed many cases of breast cancer, I believe knowledge is power.

The earlier I know about cancer, the more localized it is, the greater the chance of a surgical cure. My patients agree.

That’s why women are so angry and frustrated by the new guidelines released by the American Cancer Society this week: no mammograms before the age of 45 in women at normal risk of breast cancer, and no breast exams whatsoever by either doctor or patient.

Taking control of your own health is empowering, and a breast self-exam is part of this power. Who is the ACS to suggest that women shouldn’t examine their own breasts? A woman knows her own body better than any doctor. She can examine her breasts while washing and be sensitive to the slightest change. It is then up to her doctor to decide whether the lump she has uncovered is worth further investigation.

NEW BREAST CANCER SCREENING GUIDELINES SPARK DEBATE

I have diagnosed many cases of breast cancer this way at early stages, and patients are always grateful for knowing.

If breast exams lead to too many biopsies, it is the fault of the doctor ordering them — not of the exam. The same is true for mammography, a crucial tool for breast cancer screening.

The ACS tracks these numbers and reported almost 39,000 cases of invasive breast cancer diagnosed in women ages 40 to 50 in 2013 alone, with close to 4,000 deaths. Most of these cases were diagnosed by mammogram.

In fact, the test is over 80% sensitive at picking up breast cancer. Without a mammogram, your breast cancer would be diagnosed much later, meaning you you’d be more likely to require debilitating chemotherapy or radiation therapy — and also more likely to die.

These days, early breast cancer can be treated with a local procedure and breast reconstruction to the point where a woman is not the slightest bit disfigured. This is a goal worth shooting far.

The world of breast cancer and breast cancer screening is changing for the better, and the ACS is not keeping up with it. With digital mammography now in common use, and 3D mammography on the horizon, the test is extremely valuable in all women over 40.

A baseline exam at 40 allows a radiologist to follow a trend. Comparing a new mammogram to a previous one is the most accurate way to find abnormalities. If I delay screening to 45, it may take me to 47 to detect a problem, and by then it may be advanced disease.

FOES SUE TO STOP OBAMACARE, SAY IT'S UNCONSTITUTIONAL

Coming out against mammograms between 40 and 45 also plays to a woman’s fears of radiation or the discomfort of having her breasts squeezed flat. In fact, to put the radiation dose in perspective, the amount that a woman receives is about the same as she gets by simply living in the world for seven weeks.

So why is the ACS, an esteemed organization that supports great research, making such a foolish decision here? The timing is certainly cruel, as we are right in the middle of breast cancer awareness month.

The answer is that it is succumbing to political pressure. Six years ago, the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, fueled by Obamacare to cut costs, also relied on studies that looked at outdated technology, and also refused to put the blame for needless procedures where it belonged, on bad doctors. They released guidelines that discouraged routine mammography before the age of 50.

At that time, the ACS resisted moving the age to start screening upward from 40, but they have now given in to the one-size-fits-all pressure that is Obamacare’s trademark. It is disingenuous for the ACS to suggest that women now ask their doctors if they should be tested beginning at age 40, because with both organizations changing their guidelines, insurance companies are no longer likely to cover the test for those under 45.

The emergence and advancement of genetic testing will help us one day to decide who needs a mammogram and who doesn’t. But cutting screening costs in 40-year-olds now will cost the health care system more as 47-year-olds need expensive treatments.

Not to mention what forfeiting her screening choices does to a woman’s sense of good health and well-being.

Siegel is a professor of medicine and medical director of Doctor Radio at NYU Langone Medical Center.