Local Breast cancer survivors, caregivers, volunteers and community members participate in the American Cancer Society Making Strides Against Breast Cancer 5k walk in Point Pleasant Beach, NJ. Sunday, October 19, 2014 Noah K. Murray - Special for the Asbury Park press ASB 1020 Breast Cancer Walk (Photo: Noah K. Murray, Noah K. Murray)

Nancy Orlando suffered a double mastectomy, 16 rounds of chemotherapy and reconstructive surgery in the 20 months since she was diagnosed with an aggressive form of breast cancer.

But little evidence of her ordeal showed through her smile on Sunday, as the 50-year-old Wall resident and a team of friends wearing "Nancy's Knockers" shirts joined 20,000 people at the American Cancer Society's Making Strides Against Breast Cancer walk in Point Pleasant Beach.

"There was no lump," recalled Orlando, who wears a wig because her hair has not completely regrown. "If I didn't go for my annual (mammogram), they said it would be very fatal."

Breast cancer is the most commonly diagnosed cancer among women in the nation after skin cancer, according to the American Cancer Society. It is the second-leading cause of cancer death among women after lung cancer.

In 2011, 220,097 women and 2,078 men in the U.S. were diagnosed with breast cancer, according to the Centers for Disease Control's most recent figures.

Though rates of breast cancer diagnosis have remained stable or increased slightly for some groups of women between 2003 and 2011, the death rates have continued to drop over the same period, according to the CDC.

Beverly Kelly, 54, of Wall is one of the now-many breast cancer survivors. She attended the Making Strides walk to share her hope of bringing early detection and free mammograms to every woman. Kelly said she was diagnosed with breast cancer in 2012 and has since had a bilateral mastectomy and numerous reconstructive surgeries.

"I never found a lump," she recalled. "It was very scary having to tell my four kids I had breast cancer."

Two years later, "this is my first summer feeling good," Kelly said.

The American Cancer Society invests more in breast cancer research than for any other form of cancer and has given $84 million in recent grants toward breast cancer research, early-detection initiatives and support programs.

Donna Gulotta, a spokeswoman for the American Cancer Society's Jersey Shore division, said Sunday's goal was to raise more than $1 million.

In New Jersey, the American Cancer Society not only funds research but helps patients get transportation and find support networks, and it also provides informational hotlines, Gulotta said. The organization is also petitioning New Jersey senators to support more access to palliative care for patients, such as better access to painkillers and anti-nausea medications.

A diagnosis "can be a really confusing time for people," Gulotta said. "We're helping people stay well. We're helping people get well by funding researching and finding cures."

Kristine Vinas, a 39-year-old Matawan mother originally from the Philippines, said her view on life has changed since she was diagnosed in August 2012.

"I am aware of things," Vinas said. "I appreciate things more."

Her first clue that something was wrong was feeling a sharp pain in her chest. She underwent two months of operations and six months of chemotherapy and is now in a medically induced menopause to protect her if the cancer returns.

Despite her experience, she has words of advice for other newly diagnosed women.

"Know that there is a cure, and believe that you will be better," she said. And "surround yourself with your loved ones. They will give you strength."

By the numbers: Breast cancer deaths have dropped 34 percent between 1989 and 2010. Despite the progress, about 40,000 people will likely die this year from breast cancer.

Source: American Cancer Society

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1tEmS9N