NewsGender, Politics - U.S.

WASHINGTON, D.C., September 4, 2015 (LifeSiteNews) -- Americans will soon be able to tell their insurer to cover hormone treatments and surgery for “sex changes” if a new proposed rule from the Obama administration takes effect.

The regulations would require publicly-funded health care and other facilities to allow males and females to use restrooms of their choice, and that all insurers who receive federal funds must cover transgender-related treatment.

According to U.S. News & World Report, the head of the HHS Office for Civil Rights told reporters that the rule does not specifically require insurers to cover surgery and hormone treatments. However, "it is basically a requirement that insurers use nondiscriminatory criteria," said Jocelyn Samuels.

As such, Samuels explained, insurers would face pressure from the government if they don't cover transgender-related treatments, in part because the administration considers them medically necessary. Patients who felt they were discriminated against would be able to sue under the measure.

Like the hotly contested mandate requiring insurance companies to cover contraceptives, abortifacients, and sterilization, this new rule comes from the Affordable Care Act. And like the Obama administration's rewrite of the 1972 Title IX law, the regulation says that people with gender dysphoria are to be in a protected class because to do otherwise would be sex discrimination.

Click "like" if you want to defend true marriage.

Creating “transgender rights” has been a major priority of President Obama in his second term. Medicare has been required to cover transgender treatments for months, and at least two branches of the U.S. military will now use taxpayer funds to pay for transgender treatments -- and service members will be allowed paid time off to recover.

While the gender dysphoria of Bruce Jenner and others has convinced much of the public that mutilation, surgery, and hormone treatments are solutions to the mental illness, many medical experts say counseling is far more effective than attempting to change an immutable characteristic.