Sunday, July 12, 2015

The Fourth Circuit Court of Appeals recently issued an alarming decision affirming a $237 million judgment against Tuomey Healthcare Systems, a nonprofit hospital located in a small, largely rural South Carolina community that is a federally-designated medically underserved area. The judgment resulted from a jury’s finding that Tuomey submitted 21,730 false claims to Medicare for reimbursement knowing that the claims were generated through part-time physician employment contracts that violated the referral constraints found in the Stark Law. The decision clarifies that hospital “facility fees” associated with outpatient procedures performed by physicians constitute “referrals” under the Stark Law even when the “referring” physician is personally performing the outpatient procedure. The false claims themselves had a total value of $39 million, but with automatic treble damages and civil penalties in the minimum amount for each violation, the resulting judgment was for $237 million. Despite its affirmance of the judgment, the Fourth Circuit panel recognized “the troubling picture this case paints: An impenetrably complex set of laws and regulations that will result in a likely death sentence for a community hospital in an already medically underserved area.” U.S. ex rel. Drakeford v. Tuomey.

The part-time employment contracts at issue in Tuomey allowed the physicians to maintain their private practices, but required them to perform all outpatient surgical procedures exclusively at the hospital. The contracts had multiple compensation components, two of which proved problematic under Stark. First, each physician was paid an annual guaranteed base salary which was adjusted from year to year based on the amount the physician collected from all services rendered the previous year. Second, the bulk of the physicians’ compensation was earned in the form of a productivity bonus, which paid the physicians 80% of the amount of their collections for that year.