I’m a senior citizen. My school taxes are $4,200. That’s why I can’t afford the medication I need. I can’t afford cable TV. I can’t afford the Internet. I can’t even afford to go to McDonald’s. Please you voters, contact your congressmen and tell them to rearrange the taxes for schools, please.

I was reading the article in Tuesday’s Mercury about the Keim Street bridge. It won’t be ready till 2019. First of all to all the commissioners, I would never vote you in again. I would fire all of you until I get something done the proper way. Phoenixville’s Mont Claire bridge happened quickly, they were very fast and efficient about it. I can’t believe you are waiting until 2019 to get this bridge done. I would be embarrassed.

This is in response to the caller about the comments on the schools. Their closing was “Perhaps we should get back to the basics.” How perfectly said. You got my vote.

This is about Obama’s awesome Obamacare. You can’t even get a test done let alone go for surgery unless the hospital is calling you and telling you they want anywhere from $200 to a couple thousand dollars up front before you even have anything done. What do they think we people are made of with the economy as bad as it is but they’ll fly foreigners over here at our expense and give them the best of everything. That’s not fair, it’s not right. When is this going to stop?

Advertisement

Mary

I see the street sweeper is coming out again. They seem to bring it out at the wrong time every year. I believe last year they swept the streets before the leaves all came down and this year they’re sweeping them before the trees fully leaf out and before they drop all their little stringy pollen pods all over the place. They should have probably waited another couple of weeks.

I’d like to put Target and any other business with a ridiculous bathroom policy on notice as follows. If any of my female loved ones are using the ladies room and a male goes in you can bet I’m going in and dragging him out of there and I would hope any real man would do likewise.

I want you to remember that this time of the year people are spreading weed and feed, insect killers, all over the yard. Yes your grass is beautiful but those chemicals that you put on the soil leach into the water supply. You drink that water and remember if it kills insects and weeds, it’s going to kill you eventually, probably with some type of cancer.

Starlight

This is to the person who thinks that Donald Trump is the man to vote for because he’s such a multi-billionaire and he knows business. How come his casinos are no longer viable but bankrupt? That’s just what he’s going to do to this country, bankrupt it. You want him so good luck to you.

What can I say about living in New Hanover Township? Everyday I see the slum next door and even though I’ve begged for code enforcement for years, nothing has ever happened. The township officials and their family members who were given jobs are too busy giving themselves huge pay raises.

Disgusted Taxpayer

Sen. John McCain says he won’t be going to the Republican Convention. I don’t blame him. A war veteran is told that he’s a loser. So I don’t blame him for not going to the convention. That shows you what he thinks about Donald Trump, a loser.

So I see that Ted Cruz has suspended his campaign and has ceded the Republican nomination to the vulgar Donald Trump. I’d like to be the first to offer my congratulations to President Hillary Clinton.

“National Teachers Appreciation Day where America honors teachers in every way possible except a decent salary.” — Conan O’Brien.

John From Mont Clare

Hallelujah, Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders take all the votes. I’m so excited. Goodbye Hillary. I hope that she’s out of it and the run is between Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders and may the best man win.

The longest-serving Republican House Speaker is an admitted pedophile. The Republican front-runner has been endorsed by the imperial wizard of the KKK. Republicans are banning certain Americans from public bathrooms while encouraging guns to be brought into them but hey let’s all talk about how evil Hillary Clinton is.

Larry From Rofo

I’m calling in reference to the Jim Vlahos’ resignation as township commissioner in Lower Pottsgrove. My question is to the voters of the township, when will they wake up and take a hard look at the chairman and vice chairman of the township commission? The puppet strings are gone. They’ve been exposed.

Sound Off is a forum to spur dialogue from residents of the communities we serve on topics of interest in those communities. Fair game are comments that raise issues of note or amplify ongoing debates.

We will not publish comments that are potentially libelous, slanderous, mean-spirited, vulgar or inappropriate. Publications of Sound Off comments are at the sole discretion of the publisher.