Carey Davis is the best choice for mayor

In a Nov. 14 letter, one of your readers described former Councilwoman Wendy McCammack as the “obvious” choice for mayor.

This is certainly true. She has name recognition and high visibility. During election season her signs are everywhere. At City Council meetings, she has lots to say and is often on camera.

In this case, however, I think it would be good to think beyond the obvious choice and seek the best choice instead.

I appreciate Wendy’s years of service, her warmth to constituents, and her willingness to speak her mind.

Democracy depends, however, on leaders who can listen as well as speak and who can work toward consensus and coalition-building, especially in times of trouble.

Though I respect Wendy’s service to my ward, I regret to say that she does not appear to have or exercise that crucial skill. In fact, when it looks as if her opinion will not carry the day, she leaves her seat and takes the microphone as “just a citizen,” which deepens division and prevents the council from doing its crucial work.

Will she do the same from the mayoral chair? I think this is what brought on her recall and replacement.

I submit that it is time for the city we love to move beyond the obvious.

I think Carey Davis is the best choice for mayor.

— Sandra Tice, San Bernardino

Tea party way ignores majority rule

Events of the past few months in Washington, D.C., leading up to the government shutdown have exposed how dysfunctional the Republican Party has become.

The GOP has lost its moorings by allowing itself to be hijacked by a small group of strong-headed people.

One of the ridiculous claims made by this group is that the 2010 Affordable Care Act, alias Obamacare, is hurting Americans and killing businesses and should be repealed. How can a program that is having difficulty even getting started and registering people be hurting anybody?

The tea party, led by Ted Cruz, claims to be speaking on behalf of the American people. This claim is bogus when you look at the facts.

There are 435 members of Congress representing the entire country. Only about 30 of these identify themselves as tea party members.

Mathematically, how can a mere 7 percent of these representatives claim to represent the American people?

The approximately 260 reasonable Republicans or so in Congress who have made 40 attempts to repeal the 2010 Act since its enactment have not been suicidal about their desire to repeal Obamacare. They have not threatened to shut down the entire government because they have not had their way.

Advertisement

The tea party claims that its constituents want Obamacare repealed.

How about respecting the opinion of the rest of the population who may or may not be happy with Obamacare, however, at the least, they are reserving judgment and would like to see how the program plays out in the “real world” and affects them personally?

The tea party way and attitude is dictatorship and has no place in these United States, one of the world’s most truly democratic and beloved countries.

— Charles Blankson, Fontana