Click photo to enlarge «

1

» Sean Maher For the Camera

You have no doubt heard about the coming disruption in transportation that could be the biggest change since cars replaced horses over a century ago. While experts may disagree on exactly how driverless cars will change our daily lives and urban landscape, no one disputes there will be changes and they will be major.

If you think this disruption is way off in the future, think again. Tesla already offers an "autopilot" feature to handle highway driving and Elon Musk says his company could market totally autonomous cars in two years. Google, Apple, Toyota, GM and a dozen others are close behind.

And while we argue in Boulder about 20th Century transportation challenges, other cities are embracing a 21st Century solution and wisely positioning themselves for the future.

Last month, city leaders in Somerville, Mass., signed an agreement with Audi to start testing self-parking cars as early as 2018. Traffic lights and parking garages will be redesigned for the new technology. Audi estimates that a structure designed for driverless cars could fit 60 percent more vehicles compared to a traditional garage of the same size. That would be a huge benefit for space constrained urban districts like downtown Boulder.

Elsewhere, Google is now testing its cars on the streets of downtown Austin with the enthusiastic support of city leaders. Uber is launching a partnership with Carnegie Mellon to test driverless cars around Pittsburgh. And California is scrambling to make it easier to test the cars on its highways and streets in an effort to retain its place in the market.

Advertisement

So why are we sitting on the sidelines in Boulder when we have many of the leading players already here? Google is building a campus at 30th and Pearl streets. The technology Uber is testing in Pittsburgh was partly developed by their team in downtown Boulder and Elon Musk's favorite restaurant is just a half block off the Pearl Street Mall.

Boulder is renowned for being one of the most entrepreneurial cities in the world. So let's live up to our reputation and think big. Let's bring leaders from the city, the university and the tech community together and figure out how to be on the cutting edge of the next great technology revolution. If they can do it in Pittsburgh, Austin and a suburb of Boston, we can certainly do it here!

An obvious question is where could we base a testing effort in Boulder? One option is the hospital site recently acquired by the city which is likely years away from serious redevelopment. In the interim, a portion of that property could be used as a base for Google, Uber, Tesla or any of the other companies developing driverless technology.

Or, if CU is involved, a testing facility on the east campus might be a good choice. Either option creates an exciting opportunity for Boulder to play a role in what could be the biggest change in transportation since the last hitching post was removed from Pearl Street.

If you are skeptical about encouraging more cars in Boulder, consider the evidence that driverless cars will be amazingly green. In his book, Clean Disruption, entrepreneur and Stanford professor Tony Seba argues that autonomous vehicles will eventually be all electric and operate under a business model that is a cross between car share and Uber. If Seba is right - and he makes a very persuasive case - this disruptive force will not only make auto travel safer and faster, it will make it infinitely cleaner and less intrusive.

2015 was a divisive year in Boulder as we argued about traffic, transit, bikes and the general difficulty in getting around town. These are 20th Century challenges which could be largely solved by the 21st Century technology of autonomous cars. Let's think big in 2016 and bring the future to Boulder by embracing this next great technology disruption.

Sean Maher is the CEO of the Downtown Boulder Business Improvement District. Views expressed in this column are his own and do not reflect the position of the Business Improvement District or Downtown Boulder, Inc. He can be reached at sean@dbi.org.