Pop quiz. Match these descriptions — most friendly, least friendly, best food, worst food — to the corresponding countries: Egypt, Italy, Spain, Turkey.

Answers:

Turkish food, with its fresh fruits and vegetables, savory lamb, and honey-kissed desserts, bests most countries’ cuisine.

Worst food goes to Spain, where I managed to have nine bad meals in three days, albeit washed down with exceptional wine. The sample size was too small to make a final judgement, but the salty potatoes, salty pork, and salty soup left a bad taste.

Least friendly are the Italians, who seem adept at ignoring the millions of American tourists who flock to their famous sites. I don’t blame them; I was the same when I lived in a tourist destination.

Egyptians, on the other hand, are not only friendliest and most hospitable of the aforementioned, but of all 30 countries I’ve visited. In fact, Arab countries are the only places I’ve visited where strangers, poor strangers at that, gave me gifts simply because I was a visitor to their shores.

For those who haven’t traveled to these countries, these (certainly subjective) descriptions may seem counterintuitive. Depictions in entertainment, news and social media often suggest the opposite is true, especially of Egypt. And just as my unfortunate culinary experience in Spain does not represent the whole of Spanish food, limited exposure can leave a false impression. Knowing a little means knowing just enough to be dangerous. Distortions endure because people often seek information that confirms their beliefs while avoiding contradictory information. Thus confirmation bias protects stereotypes and false narratives.

Consider two such statements pronounced by some in the aftermath of recent atrocities: “Muslims don’t denounce Islamic extremism” and “Pro-lifers don’t condemn violence at abortion clinics.” Both are false.

Individually and through their representative organizations, Muslims condemned the violence done in the name of their religion. Likewise, pro-lifers, who are by definition anti-killing, denounced violence done in their name. But like a tree that falls in the forest, one must be present to hear the sound. People who do not know Muslims or pro-lifers hear only silence and make assumptions.

Unfortunately, widening political divisions within the American public make it easier to avoid contact with alternative viewpoints. Pew Research Center polling data show that Americans have become more consistently right or left of center in their beliefs. Over the past 20 years, the percentage of politically engaged Democrats who hold consistently liberal views has risen from 8 percent to 38 percent. A third of politically active Republicans are consistently conservative, up from a quarter in 2004.

There is nothing wrong with ideological consistency so long as one is always seeking new information. The same polling data, however, show that consistent liberals and conservatives are more likely to surround themselves with like-minded people. Add to this trend, the ideological polarization of cable news and alternative media. One can simply avoid all contact with opposing viewpoints and the people who hold them. What one does know of the other side is likely to be a distortion, rather than a real argument or a real person. Red state or blue state then becomes a state of mind and no one dares cross the border into a land inhabited by mean and nasty strawmen.

The new year promises to be politically contentious. The only way to keep an open mind is to intentionally interact with people who are different than us. Breaking bread together can open minds. Hummus, anyone?

Krista Kafer (tokrista@msn.com) is co-host of “Kelley and Kafer” airing 1 to 4 p.m on 710 KNUS and a professor of communication at Colorado Christian University.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.