In his stinging rebuttal earlier this month of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service’s “eleventh-hour” decision to suddenly reverse itself and deny protections for the estimated 300 wolverines remaining in the lower 48 states, Judge Dana Christensen revealed an agency grasping for research to support its predetermined conclusion.

While ordering the service to reconsider the issue, the judge wrote that he was left with the impression that the agency’s Denver-based Region 6 director, Noreen Walsh, was looking for research “to justify a decision already made.”

And he offered an observation about what might have motivated Fish and Wildlife to reject peer-reviewed studies indicating global warming is projected to eliminate two-thirds of the wolverine’s snowy habitat within the next 75 years.

“Why did the service make the decision it did in the proposed rule, [to protect the wolverine] based on what it determined to be the best available science, and reject that decision eighteen months later?” wrote Christensen. “Based on the record, the court suspects that a possible answer to this question can be found in the immense political pressure that was brought to bear on this issue, particularly by a handful of Western states.”

As detailed in the ruling, in the months after Fish and Wildlife’s initial proposal to protect the wolverine, officials from Idaho, Wyoming and Montana spear-headed attacks on the decision, ranging from vague assertions about faulty climate science to worries about potential harm to winter sports businesses and limits on wolverine trapping.

Christensen’s concerns about the political underpinnings of the decision mirror those of a growing number of leading scientists — both inside and outside the agency — who report that politics is trumping science in more and more important Endangered Species Act protection decisions.

In 2010, for example, the agency proposed an endangered listing for the dunes sagebrush lizard. But two years later — after heavy lobbying by oil and gas industries — the agency reversed itself and denied protection for the lizard. When Fish and Wildlife’s highest-ranking official in Texas alleged the reversal was the result of political influence and scientific misconduct, he was suddenly transferred to Albuquerque and subsequently retired after filing a whistleblower complaint against the agency. It was eventually settled.

More recently, in 2013, the service proposed protecting the northern long-eared bat as endangered after populations of the bat plummeted by more than 90 percent.

But two years later — after powerful special interests lobbied against that recommendation — the bat was listed under the less-protective “threatened” status, opening the door to the service approving exemptions that allow ongoing logging, ranching and energy development in the core of the bat’s habitat.

Creating sweeping industry-friendly exemptions in the habitat of protected species has become commonplace at the service. The northern long-eared bat rule, called a 4(d) rule, is the eighth such rule adopted by the Obama administration that authorizes ongoing destruction by industries of a threatened species’ habitat.

A report released late last year by the Center for Biological Diversity documents that no single presidential administration has approved more of these damaging industry loopholes than the Obama administration.

In addition, a 2015 survey by the Union of Concerned Scientists found that three out of every four Fish and Wildlife Service scientists reported that consideration of political interests was too high at the agency. And two-thirds of Fish and Wildlife scientists reported that they had witnessed congressional interference that led to the withdrawal or modification of policies or decisions.

A quote included in the report of one agency scientist proved particularly prescient: “Outside interest groups (especially the States, BLM, and energy companies) have too much influence on FWS decisions. We need more backbone to make the right decisions regardless of political posturing, especially in Region 6.

“Look at the wolverine decision, for example.”

Andrea Santarsiere is a staff attorney at the Center for Biological Diversity’s office in Victor, Idaho.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.