After some initial caution, UnitedHealthcare has embraced President Barack Obama's health reform.

With open enrollment on the Illinois online marketplace underway, the giant insurer is selling individual health plans in 27 counties. It was only in Cook County this year.

Its coverage area now includes the collar counties, continues southwest to Peoria and ends at the Mississippi River. Colleen Van Ham, CEO of the company's Illinois and northwest Indiana operations, recently sat down with the Tribune to discuss UnitedHealthcare's Obamacare strategy and other insurance trends. This is an edited transcript of that conversation.

UnitedHealthcare executive on what she learned from interior design Colleen Van Ham discusses biggest fear, companies she admires and following your passion. Nov. 6, 2015. (Ameet Sachdev / Chicago Tribune) Colleen Van Ham discusses biggest fear, companies she admires and following your passion. Nov. 6, 2015. (Ameet Sachdev / Chicago Tribune) See more videos

Why are you expanding?

We believe it's something we can do at an affordable price. There are so many additional people who need insurance coverage. We have a product that really helps people understand how to buy, what's available to them, the subsidies that are available and the benefits. After they select us, we're reaching out to them and asking them if they selected a physician and scheduled a preventive care appointment. It's really an end-to-end experience based on everything we heard from consumers.

What did you learn in 2015 in Cook County?

No matter how we try to educate and put materials out there, people still want to talk to a live person. Once they are signed up they still need their hand held in terms of what they just purchased and how they can use their insurance. The other thing we did is cut the amount of time it takes to complete an application in half, to within two weeks compared with 25 to 30 days.

What types of exchange-based plans do you have in the Chicago area?

We have eight copay plans with various ranges of deductibles, and we also have two health savings account plans. All of our plans are HMO plans, and with them comes access to at least 50 percent of the hospitals within that area. The other key feature is we ask the customer to select a primary care physician. If we see within 90 days after enrollment that they haven't selected that doctor we will reach out and call that individual. We're encouraging them to go to the doctor and use the benefit to make sure they understand what they have available to them.

What kind of rate increases will your current customers on the exchange see?

From 2015 to 2016 our customers will see very moderate rate increases. We think they may be some of the lowest on the exchange. It was single digits on average. What we strive to do over the long term is offer very predictable costs year over year. We want people to stay with us and not feel like they have to go out to the marketplace every single year because they were surprised by the rate increase.

Why are insurers going to narrow provider networks and eliminating their PPOs on the exchange?

Our HMO plans are narrower than our broad PPO network. There's a lot of different definitions on the exchange of how narrow is defined. That's where consumers need time to understand what they are buying because there can be certain options where it's just one hospital system and that's it.

That's probably a distinct differentiation for us versus some of the other network offerings on the exchange that might have lower price points attached to them.

What we do know when we have narrow-network offerings is we're able to work with the providers to bring the best-in-class discounts to those individuals so that they are seeing the return in terms of what they might trade off in overall access.

How can you make it easier for consumers to see how much they spend on health care?

We have the "myHealthcare cost estimator." It provides the cost of procedures in advance at specific hospitals and facilities so members can understand in advance what their out-of-pocket spend will be for a specific procedure. Costs haven't been as transparent, and that's been one of the biggest criticisms of the industry.

On employer-sponsored insurance, what big trends are you seeing?

The biggest trend right now continues to be how do employers help their employees live healthier lives. We see a lot of movement to platforms like the one we have called Rally, which allows an individual to go on everyday and enter what foods they ate or how much they walked and get points for doing that. Companies can decide how they want to reward those points in terms of potential premium reductions or other incentives. Last night I was 14 steps shy of 10,000 steps so I stood in place and walked just to get those 14 steps because I was motivated by that goal.

On employer-sponsored plans, the average deductible has gone up 67 percent since 2010. Why?

It's reflective of the underlying pressures companies have in terms of their overall performance and how much of that they are dedicating to health care costs. Companies are moving to programs where they can offer an array of choices. I also see them moving to programs with tiered benefits, such as lower copays if employees use providers in a preferred network.

What has been your experience with accountable care organizations (networks of doctors, hospitals and other health care providers that coordinate patient care and become eligible for bonuses when they deliver care more efficiently)?

We're seeing great results from ACOs. We have two here locally, with Advocate and Illinois Health Partners. We're looking at improving the patient experience while improving outcomes and reducing costs. It has to meet all three criteria for us to start looking at a value-based contract with a health system. We've been pretty judicious about how we enter into those contracts because not everybody is ready for shared risks. Providers are getting a more holistic look at the individual patient. Before, physicians didn't know if that person was going to any other doctors or any other pharmacies or went to the emergency room.

What are some of the big mergers among insurance companies going to mean for consumers?

The Affordable Care Act was intended to expand coverage and make it affordable. To meet the intent of the act insurance companies have to scale to be able to absorb the costs. Consumers will benefit if the mergers bring benefits in terms of affordability or an enhancement to the coverage.

asachdev@tribpub.com