Jody Collins recommends a helmet, gloves, leather pants and jacket, and boots that cover your ankles when riding a motorcycle.

Jeremy Peacock, who also drives a motorcycle, knows the dangers of a deer collision firsthand.

An Owasso man died of injuries he received when his motorcycle hit a deer Friday night.

An Owasso man died Monday morning, following a motorcycle wreck Friday night. The Oklahoma Highway Patrol says Mark Robinson died after he hit a deer, while driving a motorcycle in Collinsville.

State Farm says drivers in Oklahoma are at moderate risk for hitting a deer, but it can be prevented. There were more than 11,000 deer-vehicle collisions from July 2012 to June 2013, according to State Farm.

This time of year is when drivers should be especially on the lookout.

Jeremy Peacock, who also drives a motorcycle, knows the dangers of a deer collision firsthand.

"The deer just came out of nowhere and it brushed my wife's leg," Peacock said.

His wife was sitting behind him when the deer ran towards them on a country road near Catoosa.

11/1/2013 Related Story: Motorcyclist Seriously Injured In Crash Caused By Deer In Collinsville

"Instantly, she just grabs me and we slowed down to a stop, because it was pretty crazy. We slowed down to a stop and just stopped and gathered our thoughts," Peacock said.

Friday night in Collinsville, Mark Robinson and Charlotte Crawford were riding on Garnett Road near 126th Street North. OHP says a deer ran out in front of Robinson's motorcycle and he was thrown when he tried to avoid it. Crawford hit Robinson's bike and suffered minor injuries.

Troopers say neither was wearing a helmet.

"Deer are very unpredictable," said Jody Collins, sales manger at Route 66 Harley-Davidson.

Collins has heard his share of deer-motorcycle collisions. He said the best advice is to avoid country roads at night and scan the horizon for any wild animal that can dash onto the road.

"If you see deer in a roadway you should come to a stop. Deer are unpredictable, if you've got your headlights on them, they can jump right on top of you," Collins said.

The Oklahoma Department of Wildlife says drivers need to be especially careful over the next month. Deer normally go out around sunrise or sunset, but for the next 30 days or so it's breeding season, which means they'll be out and about 24 hours a day.

Peacock considers himself lucky and says the incident has changed the way he rides his bike.

"I definitely watch more than I did to begin with now. That was a pretty close brush with an accident," Peacock said.

Collins recommends a helmet, gloves, leather pants and jacket, and boots that cover your ankles when riding a motorcycle. He said those are the only things between you and the asphalt.