CONTACTS:

Carla Clunis, 646-633-4971, Carla.Clunis@coburnww.com

Paola Torres, 202-434-2555, ptorres@aarp.org



Tweet It: New April/May issue of @AARPMag chats w/ @RobinRoberts; the 2014 @Movies4Grownups winners & more! www.aarp.org/magazine

Robin Roberts’ Brave Journey—In Pictures: At 54, Robin Roberts has not only built a stellar career as a journalist, she has famously—and dramatically—overcome life-threatening illnesses, including cancer. Admitting she never dreamed she’d come so far, so fast in both her recovery and career, the Good Morning America co-anchor opens up in this issue of AARP The Magazine about success—and the importance of faith and family when times get tough. Sharing her private photos, Roberts narrates some of the unforgettable moments of her life, from the heartrending to the joyous. (Page 28)

The Ultimate 50-Plus Health Guide: The April/May issue of AARP The Magazine offers an extensive three-step guide to make you feel healthier, fitter and calmer. Between a no-diet way to lose weight and maintain healthy eating habits to jump-starting a lifelong fitness regime to combating stress through mindfulness, the fundamentals of sustaining a healthy lifestyle are all here. Plus: The AARP 15-minute workout, five tranquil meditation apps to check out, and hot new health foods to try like hemp milk and matcha. (Page 48)

A Look Back at the Vietnam War: This year marks the 50th anniversary of Operation Rolling Thunder, America’s first major offensive in the conflict with Vietnam. Taking a look back at the decade following President Lyndon Johnson’s decision to escalate the war, the April/May issue of AARP The Magazine shares intimate tales from those who lived through the war that changed everything. (Page 66)

Setting A Multigenerational Home Up For Success: With more adult children opting to move back home with their parents for financial reasons, this issue of AARP The Magazine shares tips on how to set a multigenerational home up for success. Financial expert Jean Chatzky discusses the best ways to navigate the transition—from how to talk to adult kids about financial responsibility, to how to share the truth of a parent’s own economic woes. (Page 24)

A Smooth Sailing Guide to Cruising in 2015: Finding the perfect ship and destination for an epic cruise adventure can be a daunting task. But whether you plan to cruise solo for a few days or take to the seas with a group for three months, there’s potential for big fun. In the April/May issue of AARP The Magazine, four cruisers reminisce about their recent adventures and share advice on how to make your own floating escape the happiest getaway yet. (Page 36)

Double Check Your Insurance in 2015: From knowing when to cancel a life insurance policy to making sure your valuables are protected in the best way possible, the must-do’s that consumers often overlook are revealed in this issue of AARP The Magazine. (Page 18)

Broken Bones to Blond Ambition, Candice Bergen Talks Aging: Emmy-winning actress Candice Bergen dishes on the growing pains of getting older in this issue of AARP The Magazine. Check out the lessons she’s learned through the years – from learning to love again after the death of her husband to dealing with her own mortality. (Page 12)

# # #

About AARP The Magazine

With more than 35.2 million readers, AARP The Magazine is the world's largest circulation magazine and the definitive lifestyle publication for Americans 50+. AARP The Magazine delivers comprehensive content through health and fitness features, financial guidance, consumer interest information and tips, celebrity interviews, and book and movie reviews. AARP The Magazine was founded in 1958 and is published bimonthly in print and continually online. Learn more at www.aarpmagazine.org .

About AARP



AARP is a nonprofit, nonpartisan organization, with a membership of nearly 38 million, that helps people turn their goals and dreams into real possibilities, strengthens communities and fights for the issues that matter most to families such as healthcare, employment and income security, retirement planning, affordable utilities and protection from financial abuse. We advocate for individuals in the marketplace by selecting products and services of high quality and value to carry the AARP name as well as help our members obtain discounts on a wide range of products, travel, and services. A trusted source for lifestyle tips, news and educational information, AARP produces AARP The Magazine, the world's largest circulation magazine; AARP Bulletin; www.aarp.org; AARP TV & Radio; AARP Books; and AARP en Español, a Spanish-language website addressing the interests and needs of Hispanics. AARP does not endorse candidates for public office or make contributions to political campaigns or candidates. The AARP Foundation is an affiliated charity that provides security, protection, and empowerment to older persons in need with support from thousands of volunteers, donors, and sponsors. AARP has staffed offices in all 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands. Learn more at www.aarp.org.