Ed Gillespie and Sen. Mark Warner (Photo: Campaign Websites)

US Senate Virginia Mark R. Warner (D) 1,071,283 votes 50% 50% Ed W. Gillespie (R) 1,054,556 votes 48% 48% Robert C. Sarvis (Lib) 53,396 votes 2% 2%

RICHMOND -- Virginians will have to wait for a recount to find out who will be representing them in the U.S. Senate.

Democratic Sen. Mark Warner of Virginia, who is locked in a tight race with GOP challenger Ed Gillespie in a contest many thought he'd easily win, claimed victory late Tuesday night.

"I come out of tonight's election energized, fired up, ready to go, let's make sure we get our country headed back in the right direction," Warner told a room full of supporters.

Returns show the race, however, is too close to call. Warner's lead narrowed from about 19,000 to 12,300 votes by Wednesday morning, a difference of just 1% between the two. If that difference remains, there could be a recount.

Steps to Certify Results of U.S. Senate Race

Step 1: Electoral boards in every county and city have until 5 p.m. Wednesday to ascertain and finalize yesterday's results.

Step 2: The State Board of Elections will meet on Monday, November 24 to certify the results, at which point an official winner will be declared.

Step 3: Virginia has no automatic recounts. But if the race is within 1%, Gillespie has 10 days to request a recount. If the margin is less than 0.5%, then the localities are responsible for paying for the recount. Otherwise, Gillespie's campaign must pay $10 per precinct -- about $25,000.

Learn More: How a recount works in Virginia

Warner won by 30 percentage points during his last campaign.

Warner said Tuesday night that he though Gillespie ran a hard-fought race.

"I know what it's like to come up a little short against a Warner," he said, referring to his unsuccessful 1996 Senate run against then Senator John Warner, who is not related to him.

Tim Kaine to Dem crowd: "The results are in and we won!" #WVECVote — Nick Ochsner (@13NickOchsner) November 5, 2014

Gillespie, who did not concede, thanked his supporters and asked them to get a good night's sleep as they wait for the final results to come in.

"Obviously we are going to accept whatever is the final outcome, but I owe it to the voters of Virginia, owe it to all of you to make sure that the outcome is final," Gillespie said.

"We will accept whatever is the final outcome" Ed says #WVECVote — Nick Ochsner (@13NickOchsner) November 5, 2014

A popular former governor, Warner maintained a lead throughout the contest but polls showed the race getting closer throughout the evening.

"I don't take anything for granted," Warner told reporters after a get-out-the-vote rally in Richmond on Monday. "We're not giving up a single corner of the state."

Warner has emphasized his bipartisan record and has been closing out the final days campaigning with former Republican Sen. John Warner.

Warner calls it "hard fought campaign," says he looks forward to serving another 6 years #wvecvotepic.twitter.com/wR92jpW41j — Mike Gooding 13News (@13MikeGooding) November 5, 2014

The Senate race drew little national interest or outside money. Outside groups spent $50 million in the 2012 Senate race in Virginia but virtually nothing this campaign. The absence of outside groups has helped Warner, who has held a huge cash advantage over Gillespie.

Gillespie spent much of the campaign linking Warner to the president, particularly Warner's vote in support of the Affordable Care Act. At a stop Monday to fire up Richmond-area supporters, Gillespie portrayed himself as a scrappy underdog.

"We've been outspent, but we have not been outworked," said Gillespie, a former top GOP operative who was chairman of the Republican National Committee. "We're going to surprise a lot of experts in Washington."

ABC exit poll results showed that 34% of voters in Virginia said they cast their vote to show opposition against Obama, which is an encouraging sign for Gillespie and other Republicans. Nearly half also said Obama's signature 2010 health care law went too far.





Read or Share this story: http://www.13newsnow.com/story/news/politics/2014/11/04/virginia-us-senate-race/18474809/