A Johns Hopkins transplant surgeon asserts that a single payer health care system will actually save most taxpayers money.

In his new book — Talking About Single Payer: Health Equality for America — Dr. James F. Burdick, details the opportunities for further savings in the present U.S. system, despite the improvements of Obamacare.

Dr. Burdick maintains that “through controlling expenses that do not help patients, a single payer system will simplify our health care, improve the quality of care and provide savings far exceeding the cost of extending coverage to every American.”

Dr. Burdick’s book disputes criticisms being lodged against Bernie Sanders’ single payer health care plan.

“The cost of a single payer national health program will be lower because it will avoid the excess expenses in the largely unregulated chaos today,” Dr. Burdick says.

Dr Burdick cites what he calls the sinkholes of wasted US medical expenditures — insurance administration ($300 billion), harmful excessive care (at least $500 billion), lost taxes from employer health plans ($100 billion).

“None of these costs would be necessary in a single payer system,” Dr. Burdick says. “Savings of nearly a trillion dollars, as detailed in these estimates, will far exceed the cost of extending coverage to the over 30 million presently unserved Americans.”

“This common sense has been buried in expensive campaign advertising that confuses present reality and clouds future possibilities,” Dr. Burdick says. “The game-changing argument in this book is that now no one can honestly claim that higher costs will result for most Americans in a single payer system than the charges and financial risks we are burdened with in our present outrageously expensive health care system.”

Dr. Burdick developed the physician-empowering strategy detailed in his book after a high-tech surgical career in organ transplantation.

“Fifteen years ago, when the Clinton health reform failed, I began to feel that something was missing,” Dr. Burdick says. “Almost no one mentioned it — the doctors were missing from the design. This book corrects that error.”

The book includes quotes from Burdick’s interviews with thirty health care experts.

His single payer solution calls for the creation of “a transparent, apolitical national public-private doctors board, using secure electronic medical records to make the system work best for doctors and patients.”