Last week, Congress opened its new session with a lot of unfinished business on its plate. One item that’s on everyone’s short list? Tax reform.

Key provisions for the working class — the Earned Income Tax Credit and the Child Tax Credit, which are due to expire in 2017 — are one point of friction between left and right stalling reform. Last term, President Barack Obama was in the habit of threatening to veto any bill that left out these credits, while Republicans opposed including them, purportedly because they are abused by undocumented workers. So far, there’s little to indicate any change of opinion.

So why should we hold up until we can include the credits? Well, because for poor children in America, it turns out they’re a really big deal.



[SEE: Political Cartoons on the Economy]

Currently, these refundable tax credits are our government’s most effective tool for lifting children out of poverty, which is as good reason as any for Obama’s stubborn resolve. In combination, they lift 5 million children out of poverty, and make an additional 8.8 million children less poor. According to the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, letting these credits expire would push 7.7 million children into or deeper into poverty.

So we need them. But, with a looming expiration date on these programs, continued gridlock and a child poverty rate of 20 percent, it might be time to shift the conversation from policies that stymie Congress, to those that have not been considered — including cash allowances.

In my recent report, “Seven Lessons about Child Poverty,” the last (but not least) lesson is that cash allowances are an effective policy when it comes to combating child poverty. The idea is simple: A set amount of cash would be transferred to all parents, monthly or weekly, depending on how many children they have. No other strings attached.

This idea may sound outlandish, given that as a nation we can’t even ensure tax credits that include a work requirement. For most U.S. politicians, cash allowances aren’t even on the radar. However, the truth is, these sort of transfers are neither rare nor unheard of. In fact, they’ve existed in Europe for decades, and have been the go-to anti-poverty tool in countries such as Brazil and Mexico.



[SEE: Congress Cartoons]

While tax credits are important, they are not the end-all solution for lifting children out of poverty. First of all, the Earned Income Tax Credit only benefits, well, those who are earning income. Parents who are unemployed or don’t make enough money to qualify receive no credit, even though their children may need it the most.

The spirit behind tax credits fits into the general U.S. trend since the mid-1990s of shifting benefits away from the out-of-work poor and toward the working poor. For example, Aid to Families with Dependent Children, which mostly helped those with little to no income, was replaced in 1996 by Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, which has stricter work requirements, and less than a third of its benefits are comprised of cash assistance. The result of this shift in policy is that the share of children living in deep poverty (less than 50 percent of the official poverty rate) has increased faster than the share of children in poverty overall.

What is the real-life impact? Just looking at the most extreme end of poverty, we see that more than 3.5 million children in the United States in 2011 were living on less than $2 per day, which represents a 150 percent growth since 1996. Cash allowances would help fill these gaps in our current welfare policy, since every family, regardless of their parental work status, would receive the benefit.

Another argument for cash allowances is their simplicity. While the take-up rate (the percent of eligible recipients who actually claim the benefit) of programs such as the Earned Income Tax Credit can be relatively high in comparison to other U.S. welfare policies, the take-up rate of cash allowances is markedly higher. The reason is that applying for means-tested benefits is often more complicated by design, which causes misinformation and confusion. The EITC has especially been criticized for its complexity. A universal cash allowance, on the other hand, would simply require a birth certificate.



[SEE: 2014: The Year in Cartoons]

Perhaps the best example of how such a plan would play out is across the Atlantic, where the United Kingdom has had a universal cash allowance (called the child benefit) in place for almost 70 years, as well as a Child Tax Credit (which, like U.S. tax credits, is means-tested and can only be claimed by those below a certain income level). On average, the U.K. child benefit has a 96 percent participation rate, while their Child Tax Credit has only an 80 percent participation rate. (Similarly, in the United States, the participation rate for the Earned Income Tax Credit is estimated to be somewhere between 75 and 80 percent.)

The truth is, a universal cash allowance in the United States would reach many more poor children, as well as those living in the most extreme depths of poverty.