Dynamic duo builds a special bond on way to setting Buffs' records

Colorado wide receiver Nelson Spruce, left, and quarterback Sefo Liufau have connected for 147 receptions (including three from Spruce to Liufau), more than any other duo in program history. Their 16 touchdown connections are also a school record.

Topping the charts Most career pass completions for a duo 147 - Sefo Liufau & Nelson Spruce (includes three from Spruce to Liufau), 2013-14 142 - Cody Hawkins & Scotty McKnight, 2007-10 (one from McKnight to Hawkins) 116 - Kordell Stewart & Michael Westbrook, 1992-94 Most career pass TDs for a duo 16 - Sefo Liufau & Nelson Spruce (includes one from Spruce to Liufau), 2013-14 15 - Cody Hawkins & Scotty McKnight, 2007-10 Online Go to BuffZone.com for a look at CU's top pass-catch combos through the years.

Nelson Spruce has a sense of humor that isn't easy to grasp at first.

"You just have to get used to it," junior quarterback Sefo Liufau said. "I get his jokes, for the most part, now."

While it may have taken Liufau some time to understand Spruce's dry humor, the two had an instant connection on the football field when they became teammates in 2013.

Now entering their third year together, Liufau and Spruce have formed one of the best pass-catch duos in the history of Colorado football.

"From that first drive he came in at (Arizona State), I kind of felt a connection," said Spruce, a senior who caught a school-record 106 passes in 2014.

Spruce had spent the entire 2013 offseason — and the first five weeks of that season — building his rapport with Connor Wood, the starter going into that fall.

Advertisement

When Wood struggled, however, coaches pulled him and never looked back. Liufau made his debut late in the first quarter at Arizona State on Oct. 12, 2013.

The first time Liufau dropped back to pass as a Buff, he found Spruce for a 6-yard gain and a first down on a 3rd-and-4 play.

His next two throws were intended for Spruce, too, and Liufau completed his first drive by throwing a touchdown to ... Spruce, of course.

"It's pretty special," Liufau said of how that first drive came together. "You're kind of worried going out there on your first drive. I'll remember that."

Trust factor

Their on-field connection has only grown since then. Already, they have connected for 147 receptions (including three from Spruce to Liufau), more than any other duo in program history. Their 16 touchdown connections are also a school record.

Offensive coordinator Brian Lindgren said he didn't necessarily see an instant bond between Liufau and Spruce, but said, "As a young quarterback, I could see how the connection would be made with Nelson because he's a very savvy receiver. During practice and repetitions, you're going to go back to someone who continuously gets open."

Few receivers in CU history have been as good at getting open as Spruce has become.

While not a speed burner like former teammate Paul Richardson or even current teammate Devin Ross, Spruce's other qualities have made him a favorite target of Liufau's.

"I trust him a lot," Liufau said. "He's like a security blanket. He's always there for me. He's fast; not the fastest guy, but he runs really good routes, which gives him the separation. He's got really good hands. I trust him in a one-on-one matchup with pretty much anyone in the country."

Close off the field

While Spruce felt a connection with Liufau right away, he said that has grown in the past two years.

"I feel like this offseason over the summer, we really improved our chemistry," Spruce said.

Spruce said the connection he and Liufau have has allowed them to be successful even on plays where Liufau doesn't throw the best ball or Spruce doesn't get as open as he needs to get.

"If we're on the same page ... I think that makes up for any little mistakes we might make," Spruce said.

Off the field, they aren't the best of friends, but they are "close," Liufau said.

Lindgren, who is a former quarterback himself, said developing a friendship with a receiver helps a quarterback get comfortable in throwing the ball to that receiver.

"When you're friends, you're going to work out together," Lindgren said. "I think those guys have spent a lot of time in the summer and the offseason throwing."

Epic battles

They also spend a lot of time competing, and not just in football.

Liufau's affinity for soccer, and the FIFA video game, is well known. He's had some epic video game battles with teammates, including with Spruce.

"He challenged me and I went to his house and claimed the crown from him," Liufau said. "On his own turf."

Spruce didn't confirm that, but did joke that Liufau's passion for FIFA is out of control.

"We were sitting in meetings the other day and coach said Sefo's banned from FIFA because he needs to watch more game film," Spruce said.

They might have some heated battles in FIFA, but Liufau and Spruce have figured out how to use their competitiveness together and help the Buffaloes.

"To be a football player, you have to have some traits that make you successful," Spruce said. "I think we're both competitors and we want the best for this team."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.