Yuengling makes multiyear commitment to VFW

D.G. Yuengling & Son will support the Veterans of Foreign Wars with a multiyear commitment through its Respect. It's Earned. campaign, kicking off in 2016.

Yuengling's #LagersForHeroes program will be promoted at restaurants, retail locations and bars starting in May. Consumers, retailers and wholesalers will be able to join Yuengling to help support the many VFW programs and services that benefit veterans.

"We have tremendous respect for those that have served and their sacrifices," said Dick Yuengling, president and owner of Yuengling. "As a family with multiple generations of servicemen dating back to the European theater of World War II, we know the toll it takes to leave your family to protect and serve our great country. This is our way to support those who give so much."

The VFW offers scholarships, financial grants, employment assistance and other services to veterans, service members and their families.

CSI Allentown honored at national conference

CSI Allentown received the Outstanding Chapter Commendation for fiscal year 2015 at CONSTRUCT, the organization's national conference held in St. Louis, Mo., in October. This is the eighth time the chapter has received the award.

Lee Ann M. Slatteryaccepted the award on behalf of the Allentown chapter. "The efforts of our CSI Allentown chapter board and committee members are what made this award possible," she said. "We look forward to continuing to grow and improve the chapter."

Lehigh River named a finalist for River of the Year

The Lehigh River is among five finalists for Pennsylvania's 2016 River of the Year, according to the Wildlands Conservancy.

As the region's nonprofit land trust and Lehigh River water trail manager, Wildlands nominated the Lehigh River for the honor and is calling on the community to vote for it as their favorite Pennsylvania waterway.

Presented annually since 1983, the Pennsylvania Organization for Watersheds and Rivers, an affiliate of the Pennsylvania Environmental Council, administers the River of the Year program with funding from the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources.

The community can vote online throuigh 5 p.m. Dec. 14 at www.pariveroftheyear.org. Voting is limited to one vote per email address.

This accolade raises awareness about the importance of the Lehigh River as a regional natural resource. The Lehigh's selection as a finalist was based upon its history of conservation success, as well as celebration plans should it be voted 2016 River of the Year.

PBS39 receives two PICPA Truth in Finances Awards

PBS39 received two Truth in Finances Awards from the Pennsylvania Institute of Certified Public Accountants.

The team received two awards for reports on PBS39's weekly news magazine program FOCUS, which showcases people, places and issues of the greater Lehigh Valley and surrounding areas. FOCUS received the following two awards:

•Series radio or TV: "Obamacare: Ready or Not", Laura McHugh, host of Focus and executive producer of local programming. The program was presented in partnership with The Morning Call.

•Stand-alone radio or TV: "Under Construction: Bethlehem's City Revitalization and Improvement Zone," Brittany Garzillo, reporter/producer.

The PICPA Truth in Finances Award recognizes balanced reporting that clarifies financial issues, and uncovers fraud or reports on fraudulent activities that harm the financial well-being of individuals, communities, or companies withinPennsylvania.

Kinsley Construction awarded Hamilton Crossings contract

The Wyomissing office of Kinsley Construction has been awarded the contract to build four multiple-tenant buildings within the Hamilton Crossings town center at Hamilton Boulevard and North Krocks Road in Trexlertown.

The 207,000-square-foot project includes turnkey projects for tenants such as Dick's Sporting Goods, PetSmart, DSW, Rally House and the Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board.

Hamilton Crossings is being developed by the limited partnership of The Goldenberg Group of Blue Bell, and TCH Realty and Development of New York, N.Y.