Bill Clinton was the first black president. Thursday afternoon, taking in the Cuba thaw after weeks buoyed by President Barack Obama’s immigration reform executive actions, Labor Secretary Tom Perez put down a new marker for his own boss.

“When I reflect on the breadth and depth of what he has done for Latinos, it really makes him in my mind, and in the minds of so many others, the first Latino president,” said Perez, the son of Dominican immigrants and one of the administration’s highest-ranking Latinos.

Story Continued Below

Perez isn’t alone in that assessment. But many Latinos aren’t ready to go that far. But they’re starting to move. Obama’s approval rating shot up among Latinos since the executive action announcement, and the change in Cuba policy is a reminder of just how much politics have shifted: Most older Cubans rage against lifting the embargo, while most younger Cubans track with the American public in supporting what Obama did — not to mention that Cubans now make up only 3.5 percent of the country’s Hispanic population. But polls show non-Cuban Hispanics support normalizing relations with Cuba by far greater margins.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama libre)

Obama has already increased his Latino support from 67 percent in 2008 to 71 percent in 2012. If things keep up this way, pollsters see the chance that one of his electoral legacies could be helping deliver upward of 80 percent of a quickly growing population to the next Democratic nominee.

Gary Segura, the principal and co-founder of the polling firm Latino Decisions, said Republicans risk hastening that along if they spend the next two years railing against the immigration executive actions — which, he said, will only help Obama’s standing among Latinos by giving him a chance to repeatedly remind them that he stood with them.

“He’ll spend most of the last two years of his presidency defending Latinos and his executive action. He’ll look good, his party will look good, the opposition party will look bad,” Segura said.

Rep. Mario Diaz-Balart (R-Fla.) is a leader of immigration reform efforts among House Republicans. But as a Cuban himself, and one who represents many other Cubans in South Florida, he said Obama’s outreach to Castro demonstrates “a limitless willingness to appease enemies of freedom,” and a “grotesque concession.”

Obama as the first Latino president? Diaz-Balart said no way. The congressman said Obama’s Cuba shift will hurt him among Latinos, who will reject his backtracking on promises not to change the Cuba relationship without guarantees of human rights or freedom of labor unions and political parties.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama's December surprise)

“There will be a first Latino president, and one of the things that Latinos want — it’s an American thing, but a Latino thing — is you keep your word,” Diaz-Balart said. “If George Washington was the president who could not tell a lie, then history will record Obama as the president who could not say the truth.”

Obama’s relationship with the Latino community has been among the more painful and awkward of his presidency. Like many minority groups, Latinos overwhelmingly attached deep hopes to him coming into office, then spent large parts of the past six years feeling that they were constantly fighting to extract any help or attention from the president.

Many Latinos leaders felt Obama moved on immigration reform last month only because they’d finally boxed him into a corner, much as they attributed the president’s June 2012 executive actions to protect DREAMers to the well-telegraphed plans to have young undocumented Latinos stage civil disobedience protests at Obama reelection campaign rallies. They’re happy about what he finally did — shielding 5 million people from deportation is the largest single unilateral move any president’s ever taken — but they haven’t forgotten the 2.1 million Latino-heavy deportations over his six years in office.

“Those wounds don’t magically disappear,” Segura said.

In the White House and throughout the administration, they point to a bigger story: Obamacare, minimum wage, the emphasis on early childhood education and college affordability already disproportionately affect Latinos. The Latino unemployment rate and high school dropout rate have both dropped by half since the president took office.

( Also on POLITICO: The Democrats' risky Cuba bet)

“The frustrations with the broken immigration system are real,” said a senior White House aide. “It’s one element of the administration’s record, and it’s one element of the relationship with the Latino community, but in both cases, it’s one of many elements in a relationship.”

First Latino president — they’re not ready to say it at the White House.

But the suggestion generates encouraging chuckles more than outright rejection.

“I think it’s pretty clear who the president is, and it’s also very clear that this will be one of the most consequential for the Latino community,” the White House aide said.

There was a lot of ground to make up.

A September Wall Street Journal/NBC poll, ahead of the midterms, showed a 14-percentage-point increase in the number of Latinos saying the country was on the wrong track. Since the previous spring, Obama’s job approval among Latinos dropped from 62 percent to 47 percent.

But in a poll out Thursday, his approval rating was already up 10 points.

“2016 is going to be a great year for Democrats for many reasons, and at the top of that list is Hispanic voters know that Democrats have their backs — including recent action President Obama took to fix our broken immigration system while House Republicans continue to attack DREAMers and play politics instead of allowing us to vote on a bipartisan, comprehensive solution,” said Rep. Ben Ray Luján (D-N.M.), the new chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

Segura and other pollsters say the president’s Latino support likely hasn’t hit the ceiling, though that’ll be driven more by the deportation changes than getting an embassy open in Havana.

( Also on POLITICO: GOP livid over Cuba)

Top people in the White House and throughout the administration say Obama’s path forward with Latinos will look a lot like his path forward domestically overall: keeping up the focus on the economy, pushing for new areas of opportunity and growth. They’re still talking about trying again on immigration reform in Congress, though few of them believe there’s much of a chance.

While Diaz-Balart said he’ll keep trying, he noted that the Cuba move — on top of the executive actions — makes him less willing to work with the White House to get a bill done.

“If you had presidential leadership and you had a president who kept his word, who you could talk to, it’s still very difficult to do immigration reform. But when you have a president who consistently misleads,” he said, “it makes it more difficult.”

In the meantime, incoming Congressional Hispanic Caucus Chairwoman Rep. Linda Sánchez (D-Calif.) said she hopes the White House will build on what she agrees is one of the stronger moments for Obama’s relationship with the Latino community by making sure that the CHC and other Latino groups have a major role on issues far beyond immigration reform, from income inequality to voting rights.

Perez called the Cuba announcement one of the 10 most important days of the Obama presidency. He urged Republicans on the Hill not to let that or resistance to the immigration reform executive actions get the better of them.

Those who do, Perez said, are “following the tradition of [then-California Gov.] Pete Wilson in the ’90s, who felt that his path to the White House was trying to make it harder for Latinos to get access to opportunity.”

( Also on POLITICO: How Obama and Castro came together)

“That’s wrong policy, and that ended up transforming the State of California in getting Latinos to vote overwhelmingly Democratic,” Perez said, predicting that the pattern would repeat itself writ large for the entire country.

“The president gets it,” Perez said.

And the White House is trying to get more and more Latinos to see Obama as more than the “deporter in chief,” as National Council of La Raza president Janet Murguía called him this spring, or the “appeaser in chief,” as Diaz-Balart called him in response to the Cuba news.

“It’s something that we work at,” the White House aide said.