Amgen, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN) has succeeded yet again in its aggressive efforts aimed at preventing Sandoz, the generics drug unit of Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS), from launching a biosimilar version of its blockbuster cancer drug Neupogen in the US. The US Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (which focuses on US patent law) in Washington ordered that sales launch of Neupogen biosimilar, dubbed “Zarxio,” should be ceased “effective immediately” as long as there is an ongoing legal dispute against it.

Neupogen is designed to treat neutropenia in cancer patients. The drug brought in nearly $1.2 billion for Amgen last year, despite loss of US patent protection in 2013. Neupogen has the advantage of being a biologic, so that generic copies of the drug’s organic substance cannot be made. Sandoz dared to challenge the drug’s dominance in the US by filing an application for a biosimilar version, Zarxio, with the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), which was surprisingly accepted in July 2014. Biosimilars are not exact copies of biologic drugs but aim to use the same active ingredients to produce an effect very similar to the original drug. Biologics, being complex, require a lot more expertise and time to be imitated. It was only in 2010 that review and potential approval of biosimilars in the US got regulatory authorization under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act.

Biosimilars are expected to be priced at significantly less than the original brand name drug, while being more expensive compared to generics. Neupogen biosimilars are already widespread in markets other than the US. Novartis itself sells Neupogen copy under the name Zarzio in as many as 40 countries worldwide since 2009. The drug constitutes one of the most prominent biosimilars in the world with an estimated 30% market share in Europe alone.

In January, Zarxio received positive appraisal from the FDA earlier than expected. This dealt a blow to Amgen, who was still reeling from a massive patent cliff for many of its blockbuster products and could not afford to have another one’s sales cannibalized. Amgen immediately sued Sandoz on grounds of unfair competition and patent infringement, claiming that the company failed to meet disclosure prerequisites of Zarxio development under the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation Act.

While the court was still reviewing Amgen’s case, the FDA announced the first-ever approval of a biosimilar in the US — for none other than Neupogen’s knock-off Zarxio. Sandoz postponed the drug’s launch until the court’s ruling on Amgen’s injunction. Ten days later, a San Francisco-based federal judge had given a decision in Sandoz’s favor, only to be re-appealed by Amgen, this time both against the denial of its earlier petition as well as the court’s ruling in Sandoz’s favor. Despite the absence of any legal obligations to hold off Zarxio’s launch, Sandoz agreed to wait until May 11 or when a decision is made on Amgen’s second petition, whichever happens earlier.

"Sandoz has agreed to refrain from launching its Zarxio product until the earlier of May 11, 2015 or a decision by the Federal Circuit on Amgen's application for an injunction pending appeal,” the court’s filing confirmed.

Novartis took on the position of the “bigger person” in the scenario with spokeswoman Julie Masow saying: “We acknowledge the court’s decision and look forward to a prompt resolution of the appeal procedure. We continue to look forward to launching Zarxio as the first U.S. biosimilar in the near future.”

The Federal Circuit will hold court on June 3 to decide if the trial judge was justified in making Sandoz halt Zarxio sales launch even after FDA approval.