Patients stood in corners and stretched their necks out to look for empty seats in the Mercy Health Center waiting room.

Staff worked to answer the myriad of questions posed to them by patients at the crowded counter at the front desk.

Though that scene took place on Wednesday, Mercy Health staff said it nearly reflects a typical day at the clinic.

Despite the noise emanating from the standing-room-only conditions in the waiting room, Mercy Health Executive Director Tracy Thompson said staff still considered it a light day since most in the waiting room were pharmacy patients.

It’s more difficult to manage high patient numbers on days when the center conducts medical clinics, Thompson explained, especially since the Affordable Care Act was implemented in October.

According to Thompson, Mercy has seen a 13-percent increase in patient numbers since ACA took effect. It is a stark contrast to the decrease predicted prior to the roll out of ACA.

“I was called regularly by news outlets prior to ACA regarding how the clinic was going to manage such a decrease in patient numbers as a result of the health care exchange mandated by ACA, but we actually are seeing more patients than before,” she said.

Patients include those who signed up for health care through the exchange, but returned to Mercy Health Center when they were unable to find a doctor’s office willing to accept their coverage; found out hospitals would not accept the specific health care plan they signed up for; or were able to find doctors, but had to pay out of pocket for prescriptions.

When former Mercy patient Lorenzo Wise signed up for Ambetter, a health care plan offered through Peach State Health Plan via the exchange, he thought he was going to have medical, vision, dental and prescription coverage for less than $40 per month. Later, he was told the plan did not include dental and the first time he tried to use his insurance discovered that none of the doctors listed on his plan had offices in Athens.

“No one told me all of the doctors that take the insurance are outside the county. I have to go to Medlink in Colbert right now,” Wise said. “That hurts the people trying to use it because you have to see a doctor outside the county, which costs a lot of gas money and time off work.”

While his insurance does include prescription coverage, Wise, who is diabetic with thyroid issues and high blood pressure, said he still struggles to pay for his prescriptions.

“A 30-day supply of my medication costs me $37 a month out of pocket, and that doesn’t count my insulin, which is $60 a month,” he said.

Wise recently found full-time work at AmeriPride in Watkinsville and will receive health benefits after a 90-day trial period. Once his coverage through AmeriPride kicks in, Wise said he plans to drop his coverage through ACA.

“We encourage patients to sign up for health care if ACA is the best route for them, but it’s not for everybody,” Thompson said. Mercy currently is creating a three-year strategic plan to better serve more patients in need in the six-county area it serves, which includes Clarke, Oconee, Madison, Oglethorpe, Barrow and Jackson. Plans include bringing on a paid physician 20 hours per week and a full-time nurse practitioner, researching new medical electronic records systems and working with St. Mary’s Hospital and Athens Regional Medical Center to convert patients that consistently visit the emergency room to Mercy in an effort to relieve emergency room congestion.

In addition to high patient numbers, Thompson said Mercy also has seen a decrease in funding and professional volunteer hours from physicians, nurses assistants and other medical professionals.

About 25 percent of Mercy’s funding comes from grants and another 25 percent is provided via donations from local church congregations. The other 50 percent is generated from donations made by businesses and individuals in the community and, although it serves a six-county area, a majority of the financial and volunteer support Mercy receives comes from Clarke and Oconee counties, Thompson said. To help generate more support, Thompson said Mercy is looking for ways to get “buy-in” from Madison, Oglethorpe, Barrow and Jackson counties in the way of financial and professional volunteer support and volunteer support from community groups like Rotary Clubs, churches and women’s groups and others.

“Our patient numbers are growing and our support is not,” Thompson said. “We just want to do what’s best for out patients and serve as many people as possible and we need the support of all of the counties we serve to help us make that happen.”

For more information about Mercy Health Center, visit mercyhealthcenter.net.

Follow faith, health and Blueprint reporter April Burkhart at www.facebook.com/AprilBurkhartABH.