Tribal gaming, green-lighted by the U.S. Congress with the passage of the Indian Gaming Regulatory Act (IGRA) in 1988, has been a major success for the state of Arizona since the first tribal casinos opened in the early 1990s with just a handful of slot machines.

But today, this success is being jeopardized by a single tribe that has used bullying tactics and deception to develop a casino near Phoenix. This is in direct opposition to what the tribe told voters back in 2002 – that there would be no additional casinos in the Phoenix-metro area. That’s why Congress must step in and ensure that the public trust isn’t breached.

ADVERTISEMENT

In terms of Indian gaming in Arizona, the numbers speak for themselves.

Tribal gaming is responsible for nearly 15,000 jobs in Arizona, and gaming revenues fund investments in public projects such as hospitals and fire stations. Tribal revenue underwrites important Arizona programs in education, tourism promotion and wildlife conservation. These contributions totaled $1.1 billion since 2004, and amounted to nearly $98 million in fiscal year 2014.

In 2014 alone, Indian casinos generated more than $2.5 billion in estimated gross state product including $1.6 billion in labor income and $271 million in state and federal taxes

Tribal gaming is vital to the economic and philanthropic fabric of Arizona.

But this success is not an accident. Tribal leaders and Arizona state government officials put together a 25-year master plan that focused on maximizing the benefits of tribal gaming. The plan was put to a voter referendum and approved by Arizonans in 2002.

The statewide policy was built on three simple principles: 1) gaming would be limited and highly regulated; 2) revenue would be shared with the State of Arizona and local governments; and 3) there would be no additional gaming facilities in the Phoenix metropolitan area until 2027.

We wanted to ensure that tribal nations and the citizens of Arizona reaped the financial rewards of a thriving casino industry, while at the same time ensuring that the integrity of our communities would be protected and casinos would be located on reservations.

The citizens of Arizona did not want any city or town to become the Las Vegas of the southwest. And that was not a possibility, until now.

A comprehensive, decade-long plan built on misinformation and deception by the Tohono O’odham (TO) tribe, based in Tucson, has led to the development of a new Phoenix casino nestled in a highly-populated area – across the street from a high school, next to a church and 100 miles away from TO’s reservation.

This new casino is a direct breach of the assurance that TO gave voters and public officials in 2002. If the casino moves forward, it sets a bad precedent that could open the door to a wild-west expansion of casinos in Arizona, which is in nobody’s best interest.

The only way to stop this casino is for Congress to pass the “Keep the Promise Act” in order to ensure that the tribal gaming success story in Arizona continues. This legislation simply ensures that there are no new casinos built in the Phoenix area through 2027, upholding the original 2002 compacts.

TO’s breach of the public trust cannot be rewarded by enabling the tribe to bully its way to a fourth casino. Arizonans spoke loud and clear in 2002 and tribal nations and Arizona state officials heard them loud and clear. It is time that the federal government ensures that TO listens as well.

Ray is president of the Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community.