Spurred in part by the Affordable Care Act, Rutgers and Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital are forming their own Accountable Care Organization.

The ACO, called Robert Wood Johnson Partners, will start with 5,000 Medicare patients and plans to launch in January, said Alfred Tallia, chair of family medicine and community health.

The Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, incentivizes these types of organizations by allowing the doctors and other care providers to share in any savings they achieve when they move away from a fee-for-service model.

These saving programs, which are managed by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, encourage doctors and nurses within the organization to be more proactive with their patients, checking up on their medications and pushing them to keep appointments as opposed to only treating people when they have an emergency.

The theory is that a well-coordinated continuum of care will decrease emergencies, which are far more costly.

Tallia hopes to expand the ACO to private insurance patients and is in discussion with Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield and Aetna. He’d also like to strike a deal with the state so that he could accept patients with the state’s health benefits plan, which many at Rutgers have.

What makes this ACO somewhat different from the many that have popped up since the passing of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 is that it is based out of a research institution.

"The health system acts like we know all the answers," Tallia said. "The reality is there are a lot of unanswered questions ... So I think one of the things were are hoping to do is really start to look at how we best tailor care for different patients in different populations, and that is something Rutgers can contribute that your typical ACO, built around a hospital, will not be able to contribute."

Graduate students from the Department of Psychology in the School of Arts and Sciences and the Graduate School of Applied and Professional Psychology will work in a primary care practice to help patients quit smoking, improve eating habits and address other behavioral health issues.

Rutgers School of Communication and Information plans to study the use of a portal, which would allow patients to access test results, schedule appoints, renew prescriptions and other administrative tasks.

None of these by themselves are groundbreaking, but taken together they can reduce the overall costs of delivering care. Those savings can be shared with the doctors in the ACO, and Tallia hopes, to gain regulatory approval that would allow some of those savings to be shared with the patients.

The partnership would also include the 500 specialists in the Rutgers Robert Wood Johnson Medical Group along with clinicians on staff at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital and the other hospitals within the Robert Wood Johnson Health System.