A skydiving student was killed and an instructor was injured in a tandem jump Saturday in Arizona.

A malfunction or failure occurred, leading to a hard-impact landing during the jump Saturday morning at Skydive Phoenix in Maricopa.

After lifesaving efforts were unsuccessful, firefighters pronounced the 26-year-old female student dead. She has now been identified as Geriann Henderson.

"It's just tragic to have a young woman, 26 years old," says Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu. "From what I understand this was her second jump, and it ends this way for her."

The instructor, 47-year-old Todd Dimauro, was hospitalized with two broken legs. He is expected to survive. Officials say he has done more than 5,000 jumps.

"He has over 5,000 jumps under his belt," says Babeu. "And so you have a lot of experience there. Yet this seems very unusual. In tandem, with a student, usually every safety precaution is used. So, we haven't seen this happen in some time."

Skydive Phoenix operates a drop zone for skydivers in Maricopa, about 34 miles south of Phoenix.

According to a post on the company's Facebook page, the female student was conducting her second jump for their Accelerated Skydiving Program and a main parachute did not deploy.

The statement says the reserve parachute turned into the ground.

Here's the full company statement:

"Skydive Phoenix had an accident today involving a tandem student conducting her second jump of the Accelerated Skydiving Program. Preliminary reports indicate that the main parachute was not deployed.. followed by proper procedures and deployment of the reserve parachute. The reserve parachute was open and flying properly.. But upon landing they encountered turbulence possibly a dust devil turning the parachute into the ground at the last second.

"The FAA USPA and local authorities have been notified.. and are conducting an independent investigation. Our thoughts and prayers go out to student, instructor and their families. Please respect our privacy and allow the investigation to take its course."

The accident occurred northwest of Bowlin and Hidden Valley Roads, according to a tweet from the Pinal County Sheriff's Office.

"PCSO will conduct the death investigation in conjunction with the Pinal Medical Examiner," Clark said.

The FAA will also conduct its own investigation to assure federal regulations were followed.

"What they'll look at is the equipment. And how it was properly packed," says Babeu. "Every indication we have at this point, it doesn't appear there's anything amiss at all."

PCSO deputies are on the scene of a skydiving accident northwest of Bowlin Rd and Hidden Valley Rd. There was... https://t.co/Fj8pucstbR — Pinal County Sheriff (@PinalCSO) November 21, 2015

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved. The Associated Press contributed to this story.