Photo

Li Na has had a lot of things going for her at the United States Open: an adoring crowd, a rejuvenated game, being a round ahead of almost everyone in the women’s draw because she has managed to play her matches while it was not raining. But that does not mean advancing to her first Open semifinal came easily on Tuesday.

Li, the fifth seed, needed 2 hours 20 minutes to fight off a challenge from No. 24 Ekaterina Makarova of Russia, 6-4, 6-7 (5), 6-2, in the women’s quarterfinals in the afternoon. The match was packed with long rallies, dramatic swings in momentum, bucketloads of unforced errors and, fortunately for Li, just enough winners to end the third set before her nerves had a chance to fray.

Li said she battled nerves from the beginning of the match until the end. “But I was happy because at least I fight a lot on the court,” she said. “Even didn’t play best of tennis, but still fight and still in the tournament.”

In the end, it was enough, vaulting Li a round ahead, much sweat required. That was merely keeping up the theme of the day at Arthur Ashe Stadium, which started with an almost equally grueling victory by No. 2 Victoria Azarenka, 4-6, 6-3, 6-4, over No. 13 Ana Ivanovic. Worse for Azarenka, who had to overcome her own nerves in a slow start while Ivanovic fired rocketlike forehands to every corner of the court, hers was only a fourth-round match, delayed by Monday’s rainstorm.

Bucking the trend of long, dramatic matches was the third one up at Ashe, between No. 1 Novak Djokovic and the unseeded Marcel Granollers of Spain. In a 6-3, 6-0, 6-0 victory, Djokovic did not lose a point on his serve until the fourth game of the second set. Djokovic advanced to play No. 21 Mikael Youzhny, who needed five sets to beat Lleyton Hewitt, 6-3, 3-6, 6-7 (3), 6-4, 7-5. Djokovic called the second and third sets “some of the best tennis that I’ve played on Arthur Ashe in my career.”

Photo

“I was wishing to be more aggressive as the tournament progresses and to be able to stay committed to play every point, to win every point, regardless of what’s the score,” he said.

Azarenka will play her quarterfinal match against the unseeded Daniela Hantuchova on Wednesday night. She will hope for a much stronger start than she managed against Ivanovic.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

“Ana just came out firing,” Azarenka said. “She played really amazing tennis in the first set. I was feeling out of place. I was like sleeping. I had to wake up in the second set and start fighting.”

Fighting became the theme of the day. None of the women could rely on their own service games for their usual built-in advantage. There were 16 breaks of serve between Azarenka and Ivanovic, 11 between Li and Makarova.

Ivanovic raced to a 3-0 lead and took the first set by blasting forehand winners. She had a chance to win in two sets had she taken advantage of Azarenka’s struggles on her serve and not struggled so much on her own. She followed an early break of Azarenka by giving it right back, and failed to control any of her service games from there.

“This was the big difference because I felt like I could break her, but it was very frustrating that I was losing my serve constantly,” Ivanovic said.

Photo

Just when it seemed Ivanovic would fold for good, she dug out a break of Azarenka’s serve in the third game of the third set, hitting a lob for a winner on break point. But with Ivanovic serving at 3-4, Azarenka dictated several points in a row to go ahead, 40-0, and grabbed a crucial break to serve for the match at 5-3. Ivanovic staged another rally, managing to break Azarenka on her third break chance. Azarenka had several match points in that game, which she responded to with some of her weakest play.

“The match points were pretty bad,” she said. “I really didn’t go for my shots. I kept waiting for a mistake, and it didn’t happen. She played really great. In the tough moments, I felt like she was raising her game and I had to respond as well.”

She did that in the very next game, helped by Ivanovic’s dumping several errors into the net. Azarenka had two break points, converted the second and could take comfort in having won a match playing far from her best tennis.

Li said she felt the same, having taken a lead in each set — and in the second-set tiebreaker — only for her advantage to slip away each time. Usually, the culprit was an unforced error at the worst time.

She will have little room for mistakes in the next round when she meets No. 1 Serena Williams.

“Yeah, I still have a chance,” said Li, who has two days off before the semifinals. “But for me today, I don’t have to think about more tennis, you know, so just relax.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

With that Li smiled, something she had not done much all day.