Memories of Rector Street

I was happy to read that Newark will soon have its first high-rise apartment building since 1962, following last week’s ground-breaking by Shaquille O’Neal and his developer on Rector Street (“Shaq breaks ground on Newark tower,” Sept. 28).

It brought back fond memories of my undergraduate days at Newark College of Arts and Science, now Rutgers-Newark, which had one of its buildings on Rector Street, the site of the proposed high-rise, and its other building on Washington Place.

As an undergraduate in the early 1950s, I remember trudging back and forth from Rector Street, in all kinds of weather, to Washington Place and passing what was then the new YMCA on Broad Street.

We did not have a tree-lined campus, but the faculty and students on Rector Street and Washington Place gave us a wonderful education and forged lifetime friendships. I hope that somewhere on Rector Street there can be some recognition of its connection to Rutgers-Newark.

Ted Einhorn, Rockaway

Gay marriage isn’t the court’s issue

The gay marriage decision by Superior Court Judge Mary Jacobson (“Judge: N.J. must let gay couples marry,” Sept. 28) violated many of the prongs of the “political question doctrine” set forth by the U.S. Supreme Court in Baker vs. Carr.

Same-sex marriage, without question, is a political question and therefore beyond the jurisdiction of the courts. There is a bill returning to the Legislature from Gov. Chris Christie’s veto on this very matter. The issue remains in the political arena.

Courts do not have the authority to create rights. This was made clear at our country’s founding when Alexander Hamilton, in Federalist No. 78, observed: “The legislature not only commands the purse but prescribes the rules in which the duties and rights of every citizen are to be regulated.”

So our Legislature should consider impeachment proceedings against Jacobson because she violated the U.S. and New Jersey constitutions, and therefore her oath of office, in her ruling. It’s time our elected officials speak out on the court’s trespassing into the political domain, not only on gay marriage, but also on issues such as school funding and affordable housing — all political questions.

Douglas Wicks, Basking Ridge

Birchers are back

Instead of sanctimoniously wrapping themselves in the Constitution at every turn, today’s congressional Republicans should consider reading it. The presidential candidate who opposed the Affordable Care Act lost. “Obamacare” was passed by the legislative branch and upheld by the judicial branch. The minority’s opposition was constitutionally defeated.

Having exhausted their constitutional options, Republicans are down to holding the economy hostage to achieve their goal of overturning the ACA, which by the way is established U.S. law.

But why stop there? As long as bypassing the Constitution is on the table, why not eliminate other established laws that their predecessors, the John Birch Society, couldn’t overturn: Social Security, unemployment, welfare, NASA, federal funding for highways and bridges, civil rights and all those pesky regulations.

Fortunately, our grandparents ignored the small-government types. With the help of government investment, we went to the moon, made investments in technologies that would later lead the world and created a prosperous society where all, and not just the few, prosper.

Bob Verbeek, Leonia

What will cut costs?

No matter how much lipstick The Star-Ledger attempts to put on the Affordable Care Act, common sense and history have shown us that another bloated government program will do little to solve health care problems.

I keep looking for what is in the law that will actually reduce health care costs, and I come up empty. The only thing I see is more government programs that will add to the tax burden and place the future of health care in jeopardy.

Reducing premiums to doctors, who already are leaving the profession, is hardly a solution to decrease health care costs. If the government truly wanted to reduce costs, it should ask health care professionals, who will tell them to look at items such as tort and liability reform.

“Obamacare” is a political ploy for the government to obtain more control of our lives.

Gregory Borsinger, Chatham

Blame for a shutdown

The government has shut down at great risk to our country. Do you think our Republican senators and House representatives care when Democrats call? Of course not. They only care about your vote.

The Affordable Care Act passed both houses of Congress, the president signed it and the Supreme Court affirmed it. That is all three branches of the government. The people re-elected President Obama, who campaigned for the Affordable Care Act.

Do you really want the government to shut down to prevent the evils of:

• Adult children in their 20s staying on their parents’ medical plan;

• Making insurance available to people with pre-existing conditions;

• Rewarding hospitals for lowering costs while improving health care;

• Permitting people to buy insurance coverage in a competitive environment;

• Bringing efficiency and accountability to a notoriously unaccountable system; and

• Saving the country money?

Polls say people will blame Republican legislators for the shutdown. Perhaps they should blame Republican voters who didn’t make their voices heard.

Jane Reynolds, Madison