LINCOLN — The Democrats will be fielding an opponent for Republican incumbent U.S. Rep. Lee Terry.

State Sen. Brad Ashford of Omaha, who switched his registration to Democrat in August, told The World-Herald that he will file for the 2nd Congressional District seat today.

That represents an about-face from October, when Ashford said he didn't plan to run so he could focus on legislation to reform the state's overcrowded prison system.

But the 64-year-old lawmaker, who ran unsuccessfully for Omaha mayor as an independent a year ago, said he was urged by his family and others to reconsider.

He said he enjoys the work of a legislator and can offer a “centrist” approach in highly partisan Washington, D.C.

“I've learned how to work from the center here,” Ashford said from his State Capitol office. “People say you can't do that in Washington. I think I can.”

Ashford has represented central Omaha's District 20 for 16 years in the Legislature, from 1987 to 1995 and from 2007 to the present. Because of term limits, he is ineligible to run for re-election this year.

As chairman of the Legislature's Judiciary Committee, he oversees the crafting of bills concerning juvenile justice, crime and punishment and abortion and gun rights. He has pushed several bills on behalf of the City of Omaha, including the law that provided financing for the CenturyLink Center.

He said he would begin campaigning in earnest after the Legislature's session ends April 17.

“I'm going to have time to run after that,” Ashford said.

He describes his political views as “pragmatist,” “pro-business” and “independent.”

“I borrow from both parties on issues,” Ashford said.

For instance, he supports abortion rights but voted in favor of bills that ban abortions later than 20 weeks after fertilization and require notification of at least one parent when a girl 17 or younger seeks an abortion.

Ashford said Wednesday he would have voted against the Affordable Care Act because it was “too far-reaching.” Yet he supports a bill in the Legislature to expand Medicaid to cover more low-income residents, as was proposed in the Affordable Care Act.

Ashford criticized Terry's role in the federal government shutdown last year. Terry voted with other House Republicans to fund the government only if Congress defunded the health care law, a position that led to the partial shutdown.

He also said Terry was among those in Washington who would rather criticize President Obama instead of work collaboratively.

“You don't shut the government down because you don't like the president,” Ashford said.

Ashford, an attorney and a businessman, previously served as director of the Omaha Housing Authority and as a judge for the Nebraska Commission of Industrial Relations. He was co-owner of the Nebraska Clothing Store in the Old Market from 1993 to 2006.

He ran unsuccessfully as a Republican for Congress in 1994.

He is from a prominent Omaha family. His brother, Mark, is a Douglas County district judge. His father-in-law, Randy Ferlic, is a former member of the University of Nebraska Board of Regents. His wife, Ann, was an unsuccessful candidate for regent in 2012.

Ashford's candidacy comes two months after Omaha City Council member Pete Festersen, a Democrat, dropped out of the race, citing family responsibilities.

Terry also faces a challenge in the May 13 primary from Republican businessman Dan Frei.

Ashford placed fourth in the Omaha mayor's race last spring. He said he learned two things: you cannot win unless you have a party affiliation, and running for office while the Legislature is in session doesn't work.