Topics: From the Wires, News

BUIKWE, Uganda (AP) — When a child goes missing in this central Ugandan district, villagers beat drums into a pulsing rhythm that sends rescuers scampering through bushes. Others, riding motorcycles, try to block exit routes.

In response to the kidnappings and ritual killings of children here, the traumatized community has created a rudimentary but effective abduction alert system that has saved at least two children so far this year.

Although the problem of children being killed as human sacrifices is reported in several parts of Uganda, Buikwe has gained notoriety recently as the country’s witchcraft capital. One in three households here keeps a shrine — a thatched hut in which so-called witchdoctors can be consulted — a frightening statistic that explains the prevalence of superstitious practices that threaten the lives of many children and even adults.

Some traditional healers use body parts to make potions for success in business and love, or to cure people of ailments.

The widespread fear of murder is why civic groups believe this fishing community on the shores of Lake Victoria can be mobilized for change. Eight children have been abducted and ritualistically killed in Buikwe this year, their mutilated bodies dumped in bushes and sugarcane plantations, according to local officials.

Across Uganda at least 729 children were abducted in 2013, according to a Ugandan police report that also cited a 39 percent increase in crimes against children over the previous year.

The village alert system is the best model to stop the abduction of children without actively stigmatizing traditional healers, some of whom are not involved in the killings, said Obed Byamugisha, of the aid group World Vision, who is working with local officials to stop the killings. The alert system makes child sacrifice “a concern of all the citizens,” said Byamugisha. The group has distributed many drums and megaphones that are now mounted atop poles in shopping centers across Buikwe, and more are planned.

A tearful mother, Juliet Nabirye, described to The Associated Press how one January evening a former boyfriend stole her four-year-old son and told her to “forget about the child because you will never see him again.” The man, an itinerant with no known home, had a history of criminal behavior and authorities believed the boy was in serious danger. So they drummed alerts and mounted a public campaign to find the child until the man released the boy to strangers who then handed him over to the police.