Q: Do recently arrived permanent residents over 65 qualify for Medicare, Medicaid or Obamacare?

Myriam, South Carolina

A: Most recently arrived permanent residents (green card holders) qualify for Obamacare, but not Medicare. Depending on where they live, they may qualify for Medicaid. Let’s break it down.

Permanent residents and others lawfully here qualify for Obamacare, more properly called the Affordable Care Act. If you cannot afford the insurance premiums, you will qualify for a federal subsidy. If you don’t have health insurance by the end of March, you may face penalties.

Permanent residents qualify for Medicare (a federal health insurance program) if they have worked in the United States for a total of 40 quarters — 10 years. U.S. citizens and lawful permanent residents at least age 65, who have been here five years, may buy into Medicare if they don’t have the work history. Individuals who qualify to buy-in to Medicare can choose to participate in Medicare or, buy Obamacare insurance. Individuals who have “premium free” Medicare or Medicaid are not eligible for Obamacare.

Medicaid is a need-based health insurance program for individuals with little or no income. In some states, including South Carolina, you cannot get full-Medicaid until you have been a permanent resident for five years. You can however, get Medicaid reimbursement for emergency services. In some states, including New York, all permanent residents who meet the income qualifications can get Medicaid. You can get more information about Obamacare and the foreign born at https://www.healthcare.gov/immigration-status-and-the-marketplace/.

The Statue of Liberty stands tall in New York Bay, a beacon to immigrants worldwide (Bryan Smith for New York Daily News)

Q: I would like to apply for citizenship, but I just realized that my permanent resident card expired. Can I submit my application with the expired card or do I have to renew it then submit my application?

Name Withheld, Queens

A: You can naturalize without renewing your card. Though your card is expired, you are still a permanent resident. A permanent resident whose card whose card was stolen, lost or expired can get U.S. citizenship without getting a new card.

Some people are confused about whether a naturalization applicant needs an unexpired card in hand to naturalize. If you ask USCIS officials whether a person with an expired or missing card must replace the card before naturalizing, many will answer “yes.” But that’s only because the law says that a permanent resident must always be in possession of a valid card. However, if you ask USCIS whether you can naturalize without a valid card, the answer is again “yes.” A person with required number of years of permanent residence can naturalize without producing an unexpired plastic card.

Allan Wernick is an attorney and director of the City University of New York’s Citizenship Now! project. Send questions and comments to Allan Wernick, New York Daily News, 4 New York Plaza, N.Y., 10004 or email to questions@allanwernick.com. Follow him on Twitter @awernick.