As part of a look at the $200 million in outside money that has flooded Florida elections since 2010, we caught up with Americans for Prosperity, the Koch-backed group that has emerged as one of the biggest players.

Americans for Prosperity stands apart from many outside spending groups that simply unleash TV, radio and online ads.

The conservative organization has built a political machine in Florida, with 10 field offices, more than 40 paid employees and hundreds of volunteers who do regular phone banking and monthly door-to-door canvassing on a wide array of issues.

The operational budget this year is $6 million, a significant increase over the $4.2 million spent from 2010-13. And that does not include millions in TV ads the group has done in Florida.

The precise figure is not clear because the group's spending on "issue" ads does not have to be reported to the Federal Election Commission. AFP is organized as a nonprofit and does not disclose its donors, though billionaire industrialists Charles and David Koch are the founders and a major funding source.

The on-the-ground strategy was inspired by labor unions and other liberal groups. "We looked at what the left has done effectively," said AFP president Tim Phillips. "They have been able, over the decades, to build a permanent, powerful infrastructure at the local and state level."

Nationally, AFP has 240 full-time employees in 32 states. It has unleashed tens of millions in TV ads attacking Obamacare and pushing free market, pro-business ideals, with plans to spend as much as $125 million this election cycle.

In Florida, the organization is promoting the policies of Gov. Rick Scott, leaving literature at voters' doors as the November election nears. But it also helped defeat Scott's move to expand Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act. AFP activists sent more than 13,400 emails to members of the Legislature and Scott warning against the expansion. It has started scorecards of legislators on key issues.

This year, AFP has run TV ads attacking Democratic U.S. Reps. Joe Garcia of Miami and Alan Grayson of Orlando over the health care law while launching another thanking Rep. Steve Southerland, R-Panama City, for his opposition.

"He told us the lie of the year," a narrator says, referring to President Barack Obama's pledge that people could keep their health care plans, if they liked them. "But our congressman, Steve Southerland, didn't buy it."

Chris Hudson, AFP's Florida director, said the group would continue to push for more accountability in Tallahassee while focusing on congressional races. "Florida is going to lead the way," he said. "Our bite is going to match our bark. I assure you."