A nurse quarantined at University Hospital in Newark after returning from Sierra Leone where she was working with Doctors Without Borders said in a television interview today that keeping her in isolation is "inhumane."

Kaci Hickox, 33, was the first health care worker to fall under a 21-day quarantine policy jointly announced by New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie and New York Gov. Andrew Cuomo for passengers who had contact with Ebola patients in West Africa. Hickox told CNN today that she felt her "basic human rights have been violated."

Hickox has tested negative for Ebola.

"It's really inhumane," she said. "To quarantine everyone, in case, when you cannot predict who may develop Ebola or not, and to make me stay for 21 days, to not be with my family, to put me through this emotional and physical stress, is completely unacceptable."

Christie today defended the quarantine policy, which breaks from federal guidelines today. He said the protocols from the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have been a "moving target."

On "Fox News Sunday" the governor said he reached the conclusion that "we needed to do this to protect the public health of the people of New Jersey."

Dr. Anthony Fauci, head of the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases, said today that the quarantine policy may have the "unintended consequences of disincentivizing health care workers" from traveling to Africa to help.

The New Jersey chapter of the American Civil Liberties Union called on Christie to release more information about why the mandatory quarantine was necessary, saying such measures "raise serious constitutional concerns about the state abusing its powers."

Doctors Without Borders said they were "very concerned about the conditions and uncertainty" Hickox was facing.

Hickox told CNN she was asymptomatic.

"I feel physically completely strong and emotionally completely exhausted,” she said.

Erin O'Neill may be reached at eoneill@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter NJ.com on Facebook.