Health care workers are often subjected to violence on the job, which can range from shoving to shooting. As statistics point to a rise in attacks, attention is turning to the need for mental health resources and policy reforms.

From 2012 to 2014, injuries caused by patients nearly doubled among nurses and nurse assistants, show data published in April from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, in 2013 psychiatric aides experienced violent injuries that resulted in days away from work at a rate 10 times higher than the next group – nursing assistants.

[MORE: White Americans Are Dying Because We Ignore Mental Health]

Injury to health care providers once was culturally accepted as “part of the job,” given that the rate of assault is high in these professions. Some 75 percent of the 26,000 significant injuries from workplace violence occurred in health care and social services sectors, the Bureau of Labor Statistics reported in 2013.

Some caution that data may reflect increased reporting. Paul Spector, professor of psychology at the University of South Florida who has conducted research on workplace violence, says he hasn’t seen a rise in violence, but says it has always been a major issue that remains underreported. “It’s hard to know how much of [the rise] is accuracy and how much is better reporting,” he says.

Anecdotal evidence, however, points to a rise, even if the cause remains inconclusive.

“I would have to say that violence against nurses has increased,” says Jill Arzouman, president of the Academy of Medical-Surgical Nurses. “In spite of increased access to health care, a number of people wait until the last minute to come in, and they are sicker so they are more frustrated when they get into the health care facility. They come in already upset.”

Other times, a family member may get angry over a patient’s death. About a year ago, Stephen Pasceri, the son of a patient who died, shot Dr. Michael Davidson, a cardiac surgeon at Brigham and Women’s Hospital in Boston, because he blamed the physician for his mother’s death. Pasceri then fatally shot himself.

Shootings are much less common than other forms of violence – from 2000 to 2011 there were 154 hospital-related shootings in the United States. Still, the Federal Bureau of Investigation found that active shooter incidents are becoming more frequent and in April provided guidance on how to prevent, respond to and recover from active shooter events at health care facilities.

The Occupational Safety and Health Administration in December released tools for preventing workplace violence, singling out reduced funding for mental health services as a cause for concern.

[RELATED: After Terror, What's the Plan?]

“Because of reduced funding for mental health services, severely ill patients with violent tendencies are increasingly using emergency departments rather than more specialized facilities for treatment,” the federal agency stated.

The Affordable Care Act provides for mental health services to be reimbursed at the same level as traditional medical care but doesn’t address longstanding systemic issues, including the rule that to receive government reimbursement hospitals cannot have more than 16 psychiatric beds. This limit is one of the culprits of a major care shortage, often causing people who have schizophrenia, bipolar disorder and major depression to receive care at emergency rooms rather than staffed psychiatric facilities, according to the American Psychiatric Association.

The United States had more than half a million psychiatric beds in health care facilities in 1955. By 2010, that number dropped more than 90 percent, to 43,000. Under the government's Medicare program, which covers seniors and people with disabilities, patients with a mental illness can receive no more that 190 days of inpatient treatment over the course of a lifetime. The limit applies to private psychiatric hospitals, nursing homes, residential addiction treatment programs and long-term state hospitals.

Inpatient care may be necessary and useful for decreasing symptoms – to make voices less prominent or delusions less frightening – for patients experiencing psychotic episodes, said Dr. Renée Binder, president of the American Psychiatric Association, speaking at an event on Capitol Hill Monday.

Emergency rooms may not have adequate resources to deal with such patients, she said, citing a hypothetical case: one patient is having a heart attack and another is experiencing psychosis and under restraint, crying out in agitation. The situation is not ideal for either patient, she said.

“But this is what is happening because of the shortage of psychiatric beds,” Binder says. “We are recognizing that this needs to change.”

Dr. Jeffrey Lieberman, chairman of psychiatry at Columbia University College of Physicians and Surgeons, says people who do not receive ongoing treatment can have difficulty managing their symptoms, sometimes reacting aggressively. Police officers often take people with a mental illness to the emergency room after an altercation.

“You have a fragmented and insufficient system of health care services that makes it difficult for providers to give people what they need and it makes it difficult for patients to get what they need,” says Lieberman, who is also director at the New York Psychiatric Institute and psychiatrist-in-chief at New York-Presbyterian Hospital of Columbia.

“This creates a whole set of risks and hazardous situations,” he says.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – December 2015]

Hospitals aren’t required to report incidences of violence against their staff, and states vary on providing education, training and protection. Thirty states have passed laws making it a felony to assault hospital workers, a report in the medical journal The Lancet showed.

In August 2014, OSHA fined Brookdale University Hospital and Medical Center in Brooklyn, New York, $78,000 for not adequately protecting its employees from violence. According to OSHA's statement, Brookdale was aware of about 40 violent incidents between Feb. 7 and April 12, including an attack that left a nurse with severe brain injuries.

Bipartisan bills to address some systemic problems in mental health care have been introduced in the House and Senate, but have remained in limbo because of civil liberty concerns by opponents. The Senate version, called the Mental Health Reform Act, was introduced in August by Sens. Bill Cassidy, R-La., and Chris Murphy, D-Conn., while Rep. Tim Murphy, R-Pa., introduced the Helping Families in Mental Health Crisis Act in the House in June. Supporters cite the bills as actions that would help prevent mass shootings by people who have a serious mental illness.

“The mass violent incidents are one of many social pathologies that exist and are the tip of the iceberg of the failed mental health policy in this country,” Lieberman says. “The lack of adequate availability of qualified mental health services and providers contributes to the problems.”

Corrected on Dec. 18, 2015: A previous version of this story incorrectly identified the name of the organization Academy of Medical-Surgical Nurses.