Deadline for applicants is Feb. 15

The Boulder County Parks and Open Space Department is accepting applications for its 2015 artist-in-residence program at the county-owned Caribou Ranch Open Space area.

County officials said the program provides an opportunity for artists to pursue their work in the landscape of the onetime ranch located between Nederland and the Indian Peaks Wilderness Area.

Musicians, painters, illustrators, photographers, visual and film artists, sculptors, performers, poets, writers, composers, crafts makes and artisans are being invited to apply before a Feb. 15 deadline.

Artists selected for the 2015 program, who will be notified by April 3, will stay in the historic DeLonde Barn on the ranch. Each selected artist can stay for up to seven days during a period between July 1 and Oct. 1.

That residence is at the center of the property, with no nearby neighbors. The facility has solar-power electricity for lighting, cooking and heating water, as well as outlets for low-powered electrical devices, such as a laptop, that the artist may bring.

There are twin-size bunk beds. Tents and camping are not allowed outside the living quarters. There's an outhouse with a pit toilet and solar-powered camp shower and sink, as well as an outdoor dish washing station and outdoor picnic table. Outdoor campfires aren't permitted.

Inside the residence, there's a dining area and kitchen furnished with drinking water, electric stove-top burner, a toaster oven and small refrigerator, as well as cooking utensils, large plastic bins to store dry food, and cleaning supplies.

According to the Parks and Open Space Department's website for the program — http://www.bouldercounty.org/os/events/pages/artistresidence.aspx — the property offers artists "a variety of landscapes to explore, including streams, waterfalls, forests and beautiful vistas.

"Moose, elk, black bears, beavers, bats and nearly 90 species of birds live within or pass through the area," Boulder County notes on that website, adding that the property also includes the Blue Bird Mine complex, where silver ore was extracted from the 1870s to the 1960s.

County officials have said that by sharing the art produced by those participating in the program, Boulder County hopes "to add to residents' enjoyment of open space lands and create a legacy of art preserved for future generations."

For more information, including program guidelines and an online application, visit that website, which also is available on the county Parks and Open Space Department's home page, www.BoulderCountyOpenSpace.org.