This telephone survey collected the opinions of 2,000 Maine registered voters age 50+ between May 16 and May 25, 2014, on the issues of financial security, consumer protections, age-friendly communities, and caregiving. The survey shows Maine registered voters 50+ are deeply concerned about financial security and maintaining their independence as they grow older.

The survey clearly demonstrates a deep concern regarding financial security, particularly for lower income individuals. Nearly half (49%) of those earning less than $20,000 are not confident they will be able to retire, and nearly two-thirds (62%) of this same group reported being extremely or very worried about having health or medical expenses they couldn’t afford.

Reflecting their desire to maintain their independence, nearly three-quarters of Maine registered voters age 50 and older think funding services that enable seniors to remain in their homes for as long as possible should be a top or high priority for elected officials in the state. Nearly seven out of ten think it should be a top or high priority for Maine’s elected officials to support age-friendly communities by funding services, programs, or infrastructure changes that enable residents to “age in place.”

Most registered Maine voters age 50 and older have been family caregivers or expect to be in the future. Given this large proportion of the population that is affected by this issue, it is not surprising that the vast majority also think it should be a top or high priority for elected officials in Maine to fund services that support family caregivers.

According to the survey, Maine registered voters age 50+ say they are likely to vote for candidates who will work on issues that enable Mainers to have financial stability as long as possible. This includes ensuring they have affordable prescription drugs, affordable homes, safe-guards against scams, and adequate work opportunities.

For more information, contact Kate Bridges at kbridges@aarp.org.