Starbucks’ “Race Together” campaign is off to an awkward start.

After the company announced that it would be encouraging baristas to voluntarily scribble about the campaign on customers’ cups and “engage” them in a conversation about race relations, the Twitter-pile-on was swift. And it quickly became apparent that not everyone at Starbucks was super excited to talk about it.

Starbucks’ Senior Vice President of Communications, Corey DuBrowa, bore the brunt of the mockery. From Mediaite’s roundup of some highlights:

@nashwakay @coreydu How do you think this is a good idea? How could a barista be expected to deal with the complexity of race relations… — Bartosz Scheller (@BartoszScheller) March 17, 2015

@coreydu why do you think i want to hear what a white barista with matted dreads thinks about race — hugh honey (@fkabiggs) March 17, 2015

DuBrowa apparently could not take the heat. First he started blocking people who tweeted to him:

that was quick @coreydu pic.twitter.com/aXqWwCtHI8 — hugh honey (@fkabiggs) March 17, 2015

And at midnight he deleted his account. A swimming start for a national “conversation” about race!

By now the account is back up again, and DuBrowa has authored a post at Medium explaining why he pulled it:

… last night I felt personally attacked in a cascade of negativity. I got overwhelmed by the volume and tenor of the discussion, and I reacted. Most of all, I was concerned about becoming a distraction from the respectful conversation around Race Together that we have been trying to create. To be clear, Race Together isn’t about me, it’s about we: and having heard first-hand the number of stories our partners (at Starbucks we call our employees “partners”) shared with us in the open forums of the past few months, I have thought long and hard about the passion, concerns and painful experiences our people across the country have endured, and wanting to make sure they felt supported by their company.

As for why he’s back, DuBrowa says he’s “reaffirming my belief in the power of meaningful, civil, thoughtful, respectful open conversation — on Twitter and everywhere else.”

“I’m only one guy, and I do actually sleep occasionally (and definitely needed to last night), but I personally will answer the challenge to participate where it’s uncomfortable, and to do so with integrity, openness, and empathy,” he says. Does “openness” to “uncomfortable” conversations mean no more blocking accounts? Only time will tell!