The differences in workload are apparent in measures of the time men and women spend on household chores. According to Bureau of Labor Statistics data, women overall spent an average of two hours and 13 minutes on chores daily, compared with one hour and 21 minutes for men in 2013 (the most recent year for which data is available). In households with two full-time working parents, the gap is somewhat smaller: Full-time working mothers spent just under two hours a day on "household activities" while full-time working fathers spent about an hour and 18 minutes on them, according to the BLS.



Even when men and women are not working, their division of labor differs. Men are likely to watch more television when they are out of work, while women will likely spend more time caring for others. Not surprisingly, the American Psychological Association found that women reported higher levels of stress than men.

In addition, the Working Mother study found that several of the chores men tend to pick up, like mowing the lawn, landscaping, car washing, car maintenance and doing the taxes, are among the chores families are most likely to outsource.

There is also a difference in the quality of work men and women take on, according to the survey. Men's chores tend to have a finite endpoint—it is obvious when the garbage cans have been taken out. Women, though, take on the bulk of the planning activities, like children's health care, birthday parties and vacation planning, in addition to chores like cooking and cleaning.



"There is a whole other job that happens with planning out the summer camps, figuring out when we will pay what, and where one kid will be and where the other will be," said Jennifer Owens, editorial director of Working Mother and director of the Working Mother Research Institute. "There is this whole other orchestration going on behind the scenes."



Read MoreWhat about working moms?

When men leave the bulk of the housework to their spouses, they don't just create tired partners. A study published in 2014 in Psychological Science found that when fathers and mothers share chores more equally, their daughters tend to have broader professional ambitions. (Tweet This)