Chris Flieller (seated) works to get the choir back together in “A Cudahy Caroler Christmas.” Credit: Mark Frohna

By of the

In its beer-friendly, duckpin-lovin' way, "A Cudahy Caroler Christmas" brings a message of hope for the holidays:

You don't have to live in a fancy ZIP code or speak with a posh accent, ya der hey, to dream big.

In Tandem Theatre Company opened its ninth production of this slightly naughty chestnut Friday night at the Tenth Street Theatre. Proceeds from earlier productions of "Cudahy Caroler" enabled In Tandem's Chris and Jane Flieller to build the cozy 99-seat venue. Jane Flieller has directed this show from the beginning.

If you've never seen "Cudahy Caroler," think of an "SCTV" episode but set on the South Shore instead of Canada. In the first act, widower Stasch Zielinski (Chris Flieller) makes the rounds to reunite his beloved choir: Pee Wee (Nathan Wesselowski), the friend with whom he's fallen out; Edna (Lisa Morris), a lottery winner who aspires to live the genteel life in Whitefish Bay; young Nellie (Megan Kaminsky), who dreams of being a Tommy Bartlett water-skiing queen; and Wanda (Jocelyn Ridgely), a lusty beautician who extracts the promise of a date from Stasch.

He also hires a new singer, Trixie (Samantha Sostarich), a painfully shy librarian who leans on liquid courage. (Their savant accompanist Myron, played by Matt Zembrowski, is a salute to famed Wisconsin pianist Leslie Lemke.) In the second act, the carolers stage a cable-access TV reunion special, with plenty of high jinks during the commercials.

Playwright Anthony Wood, who grew up on the south side, and the In Tandem team have filled the show with local references — Ma Baensch's, Kuglitsch's and Serb Hall, to name a few. And the show names more varieties of processed meat than the entire first folio of Shakespeare.

But while local color and humor generate laughs and nods of recognition, "Caroler" soars on the strengths of its music: familiar Christmas songs whose lyrics have been rewritten to reflect the humorous dilemmas of the characters, sung beautifully. For example, "Silver Bells" morphs into "In the Dells," about Nellie's dream of water ski stardom.

While the plot, with its three parts humor to one part pathos, reminds me of "SCTV," the staging of the cable-access special occasionally brings to mind a fractured Lawrence Welk show, with Kaminsky and Joe Fransee (as Zeke) tossing off a Bobby and Cissy style dance number, and Morris and Wesselowski offering a "Baby, It's Cold Outside" unlike any other.

When this year's run ends, Chris Flieller will have been terrorized by Trixie, nuzzled by Wanda and scowled at by Pee Wee some 280 times. In Tandem plans to give the show a rest and suggests the man who originated Stasch has aged out of the part.

Really, Chris? Did getting too old for the part stop Elvis, or Krusty the Clown? Maybe you just need a little of Trixie's shoe polish.

Given its bawdy jokes and frequent references to epic beer consumption, In Tandem appropriately recommends the show for people 13 and older, though nothing in it is terribly shocking.

IF YOU GO

"A Cudahy Caroler Christmas" continues through Jan. 4 at the Tenth Street Theatre, 628 N. 10th St. For tickets, call (414) 271-1371 or visit www.intandemtheatre.org.