These attitudes didn't come from nowhere. As Pew's research shows, this generation has had a harder time climbing to its feet than any since the Great Depression. At an age when the Baby Boomers were having their first children, flipping through wanted ads and buying houses, only 32% of Millennials report making enough money to even build a stable life. What they do earn increasingly goes to repay student loans that have doubled over the last 20 years, leaving the average college graduate carrying $27,000 in debt even before his first day of work.

Unfortunately simply staying home and avoiding the tuition isn't an option for the Millennials either. Young adults without a bachelor's degree are 400% less likely to get a job and earn approximately two-thirds of what a college graduate does . Degrees aren't a luxury any longer. Anecdotes of personal success aside, for most Millennials getting a fair chance at a good job means out the loans.

Growing up in 21st Century America, it seems, comes with a $27,000 price tag.

This is the first generation in modern America to enter adulthood with more debt, fewer jobs, lower incomes and greater poverty than their parents did. A full 46% describe themselves as lower or lower-middle class, and many have even put off marriage, because as 69% of Millennials say, they simply can't afford it. Millennials don't put off adulthood because of a generational Peter Pan complex. They simply can't afford to grow up.

Oddly enough, among all this economic bad news, the most popular fact seems to have gotten completely overblown. All of those young adults moving back in with their parents in a sign of generational collapse? About 12% of college graduates return home today compared with 10% in 1965.

Now for the good news. Against all odds, Millennials are actually optimistic. Whether or not they make enough money right now, almost everyone born after 1980 believes they will in the future. Only 14% of Millennials don't think they'll succeed sooner or later.

"No other cohort of adults is nearly as confident," according to the report, "though when Gen Xers were the age Millennials are now, they were equally upbeat about their own economic futures. Some of this optimism, therefore, may simply reflect the timeless confidence of youth."

They show this almost paradoxical confidence across all areas. Millennials don't believe in government, but do believe in government programs. They disapprove of the Affordable Care Act, but believe in making sure that all Americans get health care. They register independent and avoid political affiliations, but by large margins support liberal positions.

Millennials embrace ideas, but don't count on anyone else to do it for them.

Among all of the numbers from last week's Pew report is a fundamental lesson: we've learned not to trust institutions and organizations, but we still believe in ourselves. We've taken a beating at the hands of a rough economy and had a harder getting on our feet than any generation in 75 years. We've walked away more confident than any of them.

That's got to be worth something.

--Written for MainStreet by Eric Reed, a freelance journalist who writes frequently on the subjects of career and travel. You can read more of his work at his website www.wanderinglawyer.com.