The outside view of Louisville Distilling Company's Angel's Envy Distillery's building in downtown Louisville. July 9, 2013. (Photo: John Sommers II, special to The Courier-Jouranl )

Investors planning the Angel's Envy liquor distillery at 500 E. Main St. across from Louisville Slugger Field have filed plans for a large warehouse project at 3430 Seventh Street Road in Shively, where their bourbon will be aged.

A newly filed plan says that an existing unused warehouse on the 10-acre site will be renovated and expanded, and two new warehouses -- one with 217,000 square feet and other with 231,000 square feet -- will be developed.

Papillon Property Group LLC, headed by operations manager Kevin Curtis, filed the plan for the warehouse development last week with the Metro Department of Planning & Design Services, which provides staff to the Metro Planning Commission and the Metro Board of Zoning Adjustment.

Those agencies are expected to have to review the plans, which include a request for a variance to allow the new warehouses to be nearly 60 feet high, or slightly above the maximum height allowed in the Enterprise Zone zoning district.

The variances are sought to allow the warehouses to be seven stories. The buildings will be set back at least 250 feet, the documents said.

A letter accompanying the plans said liquor in barrels from the downtown Angel Envy's facility will be aged at the Seventh Street Road development for a minimum of four years. Only minimal parking is proposed at the warehouse site, the letter said, because nearly all the vehicles entering the property will loading and unloading the barrels.

Papillon Property group is a sister company of Louisville Distilling. The partners in the Angel's Envy plant recently reported that they expect construction to begin soon on the long-awaited urban distilling business. It is to be centered in the former Vermont American site near Main and Jackson streets. The business will also include part of the former Baer Fabrics site.

In August the distillery partners filed plans for the former Vermont American site. They plan to operate in a total of 44,000 square feet of existing space, plus a 7,850-square-foot addition with a 4,500-square-foot patio fronting on Main Street.

The Angel's Envy project is one of several local bourbon-related developments either planned or under way, most of them along the Main Street corridor.

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1tSiH5Q