Supreme Court Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg said her colleagues weren't surprised she nodded off during President Obama's State of the Union address earlier this year.

“They expect me to sleep,” Ginsburg told The Hill when asked if her colleagues ribbed her about being caught on camera apparently falling asleep in the first row of the speech.

ADVERTISEMENT

Ginsburg acknowledged her sleepiness last month, disclosing she had enjoyed a “very fine California wine” courtesy of Justice Anthony Kennedy before the speech because her “dinner was so delicious, it needed wine.”

The Hill caught up with Ginsburg as dozens of guests garbed in Beltway power outfits meandered around Wednesday evening for Elle magazine's annual “Power List” of Washington, D.C., women.

Ginsburg was among the 10 women on this year's list and was highly sought out by attendees clamoring to greet the notorious 82-year-old liberal Supreme Court icon.

Donning a maroon emblazoned Indian floral jacket, Ginsburg told The Hill it was one of “many” purchased in Santa Fe where she attends the summer opera each year. It's part of “quite a collection,” she said.

Ginsburg sipped from a clear wine glass while talking with fellow diners Elle editor-in-chief Robbie Myers and NPR legal correspondent Nina Totenberg.

Virginia Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D), whose wife Dorothy was honored at the event, was one of a number of men who attended the annual soiree, this year hosted at the home of German Ambassador to the U.S. Peter Wittig.

Other honorees included Sen. Amy Klobuchar (D-Minn.), D.C. Mayor Muriel Bowser, White House domestic policy director Cecilia Muñoz, State Department spokeswoman Jen Psaki and Rep. Elise Stefanik (R-N.Y.).

ABC's “The View” co-host Nicole Wallace, EMILY'S List's Stephanie Schriock and “PBS NewsHour” co-anchor Gwen Ifill rounded out this year's list for the event, which was sponsored by Hugo Boss.

Rep. Tulsi Gabbard (D-Hawaii) and D.C. Police Chief Cathy Lanier, whose white police uniform stood out among the evening wear, joined other list alums picking at hearts of palm, baby radish and Meyer lemon gel salads for dinner.

The fifth annual event celebrated influential D.C. women and attracted lobbyists, designers and members of the media previously honored by Elle.