Racers compete in the Pumpkincross cyclocross event at Lime Kiln Park in Grafton on Saturday.

Lori Nickel SHARE Dennis Christensen and daughter Arielle participate in cyclocross to spend time together.

Grafton — There aren't enough sports events and activities for parents and their kids to do together.

Parents get to take a seat on the bleachers after chauffeuring their kids to youth sports and games all week.

But bike riding can be the perfect parent-kid activity, and cyclocross in particular because even though the sport is small, it is very welcoming to all abilities.

Dennis Christensen signed up his 10-year-old daughter, Arielle, for a few cyclocross lessons and when he saw how adept she was, signed her up for four events through Ben's Cycle, which is in Milwaukee.

The Christensens were at the Pumpkincross Supercup in Grafton this weekend.

"It is fun, we spend a lot of time together doing this," Dennis said. "Its one of the fun ways to spend time together outside."

Father and daughter sometimes do the Wednesday group rides together. Otherwise, they ride a lot on the weekends. Arielle has a Trek mountain bike, a secure Bell helmet and protective sunglasses.

"This is just a lot of fun," said the fifth-grader at Golda Meir School.

Dennis, the Racine Park High school principal, also rides in the Wisconsin Off Road Series (WORS) with his daughter.

They did nearly a dozen WORS events this year.

"This is what got me back to being more athletic and active," Dennis said. "It had been a while since I had been active."

Cyclocross is different from road racing or riding on pavement, like the Ride for the Arts. And it's not mountain biking either, where heavier, thick-tired bikesgrind through the dirt, sand, rocks and tree roots of a single track trail through the forest.

Cyclocross is a mapped-out, set course through varied terrain and a few obstacles. Almost like a mud and trail run but on a bike.

The Pumpkincross was a 1.78-mile course set up through the Lime Kiln Park in Grafton. Riders were given 30 minutes to do as many laps in that time as possible. In most cases, that was three or four.

This was a winding, rolling, white-knuckling ride with hairpin turns and curls up and down the sides of big hills. And then there were stairs, barricades and a fallen tree to get over. The fastest riders gracefully hopped off the bike and ran up, around and over the obstacles in their way.

The rest of us just sort of managed. This is a furious, sometimes organ-reorganizing ride over all the bumps and divots of the earth. Kids and adults do the same course. Going up that killer hill was lung burning and going downhill was thrilling for the kids who don't worry about crazy things like broken teeth and hip replacements.

It's a great race for anyone with a little sense of adventure and a fun way for parents and their school-aged kids ages 9-14 to swap stories on the drive home.

Pumpkincross race director Bill Koehler, from BelgianWerkx, said that there were 329 participants, a 10% increase over last year, with the highest number of participants in the Men's Masters categories. They're trying to get more women and juniors involved; 22 women and 17 juniors did this race.

The elite racers took off in the first waves and sped their way to podium finishes, "pumpkin trophies" and cash prizes of about $1,400 total.

For the rest of us, there really is no other race like it. First of all, they call you — by name — to line up in your lane at the starting line, so you may want to consider an alias if you plan on finishing in last place. My 11-year-old blew by me in the first 20 yards of the race, while I was still trying to figure out how to shift gears.

It didn't matter too much. In cyclocross, the race rules are a little different, than say, running a 5K and simply going as fast as possible from beginning to end. I was not racing against an opponent as much as a trip to the emergency room.

"Your race was a 30-minute race but that's a guideline," Koehler said. "Once the first lap is complete, the officials figure how many laps can be done — by the leaders — in 30 minutes.

"The officials look at all the race numbers as you go by and keep track of who is where, and the lap counter at the finish tells racers how many laps to go.

"With one lap to go, the bell is rung so everyone knows it's the last lap. Once the leaders cross the finish line, then everyone else must finish on that same lap."

Koehler said that in the eight years of Pumpkincross, Belgianwerkx began helping with the race in 2012 (www.belgianwerkx.com). The sport is growing in Wisconsin. This year, the Wisconsin Cycling Association (www.wicycling.org) created two categories: SuperCup events, with Pumpkincross being one of the six, and Bragging Rights, with 10 events.

"The SuperCups are required to have higher cash payouts, more difficult courses, race announcer and food," Koehler said. "The Bragging Rights are more low-key and inviting for the more casual racer. But all are welcome and appreciated at either series."