Double act: Dan Andrews and his wife, Cath, at Albany Rise Primary School, Mulgrave, on Saturday. Photo: Paul Jeffers

The function room at the Mulgrave Country Club is pumping, vibrating to the swelling, rafter-shaking cheers. At 10.14, the reason for their rapture appears, and Dan Andrews - premier-in-waiting - makes his slow way to the microphone through the handshaking and back-slapping crowd.

But there is no quieting them in their adulation of their new Labor hero, as a chant of "We want Dan!" takes hold. Eventually, with wife and fellow campaigner Cath and their three children by his side, Andrews composes himself, calms the faithful.

He tells them the people of Victoria have given Labor the greatest of gifts and responsibilities. "Ladies and gentlemen, we will not let them down."

The room is ecstatic, for this is history in the making. While the Labor campaign was outwardly confident, there is a sense of quiet disbelief in the room as the party faithful digest as the evening unfolded. As 8pm approaches, there is a growing realisation that Dan Andrews will likely be the 48th premier of Victoria.

Advertisement

When the image of a grim-faced Denis Napthine conceding flashes up on the TV screens, the realisation sets in. Victory is theirs.

The political rule book says he should not be standing here tonight as a victor. Voters always give one-term governments a second chance.

The last such government to be thrown out after one term was the Labor government of John Cain snr. That was in 1955, in the white hot turmoil of The Split which tore his party apart. Almost six decades on, the Coalition's ructions have been the deposing of a premier, and government dependent on a maverick Liberal MP turned independent.

So here in deep in the eastern suburban heartland of Wheelers Hill, there is an intense awareness that the appearance of the victorious Labor leader changes the very nature of politics in Victoria, and indeed, the country.

In the Labor pantheon, Dan Andrews will rank alongside Steve Bracks, who in 1999 slayed the Kennett dragon.

"They said this couldn't happen," federal Labor leader Bill Shorten told the crowd before Andrews arrived. "They said that first-term governments never lose. Please remember tonight for the rest of your lives because we are witnessing history in the making."

As the TV monitors flashed up the the extent of the swing and likely Labor majority, there were whoops and cheers. The only discordant notes were the likely gains made by the Greens, which have entailed Labor losses.

"I'm over the moon," said Rob Hulls, former attorney-general in Victoria's last Labor government - which, of course, was only at the last election.

He had an ear-to-ear grin. "I knew Dan was a man with a plan, and now I am even a bigger fan."

Labor and Andrews fittingly chose his own electorate for tonight's function. When he took over a demoralised Labor after the 2010 election defeat, he described himself as an "ordinary suburban husband and father". His Labor detractors once privately bemoaned his focus on local affairs, deriding him as the "Mayor of Mulgrave".

But those detractors are not to be found tonight.

As he raises his arms to the crowd, he is a man transformed from the dour, grim and slightly stooped figure that was his public image for most of the past four years.

Observers have marvelled at his transformation into a more upbeat, relaxed family man during recent months. That rebranding even included a name change - from Daniel to Dan.

Timing is everything. In state politics, voters only really pay attention to an Opposition Leader during the campaign. Labor strategists knew underneath the hard political exterior lurked an ordinary bloke from the suburbs that he declared himself to be four years ago.