There’s a lot to look forward to in the local retail and restaurant scene. Some things will come soon; we’ll have to wait for others.

But all the same, there’s a lot to announce.

Two restaurants are expected to open in coming weeks in South Bend.

Rack House Tavern & Grill put its sign up last week and has only a few things to finish up.

The restaurant is located at 1902 South Bend Ave., across the street from Taphouse on the Edge and Studebagels. Since it’s named for the buildings that house barrels of aging whiskey, we can expect a more rustic decor with sleek patchwork wood walls.

The Rack House needs only to install its beer lines and put some final touches on the kitchen, and it hopes to open by the end of this month. You can find out more about the restaurant at Facebook.com/RackhouseSB. And those who “like” the restaurant’s Facebook page will receive a special opening invite.

In downtown South Bend, Vegetable Buddies, at 129 N. Michigan St., is also very close to opening. Its sign went up Friday and music is now playing outside the business, giving a taste of the type of artists who will appear on the Vegetable Buddies stage.

A reincarnation of the well-known South Bend nightclub of the same name from the ‘70s and ‘80s, Vegetable Buddies will focus on classic rock and blues music. It will feature a restaurant with Southern-style food, but it prides itself as a “music is art” venue, showcasing musicians’ original work.

Vegetable Buddies hasn’t announced an opening date yet, but it’s hoping to be up and running early next month. There will be a job fair at the venue to hire kitchen staff and servers on Monday from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m. and from 5 to 7 p.m.

Two other downtown restaurants posted signage, and Market Basket will have more information on those openings soon. Nom Nom Pho Noodles & Rice posted an opening soon sign at 213 N. Main St. It’s the former location of Siam Thai.

Nom Nom Pho’s sign says it will serve Vietnamese and Thai cuisine.

On East Jefferson Boulevard, a sign for The General Deli & Cafe has been posted on a storefront across from the Howard Park ice rink.

And in case you’ve missed the other downtown South Bend news recently, the South Bend Chocolate Cafe is opening a Ben’s Soft Pretzels inside its card and candy shop. It will be the first brick-and-mortar location for Ben’s in South Bend.

It’s set to open April 26, which happens to be National Pretzel Day. All Ben’s Soft Pretzels locations will be giving away a free pretzel with a $1 donation to the Intrepid Fallen Heroes Fund.

India Garden also opened its downtown restaurant recently on North Michigan Street.

Then in Mishawaka, there are a lot of new stores we’ll see coming together in the next few months. Ziker Cleaners is turning the old Save A Lot near the corner of South Byrkit Avenue and East 12th Street into a new facility.

A Family Express gas station is planned for a currently vacant lot at 1030 W. Edison Road, just west of Hickory Road. It will include a car wash and six fuel islands.

The Burger King on Grape Road across from Indian Ridge Plaza will be remodeled and expanded to “bring the store up to BK standards,” according to a state construction report. About 63 square feet will be added to the existing restaurant.

A new Holiday Inn Express and Suites is planned for the Toscana Park area. It will be four stories and 63,660 square feet.

Also, many readers have been asking about work being done on the lot just north of Scotty’s Brewhouse on North Main Street. Right now, the empty lot is being leveled to make it possible to develop it in the future. There have been no announced projects.

Some of the most exciting news is a list of new stores coming to Wilshire Plaza on Grape Road.

Home Goods will open a nearly 22,000-square-foot store next to Fresh Thyme in the former Office Max location, according to a site plan from Chase Properties. Home Goods is a decor retailer that typically offers top brands at prices that are generally 20 to 60 percent below normal retail.

The companies could not be reached to confirm when the store will open, but work is already underway inside.

A site plan also lists a Christoper & Banks next to the future Home Goods, and a Carter’s Osh Kosh filed construction plans with the state to open a store in Wilshire Plaza. Again, the companies have yet to confirm when their stores could open.

Then a DSW, Designer Shoe Warehouse, will be moving in next to Jo Ann Fabrics. This will be the second DSW location for the area. They have a store at Erskine Village on the south side of South Bend. The company said the new store is expected to open in late August or early September.

These new stores are big news for Wilshire Plaza, which seems to be in the midst of a comeback. There are currently many vacant stores and the plaza took a heavy hit losing stores such as The Room Place, Office Max and the Old Country Buffet.

These new announcements of stores are in addition to recent openings at the plaza, including Fresh Thyme and Sky Zone.

As more information comes out about all of these stores and restaurants, Market Basket will continue to provide updates.

Lincoln Wright’s column runs on Wednesdays and Sundays. Contact him at LWright@sbtinfo.com or 574-235-6324. You also can talk retail at Facebook.com/thebasket and at Twitter.com/marketbasket.