: People cheer Sen. Ted Cruz (R-Tes.) is declared the winner in Iowa. (Christopher Furlong/Getty Images)

Many Republicans breathed a sigh of relief Monday night as the Republican Party of Iowa delivered Donald Trump a defeat. After all the hype, exaggerated polls, media obsession and drama surrounding his refusal to appear at a Fox News debate, Iowa Republicans showed they are more level-headed than many had feared. Quite simply, they turned Trump into a loser.

As we have seen in polling, the more educated the voter, the less likely he or she was to vote for Trump in Iowa. Thirty-two percent of caucus goers with a high school degree or less voted for Trump, 26 percent with some college education did, 22 percent of college grads went with him and only 20 percent of those with some graduate study. While it is too late to send millions of GOP voters to college before they vote in their state’s primary, it does suggest that voters who educate themselves, whether formally or informally in the election process, can figure out what Trump is up to. Republicans may be angry and frustrated, but a large majority have not gone completely bonkers.

For months now, it has been an open question whether the entire GOP had lost its collective mind in rushing to support a bully, a know-nothing, a bigot, a misogynist and a vulgarian. Iowa voters made clear that at least in their state less than a quarter of caucus voters do. It does seem that the Trump mystique can be broken. On Monday night, Trump was plainly stunned, almost humbled when he came out to speak to supporters. The next day he was crying foul about Sen. Ted Cruz’s (Tex.) tactics. And by week’s end he seemed to have moved on from his loss. Best of all, he was not dwelling on polls.

We do not know if voters in New Hampshire, South Carolina and other states will be as clear-eyed. Trump may win a race here and there. Iowa, however, showed us that there is no giant groundswell that is going to let him sail through the primaries. In showing that media buzz, profanity and bigotry do not lead one to victory, the Republican caucus goers in Iowa did themselves, their state and the party proud. We hope they set an example for others to follow. We can enthusiastically say, well done, Republican hawkeyes.