I would then be told I could use the 'designated office,' which, again, was never available.

There's the law, and then there's reality.

The Affordable Care Act, passed in 2010, requires most employers to provide reasonable break times for expressing (pumping) breast milk and "a place, other than a bathroom, that is shielded from view and free from intrusion from coworkers and the public" for employees to pump breast milk.

It's what the law says; but how many women are provided those things when they return to work from maternity leave and need to pump breast milk for their babies?

One Alabama mother sued the police department where she worked when the department failed to accommodate her needs and created a hostile work environment after she returned from maternity leave. She won her suit.

AL.com asked readers to share their experiences and received hundreds of responses. Ninety percent said they pumped while at work.

"My baby has to eat and I have to work, so I pump," explained one respondent.

Only about 27 percent of respondents said they pumped in a room specifically designated for pumping. 14 percent pumped in a room that wasn't private. Others pumped in bathrooms or their cars.

About 45 percent listed "other" as the space where they pump at work. Answers ran the gamut from classrooms (for teachers) and storage rooms to empty offices, boss' offices and conference rooms. One respondent pumped in a physics lab storage room, another in a supply closet, another in the fax machine room.

"I was fortunate enough to have a relaxing environment in an empty furnished office," said one person.

"I had a sign on my door that said do not enter do not knock. It was locked," said another. "I frequently had people knocking and trying to walk in. My principal even unlocked my door and walked in one time."

In some instances, employers were more or less following the law but not in a way that accommodated the employee.

"I tried over and over to obtain a place to pump," said one respondent. "I was told I would have access to a private office to pump in, but this never worked out. The office was always being used for something 'more important.' I then had to resort to pumping in a storage closet, there wasn't even a private bathroom available.

"I told my employer that it was the law to provide a place for me to pump, but I would then be told I could use the 'designated office,' which, again, was never available."

On the positive side, 76 percent of respondents said they felt like their supervisors supported them in their choice to pump, and 79 percent said they were allowed to take adequate pump breaks.

One respondent said her supervisor and coworkers "make sure I have space and time to pump as well as someone to cover for me while I am pumping."

Another said her supervisor was supportive in some ways, "but with all the rules and time limits, I felt like it was an inconvenience to work around my pumping." Several others said it varied depending on which supervisor they had at the time.

Thirty-five percent said their coworkers made supportive comments about their pump breaks; 47 percent said their coworkers made no comments or were neutral.

Said one respondent, "They were 50/50. Some referred to me as the milk maid, some said it was disgusting."

Said another, "People complained I was getting special treatment and everyone had an opinion as to how long was appropriate to breastfeed."

Are working mothers, on the whole, supported when they need to pump breastmilk? The response to the AL.com survey was split, with 49 percent saying they rarely get the support they need, while 44 percent said there's room for improvement. Only 4 percent believe breastfeeding working mothers are supported.

"I think it depends, for each individual person and their particular work situation," said one respondent. "Certain kinds of work demand continuous attention and are hard to take breaks from, even for 20 minutes. Serving tables is one of those kinds of situations. In sit-down office situations that allow for a certain level of autonomy, it may be easier to take more structured breaks."