2013 had no shortage of ridiculous pranks, brilliant memes and hilarious responses to the news. Not to mention that time Donald Trump tried to sue Bill Maher over a monkey joke.

Between Carlos Danger, prancercising and Will Sasso's Vines, 2013 was a pretty decent year for comedy on the Internet. Scroll down for 87 of the funniest things that happened this year and reminisce with us in the comments.

1 We learned about the Evolution of Mom Dancing.

2 Jimmy Kimmel confused pedestrians about Obamacare...

3 Shark Cat mesmerized us.

I mean.... Just look at him.

4 Anthony Weiner transformed into Carlos Danger. Getty/HuffPost Comedy

5 Jean-Claude Van Damme did an epic split.

6 A Raccoon stole cat food.

7 Tina Fey & Amy Poehler showed everyone how hosting The Golden Globes is done. Giphy

8 Seriously, they nailed it.

9 We found out what happens AFTER "Ever After."

10 We got pick-up lines inspired by the Government Shutdown. #ShutdownPickupLines

11 We Prancersized. YouTube

12 Jon Stewart ranted about Chicago style pizza.

13 Stephen Colbert fought for same-sex marriage rights.

He went after the Oklahoma governor for blocking same-sex marriage benefits.

14 Miley Cyrus twerked her way through the Government Shutdown as Michele Bachmann.

15 The Royal baby reminded everyone of "Seinfeld." Getty

Jason Alexander + George Costanza + Julia Louis-Dreyfus = Prince George Alexander Louis.

16 A deranged sorority girl wrote a letter that made us LOL.

17 We asked, "What Does The Fox Say?"

Thank you, Ylvis

18 Brides threw cats. Brides Throwing Cats

19 Zach Galifianakis said what we've all wanted to say to Justin Bieber on "Between Two Ferns."

20 Will Sasso showed us how truly funny Vines can be.

The lemons.... THE LEMONS!

21 Colbert performed the most epic Daft Punk dance routine.

22 A wise woman reminded us that "Ain't nobody got time for that!" YouTube

23 Jimmy Fallon transformed into Walter White.

Fallon exhibited late night ambition at its finest with this 13-minute parody, 'Joking Bad'.

24 A giant snake opened a door. A door to our nightmares.

25 Florida got a ridiculous new mascot. @_FloridaMan

Thank you, @_FloridaMan

26 Grumpy Cat was grumpy.

27 John Oliver did an awesome job on "The Daily Show."

He went above and beyond our expectations.

28 Key & Peele gave us more hilarious sports names.

29 Nathan Fielder made kids trick their parents via text.

And it was glorious.

30 Billy Eichner became our new favorite 'Parks & Rec' character. Giphy

Who doesn't love crazy Craig?

31 Donald Trump tried to sue Bill Maher over a monkey sex joke.

We still think the Donald may be the spawn of an orangutan.

32 Patton Oswalt brilliantly trolled conservatives on Twitter.

33 Stefon married Anderson Cooper in the best 'SNL' wedding ever.

And Bill Hader's last episode. See you around, Stefon.

34 Ryan Gosling wouldn't eat his cereal.

35 Jimmy Fallon, The Roots & Sesame Street made us smile with toy instruments.

36 We realized that beach legs look hot dogs. http://hot-dog-legs.tumblr.com/

2013: the year we stopped assuming that those sexy legs on the sand are not actually sticks of meat

37 Jon Stewart blasted Republicans over the government shutdown.

38 Ron Burgundy was everywhere... And we loved it. KXMB-TV

39 We met the best "Single Ladies" lip-syncer of our time.

Thank you, Jimmy Fallon, for bringing us this Stephan Merchant magic.

40 Conan took the funniest Lyft ride ever taken.

41 Jimmy Kimmel fooled us all with the worst twerking "FAIL" ever.

42 Randy Lietdke fooled Kyle Kinane (and everyone else) with a fake Pace Salsa Twitter account.

43 We found out that Beyonce is in the illuminati.

44 A spunky little girl tap danced her way into our hearts.

45 Colbert showed us the South might be way more tolerant than people think.

In one of his funniest segments of the year.

46 We figured out how to survive Whole Foods.

"Whole Foods is like Vegas. You go there to feel good but you leave broke, disoriented, and with the newfound knowledge that you have a vaginal disease." Read the rest HERE.

47 Aziz Ansari reminded us how insane marriage proposals are.

48 'SNL' perfectly summed up Healthcare.gov's woes.

49 Louis C.K. told us to put down our smart phones.

“The resolution on the kid is unbelievable if you just look,” CK says. “It’s totally HD.” He also made an amazing argument against texting and driving.

50 Sarah Silverman returned a box of stuff to her ex, Jimmy Kimmel.

51 "SNL" proved that Wes Anderson could make a horror movie.

Their parody was so spot on.

52 Jon Stewart destroyed the House GOP over the Hurricane Sandy vote.

53 A Brazilian TV show came up with the scariest prank ever.

54 'SNL' brought back The Lonely Island for "YOLO."

55 A teen Jeopardy! contestant won LIKE A BOSS.

Thank you, 'Jeopardy!' Teen Tournament, for introducing us to our new favorite game show contestant: Leonard Cooper.

56 The "Anchorman 2" guys sang with One Direction.

57 A reporter got revenge.

58 Kristen Wiig crashed "SNL" just in time for "The Sound Of Music."

She made a surprise appearance as her big-foreheaded character Denise (or Dooneese, or Judice... the jury seems to be out on her name).

59 A cat reacted to his owner coming home after 6 months.

60 Colbert lost it over the ridiculous Miss America backlash.

When Nina Davuluri was crowned Miss America and made history as the first Indian-American to hold the title, the racist corner of the Internet predictably reacted with dumb, ignorant bile. Stephen Colbert responded to them with the exact right tone: Unrepentant mockery.

61 Alyssa Milano released a "sex tape."

62 Key & Peele showed us how amazing free continental breakfast is.

63 Taylor Swift turned into a feminist.

64 We fell in love with Hudson Valley Ballers.

65 Jim Carrey made fun of the NRA.

66 Kimmel made fools out of Coachella attendees.

67 We saw actresses without teeth. http://actresseswithoutteeth.net/

It was the perfect combination of hilarious and terrifying. Hilarifying?

68 A Waffle fell over.

Enough said, indeed.

70 'Thumbs And Ammo' changed the way we look at movies. Thumbs And Ammo

71 We added KAPOOOYA!! KAPOOOYA!! KAPOOOYA!! to our vocabulary.

72 We started making fun of Upworthy headlines. Upworthy: Springfield

The website du jour + "The Simpsons" = LOL.

73 A hashtag made Twitter confuse Margaret Thatcher with Cher #NowThatchersDead

SMH all over the place.

74 We came up with an endless amount of red equal sign parodies.

People got pretty creative with the Human Rights Campaign's logo in support of The Supreme Court's landmark gay marriage ruling this pas March.

75 Miley Cyrus' "Wrecking Ball" got the Chatroulette parody it deserves.

76 We realized how much we needed Jebidiah Atkinson in our lives.

We can't wait to see Jebidiah again.

77 We couldn't get enough of "Convos With My 2-year-old."

Father of the year right here

78 We twerked to classical music.

79 Guys made dresses out of basketball shorts. Imgur

We can't believe it took you guys until 2013 to figure this out

80 Patton Oswalt delivered an 8-minute 'Star Wars' filibuster on 'Parks & Recreation.'

81 George Takei took on homophobes in a hilarious way.

Takei, Jesse Tyler Ferguson and Brad Goreski explain how to treat homophobes.

82 Google's April Fools Day prank didn't disappoint.

83 "SNL" stirred up controversy with "Djesus Uncrossed."

84 'Totally Biased With W. Kamau Bell' held an intervention for Florida.

A much, much needed intervention.

85 We thought a guy was seeing his wife for the first time.

Whether it was real or fake, we laughed

86 The ridiuclous backlash to a biracial Cheerios commercial was thoroughly mocked.

87 TO BILL BRASKY!