Donald Trump wasn't former Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal's second or third choice for president, and he said he isn't walking away from the harsh criticisms of the now-presumptive GOP nominee. However, he's backing him anyway because he still thinks Trump is better than Hillary Clinton."Sometimes you choose the lesser of two bad choices," Jindal toldhost Joe Hemmer. "I'm not walking away from my criticisms. I haven't had a sudden epiphany, and I don't think Donald Trump has evolved."But Republicans have spoken, said Jindal, who dropped his own bid for the nomination last November, and "that is important. Unlike many people in the establishment I think it is important to listen to voters in Republican primaries telling us they're frustrated and mad not only at President [Barack] Obama but Republican leadership."With the choice being down to Trump or Clinton, though, Jindal said he'll pick Trump."I don't like Donald Trump," said Jindal. "I don't think he is a conservative. But I think he is better than Hillary Clinton."Jindal said that part of his decision is because he is concerned about the Supreme Court."The next president will appoint a very critical person to the Supreme Court of the United States," said Jindal. "That person may be the tie-breaking vote on whether we have religious liberty rights, on scope of our Second Amendment rights. Whether they will rein in the federal government like EPA when they overreach. I don't think there is a chance that Hillary Clinton will put a constitutionalist on the court."He said he's not sure that Trump will, either, but the chances will "at least be greater than zero."Also, Jindal said that Clinton will not eliminate the Affordable Care Act, as she was "for Obamacare before there was Obamacare. She was for Hillarycare in the 1990s," and there is a chance Trump will end the controversial healthcare law.There are still other former candidates, like Jeb Bush and Lindsey Graham, who have refused to support Trump, but Jindal said he hopes that between now and November Republicans will decide that they like Trump rather than the alternative."We may not like what he says or some of the policy positions he has taken but he is definitely better than Hillary Clinton," Jindal said.He also told Hemmer that he has not talked to Trump for several months, but he doesn't want a job or anything from him."This isn't about the Republican Party," Jindal said."This is about our country. I spent a lot of time saying last several years we're headed in wrong direction. We need a fundamental course correction. To me Hillary Clinton represents more of the same, more government dependence, more borrowing, more spending, more government regulations.We know that path doesn't work. I can't promise you Donald Trump's path will work but it will be better."