He countered today's struggles with the hope of a bright future made possible through a coalition of patriots.

Advertisement - story continues below

Fox News Channel host Sean Hannity rallied an enthusiastic audience at CPAC Friday by presenting what he believes is the Republican Party’s best path to victory in the next presidential election.

“America,” he said, “we will fundamentally transform it to the great country it was. Our long nightmare of lawlessness and Obamacare and weakness as it relates to foreign policy … is coming to an end.”

Though he acknowledged he has not yet selected a favorite from among the wide group of likely Republican contenders, Hannity said all conservatives — including himself — must begin the process of vetting the field of hopefuls now. He said this is such an important step because America needs someone willing and able to restore America’s greatness.

Advertisement – story continues below

“I look at this audience,” he said, “… and I see one young face after another, which gives me hope for the future. Here’s the problem: I never thought there would be a time in America where 50 million of our fellow citizens … live in poverty.”

That number is nearly 20 million more than when Barack Obama was inaugurated, Hannity added.

“I feel bad,” he continued, “because this may become the first time in American history where our generation leaves this country in worse shape than that in which we found it.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Though candid about the perils our nation faces, he did offer an optimistic view of the future provided Republicans unite behind the common goal of saving the U.S.

“I would like to see the establishment and the Tea Party unite,” he said, offering several issues through which that goal can be met.

Most importantly, he said the next president must be one willing to eradicate the threat of radical Islam. A number of other topics are also likely to appeal to Republicans of all stripes.

“We have more resources than the entire Middle East combined,” he said of our reliance on foreign oil. “Let us break this monopoly. Let American commit to being energy independent in five years. Let you the parents choose the school that you want to send your children to. Let’s secure America’s borders for the safety and security of the American people.”

Advertisement – story continues below

Citing the sacrifices of our military members throughout the history of this nation and the next generation for whom we will leave America to, Hannity said we must make every effort to correct our course.

“We owe them that,” he said. “We are going to work day and night; blood, sweat and tears. We owe it to them that when God calls us home … that we leave them with what President Reagan described a shining beacon city on a hill.”

Click to see the latest news from CPAC 2015

Sign up below for a morning, afternoon, and evening update each day of CPAC.