Marc-André Hamelin, guest pianist in the CMF's final week, "has no technical limits," says festival music director Jean-Marie Zeitouni ( Sim Canetty-Clarke / Courtesy photo )

If you go What: Colorado Music Festival: Week 6 • Tuesday, Aug. 4: Music Mash-Up Concert No. 3, "The Crazy Arc of Love" with Storm Large • Thursday, Aug. 6-Friday, Aug. 7: "From Paris to New York" with the CMF Festival Orchestra and pianist Marc-André Hamelin. Pre-concert talk with pianist and musicologist Lisa Harrington, 6:30 p.m. Thursday • Saturday, Aug. 8: Chamber Music Concert No. 5, 7:30 p.m., First Congregational Church, 1128 Pine St., Boulder • Sunday, Aug. 9: "A Royal Finish" with the CMF Chamber Orchestra, Chorus and soprano Karina Gauvin Where: Unless noted, Chautauqua Auditorium, 900 Baseline Road, Boulder Tickets: $25-$45 for Tuesday, $12-$54 for Thursday-Friday and Sunday, $30 for Saturday Info: 303-440-7666 or comusic.org

Jean-Marie Zeitouni says he is seen as "exotic" on either side of the Atlantic.

"I'm in France a lot, and when I'm there, I'm treated like a North American," the Montreal native said. "But in the states, I'm kind of the 'Frenchy' type."

And that gives Zeitouni, the Colorado Music Festival's first-year music director, a perspective on how the French and Americans see each other.

It also served as the inspiration for the final full festival orchestra program of the season, which will be played Thursday and Friday at Chautauqua. Featuring French and American composers, all looking at the other side, the program is titled "From Paris to New York."

The international flavor continues in the season finale with the smaller chamber orchestra on Sunday, Aug. 9, with "A Royal Finish," featuring mostly vocal works written for nobility and royalty in Austria and England by Mozart and Handel. The CMF chorus (making a welcome return after its 2014 absence) will be prepared by Greg Gentry, the University of Colorado's director of choral studies.

Like Zeitouni, the two soloists for the week, pianist Marc-André Hamelin and soprano Karina Gauvin, are natives of Montreal, and they have worked with Zeitouni. All three also have been closely associated with Quebec City-based chamber orchestra Les Violons du Roy. Hamelin played with the group on Denver's Friends of Chamber Music series this past spring.

The festival orchestra program opens with Leonard Bernstein's overture to his 1956 operetta "Candide," which uses Voltaire as its source material. Ravel's 1930 Piano Concerto for the Left Hand, to be played by Hamelin, has elements of American jazz. George Antheil, an American composer who spent much of his career in Paris, is represented by his "Jazz Symphony." That work has a substantial piano part, which also will be taken by Hamelin.

Finally, the program concludes aptly with George Gershwin's 1928 tone poem, "An American in Paris," which is preceded by the obscure suite written in response by Darius Milhaud in 1962, "A Frenchman in New York."

While many of Milhaud's works are well-known, this one was recorded only once, as the B-side to the Gershwin on a long out-of-print LP from Arthur Fiedler and the Boston Pops.

"It really only makes sense to program it when playing the Gershwin," Zeitouni said.

Zeitouni, who worked with Hamelin at his former post in Columbus, Ohio, says he is "in the highest circle of pianists, with no technical limits." Hamelin is known for playing modern works of great complexity but also is associated with high classical repertoire such as the Haydn sonatas.

Hamelin also has worked and recorded with Boulder's own Takács String Quartet. And he is both an editor and composer. But during an interview, the pianist was keen to distance himself from specific associations.

"I really try to do everything I can in solo, chamber, and concerto realms," he said.

"My programs have always included standard repertoire and they always will," he explained when asked about his work with avant-garde and modern works.

Speaking of the Ravel concerto, Hamelin said it is "really a pure concert work with a few jazz elements. He uses some chords and bluesy melodic elements. It's really a very dark piece as compared to his other concerto in G major for two hands." Ravel did have great admiration for Gershwin.

Soprano Karina Gauvin will sing on the Colorado Music Festival's season finale, "A Royal Finish." (Michael Slobodian / Courtesy photo)

Hamelin also opined that the Ravel work is "by far the best work that stems from (Paul) Wittgenstein, by quite a margin," referring to the pianist who lost his right arm in World War I and subsequently commissioned left-handed works from many great early 20th century composers.

Of the Antheil piece, Hamelin said, "it's a hoot."

Antheil was known in Paris as the bad boy of American music. The Jazz Symphony was written in 1925, just a year after Gershwin's "Rhapsody in Blue," a piece similar in structure and spirit. He revised it from 12 minutes down to seven in 1955, and the latter version will be played at the CMF. Hamelin said that after everything suddenly grinds to a halt, Antheil closes with "16 bars of swooping waltz, and it's really quite a master stroke."

Sunday's season finale opens with three sacred vocal works by Mozart. The first, the famous "Ave verum corpus," is one of his latest pieces. It is followed by two youthful works from Salzburg, the popular "Exsultate, jubilate" and the very early "Regina Coeli," K. 108. Gauvin sings both, alone on the "Exsultate" and with the chorus in "Regina Coeli."

The Handel portion opens with the grand coronation anthem for "Zadok the Priest." Then the orchestra alone plays the "Music for the Royal Fireworks." Both were written for England's George II. Finally, excerpts from the grand "Ode for St. Cecilia's Day," including portions with soprano solo, close the evening.

"I wanted to end with a celebration of music," Zeitouni said.

The conductor spoke glowingly of Gentry's choral preparation and especially highly of Gauvin: "She's a princess in a really good way," he said.

Zeitouni worked with her as recently as early July, during his Week 2 break from the CMF. Together, they recorded Britten's "Les Illuminations" with Les Violons du Roy. For this concert, she stepped in after a cancellation by Sara Coburn.

Thus, without planning for it, Zeitouni began and ends his first festival with French-Canadian singers. The CMF season opened with contralto Marie-Nicole Lemieux, who recorded an album of Handel arias and duets with Gauvin.

Gauvin, while Francophone, grew up in Toronto and speaks English with almost no accent. In a delightful interview, she said she did not initially plan a career in music.

"My parents were both non-career singers," she said, "and I sang in the Canadian Children's Opera Chorus, which was my musical awakening."

While majoring in art history at McGill University in Montreal, Gauvin said, "I sang in the concert choir and was told I should be studying singing."

She took the advice. And her specialization in baroque and early classical music came naturally, she said:

"I wasn't really aiming for it, but my affinity for that style was recognized by conductors early on, and I embraced it."

The other Week 6 events have an American flavor.

Closing the Mash-Up Concert series on Tuesday, performance artist Storm Large and her band Le Bonheur present her program of songbook standards in orchestral arrangements, "The Crazy Arc of Love." The last chamber music concert, performed Saturday at First Congregational Church by CMF wind players and pianist Vivienne Spy, features American wind quintets by Samuel Barber and Walter Piston, plus Beethoven's Quintet for Piano and Winds.