STAFF WRITER

kelly lapczynski

Insurance company United Healthcare reached an agreement last week that allows its customers to continue using Tennova Healthcare hospitals for their medical needs — unless they are in Tullahoma.

Negotiations over reimbursement rates with seven Tennova hospitals had gone on for more than a year when United reported to its customers and shareholders that its relationship with those hospitals would end on March 1 if no agreement was reached.

Six of the contracts set to expire March 1 were between the insurer and Knoxville-area Tennova hospitals; the seventh was with Tennova Healthcare – Harton, formerly Harton Regional Medical Center.

United reported that it would be severing the relationship because Tennova’s parent company – Franklin-based Community Health Systems (CHS) – was demanding double-digit rate increases in the six East Tennessee hospitals and rates “up to 227 percent more than the state average” in Tullahoma.

Agreeing to those demands at the seven hospitals would mean a significant cost increase to United customers, the company reported, but CHS would not renew the insurer’s contracts without such an agreement.

“Since United Healthcare notified us that it would terminate the contract with our hospital over a year ago, we have worked diligently to reach an agreement that will allow patients to continue to choose our hospital for any of their healthcare needs,” said Harton Marketing Director Ava Lynch.

“We have had the same contract with United for over 15 years with no changes. In an effort to reach resolution for our patients, we made offers to reduce costs over time as part of a new agreement that would incorporate other affiliated hospitals but United refused.”

Lynch did not address United’s claim that Harton’s rates were substantially higher than the state average.

The day before the contracts were set to expire, Tony Stubbs of Knoxville-based Trinity Benefit Advisors explained the situation to a local employer that provides United Healthcare coverage to its employees.

“They (United) have reached an impasse with Tennova Health System and basically, at this point, neither side is willing to give what the other side wants.”

But, he added, contract disagreements between insurance carriers and health care providers tend to resolve themselves as deadlines come and go, when providers face an undesirable loss of patient volume as insured patients seek alternate care providers.

In the Knoxville area, where United Healthcare represents almost half of the insurance market and patients have a choice of providers, the loss of United customers would have been a substantial blow to Tennova.

“Typically they work it out and we think that’s going to happen here,” Stubbs said. “We think that this will remedy itself, it’s just a matter of when.”

Though it seemed that Harton would be a part of any eleventh-hour agreement between United and Tennova, Stubbs acknowledged that might not be the case. The stakes here, where Harton serves four counties without a comprehensive care competitor, weren’t as high as they were in Knoxville.

“I’ve never seen them exclude a hospital,” he said, “but I’ve also never seen a hospital so out of skew with the rest of their peers.”

As predicted, United and the six East Tennessee hospitals did reach an eleventh hour agreement, ensuring that Knoxville-area customers would see no interruption of service. But the deal did not include Harton.

As the March deadline passed, the United contract with Harton expired.

Under the Affordable Care Act, United customers are still entitled to emergency and non-elective services at the Tullahoma hospital without higher out-of-network costs, but in-network services are required for all elective, non-emergency services.

According to United, the nearest alternate in-network facilities are United Regional Medical Center in Manchester and Southern Tennessee Regional Health System in Winchester.

“We continue to work toward resolution with United,” said Lynch. “Tennova Healthcare – Harton is committed to providing services for the Tullahoma community and has contracts with most other major health plans in our area. We will work with patients who have United on a case-by-case basis to see what options are available to them.

“Patients with United can continue to access emergency care here and United is obligated to process their claims. Certain patients receiving ongoing treatment for special conditions or pregnant women may be eligible for Continuation of Care benefits. We encourage patients with questions to contact Teresa Ervin, Revenue Cycle Director, at 931-393-7991 or Teresa.ervin@tennova.com.”

United’s exclusion of Tennova Healthcare – Harton from its network does not affect Tennova-affiliated independent physicians and no other insurers are involved in the dispute.

Harton continues to provide in-network care for patients covered by most other major health plans in the area, including BlueCross BlueShield, Cigna, Aetna and Humana.