By Daniel Krieger



For those averse to working out in gyms or who wouldn’t go for a jog if they were paid to, there are still enjoyable ways to get going without feeling as if it were Exercise with a capital E.

That’s what three dozen women were after when they attended a recent Jamaican-inspired dancehall fitness class called Brukwine — an invitation to women of all shapes and sizes to shed their inhibitions and move with abandon.

It’s geared toward those who may steer clear of more traditional types of exercise, and it offers a spin on the sultry moves that accompany Jamaican-style dancehall music.

Brukwine is all about breaking out and moving the hips — something that the creators, Tamara Marrow, 35, and Autavia Bailey, 34, know all about. They have performed with the dancehall star Sean Paul, pop stars like Beyoncé and Jennifer Lopez and others.

They started Brukwine in 2012 as “a workout, first and foremost,” Marrow said.

In a dimly lit long room, participants faced mirrors in rows. Some were wearing Brukwine-emblazoned short shorts, tops, leggings or hats. A trained assistant known as a Brukwine Gyal guided them through stretches. Then, after many of the women put on pumps, platforms and stilettos, a second Gyal led hip-isolation practice to “Every Gyal a Mine,” by Demarco.

Like belly dancing, Brukwine involves hip movements that call for lots of muscle independence.

Bailey stepped to the front in golden stilettos. She drew cheers from the boisterous crowd and began demonstrating the routine of the day, which she and Marrow choreographed for a song called “Touch You,” by Konshens.

Bailey counted slowly as the class followed along with her steps and the rhythmic hip gyrations called “wines,” which she said were “the basis of our whole workout.” The wines, varying in speed, are performed with a circular flow punctuated by a complementary move called a “tick,” a jerk of the hips resembling the ticking motion of a clock.

“Get that hip in it,” she told the class, which went through some rounds before taking it from the top with the music at a club-like volume. Then Marrow, in neon pink stilettos, walked the class through the next piece in the routine at an easygoing pace. It included more steps, a neck and body roll and a “drop,” in which everyone squatted down and sprang back up.

Devin Edwards, 33, an administrative assistant, said she had been to almost every class for more than a year and was in much better shape as a result.

“Gyms are boring — this is not,” said Edwards. “It’s sexy to work out in heels,” she added, and some say it makes the routine more strenuous.