High unemployment in recent years has forced states to process record numbers of benefit claims using outdated technology, and without significant increases in federal funding, according to a report in 2012 by the National Employment Law Project, an advocacy group for lower-wage workers. Most states are operating unemployment insurance programs with 30-year-old computer systems, said George Wentworth, a senior staff lawyer with the legal group.

“What we have seen is that a lot of the old systems have been breaking down,” Mr. Wentworth said. “The recession really ended up highlighting the fragile state of a lot of these systems.”

But for many states, the upgrade was even worse.

So many applications for benefits were stalled when California introduced its new system on Labor Day that the government had to process them by hand. About 148,000 people waited weeks for their unemployment checks.

Similar problems after Massachusetts rolled out its system in July cost the state $800,000 in overtime and new hires to resolve and prompted legislative hearings. The project was delivered two years late and $6 million over the original estimate, The Boston Globe reported.

Also in July, Pennsylvania scrapped its $153 million online system for unemployment benefits, because the project was “simply not working,” the state’s secretary of labor, Julia Hearthway, said at the time.

Florida’s website trouble stems from a 2011 law that required people to sign up online for unemployment benefits. Before the law, 40 percent of the applications were done by phone.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In April, in response to a complaint by the nonprofit Florida Legal Services, the federal Department of Labor found that the online requirement violated the civil rights of people with language barriers and disabilities. The Florida Department of Economic Opportunity lashed back, accusing the federal agency of being overly politicized.

The state agency’s website shows more than 78,000 calls came in to the customer service center last Thursday alone. Of those, fewer than 6,500 callers spoke with a representative. More than 300 customer service representatives and claims adjudicators will be hired in the coming months, the agency said last week.

The department blamed its vendor, Deloitte Consulting, which was also responsible for the projects in California and Massachusetts. The agency issued $6 million in penalties against the company, withheld a $3 million payment and on Dec. 23 began fining it $15,000 a day until the problems are fixed.

“We are dedicated to making sure every claim is processed quickly, and we will continue to work until every claimant is served,” Jesse Panuccio, the executive director of the Department of Economic Opportunity, said in a statement. “We will continue to hold Deloitte accountable and I have asked them to devote whatever resources necessary to fix all remaining technical issues.”

Deloitte defended its work, saying that most jobless people have been able to file for benefits without trouble. It blamed the department for the latest setbacks because, the company said, it changed requirements that strained Deloitte’s resources. The company has already made more than 1,000 fixes and successfully processed at least 300,000 claims, Deloitte said in response to the latest fine.

Deloitte said a 2012 report by the Government Accountability Office showed that states were struggling to modernize their unemployment insurance programs, because governments lacked the budgets and the trained staff to make the updated systems work. Most of the issues that continue to dog the project, the company said, are beyond its control or have nothing to do with the software.

“We will also continue to work with D.E.O. to clarify the true nature of the remaining issues and will hold ourselves strictly accountable for fixing anything within our control as quickly as possible,” the company said in a statement.

Users of the site say the online enrollment system is particularly a problem for people whose benefits applications require further review.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Albert Harris, an Army reservist who recently returned from Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, was owed $2,400 in unemployment benefits, but a problem with a claim involving his previous employer, Disney, complicated his application. He was finally paid last week, after calling the customer service line about 150 times over two and a half months.

“Some of the representatives are really rude because they have been dealing with so many angry claimants,” he said, adding that he got through to speak with a representative about 30 times. “Sometimes they hang up, because they can’t take it.”

Shari Godfrey, 51, who was owed $2,000 in unemployment checks, was so desperate for money over the holidays that she set up a fund-raising site on gofundme.com to ask for donations. Having spent her severance payment so her dying sister could continue to receive hospital care, Ms. Godfrey was two months behind on her rent, was getting late notices on her car payments, and did not have enough money to pay for her diabetes medication.

Late last week she received notice that her overdue unemployment payment would finally arrive.

“The system does not work,” Ms. Godfrey said. “They cannot process claims. For months, not one check.”

Valory Greenfield, a lawyer with Florida Legal Services, said the state was not doing enough to make fixes and penalize the company responsible.

“At Legal Services, we are hearing, ‘I am getting evicted. I can’t pay my bills,’ ” Ms. Greenfield said.