GOP budget plan: Slash spending, transform Medicare, boost military

House Republicans unveiled a budget plan Tuesday that seeks to deliver on a sweeping wish list for fiscal conservatives: slashing federal spending by $5.5 trillion to balance the budget within a decade, repealing Obamacare, reforming the Tax Code and overhauling popular entitlement programs like Medicare and Medicaid — all while boosting Pentagon funding.

The proposal being rolled out by Budget Committee Chairman Tom Price (R-Ga.) attempts to placate defense hawks demanding more military spending by shifting tens of billions of dollars to a Pentagon war account, far beyond what President Barack Obama has requested. That move would avoid spending limits imposed by the 2011 Budget Control Act because war spending doesn’t count against those caps.

Story Continued Below

Without the backing of defense hawks, Price, Speaker John Bohner (R-Ohio) and the Republican leadership face a near-impossible task in just getting their proposal through the House, much less reaching a budget deal with the Senate. Senate Republicans are to unveil their own budget plan on Wednesday.

Failure to pass a budget would be a serious blow to Boehner and other House GOP leaders already reeling from the intraparty debacle surrounding the Homeland Security Department funding fight. Without a budget, they would not be able to use “reconciliation” — a tool that allows for a simple majority vote — to repeal Obamacare or enact tax reform. That means any such legislation would need 60 votes in the GOP-controlled Senate.

Passing a spending plan is also a basic test of whether GOP leaders can even run their conference.

“For 53 of the last 60 years, the federal government has spent more than it has taken in — 53 of the last 60 years. It’s unacceptable,” Boehner said. “To this day, now in his seventh year in office, the president has never proposed a budget that balances. Our budget will balance, but it’s also about growing our economy, growing jobs and building economic strength for our future.”

Yet it’s not going to be easy. Seventy House Republicans, led by Rep. Mike Turner of Ohio, have pledged to back Obama’s $561 billion request for defense spending next year, which is far higher than the $523 billion level mandated under the BCA. Price’s budget proposal retains the $523 billion spending level, but adds $94 billion to Overseas Contingency OperationsOCO, thus boosting defense spending far above what the White House had sought.

“Our budget allocates funding for the Department of Defense’s Overseas Contingency Operations fund in 2016 which when coupled with our base defense spending levels brings our FY 2016 budget for national defense to $613 billion in total — higher than the President’s budget request for the fiscal year,” the Budget Committee states in its report.

Armed Services Committee Chairman Mac Thornberry (R-Texas), who clashed with Price during a conference call to discuss military spending last week, and other hawks will huddle Tuesday morning before a GOP members-only meeting called to review the proposal.

“It’s not a gimmick,” insisted Rep. Tom Cole (R-Okla.), a senior member of the Budget Committee. “It’s a real mechanism, but it’s also certainly a [placeholder] for” House-Senate budget negotiations.

“I would look at our budget as our opening position,” Cole added, noting the difficult bargaining he foresees between the House and Senate over the next month or two.

Price is also projecting $2 trillion in savings over the next decade from repealing the 2010 Affordable Care Act, according to documents provided by the Budget Committee. That, of course, is not going to happen while Obama is still in the White House.

Another $913 billion in savings would come from turning Medicaid into a block grant program, as well as changes to other federal health programs. Those proposals will run into strong objections from Democrats and the Obama administration as well.

In addition, Price is estimating more than $1 trillion in cuts to other “mandatory” or entitlement programs, including food stamps. The federal food stamp program, formally known as the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program, would be turned over to state control starting in 2021.

The GOP-run Budget Committee estimates nearly $150 billion in savings by turning Medicare into a voucher program for anyone 56 years old or younger, an idea previously proposed by Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.), the former Budget Committee chairman. Republicans say their “premium support program” would help control Medicare costs. It would not be implemented before 2024.

By boosting the OCO funding as a means to appease defense hawks, Price is seeking to avoid politically painful cuts to domestic programs this year, even though there are some reductions to these programs in the outer period of the 10-year budget plan.

Overall, projected defense spending would rise by more than 30 percent during the next decade under the Price plan — from $523 billion in 2016 to $687 billion in 2025 — while nondefense spending would be essentially frozen. Under the GOP proposal, domestic programs would receive $493 billion in 2016, and just $496 billion in 2025. This is far less than the BCA projections, which have nondefense programs slated for $613 billion in 2025.

However, these changes can’t be implemented without changes to the Budget Control Act, and to get that done there will have to be a bipartisan deal with congressional Democrats and the White House.

Democrats, as expected, panned the GOP proposal as unworkable and unrealistic, and they mocked Republican leaders for postponing tough spending choices in order to keep their members in line.

“It’s an interesting time for the Republicans because for a last number of years they could blame [Senate Minority Leader Harry] Reid … for not getting to a budget,” Minority Whip Steny Hoyer (D-Md.) told reporters. “Now they have no one to blame but themselves.”

Hoyer continued: “They pretend highways will be taken care of sometime in the future. … They have a magic asterisk. Later never comes. We need to get rid of the sequester. Nobody on our side thinks the sequester is a realistic path.”

House Majority Leader Kevin McCarthy said the Budget Committee would move ahead with a markup of the plan this week and it would reach the floor before the Easter recess. McCarthy acknowledged the concerns from defense hawks but said leadership would move ahead.

“They raise a lot of good concerns,” McCarthy said. “We wanted to make sure our budget deals with the defense of this nation, that the [spending] level is higher than what the president has sought. That’s what [Thornberry] and others have been pushing for.”

McCarthy, however, ducked the question of whether the measure would pass. “I’m not the whip anymore!” the California Republican joked.

Rep. Patrick McHenry (R-N.C.), the chief deputy majority whip, said there would be enough GOP support to get to the 217-vote threshold for passing the budget.

“It’s coming together, it’s coming together,” McHenry said. “It’s almost there. But like everything, it comes down to the wire.”

Price, like previous Budget Committee chairmen from both parties, is using his proposal to push an aggressive policy agenda that is far broader than a simple focus on spending and deficits. Like the Ryan budgets of previous years, Price sees government as the cause of economic problems in the country and seeks to rein in federal spending — and power — by shifting programs back to state control or eliminating them outright.

For instance, the Budget Committee notes that there are 92 different anti-poverty programs, 17 food aid programs and 22 housing assistance programs. Similar overlaps have been found in federal job-training progams, it says. Price recommends eliminating or reducing many of these programs. The maximum award under Pell Grants would be frozen for a decade, helping slow the huge increases in college costs. Regulations required under the 2010 Dodd-Frank financial services reform law are also targeted as needlessly burdening the financial services industry and slowing economic growth.

Lauren French contributed to this report.