By

Teri Van Dyke was studying for the CPA exam when her 2 year old daughter was diagnosed with cancer, so she sought a career that offered some degree of flexibility while she cared for her. She had always been interested in the real estate market, so she started her career in 2007. “I had no idea at the time that real estate isn’t quite as flexible as many imagine.” said Van Dyke. “I spent three years nursing my daughter back to health and it was then that I got into real estate because I couldn’t remember much of the accounting and couldn’t picture myself sitting behind a desk. It’s been good and a good fit for the family.” Van Dyke discusses her career and approach to selling real estate in this edited interview.

Have you learned anything from your clients?

I’ve learned to be a better negotiator based on some of my clients that have been really demanding and wanted every question answered and every possible scenario played out. That has helped me negotiate in that it forced me to think far ahead and think more strategically.

What role should an agent play for a client?

There are times when you’re pop psychologist, part negotiator, part salesperson. Your role is to provide good information so that everyone knows what to expect next , what their role is and what yours is. Also to keep the transaction running smoothly. My goal is to keep everybody happy.

What qualities make for a good realtor?

Good customer service. You have to relate to people and put yourself in their shoes. Compassion goes a long way toward seeing it from both sides and explaining it from both sides, too.

What’s the best advice you’ve been given?

To persevere and don’t give up. There are so many times it seems like the transaction may be falling apart, and if you have a positive attitude and don’t give up, but do your best to approach the challenge from every angle, things usually work out.

Have you had any mentors?

There is a real good group of agents in my office who have always been helpful if I have any questions, but not anyone in particular.

How have you developed as a realtor?

Looking back, I don’t think I knew what I was getting into, so I wasn’t fully prepared for the profession, which is really different from accounting. Life experience and being a people person is really what it’s all about. I like people more now and can understand better where they’re coming from and what their perspective is.

What is your business philosophy?

To treat everyone as though they were a member of my family and I’m going to do everything I possibly can to provide my best service. That’s really important to me because I don’t really do a lot of marketing and instead rely on referrals.

What do you consider to be your client’s biggest challenge?

For some sellers, it’s challenging to readjust to market conditions. They remember what the market was a few years ago and getting them into the new market paradigm is a challenge. As far as buyers go, it’s tough getting them to be realistic on price when some have wanted to come in $50,000 below asking price.

What’s your favorite part of the process when working with clients?

After the biggest hurdles are out of the way, and they’re focused on moving toward the closing and I can focus on working to make sure everything is falling into place. In that sense, it’s more about the journey than it is about the actual closing. It’s doing a job well done along the way rather than collecting a paycheck.

What do you enjoy about selling real estate?

The variety is great and there are so many different people you meet; I love that part of it. That feeling of fulfillment when you’re helping someone buy their first home or is in a tricky situation is what drives it for me.

What do you do for recreation or to relax?

I walk my dog, which is a therapy dog for my daughter, for about four miles a day before I do anything as a way to reflect and connect. I also work with the dog for training. We’re working to get her into a group that performs tricks for the children at the hospital. That’s my thing. My kids are older now so they don’t need me as much.

What charitable organizations are you involved with?

I work with the animal performance group and also Ronald McDonald House and Children’s Hospital. In the past, I’ve trained for and participated in team marathons to benefit the Leukemia and Lymphoma Society.