For two months the 2 Works for You Investigators have been examining Indian Health Care Services. It's funded by the federal government. When the IHS hospital in Claremore can't perform a service it's contracted out, but our investigation found four out of five times funding for those procedures is denied.



Clyde Turner was one of the thousands denied. He has a condition where fluid backs up into his heart and he has difficulty breathing.



He ended up in the emergency room. Soon after, he went to a doctor at Claremore Indian Hospital who said Turner needed to see a specialist.



Since there wasn't a specialist at the Claremore hospital, doctors said he would have to go to a different non-IHS facility for care. However, despite the need for urgent care, IHS denied funding the visit.



The same thing happened to Marquetta Lyons. She needed a biopsy but says IHS denied funding it.



Then there's Carder Cleveland, he had a brain tumor but IHS denied funding a visit with a specialist twice.



Those are just some of the the thousands of denials issued every year. In fact, our investigation found of the 16,600 referrals for contract health last fiscal year, 3,100 were approved, that's an 18 percent approval rating, meaning 82 percent of the time, referral funding is denied at Claremore Indian Hospital.



The denial letters state the amount the procedure would cost. In Clyde's case it was $300 to see a doctor, for Carder it was $100.



All the while, the 2 Works for You Investigators discovered at least one administrator at Claremore Indian Hospital received bonuses.



The administrator received two $1,300 bonuses all while others like Clyde are denied.



"There's no way. If they don't have money, they shouldn't get a bonus," said Clyde Turner.



We took that to Oklahoma Congressman Tom Cole and asked if bonuses should be evaluated.

He said they should, especial after recent findings concerning the VA. Some were receiving bonuses without meeting performance requirements.



"We didn't do that in veterans health care and we found ourselves paying for bonuses," said Congressman Tom Cole, (R)-Oklahoma.



Still Cole says bonuses are a small part of the picture. He says the real issue is overall funding. He's been fighting to get additional funds to IHS for years. Cole says on average a Native American receives $2,800 in health care benefits, compared to $5,200 for an inmate.



Clyde purchased insurance through the Affordable Care Act, which offers special rates for Native Americans.

He's now seen several doctors and is already seeing improvements.

"I just want to get well, take care of my family and move forward," said Turner.