Pledge comes as expanded conservative campus center takes off

Todd McIntyre

When he voted for Ronald Reagan in 1984, then-graduate student Todd McIntyre didn't tell his University of Colorado professors or his friends.

"Quite frankly, because so many people in Boulder were liberal, I had to keep my mouth shut," he said.

McIntyre, now vice president of regulatory affairs at Durect Pharamaceuticals, went off to college in the 1970s as what he described as "middle-of-the-road liberal, somewhere center-left."

Now, he describes himself as conservative.

After his conversion, McIntyre realized he had missed out on a lot of ideas and viewpoints as a young person.

To ensure that students at CU-Boulder are exposed to a variety of concepts, McIntyre and his wife Bertha Michiyo McIntyre have established a $500,000 bequest to fund scholarships for students interested in conservative thought, public policy, economics and leadership.

"Not to say that they have to follow what I think to get a scholarship, it's to present a diversity of opinions," McIntyre said. "And that is not to say one side is right or wrong, but to expose students to varying political opinions, political discourse. But to also, at some level, make the students and faculty aware there are alternative views and just because you don't read about them doesn't mean they don't exist."

Advertisement

McIntyre's goal is shared by CU President Bruce Benson, members of the Board of Regents and campus officials. In August, CU announced the creation of the Center for Western Civilization, Thought and Policy, an expansion of an existing center combined with CU's visiting conservative scholar program.

"It just comes down to this and this is what higher education is all about: hearing different points of view and having a discussion," said Benson, a Republican who gave up partisan politics when CU hired him in 2008. "Having a good honest debate is what we need and that's all we want."

According to a 2014 social climate survey, 6 percent of CU-Boulder faculty and 16.3 percent of students identified as Republicans, a finding that concerned some conservative regents.

McIntyre, who earned a bachelor's, master's and doctoral degree in psychology and neuroscience at CU-Boulder, also established a $500,000 bequest to help neuroscience students who qualify for financial aid.

Bob Pasnau, who directs the Center for Western Civilization, Thought and Policy, said there has been "a lot" of interest since the center's launch earlier this fall.

The center hosted a series of dialogues about topics such as religious liberty and discrimination, climate change and recent Supreme Court decisions, which Pasnau said were well-attended by people from across the political spectrum.

"We've kind of hit upon a productive formula for bringing in support of people interested in these issues and the formula is to say, 'Look, we're not simply trying to bring in a bunch of conservatives, what we're trying to do is expand the domain of discourse,'" Pasnau said.

"There's a very widespread perception that universities are not open to conservative thought and, to my mind, that's not true, but to the extent that there's that perception out there, I think the University of Colorado was right to try to address it."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta