Rams won Border War, can't afford to relapse again

Colorado State defensive tackle Terry Jackson jumps on a Wyoming fumble during Saturday's 26-7 win, improving the team to 4-5 on the season. ( Michael Smith / The Associated Press )

FORT COLLINS — Colorado State has been here before.

A few weeks back, coming off two straight disheartening losses to Utah State and Boise State, the Rams felt they had a bounce-back week. They throttled Air Force at home, playing cleaner than they had in the previous games.

Order was restored.

Until coming off a bye week, CSU was given a reality check by San Diego State at home. The Aztecs took apart a mistake-riddled Rams team in a 41-17 drubbing.

Saturday, the Rams were feeling good again. They controlled the Border War and won the turnover battle, taking the game 26-7. They owned both lines of scrimmage and ran over to sing the school fight song with the fans, the Bronze Boot held high.

Coach Mike Bobo told them to celebrate and to stay out of trouble later that night. Then he also told them the truth, that the reality was they have to stand up to the challenge week after week.

"We were happy to have the Boot, but I stressed that in there," Bobo said. "As coaches, we've got to keep the hammer down. I've got to keep the hammer down on our coaches, coaches got to keep the hammer down on our players. We've got to hold everybody accountable, and it starts with me. We'll continue to do that on Monday for the rest of the year."

After the loss to the Aztecs, Bobo challenged his team to clean up their mistakes. He wanted fewer turnovers, and that was achieved. Quarterback Nick Stevens threw a pick, his 10th of the season, but that was it. Better yet, the defense created four, or half of what it had produced so far on the season.

The focus they had last week after a stern talk from the coaching staff has to carry over this week, linebacker Kevin Davis said.

"We have to keep grinding, kind of do the same thing we did last week," he said. "Really get into our playbooks and practice hard, and I think that will take care of itself."

But another lingering issue kept the Rams from blowing Wyoming right off the field, and that was penalties. In all, 10 produced 101 yards in flags and really cost CSU more than that.

In the second quarter, an illegal block wiped out a great punt return by Joe Hansley, one that would have put the Rams inside Wyoming territory. Instead, they started at their own 13. Three plays later, CSU was called for holding. The next play, a block below the waist wiped out a 75-yard touchdown run by Deionte Gaines on a reverse.

"We've got to learn from it," Bobo said. "Like I just told the guys, we're not a perfect football team. There are a lot of warts on this football team, but the thing is we can still get better. We still have a lot to play for, especially this week coming up."

Facing UNLV (5 p.m.; ROOT), the CSU seniors will be playing in their final home game and still need two wins to become bowl eligible.

The seniors know what's at stake and fully realize this is a team that is far away from feeling too good about itself for too long a period of time.

In short, they can't afford another relapse, so the goal is to stay focused.

"Forget what's in the past. Look forward to what lies ahead and strain to reach the end of the race," senior Trent Matthews said. "The race is to win the next game and go to a bowl. We celebrate now, but Monday we get our lunch pail and go back to work."

Mike Brohard: 970-635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/mbrohard