Both men appear to be testing the waters for potential presidential runs in 2016. Cruz, Rubio stress strong values

Republican Sens. Ted Cruz and Marco Rubio warned Thursday that the Obama administration’s policies must be reined in, while stressing the importance of strong moral values.

The remarks, made during the annual Road to Majority conference of Christian conservatives, come as both men appear to be testing the waters for potential presidential runs in 2016.

Story Continued Below

Cruz in particular warned that liberal policies are harmful to religious liberty.

“Here at home, we have an IRS who is asking citizens’ groups: Tell me what books you are reading. Tell me the content of your prayers,” said Cruz, the junior senator from Texas and a favorite of the conservative grassroots. “Let me tell you something: The federal government has no business asking any American that.”

( PHOTOS: 2016: Who’s next?)

Cruz also used the occasion to touch on the case of Hobby Lobby, the national retail chain challenging on religious grounds the Affordable Care Act’s mandate that it provide employees with health insurance that covers contraception. The Supreme Court is expected to hand down its ruling in the case before the end of the month.

Pacing the star-spangled ballroom stage, Cruz hammered home his opposition to the health law, citing the case of a group of Catholic nuns challenging the contraception requirement.

“Let me give you a simple rule of thumb: If you are litigating against nuns, you probably got something wrong,” Cruz said to roaring applause.

( QUIZ: Do you know Ted Cruz?)

Rubio said a major cause of rising poverty was the breakdown of the traditional American family. He also advocated for bureaucratic reform and a break-up of the “existing higher education cartel” that drives up the cost of a college degree.

“We must reinvigorate the role of values in our country,” the Florida senator said. “You can have all the diplomas on the wall you want. If you do not have the values of hard work … then you will not succeed.”

Cruz and Rubio were joined on stage by Utah GOP Sen. Mike Lee, Fox News analyst Monica Crowley, former House member Allen West, and former Ambassador John Bolton, as well as Ralph Reed, the chairman of the Faith and Freedom Coalition, which puts on the conference.

( QUIZ: Do you know Marco Rubio?)

The three-day gathering, which ends Saturday, will play host to several of the GOP’s potential 2016 contenders, including Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, House Budget Committee Chairman Paul Ryan of Wisconsin, and Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal. New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie will headline Friday’s events.

Faith and Freedom Coalition organizers expect close to 2,000 people from across the country to attend the conference throughout the weekend. The event is billed as a “policy conference and strategy briefing” for the Christian right.

Reed called the summit “an island of reality in a sea of fantasy” during the kickoff luncheon Thursday.

Soft Christian rock filled the air. Many people came as part of church groups or with their families. At least one man, calling himself a tea party patriot, wore Revolutionary-era garb and carried a flag bearing the words “Don’t Tread on Me.”

After lunch, attendees boarded buses for Capitol Hill where they were to spend the afternoon lobbying against the Affordable Care Act, the Common Core education standards, and immigration reform they allege will lead to “amnesty.”