OrthoNY possible in Schenectady Medical group could absorb downtown practice, some staff









Photo: Michael P. Farrell Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates property Thursday, April 3, 2014, on Liberty Street in Schenectady, N.Y. (Michael P. Farrell/Times Union) Photo: Michael P. Farrell Buy this photo OrthoNY possible in Schenectady 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

Schenectady

Schenectady Regional Orthopedic Associates has begun the process to join another medical practice.

The medical group would not disclose the name of the practice it hopes to join, but had been in touch with Ellis Medicine officials about discussions with OrthoNY, according to a spokesperson for Ellis.

OrthoNY was created last year by the merger of Northeast Orthopaedics and Orthopaedic Associates of Saratoga, becoming one of the area's largest orthopedic operations.

Schenectady Regional Orthopedics filed a notice Wednesday with the state Labor Department, stating it intends to close at the end of June. The notice said 79 employees would be affected by the plans.

Sandy McMahon, the group's practice manager, said employees may be able to secure jobs with the acquiring organization.

Employees have been notified of the company's plans, she said.

"We're hopeful they'll retain employment with the new group," McMahon said.

Schenectady Regional Orthopedics has three offices, two in Schenectady and a third in Clifton Park.

OrthoNY on Wednesday announced the planned April 14 opening of its ninth office in Glens Falls.

More Information

With that addition, the group will have offices in Albany, Rensselaer, Saratoga and Warren counties. It does not have a presence in Schenectady County.

At the time OrthoNY was established, Chief Executive Alan Okun said payment changes coming with continued implementation of the Affordable Care Act spurred doctors to create a larger business.

Health providers expect to see a move from payments that cover each service to set rates — say, per patient per month — that require them to provide all services for one price. Such models favor larger medical practices that work closely with hospitals to avoid unnecessary or duplicative services.

OrthoNY did not respond to inquiries about Schenectady Regional Orthopedics.

The medical practices provide sports medicine, foot and ankle surgery, hand surgery, joint surgery and general bone and joint care.

chughes@timesunion.com • 518-454-5417