Opinion

Housing as health care









Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle Image 1 of / 3 Caption Close Image 1 of 3 Buy photo By providing housing for the homeless, San Francisco could improve the quality of life for people living on the streets and contain medical costs by reducing health care expenditures. By providing housing for the homeless, San Francisco could improve the quality of life for people living on the streets and contain medical costs by reducing health care expenditures. Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle Buy this photo Image 2 of 3 Buy photo Homeless children, including Alexandra (center), at "The Road Home", a shelter near downtown Salt Lake City, have a fence around their recreation area. They wait for more permanent housing. Salt Lake City, Utah has made great strides in housing and taking care of its homeless population in the last few years. less Homeless children, including Alexandra (center), at "The Road Home", a shelter near downtown Salt Lake City, have a fence around their recreation area. They wait for more permanent housing. Salt Lake City, Utah ... more Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle Buy this photo Image 3 of 3 Buy photo Homeless women and families line up outside "The Road Home" as they wait for the facility to reopen in Salt Lake City. Salt Lake City, Utah has made great strides in housing and taking care of its homeless population in the last few years. less Homeless women and families line up outside "The Road Home" as they wait for the facility to reopen in Salt Lake City. Salt Lake City, Utah has made great strides in housing and taking care of its homeless ... more Photo: Brant Ward, The Chronicle Buy this photo Housing as health care 1 / 3 Back to Gallery

With the rollout of the Affordable Care Act in California, we have an unprecedented opportunity to provide the one proven treatment to improve the health and well-being of people living with mental illness, substance abuse, chronic medical problems and homelessness: housing. In San Francisco, the health care system that will partner with high-tech know-how and philanthropy to embrace this will not only deliver on our social responsibility to serve the urban poor, but will leave public funding on the table for other essential governmental functions.

For the past 20 years, I have been providing primary care for homeless people in San Francisco. Walking to my clinic in the Tenderloin each morning, it seems that little has changed over the years. I still see many of my patients in various states of consciousness, often lying on the cold pavement. At the beginning of the month, mornings are quiet, as many people are recovering from a night of drinking and drugging or paying back accumulated debts. At the end of the month, the sidewalk is crowded with people trying to pass the time until they can fill their empty bellies at their first meal of the day at Glide Memorial or St. Anthony Dining Room.

A year and a half ago, I had the opportunity to work on President Obama's homeless policy agency. During my time in Washington, D.C., I was able to see that the seeming lack of progress on homelessness in San Francisco is not the only narrative in the United States.

Some cities, such as Salt Lake City and Minneapolis, are on track to have sufficient housing and services targeting homeless people, so that they can legitimately claim to be able to end homelessness for the long-term, mentally ill, chronically frail subset of the homeless population.

On a national level, our one true single-payer health system in the United States, the much maligned Veterans Health Administration, is in the vanguard of making sure that the president's statement of, "After serving their country, no veteran should be sleeping on the streets," will become a reality.

What are these cities and the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs doing right? How can San Francisco learn from their example, so that we, too, can start to move the needle on homelessness?

Veterans Affairs and these cities have recognized that the majority of homeless people, including most homeless families, become homeless because of poverty rather than mental illness and chronic medical problems. The solutions for these episodic homeless individuals and families are no different than the solutions for all people living with poverty: affordable housing, a decent wage, a useful education and the skills to enter the evolving workforce.

The solution for those who have been on the streets for years and are living with mental illness and substance abuse is high-quality, low-threshold, beautiful housing with on-site or mobile services that are tailored to individual needs.

When I first started working at San Francisco General Hospital in 1989, there was little effective treatment for my patients infected with HIV. Yet, when combination antiretroviral treatment became available, the health care delivery system ramped up to help develop new and better medicines and to reimburse the pharmaceutical companies that sold these lifesaving treatments. What anti-HIV meds were to HIV in the 1990s, housing is to chronically homeless adults today.

With a system in place that assesses each homeless person's need for housing through a medical lens, San Francisco could help ensure people get the medical care they need while containing medical costs. How? Providing housing will reduce health care expenditures. There is a solid body of evidence that providing housing for the highest users of the health care system improves their quality of life and reduces the number of people on the street. It also reduces public health care spending and the overall size of government.

The influx of talented and wealthy high-tech investors to San Francisco could be an opportunity to reduce homelessness. The business acumen that comes with entrepreneurship can help guide the health care industry to develop measures that assess the success of providing housing to stabilize homeless individuals' health, and hold the health care industry accountable so that these claims of return on investment can be documented.

This partnership also could provide some funding outside of the heavily regulated health care sector so that services that are often hard to fund through Medi-Cal can be available.

The enormity of the homelessness problem is not dissuading leaders in our nation's largest cities. In New York, Mayor Bill de Blasio unveiled a plan to bring a half-million housing units to market in the next five years. In Los Angeles, the Department of Health Services is committed to developing 10,000 housing units targeting chronically homeless adults over the next three years.

San Francisco was the first out of the gate to develop supportive housing, and now we need to use what we have learned to target our limited resources toward long-term homeless people with the greatest medical needs.

The need for supportive housing in San Francisco is much smaller than in New York or Los Angeles. The San Francisco Health Department has developed about 1,700 units of permanent supportive housing - about halfway to having every chronically homeless, single adult in San Francisco off the streets.

A big, bold investment will get us to that tipping point. Without it, little will change, and it will be just another day in the Tenderloin.

"A decade of homelessness: Thousands in S.F. remain in crisis," can be read at SFChronicle.com, bit.ly/1x7otTJ