Fresh off of the Republican debate stage, New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie held a rally at Brick City Grill in Ames Saturday in which the outspoken GOP presidential candidate made his case for the party’s nomination by saying he was the strongest and most experienced candidate in either party when it comes to the issues surrounding global terrorism.

Christie struggled early on to make an impact with voters but lately he has been seen as somewhat of a rising star among the field of GOP candidates. Christie’s poll numbers may remain in the single digits in most national polls but his favorability rating has increased significantly in the early primary states, which has led many national media sources to predict a comeback from Christie in the near future.

In Iowa, Christie’s favorability rating has increased from 29 percent in August to 51 percent this week following his debate performance. Judging by his unabashed statements to voters at his Saturday rally, his rise in popularity has not gone unnoticed by the Christie campaign.

During the Brick City rally, which was attended by far more people than the room’s 99-person capacity allowed, Christie emphasized what he learned in his role as U.S attorney for New Jersey following the 9/11 attacks in New York.

“We’re forgetting about what the cost of terrorism really is. We’re forgetting about what the cost is of keeping our guard down. We’re forgetting about what the cost is of putting someone in the oval office who doesn’t have the first idea of how to keep America safe and secure and that’s the first and most important job of the president of the United States,” Christie said.

Christie said that because of his time as U.S. attorney and governor of New Jersey, he felt that he was ready to serve in that capacity.

“I see these people everyday, and more, I live with them. I’m their governor and I see the pain and the suffering that they have gone through for the last 14 years and when you see that and experience it, you never forget,” he said.

Following his 15-minute opening that only focused on the 9/11 attacks, Christie took questions from the crowd. Many of the questions gave Christie opportunities to take shots at President Barack Obama and his GOP rivals, opportunities that Christie did not miss. At different times during the discussion, Christie attacked the positions of other candidates in the field and even went as far to repeat previous jabs at the president by calling him a “feckless weakling” and a “petulant child.”

“I’m talking about his policies,” Christie said. “A president of the United States can’t be running around the world all the time apologizing for America. When you do that, you make Americans feel less about themselves.”

Ellyn Grimm, an Ames resident who is pregnant with her third child, said she feared for her children because of the rising number of shootings in the country. Because of that fear, she asked Christie if he would support universal background checks for all gun purchases in the country, an option that Christie said he would not support.

“There’s lots of gun sales that shouldn’t have to require background checks. Family members who sell to other family members or friends, I don’t understand why those folks need to have a background check,” Christie said.

Grimm said she didn’t agree with Christie’s answer and that she was hoping for more from a candidate that preaches security for all people.

“Background checks are really non-controversial, upwards of 80 percent of gun owners support them. He spent a lot of time talking today about protecting Americans and what we lose when Americans lose their lives or are unsafe, but for some reason the gun issue doesn’t seem to apply,” Grimm said. “I was disappointed in his answer, I think he knows better.”

During the rally, Christie also presented other ideas he would implement if he were to be elected in November. Christie said he was against the legalization of marijuana but was in favor of increasing the use of treatment over prison policies for nonviolent drug offenders. He also said that he wanted to repeal the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, and give the power over health care to the states.

“First thing I would do is get Obamacare the hell out of here, I can tell you that,” Christie said. “I trust the governor in this state and the Legislature to do this the right way.”

Jack Barringer, an Ames resident, attended Christie’s rally and said he was planning on caucusing for the governor in February.

“He didn’t always agree with the person asking the question but he told them what he believed and that’s what we got to have, someone who’s going to tell it the way it is,” Barringer said.

Following Saturday’s event, Christie said he will continue to campaign in Iowa until the Feb. 1 caucuses, including stops in Sioux City and other areas of the state.

Take a look at what Christie had to say during his stop in Ames: