Source: MGN

It's many kids' dreams to make it to the big leagues, but most of the time it doesn't happen. In Logan Watkins' case, it did happen.

He's 26 years old, plays for the Cubs, but still thinks of Goddard as home.

"Started playing baseball at age of four and pretty much just came up like every other kid through Wichita," said Watkins, a Cubs second baseman.

Watkins was drafted out of high school.

"You know I ran with it, as soon as the opportunity came. It was too good of an opportunity to pass up," said Watkins.

As good of an opportunity as it was, it wasn't an easy decision. It had always been a dream of his to play at Wichita State. The Shockers had offered him a scholarship.

"I wasn't even watching the draft. I didn't want to get drafted to be honest. I wanted to go to Wichita State pretty bad," said Watkins.

Watkins was drafted in the 21st round by the Cubs. His mom was was indifferent to him going pro or going to college. She just wanted him to be happy. His dad thought he should sign with Chicago.

"Everything after high school, after the draft just kind of snowballed really fast, and next thing you know, I was moving away from home and growing up pretty fast," said Watkins.

That was seven years ago. Three years ago, Watkins made his big league debut, but it was a moment two years ago that Watkins considers the highlight of his career so far.

"It was in St. Louis. It was a great crowd. St. Louis always fills out their stadium pretty well, and I just remember it kind of being a whirlwind. I hit it, and next thing you know it was in the dugout. I don't even really remember running the bases. It was a good feeling. I was playing pretty well at the time. Strung together a few pretty good weeks. I realized pretty quickly on that I belonged, and not only that I belonged, but I felt like I could prosper and do really well, and it all came together, and like I said, hopefully there's a lot more to come, but as of right now, I'm very fortunate and blessed to be where I am," said Watkins.

Watkins is coming off an Achilles injury, which caused him to miss this past season. He expects to start this next year out in Triple-A.