Obamacare sign-ups “exceeded goals” including 12.7 million nationally, 1.74 million in Florida and more than 191,000 in greater West Palm Beach, federal officials said Thursday.

Blame Ted Cruz, said fellow GOP presidential candidate Donald Trump.

“Ted Cruz gave us Obamacare, believe me,” Trump said on the stump. “If it weren’t for Ted Cruz — he’s the one that got Justice (John) Roberts onto the United States Supreme Court. He pushed him.”

Trump went on: “And Justice Roberts approved Obamacare twice when it should have been rejected.”

In 2005, then-Texas Solicitor General Cruz told reporters that he brought Roberts, then a Washington lawyer, to Florida to take part in the legal fracas after the 2000 presidential vote. Cruz called Roberts “one of the best constitutional minds in the country.”

A Cruz spokesman told the Associated Press: “Trump’s claim is ridiculous, especially considering that he has advocated and supported a single-payer healthcare system along with many other social-liberal policies.”

On Thursday, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell contended the latest enrollment numbers were cause for celebration, not blame.

“Open Enrollment for 2016 is over and we are happy to report it was a success,” Burwell said. “The Health Insurance Marketplace is changing people’s lives for the better. Across the country, about 12.7 million Americans selected affordable, quality health plans for 2016 coverage, exceeding our goals. That includes over 4 million new consumers in the HealthCare.gov states who signed-up for coverage this year.”

As of Feb. 1, 1.74 million people signed up in Florida and 191,899 consumers in the West Palm Beach-Ft. Pierce region selected or renewed a plan, officials said.

“Today’s announcement from HHS shows what we’ve been seeing in communities across Florida – consumers continue to want affordable health coverage and jumped at the opportunity to protect themselves and their family,” said Raymond Paultre, Florida director for sign-up group Enroll America. “And of the over 1.7 million Floridians that enrolled or re-enrolled in coverage, we know the vast majority of them received financial help to lower the monthly premiums and make their plan truly affordable.”

No, blame is more like it, said Andres Malave, Florida communications director for the Obamacare-opposing group Americans for Prosperity.

“Signing up for Obamacare is not the same as obtaining quality, low-cost healthcare,” Malave said. “By the numbers, Obamacare continues to create more anxiety than relief. The president’s signature supposed affordable health care act has increased premiums in each of its first three years, including by 9.2 percent on average across Florida this year. Meanwhile, skyrocketing deductibles have rendered many insurance policies all but useless.”

He continued, “Florida can’t wait for Washington to fix this increasingly unfavorable mandate. Lawmakers in the sunshine state can take major steps in tackling health care by implementing state-based reforms that can bring more choice to patients and lower costs. There are easily achievable solutions already making their way through the Florida legislature, during the 60-day session, that would significantly help Floridians more than the inefficiently-run programs coming out of the belt-way. “