It began as a weekly youth enrichment program to remind children of their cultural heritage.

Now, four decades later, the Denver March Powwow is one of the largest annual celebrations of American Indian culture in the country, representing nearly 100 tribes from the U.S., Canada and Mexico. According to its organizers, the focus on children remains.

“Our origins were with youth, and we remain in that basis,” said Ken LaDeaux, president of the Denver March Powwow board. “At that early age, it begins with education about the diversity of tribes in the U.S. — we have over 500.”

More than 1,000 dancers are taking part in the event, which began Friday and lasts through Sunday at the Denver Coliseum. The dancers represent a variety of tribes, dance styles and age groups — ranging from the “Golden Age,” 60-plus dancers, to the “Tiny Tots,” for ages 6 and under.

Grace Gillette, executive director, agreed that childhood participation is key.

“These children, when they know their roots, when they know where they come from, their path in life is going to a be a strong one and a good one,” Gillette said.

The event also incorporates about 40 drum groups from across the nation. In 2004, 73 groups registered — an international record, according to Gillette. She said they didn’t have room for everyone and had to add a registration fee to keep the numbers manageable.

LaDeaux said there is a waiting list for vendors, too. About 180 booths circle the coliseum, offering products from handmade crafts and jewelry to fine arts and raw materials.

“It kicks off the powwow season,” said Jordynn Lee Paz, this year’s Denver March Powwow princess. Paz, whose Crow name is One Who Puts Others Before Herself, said she’ll attend 25 to 30 similar events in the coming months.

The Denver March Powwow continues Sunday, with doors opening at 10 a.m. The Grand Entry begins around 11 a.m., followed by intertribal dancing competitions. In the afternoon, the 2015 princess will be crowned, and dance contest winners will be announced. Gillette urged everyone to attend.

“The misconception is that it’s just for natives, but it’s not,” Gillette said. “The indigenous people of the North American continent are not a thing of the past. … Their culture is alive and thriving today.”

Anna Gauldin: 303-954-1666, agauldin@denverpost.com