Topics: beauty, Hendrick's Gin, HENDRICKS_STORYPROMO, Keepers of Curiosity, SANAE BARBER, style

This is the fourth installment in a new series called Keepers of Curiosity, featuring interviews with intrepid performers, artists, writers and culinary-minded individuals with a thirst for discovery and innovation. The series is brought to you by Hendrick's Gin. To read the other interviews in this series, click here.

What do you do?

I wake up and I get dressed in a robe. Then I walk through a land of dreams. It’s a manmade land with natural things full of highly ornamented rooms, divine creatures, intricate rituals, inspiring inscriptions, and gorgeous nymphs who bring me the essences of songs, lyrics, and stories. Then I weave fragrances which sing these songs and tell these stories in a made-up language unique to each person.

To make this happen, I primarily blend and wear pure perfume oils, however over the last few months, I’ve been experimenting more and more with eau de parfum, which basically has a higher alcohol content. The ingredients are all the same, but there is a difference in the alcohol to perfume content ratio, which by the way, is still natural, I only use food-based, organic spirits and natural botanic oils. And, of course, the experience of applying and wearing the perfumes is different.

Pure perfume oils are concentrated; they’re a dense experience; the application is more direct. With eau de parfum on the other hand, you incorporate an atomizer. And I love atomizers! They disperse the scent in a different way, creating a new experience. It’s still very long lasting and beautiful, but different. I wouldn’t diminish one or the other. They’re just unique experiences. You could say, there’s a magic to an atomizer and an elegance to a perfume oil. They’re both right for different moods and occasions.

Where do you mine inspiration?

From the fairies that live in the forest, especially the ones who inhabit the hills of the Pacific coastline. Recently, I’ve also been incredibly inspired by my collaboration with folk singer-songwriter Father John Misty.

How would you describe your work?

As a mysterious inscription that tells the story of memory theater through the sense of scent.

What are you most inquisitive about?

I’m most inquisitive about the language of scents, and the effects of that language once it envelopes you. I’m also most inquisitive late at night and early in the morning.

What drives your curiosity?

A desire to share interpretations with people. Communication beyond words and thoughts.

How do you keep things curious?

Curiosity can happen at any moment, like a breeze though your hair or wind felling trees, like wafting moments of sidewalk rosemary, surprising notes of night-blooming jasmine, or spotting a star at the same instance I smell an orange blossom nearby.