Enrollment deadline Medicare enrollees have until Dec. 7 to evaluate their Medicare Advantage plans and Medicare prescription drug coverage (Part D) and make changes. Changes made during the open enrollment period take effect Jan. 1, 2016. • People who have questions about Medicare and its offerings can visit the Senior Health Insurance Benefits Assistance Program’s website at www.oregonshiba.org or set up an appointment to speak with one of its volunteer counselors by calling 541-678-5483. • The “ABCDs of Medicare” is a workshop where a local expert will walk people through the program’s basics. These workshops are offered at the Bend Senior Center, 1600 Reed Market Road, at 4:30 p.m. on the first Thursday of each month.

For the vast majority of Oregonians buying their own 2016 health insurance on HealthCare.gov, there’s no way around it: You’re going to pay more. In some cases, significantly more.

All the more reason to scrutinize the policies you’re considering on a number of factors: not just the ballooning monthly premiums, but the out-of-pocket maximums, prescription drug coverage and networks, too.

The Oregon Insurance Division focuses a lot on carriers’ average individual market rate increases between this year and next, but in reality, most people — especially those in Central Oregon — are going to see bigger increases than those averages. Moda, for example, got an average rate increase across its individual policies of 25.6 percent. If you live in Bend and have Moda’s bronze plans, however, you’re going to see a rate hike of about 42 percent.

PacificSource Health Plans’ average increase in individual plans is about 37 percent. Bendites with the carrier’s bronze, silver or gold plans, however, will see increases of 48 and 49 percent.

“It’s crazy,” said Patrick O’Keefe, the owner and managing partner of the Cascade Insurance Center in Bend. “It’s not going to be a fun year.”

A study released this month on premium increases in major cities in each state found that Portland had the second-highest rate increases in its silver plans between 2015 and 2016 — 22.8 percent — beneath Minneapolis, which saw increases of 28.7 percent, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Although people in Bend tend to be active and healthy compared to the rest of the state, there is a limited number of providers and only one hospital provider for carriers to contract with — St. Charles Health System, which means rates tend to be higher here, said Maile Austen, president of the Oregon Association of Health Underwriters.

It doesn’t cost an individual any money — either up front or in the form of pricier insurance — to visit with a health insurance agent, and many agents say with plans being so complex and constantly changing, it’s more important than ever to have experts help people pore over the options. Agents make their money off of commissions from health insurance companies, and the companies build those expenses into the overall cost of their policies.

Important points of policies everyone should focus on when choosing one, agents say, is networks, out-of-pocket maximums and formularies.

Mind your network

Since provisions of the Affordable Care Act kicked in, insurance carriers can no longer ask people about their medical histories or pre-existing conditions. Because of that, they’re taking on many more people who need lots of medical care.

That leaves carriers exposed to all kinds of risk they were able to avoid before, said Lisa Lettenmaier, a health insurance agent with Health Source Northwest in Portland. They’ve mitigated that risk by forming contracts with smaller groups of providers, such as one hospital system or group of doctors.

These days, carriers often sell plans that are labeled as a preferred provider organization, which traditionally give customers a range of providers to choose from but act more as a health maintenance organization — a plan that requires you to see one physician for most of your care and get other care through referrals from that physician, Lettenmaier said. Today’s narrow network plans often give people only a few options for doctors.

Any providers not considered in-network, meaning the insurer has not negotiated specific rates with that provider, will be much more expensive, and they will not contribute to reaching a person’s out-of-pocket maximum, the highest amount someone has to pay before the insurance plan covers 100 percent of their services.

In fact, a recent study by HealthPocket.com, a website that ranks health insurance plans, found that nearly 20 percent of plans sold to Oregonians via HealthCare.gov offer no coverage for out-of-network providers.

And since there’s no contract with the insurer, out-of-network providers can charge whatever they want for the services, Lettenmaier said.

“It’s their choice,” she said.

Out-of-pocket max: The new deductible

Before the Affordable Care Act, none of a person’s co-payments for medical expenses counted toward their out-of-pocket maximums. For that reason, many people never reached those maximums, said Don Klippenes, the founder of Health Insurance Strategies, Inc., in Bend. The ACA, however, made it so that all out-of-pocket medical expenses (to in-network providers, at least) are applied toward peoples’ out-of-pocket maximums.

For that reason, although there’s a lot of talk about the importance of deductibles, ultimately, the out-of-pocket maximum is the truly important number, he said.

“This is the key number going forward: that max out-of-pocket,” Klippenes said.

Each year, the federal government sets a new out-of-pocket maximum. This year? $6,850.

Make no mistake: The deductible is important, too. That’s the amount a person has to pay before your plan’s benefits kick in. In a cheaper plan, it’ll be higher. In an expensive plan, lower.

Don’t forget the drugs

Several agents warned that carriers have revamped their formularies, the lists of drugs they cover, for 2016. If you need to take certain medications, it’s important that you determine how much they’ll cost under certain policies.

For 2016 open enrollment, the federal government is requiring insurers to post their drug formularies on their websites, and the lists must be updated when any changes are made.

Although people will be able to find the drug lists online, it’s never a bad idea to call the carriers directly and ask about specific drugs you know you’ll need, Lettenmaier said.

— Reporter: 541-383-0304,

tbannow@bendbulletin.com