Gov. Rick Scott has added 100 hospitals — including North Florida Regional Medical Center and several run by the University of Florida — to the list of 29 hospitals already being audited for possible Medicaid fraud by the Agency for HealthCare Administration.

In a letter to Attorney General Pam Bondi, Scott said he is concerned that hospitals and insurance companies are making more money than allowed under state law, overcharging the state for Medicaid and other health services, “and in some instances could constitute Medicaid fraud and even deceptive and unfair trade practices.”

AHCA Secretary Liz Dudek sent a letter to all Florida hospitals and managed care plans participating in the Statewide Medicaid Managed care to certify that none of their contracts exceed 120 percent of the Medicaid fee schedule, Scott said.

“As it stands today, Florida’s insurance companies get an estimated $5 billion from Obamacare and hospitals have made a record $3.75 billion in profits,” Scott wrote.

Scott told Bondi that he's asked Dudek to refer “any contracts where we find suspicion of fraud or abuse to your office for investigation and potential prosecution.”

On Aug. 3, Scott ordered audits on 29 hospitals that failed to meet an Aug. 1 deadline for the requested information. All the Kindred Hospitals were part of that list, including one in Ocala. Shands Live Oak Regional Medical Center in Suwannee County and Lake Butler Hospital in Union County were also on that first list.

The second batch of hospitals responded on time, but warranted an audit nonetheless, Scott said, “because of the nature of the explanations they provided in their responses.”

Those include HCA-owned hospitals including Gainesville's North Florida Regional Medical Center, Lake City Medical Center in Columbia County, Ocala Regional Medical Center and West Marion Community Hospital in Marion County, and Orange Park Medical Center in Clay County. Gov. Scott was CEO of Columbia/HCA until 1997, when he was pressured to resign at the time the corporation was under investigation for overcharging the government.

Also being audited: UF Health Shands Hospital, UF Health Shands Psychiatric Hospital and UF Health Shands Rehab Hospital in Alachua County, and UF Health Jacksonville in Duval County; Shands Lake Shore Regional Medical Center in Columbia County and Shands Starke Regional Medical Center in Bradford County.

“UF Health is committed to working with the Governor and attorney general’s office to help them gather the information requested,” UF officials said in an emailed statement. “We will do everything we can to cooperate in an effort to help the state and citizens of Florida meet their health care needs in the most efficient, effective way possible."

North Florida Regional Medical Center also emailed a prepared statement, suggesting they'll cooperate with auditors:

"Hospital Corporation of America (HCA) responded to AHCA's original request with a letter on behalf of all of our hospitals. HCA did this prior to the requested deadline and, in that same spirit, will work with the government auditors to comply with this request."