Fox

One of the Wall Street Journal’s IPO reporters is evaluating each episode of a new drama airing on Fox, called “Empire,” a show that includes a major plot line about a looming public offering for a record label. The earlier posts in this series are available at this link. The latest post follows:

It was a very important episode this week for “Empire,” the story of the initial public offering of Empire Entertainment, the hip-hop and lifestyle conglomerate run by the brilliant, but ailing, Lucious Lyon.

Investors are flown in from Des Moines, or somewhere like it. The company holds a roadshow, or something like it. The secret of Lucious’s illness is revealed to the family, and it starts to have a serious impact on the IPO process. But Cookie steps up to the challenge, and is rewarded by retaking her place in the family hierarchy, in just about every sense.

Let’s not waste the time we have together and get right into this week’s IPO review. We award points to the show when it does something that’s true to a real-life IPO. We take them away when fiction doesn’t match reality.

The roadshow begins! Or at least, some kind of investor day. Everyone is calling it a “showcase,” and nobody is actually using the R-word. This could be an important distinction. Every IPO has a two-week-ish series of formal pitch meetings just ahead of the offering. This is always called the roadshow. But some IPOs, especially those who are covered under the JOBS Act for smaller companies, as we think Empire Entertainment would be, have even earlier meetings. These are known as “testing the waters” meetings, or “pre-deal roadshows.” Roadshows can be serious events, with cheesy videos and presentations (Lucious bellows: “I want more technology. Holograms!”) at big hotels. Nothing like this, but it’s within the realm of possibility. But pre-deal meetings? Those are very small, usually one-on-one affairs.

-10, just for lack of specificity. And if this was the road show, Lucious, Andre, Vernon and the bankers would be on the road, travelling from New York to Boston to Baltimore to Chicago and San Francisco. So we’re guessing it’s not a road show, and thus not very realistic.

“This investor showcase is make or break for us.” The actual genesis of the event is in question, but this rings true. Empire isn’t a cookie-cutter company that opens restaurants or sells cloud software. It’s a unique story with a unique CEO who is clearly deeply brilliant and motivated, but also highly idiosyncratic. At one point, they note how a big investor isn’t usually drawn to entertainment companies. Face-to-face time with investors could be a major part of selling this deal.

+10, because this is an important nuance. And plus, celebrity CEOs in general tend to draw a crowd. Everyone was super miffed when Mark Zuckerberg didn’t show up to every Facebook IPO meeting. And Jack Ma won plaudits for doing a lot of Alibaba shows.

Meet Terry Shiller. He’s a nice family fella, wants to have a quiet dinner, he manages one of the biggest funds shopping the IPO. “An early commitment from him would mean a huge boost in the company’s valuation,” says Andre. While I’m not sure he would boost the valuation per se, this gets it exactly right that big IPO investors aren’t Gecko-haired Park Avenue wolves, but heads of staid mutual fund companies in Omaha and Chicago. A huge stop for IPOs is Baltimore, where T. Rowe Price and Legg Mason are based, and most deals also go through Kansas City to see folks like Waddell & Reed. It’s maybe a bit odd that Terry came to New York, but even he might enjoy a night at Leviticus.

+10, and I also liked how Lucious’s plan was to have Elle Dallas—apparently Empire’s answer to the Allman Brothers or the Eagles—perform first for all the Baby Boomers attending. And I further loved that Shiller seemed to enjoy the Dire Straits-sampling, IPO-themed hip-hop single performed by Jamal and Hakeem. He especially enjoyed the bikini clad Microwave Ovens.

A reporter for The Wall Street Journal at the showcase? How I wish! But private companies going public absolutely do not invite reporters to pre-deal showcases, roadshows, or any of the above. Unless it was just a party? It is at night. Investor meetings are not at night. Earlier, they said security would be tight: “No fans, no press.” And Hakeem at one point calls it a “private” event for investors, though he still sneaks Naomi Campbell into it, who ends up playing a very convincing media investor. All of this means, we have no idea what is going on with this thing. We noticed that Entertainment Magazine put a story about Empire’s IPO on its cover. Presumably, they wouldn’t do that unless the IPO was on file. In which case, they are in a quiet period! So it’s not a roadshow, it’s not a pre-deal meeting. What is it? We are stumped.

-10, only because where was our invite?? But seriously, we are confused.

Just take a moment to appreciate Cookie. She is both the show’s most outrageous and most grounded character. She embodies the fine line the show walks between telling a very real and important story about the rise of a new American royalty, and delivering a raucus, glizty opera buffo. When her sons are feuding like brats instead of practicing for a very important performance, she reminds them of how far their parents traveled to bring them here. When Elle is slipped drugs by Anika, Cookie immediately admits to Lucious that she’s unable to perform. She delivers a rousing (if illegal, see below) speech to investors when Lucious is too sick.

+5, because IPOs can be a long and hard slog, and someone needs to be the adult in the room.

The Lawyer returns. Lucious is choking half to death, and Mr. Attorney pops in to remind everyone of what’s going on. “There’s a billion dollars in capital out there!”

+2, because though he picks a weird time to suddenly show up, he is right about this. This is why people who are very sick aren’t supposed to lead IPOs.

Cookie delivers an awesome pitch to investors that calls back both to iconic start-up garages and the “Dream” speech and even works in a supply-and-demand joke that Shiller gets. But she says something else: “He’s going to make every last one of you filthy rich.” I feel crummy knocking the speech, which really was remarkable, but this is probably the most not-allowed thing you can say to investors in a formal setting (under the assumption that’s what this was). You cannot offer to make people rich. I know it’s clearly said emotionally, not as some kind of promise in writing. But offerings of soon-to-be-public companies are designed to be very straightforward, and chock full of risk warnings. And definitely not hyped.

-10, because as great as the Lyons are, the risk that retail investors—who are most susceptible to the glamour of the whole thing—buy into the myth and ignore the risks would be high.

There’s Empire the magazine. Empire the jeans. Empire the champagne. Empire the flame thrower! (Kidding about the last one. “Moichendising!”) There are over a dozen profitable business lines, we learn. The company represents performing artists, and athletes too, who generate $32 million in revenue. Lucious wants to put music first, because that is the company’s calling card, and schedules two concerts. “This presentation is about money,” Andre protests. “Music is what is going to get them to invest their millions,” Lucious replies through the speaker phone.

+5, because investors are not robots, they respond to branding—though “the music industry” is hardly one that conjures up images of investors making lots of money. I think Andre is right to emphasize the other businesses, and Cookie later does so too.

Andre is the CFO, which wasn’t clear before. It’s highly unusual to have both a CFO and CEO who are inexperienced running a public company. Many companies with visionary CEOs, like Facebook and Alibaba, appointed veteran CFOs or people with deep business background. That’s not to say Andre is a bad or unqualified CFO, but just that IPOs require a special kind of touch, and some history with investors. Investors make promises that they might not keep, and CFOs have to have some history to know who’s real and who’s not.

-2, and not more, because maybe investors would want the likely future CEO sitting in the CFO chair, unusual as it might be. And it’s possible Empire has a very veteran bean-counter in another C-suite job, much like Alibaba had Joe Tsai, the former CFO, as vice chairman.

Our CFO loses it when his father finally comes clean to the family about his ALS. “The IPO. We have to have a plan!” he screams, before storming out. He takes a cold shower in his clothes. It seems emotionally tone-deaf, and Jamal and Hakeem are stunned at his reaction. But as the CFO of the company, he’s got a lot to worry about now. Liability issues. Insurance premiums. Disclosure to bankers and investors. And he might be the CEO much sooner than he thought.

+5, because we’ve seen this revelation coming for a while, and we’re not surprised does not go well with some people. Running a public company gives investors a stake in your life, too.

Total: +5. This was a rollercoaster, both emotionally and IPO-realism wise, but things are still on track. Maybe “Money For Nothing” should the be theme song of every IPO.