MONTREAL — As a top-two defenseman at age 34, Brad Stuart might not immediately seem like the solution to the Avalanche’s inefficiencies last season on the blue line. But his hometown speaks to Colorado fans as much as his hard-hitting résumé and respect from Avs players.

He’s from Rocky Mountain House, a small city in Alberta, and he’s been beating up on the Avs throughout his NHL career.

Like Avs players, Avs fans will soon appreciate having Stuart on their side. If nothing else, pay attention to Stuart’s skating — his smooth, seemingly effortless stride gets him in position to make plays as well as anyone in the NHL.

“He’s a really steady influence,” said Erik Johnson, who is playing with Stuart as the Avs’ top pairing. “He won a Stanley Cup in Detroit and has been on a lot of winning teams. He’s approaching mid-30s, but he really skates well out there. If you can skate in the league you’re going to be around for a long time, and he can definitely move.”

Stuart came to Colorado from San Jose at a large cost: The Avs sent the Sharks a second-round draft pick in 2016 and a sixth-rounder in 2017. Stuart waived his limited no-trade clause to come to Colorado after the Sharks self-imploded again in the 2014 playoffs after taking a 3-0 series lead over the Los Angeles Kings, the eventual Stanley Cup champions.

“Yeah, I think it was a good time,” Stuart said of getting out of San Jose, the team that chose him third overall in the 1998 draft. “They wanted to make, probably, more changes than they did. First thing I noticed here is, everything is positive; everybody is excited about the season. Reading some of the things going on (in San Jose), it’s a little different atmosphere. I’m excited to be a part of this. It really feels good.”

Stuart is beginning his 15th season, and all but one began with a Western Conference team. He has been a thorn in the Avs’ side while playing for the Sharks (twice), Calgary Flames, Kings and Red Wings. He also played in the East for the Boston Bruins.

At 6-foot-2 and 215 pounds, Stuart has the innate ability to make big hits without warning. Just ask Avs captain Gabe Landeskog, who suffered a concussion early in the 2012-13 lockout-shortened season from a huge neutral-zone check by Stuart in San Jose.

“He’s a threat,” Landes- kog said. “As an opposing forward you know that he’s on the ice, and you have to be aware. He’s like (Niklas) Kronwall of Detroit. You know when he’s on the ice and where he is.”

Avs coach Patrick Roy is happy to have Stuart on his side.

“He’s going to be able to share his past experience, and I’m sure our players will benefit from it,” Roy said.

Stuart is married with two young children and is entering the final year of a salary paying him $3.6 million annually. The family has settled in the Denver area, and Stuart would rather not move his family again.

“This is a really skilled team. The future is bright, and I want to contribute and help out with the younger guys. And moving is far tougher on the family than the player,” Stuart said. “When you know what it feels like to win, you want it back. It’s the best, the ultimate. When you experience that you don’t want to go back to just playing, waiting for hope. You want to be playing when it counts, and I think this team has the ability to play deep into the playoffs, and I want to be a part of that.”

Mike Chambers: mchambers@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikechambers