Commercial real estate developer Donald Trump speaks during the Freedom Summit in Greenville, S.C., on May 9. Reuters

Political newcomers are so 2012.

The latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll from April found some 69% of Americans expressed misgivings about a presidential candidate who is not a politician or has no previous elected experience.

That’s bad news for Ben Carson, Carly Fiorina and possibly Donald Trump, if the celebrity real-estate developer pursues a White House bid next year. It also illustrates how attitudes have shifted from the last presidential race in 2012, when Mr. Trump and former restaurant executive Herman Cain briefly led polls of GOP primary voters.

Americans don’t know who they want to be their next president, but they have distinct opinions about what they want – and don’t want – in the next commander-in-chief. And there are some surprising areas of agreement among partisans about those traits.

The numbers suggest Republicans and Democrats alike are most eager to support candidates who are black, female or military veterans. Likewise, both sets of voters express reservations about political neophytes, tea-party leaders and candidates who lack a college degree.

The college question is particularly problematic for Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker, who left Marquette University before earning a degree. Some 58% of Republicans said they were either “very uncomfortable” or had “some reservations” about a candidate who didn’t graduate from college, compared with the 42% who said they were comfortable with or enthusiastic about a candidate who lacks a degree.

The strong appetite for a female president is good news for Hillary Clinton, the former secretary of state who is the clear favorite to be the next Democratic nominee. Democrats are far more likely to express support for a woman than Republicans are, but three out of four Republicans welcome the idea of a woman running for the White House–early evidence that their opposition has more to do with her political persona than her gender.

The other positive development for Mrs. Clinton: 65% of American adults are comfortable or enthusiastic about supporting a candidate whose family has already occupied the Oval Office. That’s also good news for former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, a leading contender for the GOP nomination who is trying to follow his dad and brother into the White House. The numbers are roughly similar for Republicans and Democrats.

One trend may not matter much in 2016, but it reinforces an abrupt cultural shift: 61% of Americans are either comfortable with, or enthusiastic about, a candidate who is gay or lesbian, up from 43% in December 2006. Here, though, the difference between Republicans and Democrats is stark; Democrats are much more likely to be comfortable with a gay or lesbian candidate.

Overall, the 1,000 adults surveyed were more open to supporting a gay presidential candidate than an evangelical one. But again, the split is sharp between voters from the two major political parties, with Republicans much more accepting of evangelical Christians.

The poll was conducted from April 26-30 and has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.

Just as Americans aren’t terribly eager to support first-time politicians, they remain lukewarm about first-term U.S. senators, as well. After years of maligning President Barack Obama for serving a single term in the Senate, roughly half of all Republicans polled said they were comfortable with the idea of supporting a candidate with a similar resume.

That’s probably not a welcome development to three first-term senators running for the Republican presidential nominations – Ted Cruz of Texas, Rand Paul of Kentucky and Marco Rubio of Florida. But at least they aren’t total newcomers.