More than 123,000 of an expected 160,000 people have signed up for health insurance on the state exchange at a time when fines for not having coverage are set to spike.

More than 123,000 people have signed up for health insurance on Washington’s state exchange during the first month of the 2016 enrollment period.

That’s lower than the 155,000 enrolled at the end of 2015, but in line with state projections of about 160,000 for the third year of the Affordable Care Act, when penalties for forgoing health insurance are set to rise sharply.

“We are running a little higher than expected,” said Michael Marchand, spokesman for the Washington Health Benefit Exchange (WHBE).

People who qualify must sign up by Dec. 23 in order to have coverage that begins on Jan. 1. Open enrollment runs through Jan. 31, 2016.

“It will be interesting to see what happens leading up to Dec. 23,” Marchand said. “That last week is always a big one.”

This year, fines for skipping the ACA’s requirement that all qualified people obtain health insurance will jump to $695 per adult or $347.50 per child under age 18, or 2.5 percent of annual family income, whichever is higher.

This is also the first year that customers using the exchange will send payments directly to their insurance companies, rather than to the state-run program. The shift, which occurred in October, seems to have cut the number of complaints to the Washington state insurance commissioner.

“Our consumer staff reports that they are receiving fewer calls about exchange issues during the current enrollment period as compared to the previous two years,” said Steve Valandra, a spokesman for Commissioner Mike Kreidler.

Complaints have decreased from a few hundred at the end of 2014 to a few dozen in October and November of this year, according to a log by OIC officials. Most complaints revolve around high premium prices, he noted.

Washington’s exchange ranked either average or above average compared with other state programs in customer service in a variety of areas, according to new figures from a survey compiled by the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. On the low end, the state exchange received a mean score of nearly 60 on a 100-point scale for helpfulness of the website, but a high score of more than 89 for consumers’ rating of in-person assistance.

The number of people without health insurance in Washington state has dropped from about 1 million in 2013 to about 600,000, fueled primarily by a huge expansion of Medicaid through the Washington Apple Health Plan.

Washington is among 23 states and Washington, D.C., that run their own exchanges entirely or receive some federal help, while 27 states have programs run by the federal government.

Nationwide, about 10 million people are expected to be covered under the 2010 law that mandated health-insurance coverage for most Americans, according to the latest federal figures.