Obamacare foes in Congress see help for low-income constituents if court rules against law

Most members of Tampa Bay's predominantly Republican congressional delegation would vote to maintain financial aid — at least temporarily — for the 6.4 million Americans at risk of losing their health insurance subsidies if the U.S. Supreme Court rules against the Affordable Care Act.

The ruling, expected this week or next, will determine whether people in states with federally run insurance exchanges are eligible for the subsidies, which help offset the cost of coverage.

A decision against Obamacare might seem like Christmas come early to House Republicans, who have voted more than 50 times to repeal or water down President Barack Obama's signature health law. (The most recent vote took place Thursday.)

But many lawmakers represent thousands of constituents who have been receiving subsidies for two years and now could see that aid disappear.

In Florida, one of 34 states that uses a federal exchange, a decision invalidating the subsidies would leave 1.3 million residents without assistance — and drive up premiums and out-of-pocket costs across the board. That's enough to have even longtime opponents of Obama­care giving serious thought to a contingency plan.

"The Supreme Court will soon make a ruling that could cause millions more Americans to no longer be able to afford their health care through no fault of their own," said Rep. Dennis Ross, a Lakeland Republican whose district includes part of Hillsborough County. "Congress must ensure that these individuals do not have their coverage disrupted."

Among the potential options, lawmakers could tweak the Affordable Care Act to allow subsidies in every state.

"That's the easiest and most direct fix," said Rep. Kathy Castor of Tampa, the lone Democrat in the House from Tampa Bay, voicing an opinion held by other members of the minority party.

But few expect that would happen, given the contentious relationship between Capitol Hill Republicans and the president.

More likely, observers say, would be a vote to temporarily extend the subsidies while GOP lawmakers try to dismantle the law.

That kind of plan could win the support of Rep. Tom Rooney, an Okeechobee Republican whose district includes part of Hillsborough County.

"Once the court has issued its ruling, Congressman Rooney believes that Congress must tailor a specific response to that ruling to ensure that there is a bridge in place for these individuals — who lost their existing plans due to Obamacare and can't afford to pay Obamacare's high costs — until a full replacement is enacted," spokesman Michael Mahaffey said in an email to the Tampa Bay Times.

Rep. David Jolly, an Indian Shores Republican, said he expects to see a "transition package" that would allow people to remain covered until Congress approved a replacement for Obamacare.

But Jolly said the package would have to do more than continue the subsidies. He has been pushing for language that would repeal the so-called individual mandate requiring people to buy health insurance or pay a penalty.

"All I'm suggesting is to repeal the individual mandate and empower individuals to make the health care decisions that are right for them," he said.

Along similar lines, Rep. Gus Bilirakis of Palm Harbor pointed to the "off-ramp from Obamacare" proposed this year by House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Fred Upton.

"I would support provisions to make coverage more affordable by eliminating the costly mandates in the president's health care law, and I would support tax credits to help those who need it get the coverage that is right for them, their families, and their budgets," Bilirakis said in a statement.

But Castor said dismantling the law would be going against the wishes of voters.

"All you have to do is look at the numbers of constituents in Republican congressional districts in Florida (receiving subsidies)," she said. "Those are large numbers of our neighbors who already voted with their pocketbooks. As a member of Congress, you simply can't ignore that."

Contact Kathleen McGrory at kmcgrory@tampabay.com.