Cristiano Ronaldo has ice put on his left knee after a training session of Portugal in Campinas, Brazil. Associated Press

It is bad karma in sports to root for injuries of any kind for an opponent, but no one within the U.S. soccer community will shed many tears if reports of Portugal superstar Cristiano Ronaldo’s ailing knee prove true.

According to the Portuguese Sports Daily Record, Ronaldo cut his training short Wednesday to ice a knee that has been bothering him for the past several weeks. That isn’t out of the ordinary, and Portugal’s soccer association didn’t release any statement on the matter.

However, a not-completely-fit Ronaldo would be truly troublesome for Portugal, one of the favorites coming into the tournament but who have been bitten by the injury bug since the opening whistle Monday against Germany. Defender Fabio Coentrao and striker and Hugo Almeida suffered leg injuries in the first half that will keep them from playing Sunday. Coentrao appears out for the tournament and Almeida is out for the group stage. In addition, defender Pepe is suspended after being sent off for head-butting Thomas Muller.

The U.S. has its own injury issues. Jozy Altidore is out with a pulled hamstring and Clint Dempsey has a broken nose, but no one will ever confuse Altidore and Dempsey with Ronaldo and Coentrao.

Ronaldo was visibly struggling at the end of the game with Germany and also in recent training sessions.

A spokesman for Portugal couldn’t immediately be reached for comment.

Wednesday was an off day for the U.S. team, which landed in São Paulo, at 4 a.m. Tuesday. The Americans held a light late-afternoon workout before returning to their downtown hotel.

Klinsmann was as optimistic as possible about Altidore’s future in the tournament Tuesday evening though it appeared bleak. “All you do as a coach is give him a positive hug and tell him, ‘Listen, you’ll be back and stay positive; you’ll be back,”” he said. “‘Don’t cut if off now.’ And that’s what I told him right away in the locker room as well. I keep him positive and we have big hope that he’s coming back in this tournament.”

As for who replaces Altidore, Aron Johannsson seems to be the most likely candidate. He replaced Altidore Monday night and played a serviceable, though hardly outstanding match.

“I don’t want to go too deep into details, because obviously we want Portugal to guess a little bit as well, but you know when one of your key players is not available, does it change certain things? Absolutely it does,” Klinsmann said. “Jozy is a very strong key player in our group, so we’ll think about the right way to handle that situation. We’ll still field 11, you know; we’re not a man down.”

Klinsmann said defender Matt Besler, who strained a hamstring, is fine for Sunday. Dempsey may play with some sort of mask to protect his broken nose. The challenge will be breathing in the heat and humidity of Manaus.