I just watched a news report on changes that police agencies are making nationally in response to all of the recent controversy. I want to let you know how we stack up. But first of all, I would like to emphasize that hate and bias have no place in policing. Racism will not be tolerated at the sheriff's office.

Other agencies are starting efforts to expose their officers to cultural awareness and anti-bias training. Here, every one of our deputies goes through anti-bias training in the academy, and then mandatory cultural awareness training upon their employment, and on an on-going basis.

Other jurisdictions are attempting to put more of their officers through crisis intervention training. This is intense training that helps officers to verbally de-escalate encounters with people in mental health crisis, and reduces the use of force. In Boulder County we began the effort over 10 years ago to put all of our deputies through this training. We are beginning to use "mental health first aid" training in an on-going basis. We have also recently received a grant with Mental Health Partners to establish clinical first responders, who can go to scenes and assist officers and clients with these encounters.

Advertisement

A number of police agencies are just now deciding to equip more of their officers with "less-lethal" options (Tasers, pepper spray, etc.). These intermediate weapons help bridge the gap between the need to fight with an assaultive suspect, and the use of deadly force. They lessen the frequency and use of deadly force. We have required that our patrol deputies have a less-lethal weapon with them at all times for over a decade. Frequently, the mere threat of their use ends the confrontation with no force needed.

The public is calling for outside investigations of police shootings and deaths. In Boulder County we have been using a multi-agency investigative team for over two decades. The independent eye of the district attorney's office is involved, and the DA reviews the final report to insure these cases fall within legal standards. The results of those investigations are routinely released to the public.

Police agencies nationally are trying to build relationships and trust with communities of color. In Boulder county that is largely the Latino community. I am very proud of our relationship with the people and organizations that represent the interests of Latinos in Boulder County, especially El Comite and the Colorado Immigrant Rights Coalition. Our recent work together on immigration holds and detainer issues hopefully demonstrates our commitment to protecting the rights of everyone in our county. I am also proud of the large number of Hispanic employees at the sheriff's office, and their influence on our internal culture.

Finally, the "magic bullet" everyone is discussing are body and dash cameras. It seems like an easy solution, but is actually very complicated and expensive. We make tens of thousands of contacts every year. All of that data will need to be downloaded, stored, searchable, and retrievable. This will require a large data base and new employee(s) to administer it and answer all of the open record and subpoena requests. It will cost hundreds of thousands of dollars. There are of course privacy issues that need to be worked out, and obviously if a camera fails, a conspiracy theory will be hatched. The body and dash camera program and funding are all still a work-in-progress for us.

Our value statement and mission stress the protection of human life as our number one priority. Our values also stress the importance of diversity and treating everyone with respect.

Look, we are not perfect. We are people. There are over 200 deputies here in an organization of about 400 employees. What I do know is that there are heroes who work here who risk their lives to protect our community. Heroes who carry people out of burning buildings, perform CPR successfully saving lives, talk a despondent man out of the shotgun he is holding to his chest, and give up their sack lunch to a destitute old man living in an empty house (all true and recent stories). I know we try to reduce the use of deadly force through training and alternative methods, to be open about investigations, and to build trust with the communities we serve.

The recent protests, the "F... the Police" chants, they are indeed hurtful and as hateful as the behavior they protest. They are coming from people who do not know our hearts, or understand our motives.

Joe Pelle is sheriff of Boulder County.