Brad Pitt – or Bradley Pitts – appeared on 'Between Two Ferns' to promote his latest film 'Fury.' True to form, host Zach Galifianakis did not hold back, asking the star plenty of awkward and hilarious questions.

To avoid the morality police, some Iranian women are dressing like men

With eye on South China Sea, China's neighbors weave new web of security

After a rapid-fire series of uncomfortable questions, Brad Pitt leaned over and spat his gum into Zach Galifianakis’s eye.

This week, “Hangover” actor Mr. Galifianakis added Mr. Pitt – or Bradley Pitts, as the comedian put it – to his roster of celebrity guests on “Between Two Ferns,” a web video series hosted on Funny Or Die.

Pitt appeared on the show to promote his latest film, “Fury” a WWII picture directed by David Ayer. The film grossed $23.5 million in its opening weekend and has earned largely positive reviews from critics.

Recommended: How well do you know your family sitcoms?

“When does that come out?” Galifianakis asked. Before Pitt could answer, he followed up. “On DVD?”

“Between Two Ferns” is a parody talk show on Funny Or Die, a video website from Will Ferrell and Adam McKay, comedians who co-wrote and stared in “Step Brothers.”

Galifianakis, the show's host, has also interviewed Justin Bieber, Richard Branson, Bruce Willis, and Sean Penn on the web series. Galifianakis’s awkward or intrusive questions that often leave celebrity guests speechless have won the show millions of views. And this episode did not disappoint.

One particularly uncomfortable moment followed Galifianakis’s comparison of Pitt and his wife, actress Angelina Jolie, to Ross and Rachel from the classic NBC sitcom “Friends.” Pitt’s ex-wife Jennifer Aniston played the character of Rachel. Galifianakis added salt to the wound with a clip from the sitcom’s theme song.

The episode offered another surprise about halfway through with a guest appearance by comedian Louis C.K. So far, this installment has received more than eight million views.

The most notable episode of “Between Two Ferns” featured President Barack Obama, who appeared on the show in March 2014, to promote the Affordable Care Act. Galifianakis opened the show by asking President Obama about Thanksgiving turkey pardons and Dennis Rodman’s role in US diplomatic efforts with North Korea.

Web traffic to Healthcare.gov reportedly soared after the episode ran, and the six-minute clip received about 25 million views on Funny or Die’s site. The segment also won an Emmy for outstanding short-format live-action entertainment program.