PLAINSBORO — Citing rising costs and reduced government reimbursements for health care, University Medical Center of Princeton at Plainsboro has eliminated 19 full-time positions at the hospital in the last few weeks, a hospital spokesman confirmed today.

“We have reduced our costs in many areas,” said hospital spokesman Andrew Williams in a statement. The layoffs this week brings to 25 the number of staff reductions this year, he said.

“We are adjusting our staffing levels in areas where we are confident that we can redesign our process and continue to deliver outstanding levels of care,” he said.

The changes reflect an ongoing review that the health care system does to reduce costs while maintaining good care and satisfied patients, Williams said. He said University Medical Center and other hospitals struggle to meet patient needs with lower government reimbursement. The Plainsboro hospital opened in 2012.

“An increasing number of patients are using PHCS’s services, but our costs to provide care are also increasing,” Williams said. “Like many health care institutions, we have been impacted by significant decreases in reimbursement rates.”

According to a memo obtained by The Times sent from CEO Barry Rabner to hospital medical staff on Aug. 12, Medicare and Medicaid pay for approximately 50 percent of the care that the hospital provides. Due to a 2 percent cut in Medicare reimbursement the hospital has seen a decrease in reimbursements totaling nearly $2 million, according to the memo. At the same time hospital costs have increased. There has been a 31 percent increase for power costs and a 9 percent increase in the cost of medications, the memo states.

Rabner states in the memo that the hospital is focused on working efficiently — flexing staffing levels based on the number of patients.

“We are working hard in other areas as well but our efforts to date have not brought us the cost savings we need,” Rabner said in the memo. “We have now reached the point where despite all our efforts, we unfortunately need to reduce our work force.”

Williams said that the staffing change directly impacts less than 1 percent of Princeton HealthCare System’s employees.

“Princeton HealthCare System continuously reviews all aspects of our operations so that we can enhance the quality of the care we provide, increase patient satisfaction and reduce costs,” Williams said.

Last year the health care system announced the elimination of 45 full-time positions, but at the same time they said they had increased the number of total employees, to 3,134.

Jenna Pizzi may be reached at jpizzi@njtimes.com. Follow her on Twitter @JennaPizzi. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.