Emergency meeting Who: Food Not Bombs When: 6:30 p.m., Sunday Where: Main Santa Cruz Post Office steps, 850 Front St. Why: Discuss alternatives to restore missing homeless services

SANTA CRUZ >> The feeding program Food Not Bombs hoped to physically draw attention to the plight of the homeless Santa Cruz with its second free outdoor brunch where Highway 1 and Highway 9 intersect Thursday.

A Santa Cruz County grand jury report, which was released publicly at about the same time as cars were flowing by dozens partaking in fruit and muffins at one of the county’s busiest intersection, had a similar aim.

“This is just highlighting the instability of the social service crisis in Santa Cruz and really in the whole country,” said Food Not Bombs co-founder Keith McHenry. “The Food Not Bombs thing is that we think that broadly speaking, this is a wealthy community and nobody should have to live on the streets.”

Both Food Not Bombs and the grand jury report offered solutions to what they saw as the greatest problems facing an estimated 3,500 people without their own homes and 80 percent unsheltered across the county, according to the latest available statistics. The former plans to escalate its free meal offerings, mobile shower service, possible portable bathroom rentals and more, as the area’s largest homeless shelter faces a major cut in services July 1.

The grand jury report urges area homeless-serving agencies to include emergency shelter are part of their strategies, not just focusing on permanent supportive housing efforts. Targeted agencies include Encompass Community Services’ River Street Shelter and the three Homeless Services Center shelters, individually aimed at short-term, family, and transitional housing clients.

A 100-bed National Guard Armory also serves as an emergency winter shelter from November to April.

“Emergency shelters can be an important entry point for the homeless in beginning or continuing the process of rebuilding their lives and accessing services which may lead to stable housing,” the report found.

Santa Cruz County, the cities of Santa Cruz, Capitola and Scotts Valley also are urged to increase emergency shelter on a prioritized basis, find a more permanent location for the winter shelter, allocate additional funds for case managers and seek out more emergency shelter grant funding.

Center Executive Director Jannan Thomas, in response to the report, said she agreed particularly with the concern about insufficient case management. Potential relief on the horizon may come in the form of a legislative bill that would allow case management services to be billed to the Affordable Care Act, she said.

“We in the county have a shortage of case management services, which is why we haven’t been able to use the housing vouchers, 50 of them. That also means that those 50 people could have moved out of the shelter, if we had the resources,” Thomas said. “I think it’s important for people to match their expectations to the amount of resources that are available.”

Advertisement

The Homeless Service Center is scheduled to discontinue day services ranging from daily meals and showers to bathrooms and mail, and closure of its nearly 50-bed Paul Lee Loft, comes due to about a $600,000 expected budget shortfall.

Other of the program’s services, such as its family and interim-stay shelters, are expected to remain. The financial problems are largely due to the non-renewal of a $350,000 U.S. Housing and Urban Development Emergency Solutions Grant, which the center had consistently received for years, officials said.

Officials from the state Housing and Community Development department, which administers the Emergency Solutions Grant, said they plan to meet with Homeless Services Center leaders on June 18 to discuss the grant’s loss, said Deputy Director of External Affairs Evan Gerberding. The center’s application did not include some information requested of it, she said.

“That is not to say they did not submit data, they did, but not the specific data that was requested in the NOFA (Notice of Funding Availability),” Gerberding wrote in an email. “As such, we could not equitably compare it to other applicants that did provide the data that was requested.”

Thomas said that those involved with her organization are focusing much of their attention on finding funding to keep the services and shelter open for some or part of the coming year. No alternative state or federal grants are open for application at the moment, she said.

Some 28 Homeless Services Center employees were notified of a pending layoff due to the cuts, center board President Claudia Brown said.

Emergency meeting

Who: Food Not Bombs

When: 6:30 p.m., Sunday

Where: Steps of Santa Cruz Main Post Office, 850 Front St.

Why: Discuss alternatives to restore missing homeless services