Seventy-four couples clasped each others’ hands, gazed into their partners’ eyes and ran their fingers gently over their rings.

“I promise to be true to you in good times and in bad, in sickness and in health. I will continue to love you and honor you all the days of my life,” each one said.

They wore suits and sparkling dresses, rather than tuxedos and wedding gowns — and the words they spoke were familiar. To celebrate Valentine’s Day at Seton Hall University yesterday, couples who had been married as recently as 2011 or for 30, 40 and even 50 years gathered to renew their vows in the opulent setting of the Chapel of the Immaculate Conception on the South Orange campus.

As they stood side-by-side in the chapel’s pews during a special mass led by the Rev. Warren Hall, they kissed their brides and grooms, organ music played and bells rang. They joined in song and prayer and candles were lit.

Some wore red shoes in deference to the holiday, which was further celebrated in a reception where couples’ photos scrolled across a video screen and first dance songs, including the Carpenters’ “Close to you,” made up the playlist.

That chapel is where Kimberly Capadona and Juan Trillo were married 10 years ago. They met at Seton Hall Law School and had their first date on Valentine’s Day 2000 — which Capadona did not realize was a date at all.

After attending a basketball game together, Trillo invited her out to dinner in SoHo, where a friend was a chef at a restaurant.

“I became very shy at that point,” says Capadona, who describes herself mockingly as “an angry lawyer” unused to talking about romance. “We were such good friends, we were out every weekend with all our friends together. It was a shock but a pleasant one.”

They were engaged in 2003 and married the next year at their alma mater, where Capadona also received her undergraduate degree. They live together in Jersey City and are planning a trip back to Italy to relive their honeymoon for their tenth anniversary.

“My husband is my very best friend,” Capadona says, tearing up as she thinks about their bond.

“He’s selfless, he’s kind and you know he’s just the type of person you want in your corner.”

“I always look to my parents who have been married for over 40 years for inspiration,” she adds. “They’re in love today and I always wanted that for myself.”

Betsey and Matt Sheprow of Sea Girt serve as a reminder that Valentine’s Day can be a time to cherish all relationships, not just romantic ones. They coordinated with six other couples, with whom they have stayed friends since their college days in the 70s, to attend the event.

“We forged this beautiful friendship and here we are 40 years later,” Betsey says. “We lived together after college, we were in each others weddings, buried parents, celebrated births.”

“Now we celebrate our childrens’ weddings together.”

Marie and George Kalosieh have just that kind of long-term relationship that inspires couples like Capadona and Trillo and the Sheprows. This year, they celebrate their 50th anniversary.

George has just one Valentine’s Day wish for his wife. “I hope the next 50 are as good as the last 50,” he says.

RELATED COVERAGE

• Valentine's Day in NJ: 10 restaurants with special menus, seating still available

• Snow storm leaves florists feeling unloved ahead of Valentine's Day