Photo

MONDAY PUZZLE — Mondays are a drag, aren’t they? After a restful weekend, the last thing anyone — and by that I mean me — wants to get into first thing on a Monday is a political argument, or to have to fend off unnecessary comments about things that are really beyond the scope of a blog like Wordplay.

Today’s puzzle by Timothy Polin wanders into unusual territory for a crossword puzzle that runs in a newspaper, especially when you consider that most papers started running these puzzles as a way for people to get away from the political discourse in the rest of the pages. Nevertheless, Mr. Polin’s puzzle mentions four U.S. PRESIDENTS who represented two of the many United States political parties (cue “Both Sides Now”) and so there is no need for anyone to feel left out or unduly picked on. You would think I wouldn’t even need to mention that, but I am going ahead and putting it out there as part of the highly successful “Preempt the Enraged Emails” business strategy that I have adopted.

Anyway, this was a smooth and easy solve, with some lovely entries that have absolutely nothing to do with politics, like KARMA (O.K., that one might be close), SCRUM, TROLLED, MWAH, POESY, IT’S ON ME, NOT A SOUL, SOFT-BOILED and SWAGGERS. The PRESIDENTS come into it in the theme, which is a totally innocent list of eponymous things — OBAMACARE, REAGANOMICS, BUSHISM and HOOVERVILLE — that we all know about and have no need to belabor in the comments, because we all remember that this is not the place for it, right? If you want to talk political views, please feel free to go visit Nicholas Kristof. He loves that stuff.

As I was saying, this was a lovely way to start the week, and I thank Mr. Polin for a smooth yet heart-stopping puzzle that I am positive won’t cause any trouble at all in the comments.

Let’s hear from him.

Constructor’s Notes:

Sometimes you just get lucky. There was a tiny pool of theme entries (only five that I could find) to draw from for this puzzle. Four of those were solid; the other was an outlier. That the four cohesive answers matched up as they did, with an appropriate revealer, was where good fortune came into play. What was the unsuitable answer? There’s an overt reference to it somewhere in the grid. TEDDY (BEAR)! P.S. Had TEDDY BEAR been suitable, I would have paired it with OBAMACARE (more length luck) and skipped PRESIDENT altogether. This theme would probably work without a revealer.

Please rise for the totally patriotic playing of our national anthem.

Your thoughts? The ones that have nothing to do with politics, I mean.