University of Illinois trustees Thursday approved a nearly $100,000 bonus for outgoing UIC Chancellor Paula Allen-Meares, who earlier this week completed her sometimes rocky tenure as the campus’ top official.

The bonus payment, which is in addition to her $437,244 annual salary as chancellor, has rankled some faculty members as the public university faces possible budget cuts this year.

Allen-Meares was appointed in 2009 and given an initial five-year contract. Board members decided in 2013 to extend her contract an additional year, to this month, but not retain her as chancellor beyond then. At that time, they also decided she would be eligible for bonus pay at the end of her term.

“Why would you give money to someone who you basically didn’t renew?” said UIC English professor Lennard Davis, a member of the faculty union’s bargaining committee. “There is no excuse for giving her that kind of money. When we negotiate with the university, they cry poor. When they negotiate with themselves, they say there is money.”

But U. of I. President Robert Easter said the payment is justified. The university recently began offering its top officials bonus wages on top of base salaries, a practice more common in the private sector and one designed to put a greater emphasis on performance than longevity.

“She had goals that we agreed upon, and she made progress in those areas,” said Easter, who recommended the amount that the board approved at its meeting Thursday. “She earned what she received. I am very comfortable with this.”

Allen-Meares was eligible for up to $115,000 in bonus pay. Easter decided on $98,440, which is to be paid within 30 days.

Allen-Meares could not be reached for comment. She did not attend Thursday’s board meeting.

Easter said he evaluated Allen-Meares’ performance based on nine goals that she set for herself last year. The goals included increasing diversity in employee searches, reporting to the board on graduation rates, determining the impact the Affordable Care Act may have on hospital systems, recruiting more out-of-state and international undergraduates and working to create a brand identity for the campus.

In an email to UIC students, faculty and staff Wednesday — her last day as chancellor — Allen-Meares said it had been a “pleasure and honor” to serve.

“There is tremendous spirit and pride among the UIC community,” she wrote. “I am grateful that I had an opportunity to work with all of you who contribute in so many ways to make this university great.”

Allen-Meares, 66, took over at UIC in 2009 after leading the University of Michigan School of Social Work for 15 years. She had the difficult task of working for four bosses in six years, as scandals led to turnover in the U. of I. president position.

On Thursday, the board of trustees approved hiring her replacement, Michael Amiridis, currently the provost at the University of South Carolina in Columbia. He will take over as chancellor March 16. Until then, interim provost Eric A. “Rick” Gislason will serve as interim chancellor.

UIC is the largest college in the city, with a $2 billion budget, 27,500 students, and nearly 2,000 faculty.

According to her original contract, Allen-Meares now will join the U. of I. faculty, with an initial annual salary of $380,000 — including $285,000 in base pay for a nine-month appointment plus a summer stipend. She will not be required to teach courses in her first year but will be required to teach four courses annually in subsequent years. Her background is in social work.Allen-Meares also will have the title of chancellor emerita.

Under Allen-Meares’ leadership, UIC’s enrollment increased by more than 2,000 students and research funding grew by nearly 14 percent to more than $388 million, according to the campus. She was an advocate for bringing the Obama Presidential Library to UIC, and the campus is one of four finalists. She also led efforts to increase student and faculty diversity, and opened an Office of Diversity.

The six-year graduation rate for full-time freshmen increased to 60 percent this year, up 3 percentage points from last year, she said.

But her tenure was not without challenges. The faculty formed a union under her watch and last year held a two-day strike. The faculty Senate voted no confidence in her leadership in August.

UIC physiology professor Brenda Russell, a former associate vice chancellor, said a bonus payment could make sense if Allen-Meares were retiring, but she said it didn’t seem justified since she will remain employed by the university. While she called Allen-Meares “highly experienced,” she said the university “can’t afford” the payment.

“She is getting a bonus and then getting an over-scale faculty salary,” Russell said. “The governor says shared sacrifice. It doesn’t seem the board of trustees has listened to any sharing of sacrifice.”

But Kouros Mohammadian, vice chair of the UIC faculty Senate, called the bonus “not really a big issue.” He was among the faculty members who voted no confidence in her leadership in August.

“In the past several months after the vote of no confidence, she has been positive for the UIC and has worked hard to leave a good legacy,” said Mohammadian, a professor of transportation engineering. “I don’t feel bad about it. I know that some of my colleagues won’t feel the same, especially those adjunct professors with $30,000 to $40,000 salaries. You know in university environments, we have things like this.”

jscohen@tribpub.com

Twitter @higherednews