PITCH OF THE GAME

Josh Sborz threw 54 pitches in his four innings of scoreless relief, but the biggest might have come in the seventh inning. At 4-4 with a runner at second and two outs, Sborz worked the count full to Florida’s No. 4 hitter JJ Schwarz. The Virginia reliever then blew a fastball by Schwarz to end the inning.

STAR OF THE GAME

Kenny Towns drove in Virginia’s final three runs to propel the Cavaliers back into the championship series. The senior third baseman delivered a two-run double in the fifth inning to give his team a 4-3 lead, then produced the game-winning run with a seventh-inning sacrifice.

KEY DECISION

After Daniel Pinero singled with two outs in the fifth, Florida coach Kevin O’Sullivan elected to bring in left-hander Kirby Snead to face Matt Thaiss, a left-handed hitter. Thaiss singled Pinero to third, and both Virginia runners scored on Towns’ line-hugging double to left that put Virginia ahead 4-3.

QUIRKY MOMENT

With runners on first and second in Monday’s game against Florida, Sborz managed to knock down a line shot by Harrison Bader and recovered to get a forceout that helped him get out of the inning without allowing a run. Facing the same situation in Saturday’s sixth inning, Sborz got Buddy Reed to hit a one-hopper back to the mound that had double play written all over it. This time, Sborz bobbled the ball and had to settle for getting Reed at first. The next hitter, Mike Rivera, singled to center to tie the game.

DEFINING MOMENT

Pinero’s sacrifice bunt put runners at second and third with one out in the seventh and left O’Sullivan having to decide whether to face Thaiss or Towns. The Florida coach elected for the latter, intentionally walking Thaiss to set up a righty-righty matchup between Taylor Lewis and Towns. Towns then did what veterans are supposed to do, driving a pitch to deep right field for a sacrifice fly that put the Cavaliers up by a run.

OUR TAKE

Few observers expected Virginia, a team that started May in danger of not making its conference tournament, to wind up in the championship series when the NCAA tournament began. The Cavaliers might be longer on grit and guts than talent, but they again are one of the last two teams standing in Omaha.

THEY SAID IT

“This group has a lot of pride. They have a lot of pride in playing for each other. They’re going to give it everything they’ve got. They’re going to be prepared. It’s been a lot of fun to coach them.” — Virginia coach Brian O’Connor