District using money to provide training on transgender issues to staff

The Boulder Valley School District isn't funding leadership conferences for minority students this school year, although it has promised to work with event coordinators to look for alternatives.

The one-day leadership conferences, organized by volunteers, are hosted annually in the spring at the University of Colorado for five student groups — American Indian, African American, Asian, Latino and LGBTQ students.

Funding comes from the district, CU and private donors. The conferences have been held for about a dozen years, with goals that include creating cultural connections, networking and celebrating and supporting student voices.

Boulder Valley in the last few years has provided $20,000 for the conferences, which mainly covers busing the students to CU.

David Young, who's been involved in planning the American Indian conference and has grandchildren in the district, said the events are an opportunity for students to come together and get support.

"This is something children of color need," he said. "The district is saying it's unimportant. They're writing it off. What they're doing is just wrong."

District officials estimated about 700 students altogether attend each year, with attendance varying by group.

Individual event coordinators declined to be quoted but generally said they aren't happy with the district's decision — yet still want to work with the district to find a way to hold conferences this school year.

Advertisement

Echoing the desire to work with the district to continue the conferences this school year was Randy McCrillis, director of the CU Unity and Engagement Center. CU provides space and some funding.

"They're a way for us to increase the leadership capacity of underrepresented students and get students introduced to the campus," he said.

Moratorium on funding

Ron Cabrera, Boulder Valley's assistant superintendent of instructional services and equity, said he decided this school year to place a one-year moratorium on funding.

His office's total discretionary budget is only $22,000, he said, and the district decided to use the money this year for training.

The district is spending $20,000 to provide training to principals, support staff and teachers on supporting transgender students. The goal is to improve consistency among schools and better implement a transgender policy approved in 2012, officials said.

"The district used to have more money for equity and instructional training," Cabrera said. "Now, we need to reinvent some things."

He added that, while the conferences were well received by participants, there wasn't much follow-up or a good way to measure effectiveness.

District expectations going forward include taking what's learned and acting on it in schools or the community, coordination between the events and the schools, and collaboration with community groups and organizations.

A one-year moratorium gives the district and organizing groups time to evaluate the conferences and decide if there's a better way to design them, he said.

He added that the district is open to working with the organizers this year on alternatives to keep the conferences going, but it can't commit $20,000.

$20,000 for transgender training

The transgender training was prompted by requests from advocacy groups and a complaint from a parent. The parent said that, last year, her children didn't have a good experience at a Boulder elementary school because the school wasn't prepared to support children on gender identity issues.

To provide the training, Cabrera said, the district contracted with Sara Staley and Bethy Leonardi of the Queer Endeavor, an initiative housed in CU's School of Education. The initiative is "focused on supporting teachers and school communities around topics of gender and sexual diversity."

Principals attended training sessions in August, and training for teachers will be offered during the school year.

"This training opens up a broad conversation about equity, about how we apply our learning to kids who are marginalized," Cabrera said.

Amy Bounds: 303-473-1341, boundsa@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/boundsa