Related Stories Almost 13 years later, CU's record $250M gift slow to reach fruition

While Gerald Stopa uses his DynaVox, a computer-like device that assists people with cognitive disabilities, Jeffery Hoehl observes the way he scrolls up and down across the screen.

"Post a new Facebook status," the automated DynaVox voice says inside Stopa's room at a "smart home" in Boulder. Stopa shows Hoehl how he uses the device for social media, entertainment and his job at a brewery.

Hoehl, 32, makes his rounds through the eight bedrooms at the home, which was designed and built with many types of technology to improve the lives of people with cognitive disabilities.

As part of research for his thesis in the computer science department at the University of Colorado, Hoehl is interviewing people with cognitive disabilities, caretakers and family members to learn more about how they use technology and the Internet. Through his conversations, Hoehl hopes to learn what improvements he and other computer scientists can make to technology to make it more useful and relevant to people with such disabilities.

His research is funded by the Boulder-based Coleman Institute for Cognitive Disabilities, which was founded in 2001 after the university received a gift commitment for $250 million from Bill and Claudia Coleman. The house -- the Bob and Judy Charles SmartHome -- is owned by Imagine!, a Front Range-based nonprofit organization that works with people with developmental disabilities and partners with the Coleman Institute.

Advertisement

Though the Colemans haven't yet been able to fulfill their $250 million commitment, the Coleman Institute is getting by with cash gifts from the Colemans and competitive grant money, said institute director David Braddock. According to Board of Regents documents and Braddock, the Colemans have given a little less than $25 million since 2001, just under 10 percent of their original commitment, which was to be paid over five years.

The Coleman Institute has hosted 13 national conferences on cognitive disabilities and technology since 2001. More than 500 people from 40 states attended the 2013 conference, Braddock said, and the conference is starting to attract more international attendees each year.

The conferences are a chance for all parties involved in cognitive disability research to get together, brainstorm, hear about new ideas and learn about the latest developments in technology.

"When that conference happens, between (Boulder) and Denver becomes the focal point in not just the United States, but outside the United States, for people to come here and learn what's going to happen next in the field of cognitive disabilities," said Imagine! chief executive officer Mark Emery. "Coleman, for us, brings in so (many) lofty, thought-provoking issues."

The Coleman Institute has given funding to 14 departments and areas on several of CU's campuses for research and work on cognitive disabilities and technology, including in the computer science, electrical engineering, speech, language and hearing and psychology departments on the Boulder campus. The institute also provides funding for disability services on the Boulder campus.

In 2013, the Coleman Institute wrote and released "The Rights of People with Cognitive Disabilities to Technology and Information Access." Since October, more than 120 organizations have endorsed the declaration, which asserts the rights of all people to technology and information.

The institute also funds fellowships for graduate students, faculty and postdoctoral candidates to work on technologies and other efforts for people with cognitive disabilities.

Hoehl, one of the Coleman fellows, is working to make using a computer, the Internet and other types of technology simpler and more effective for people with cognitive disabilities.

"When we talk to people with cognitive disabilities, the glaring statement that's made is, 'It's just too complicated and it's hard to use, and we just want it simpler,'" Hoehl said.

One of the challenges researchers like Hoehl face is the array of conditions encompassed under the umbrella of cognitive disabilities -- including intellectual disabilities, autism, Down syndrome, mental illness, stroke, brain injury, Alzheimer's disease and dementia.

Part of Hoehl's research is talking with people with various cognitive disabilities to find out what technological changes would help them specifically.

The other part of his research includes creating a new website that will process other websites, making it easier for people with cognitive disabilities to read or navigate a webpage. The new website can remove advertisements or flashy videos and sounds, or simplify the text on the page to make it easier to read.

"You can consume the information you're looking for without the mess and the craziness of the web," Hoehl said.

Many tasks people used to complete in person or on paper are now completed online, Hoehl noted. Applying for jobs, purchasing airline tickets, sharing pictures with friends and getting health insurance -- nearly everything can be done online today.

Hoehl worries that the roughly 28 million people in America with a cognitive disability are being left behind as technology advances, and that's a problem. As a problem-solver and computer scientist, Hoehl is working to find ways for everyone to be included as technology advances.

"It's really everything," he said. "Almost every part of our life has shifted to be online. If you don't have access, it's going to be a big deal."

Contact Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta.