Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Louisville mentor Charles Holley's life of giving back to the youth in his community is remembered by his mother Joyce Jeter.

A portrait of Louisville mentor Charles Holley who dedicated his life to giving back to youth and touched the lives of many west end teens. (Photo: Photo contributed by family)

Most of the mourners in the overfilled Baptist church in Louisville on the cool March evening had no idea the extent of what the man in the casket had done.

But a small group of boys and young men who sat scattered among the grieving knew firsthand the influence of Charles "C-II" Holley II.

"C-II's boys" they were called, all mentored by the 49-year-old at some point in the last 20 years. Some called him Unc. To others he was Pops, II, or Uncle II. For most, Holley's guiding presence and dedication made him more like a father.

One by one, they went to the front of the church to share how Holley shaped their lives. From broken homes, the boys were taught structure. From poverty, they were shown opportunity. Often without anyone who cared, the boys had a champion.

As the service ended, his boys left their seats to stand behind the casket. Six grabbed its handles and carried their mentor from the church, the rest following close behind.

LeMondre Philpot, one of the six, at first resisted Holley's help 15 years ago when he was 12. But when he got into trouble at school, Holley was there, calling him every day. Philpot changed his mind.

"I'm glad I did, because it's the best thing that ever happened to me," Philpot said. "God put him in my life, and he really turned my life around."

A feeling of loss

There are moments Holley's mother, Joyce Jeter, knows simply won't come; her son's 50th birthday party this month; another surprise chocolate bar from him on a rough day; the sight of him taking the recycling to the curb at her Russell neighborhood home.

It's been just over a month since she found Holley dead of a heart attack on Feb. 27 in her home, where he lived.

She knows some of his boys are hurting and feel lost, she said. They've texted and called "Big Momma" since his death. She can't put a number to how many he's helped over the years.

Holley was just 24, his mother estimates, when he first began mentoring. A worker at Seven Counties Services — Jeter can't remember who — first asked if her son would be willing to help some kids.

Over the years, Holley took on dozens of pre-teen and teenage boys, many of whom were growing up poor in fractured families.

He bought them school supplies and winter coats, bikes and shoes and dinners after Sunday church. Sometimes they called in the middle of the night, broken down on the side of the road or simply needing to talk. If their grades slipped, they heard Holley's disappointment. When they graduated, Holley rented a truck and moved them in to college.

The boys were always in and out of the house, said Holley's older brother Cydric Smith. He runs into grown C-II boys around town, he said. One is Smith's mechanic, who Holley started helping when the boy's caretaker, his grandmother, was dying.

"He told you that you could do it, and he made you believe you could do it," Smith said.

The brothers opened up an events-based bartending and serving business in addition to their other jobs in the late 1980s, often training and putting to work many of C-II's boys. For most, it was their first job.

Behind the scenes

Holley was a stranger to no one and wore a near-constant smile, loved ones said. Some of his business clients knew of Holley's mentoring and would help fund his efforts, including a yearly trip with the boys to Florida over spring break. Those same clients sent checks to Holley's family when he died to help cover funeral and burial costs, Smith said. His brother died with no life insurance.

Holley never aligned with a community organization or used grants to provide for the boys, his family said. Most people, even his own family members, said they didn't truly grasp his reach until his death brought everyone together.

"C-II was the greatest light in our family," his older brother said. "It's like the center light went out when he died."

It was Holley's quiet, behind-the-scenes work that saved many of the youth, said his pastor, Rev. Stephen Smith of Portland Memorial Missionary Baptist Church.

Smith looks for the faces of some C-II boys at Sunday service, not plastered in the newspaper or on television.

"C-II was somewhat of an anomaly," he said. "We often talk about people helping people. C-II was one who put actions behind his words. If he said he was going to do something, he did it."

Story continues below gallery

Filling the void

In the weeks before Holley's death, he joked with some of his older boys, now grown men with jobs and families of their own, that he was getting gray and would need the boys to take over when he's gone.

They just never thought it would come so soon.

LeMondre Philpot has given some of the boys his phone number. But he worries without the connections and the money, he won't be able to fill the void.

"He got me to the point where I want to help the kids now," Philpot said. "I don't want them to fall off now that he's gone."

There's been talk about starting a C-II's boys foundation by Holley's mother and some of the older boys, including LeMondre's cousin Keith Philpot.

Continuing the mentor's legacy might be a long-term endeavor, but the annual spring break trip to Florida was a more pressing concern.

That yearly respite from the lives the boys knew in Louisville was already in the works when Holley died.

"Who's going to take the lead this year?" Philpot said. "It's all up in the air."

Philpot, 31, works three jobs, including one at the Courier-Journal. Holley kept him busy, taught him responsibility and showed him there was a better way than life on the streets. He hopes by summer he will be able to take a group down to Florida, he said.

"I don't want it to die," he said. "This needs to carry on."

He wants the new batch of young boys to feel what he felt. He remembers the calm, blue waters of the Atlantic that rolled onto the sandy Florida shore. It was 1998, and 14-year-old Keith was out of Kentucky for the first time in his life with C-II and the boys.

Away from the sound of bullets that punctuated his days and the needles that dotted the streets near his home, Philpot began to realize there was more to life than he knew.

On the last day of the Florida trip, Philpot made a point to wade into the ocean alone.

He used to fear the expanse, but now the warm sand and cool water felt good.

He would start to pray, listening to the crashing of the waves.

"Thank you, Jesus."

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1C7kwyd