Federal investigators say they have probable cause to believe that a conspiracy existed to defraud thousands and possibly millions of dollars from the government-backed program that insures crops, according to report in Kentucky’s Lexington Herald-Leader.

The alleged conspiracy involved Central Kentucky tobacco farmers, crop insurance agents, crop insurance adjustors, tobacco warehouse owners/employees and others.

U.S. District Court documents show the scheme allegedly involved profiting from false insurance claims for losses of tobacco.

The investigation appears similar to a 2011 case in North Carolina where tobacco farmers and insurance agents pleaded guilty to a conspiracy in which farmers fraudulently claimed crop losses and collected insurance money but profited from selling their tobacco harvest.

Last week, federal investigators searched several sites, including several tobacco warehouses and an insurance agency, and seized evidence such as bank records, tobacco crop photos, laptop computers, hard drives and crop insurance documents.

The investigation appears to have started in 2012 when the Risk Management Agency, an arm of the U.S. Department of Agriculture, received a tip that a Central Kentucky farmer had been committing crop insurance fraud with the help of an insurance agent and an insurance adjustor.

The allegation was that the farmer received $68,000 on a corn crop that was not even planted.

Another complaint alleged that the farmer had 400 acres insured in other farmers’ names.

In 2013, another anonymous complaint alleged that an insurance agent approached a farmer and offered to “give them a good insurance claim.” The agent allegedly offered to do an appraisal for a small amount, and then the farmer could “sell his tobacco for cash or destroy it.” The farmer was to pay the agent 25 percent of the proceeds.

Read the full story at the Lexington Herald-Leader: Court documents allege conspiracy to defraud federal crop insurance program in Kentucky | Lexington Herald-Leader