Woman stood up on a date in 1982 tracks down her teenage crush 30 years later on Facebook... and now they're set to MARRY

Pair had a week-long whirlwind romance as teenagers



Lovestruck Mandy Ashforth said she never forgot about her holiday beau



A woman left heartbroken as a teenager after her date stood her up in the early 1980s has tracked down her man and now the couple are set to wed.



Mandy Ashforth, 48, and Barrie Moat, 50, both from Rotherham, South Yorkshire met on holiday in Bridlington and were inseparable - until a week later a 19-year-old Barrie failed to turn up for a date with Mandy, leaving her alone at a bus station. He didn't have her home phone number or address so he couldn't contact her.

Mandy, who first met Barrie in 1982, aged 17, said: 'We spent all our time together and at the end of the holiday he walked me to my coach and arranged to meet the following week on the Sunday.

Together after 30 years: Barrie Moat, 50, and Mandy Ashforth, 48, are to walk down the aisle 31 years after they first met

'I arrived to meet Baz in Rotherham bus station and waited two hours but he never came and I was devastated.

'In the year that followed, I looked for Barrie Moat in various places in Sheffield but never found him.



'The months turned into years and Barrie was always in my mind.



'I searched for him numerous times but it always led to a dead end.'

Mandy spent 30 years looking for Barrie and finally managed to track him down on Facebook.

But when he accepted her friend request it was because he thought she was interested in his fishing business.



Barrie, who lives in Sheffield, South Yorkshire, said: 'I have no idea why I didn't turn up to meet her - I really can't remember.





Full circle: The couple celebrated their reunion by returning to the place it had all started - the Yorkshire resort of Bridlington

Stood up: Rotherham bus station, as it is today, where Mandy waited for two hours for Barrie - to no avail

'I only joined Facebook to promote my fishing pole repair business and I never normally accept friend requests from women unless they have something to do with fishing.

'For some reason I assumed she was involved with fishing so I clicked to accept it and within seconds she had sent me a message.



'Things very quickly just clicked into place and we both decided we wanted to be together.



Aisle be yours: the pair are set to wed next summer

'It was just too good to be true. We both knew we had met the right person - I only wish I'd known that 30 years ago.'



Mandy couldn't believe her luck when she finally found Barrie online.



She said: 'I searched and there he was, that cheeky face which I recognised straight away.'



'I couldn't believe it was my childhood sweetheart - I sent him a friend request and he accepted.



'He said later he wouldn't normally accept a request out of the blue but it must have been meant to be.



'We started texting and messaging each other and the bond between us became stronger each day, and our love grew stronger as each day passed by.



'We eventually decided it was time to meet up after over 30 years apart and it was the scariest thing I have ever done.'



Barrie proposed to Mandy 18 months after she first found him online and now the couple are looking forward to their wedding next summer.



Mandy, who has five children from a previous marriage, said: 'As soon as I saw Barrie, I knew from that moment all my hopes and dreams had come true.



'I don't know why Barrie didn't turn up at the bus station back then and he can't remember why, either.