On Tuesday the House of Representatives voted for the 56th time to repeal Obamacare, but the health insurance plan is receiving an upswing in enrollment as the deadline to obtain insurance approaches.

Before the open enrollment period began Nov. 15, around 6.7 million people were enrolled in the program. Now the number has risen close to 7.5 million, according to a senior U.S. health official.

Although President Obama said he would veto any repeal on the Affordable Care Act, some people pondered what would happen if Obamacare was eliminated through the courts.

Pema Levy, a reporter from Mother Jones discussed what would happen if the Supreme Court rules in favor of the King vs. Burwell case. The court is expected to decide whether federal subsidies for health insurance are valid in states where the federal government set up the insurance marketplace.

She writes, "If the Supreme Court stopped subsidies from flowing to the 34 states that did not establish their own exchanges, 8.2 million fewer people would have coverage by 2016, according to research released this month by the Urban Institute, an economic and policy research think tank. Next year, the number of people insured through purchasing private plans would drop by 69 percent."

Jamelle Bouie from Slate, discusses how some Republicans aren't in a hurry to create a back-up plan if Obamacare is eliminated.

"For an ideological team trying to win, this is smart strategy. But for a political party trying to prove its mettle ahead of the next election, it's terrible, irresponsible behavior. It's also self-defeating. Thirty-six states don't run exchanges and they're mostly led by Republican governors and statehouses. And of the 5.4 million middle- and working-class people who buy insurance on those exchanges, 87 percent receive subsidies. In other words, even if Congress doesn't act, Republicans will still be responsible for cleaning up the mess."

Republican Sen. Richard Burr, from North Carolina, said don't blame Congress if the Affordable Care Act is overturned.

"As far as I'm concerned, if King v. Burwell is struck down, the White House is the one responsible to say what they're going to do next. They're the ones between a rock and a hard place because this is their plan," Burr told Politico.

Even if the King v. Burwell scenario doesn't happen, Levy writes that a complete repeal of Obamacare would be even more detrimental to society.

"By now, the ACA has so fundamentally changed the health care system that repeal would not simply return the country to its pre-Obamacare state. The Urban Institute estimates that just rolling back subsidies for people in states with federally run exchanges--the Supreme Court scenario--would create such turmoil in the private insurance market that the number of people in 2016 buying private plans on their own would be substantially lower (just over 1 million) than if the ACA had never been implemented (about 7.3 million)."

Politico reported that 5 million lower- and middle-income people in 37 states would lose their subsidies if the court strikes down the Affordable Care Act.

What's your prediction for the future of the Affordable Care Act? Leave a comment below.