I always wonder why some people are compassionate and others aren’t. The concept of compassion — the ability to feel empathy for someone else — is not complicated.

My parents taught me a lot about empathy and compassion. My stepfather, an immigrant to America, was so poor, he couldn’t even afford his boat passage from Hiroshima, Japan, in 1940, when he was 16. American missionaries paid his way and offered to sponsor his first few years in Los Angeles. Not one to take handouts, he got a job as a janitor in a hospital, sleeping in a laundry room on a cot.

Though he eventually found the American dream and owned three hospitals, he never forgot his roots and frequently reminded me of his days as a poor immigrant. He gave me lengthy lectures about the meaning of compassion and the importance of treating others with dignity and respect, no matter what their bank account may look like or whose floor they might be cleaning. “You are no better than anyone else,” he frequently reminded me.

My mother, also a very compassionate person, was one who believed actions spoke louder than words. She has spent most of her life working with low-income individuals — during the AIDS crisis of the 1980s, she helped HIV-positive clients, then she was a bilingual social worker and domestic-violence prevention counselor. She’s now 72 and works with children whose parents are in the military. She took classes on mental illness after she learned of my bipolar diagnosis. Helping others is just a part of her life. She thinks everyone should volunteer because “there are always those who need help, who are worse off than you.”

Mentally and physically disabled individuals rely a lot on the compassion of others. We aren’t a big, powerful lobby throwing millions of dollars at politicians, pressuring them to pass laws on our behalf. Fortunately, there are good folks on Capitol Hill whose compassion has changed my life.

Take former U.S. Rep. Patrick Kennedy (D-R.I.) and his father, the late Sen. Edward Kennedy (D-Mass.), who together passed the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act in 1996, prohibiting insurance companies from treating mental illness different from physical illness.

Until then, insurance companies limited the number of days they would pay for a patient in a private mental hospital and how many times a year they’d pay for a visit to a regular psychiatrist. Patients often were discharged from mental hospitals the day their insurance ran out, regardless of their medical condition. They avoided their psychiatrists because they had used up their annual benefits. Thanks to the Kennedys, that no longer happens.

I remember what it was like to not be able to get health insurance at all due to my pre-existing bipolar disorder. I looked everywhere in search of buying into a group plan: at flyers on telephone polls, advertisements in writer’s magazines and alumni association membership benefits.

I contemplated lying on the insurance applications but figured they’d somehow find out. Once, I tried to negotiate a specific plan that would only cover my physical health. This proved to be impossible. My mother was upset. If something catastrophic happened to me — such as getting cancer — she’d end up shelling out her life’s savings to save my life.

When the Affordable Care Act passed in 2012, millions of Americans like myself who had pre-existing conditions were grandfathered in two years before the rest of the country. For the first time in years, I had health insurance because one man in the White House had compassion.

I don’t know how you teach compassion, especially for the mentally ill. I lived in Seattle in 2001, when a woman straddled a bridge railing, threatening suicide. Police officers quickly stopped traffic, and commuters were left stranded on the bridge for four hours as the police tried to talk her out of leaping. Eventually, folks in stalled cars started screaming, “Jump!” “Get it over with!” and worse. What if it were their child or spouse on the railing? The drivers’ horrific and cold-blooded response caught the attention of the entire world. The woman eventually jumped into the waterand was saved. What if she wasn’t? It made me think: Are Americans that indifferent to those at the worst moment of their lives?

I still don’t know what causes some people to be compassionate and others to not be. I do know my life is richer because I am empathetic toward others — thanks to my parents’ selflessness — a trait many of should try to nurture as a way to help those around us.

Kim Palchikoff is studying social work at UNR and writes about mental health. Her Twitter handle is @NVmindsmatter.