Rep. Trey Gowdy says that the Select Committee on Benghazi that he heads is pressing on with its controversial investigation that could result in findings hitting the news before likely Democratic nominee Hillary Clinton faces voters on election day.

"We're gonna find out what happened before, during and after Benghazi," Gowdy, a South Carolina Republican, told the Washington Examiner in a recent interview in Derry, N.H., where he was campaigning for Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla.

Gowdy said the panel last week interviewed White House National Security Adviser Susan Rice, Deputy National Security Advisor Ben Rhodes and State Department Undersecretary for Management Patrick Kennedy.

Rice, then serving as U.S. Ambassador to the United Nations, and Rhodes had key roles in disseminating much-discussed talking points that initially put blame for the Sep. 11, 2012, attack on the U.S. Consulate in Benghazi, Libya, on angry reaction to a video rather than terrorism.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

Critics argue the talking points aimed to downplay terrorists' responsibly for the deaths of four Americans in the attack in a bid to avoid undercutting Obama's claims of success fighting terror. Obama administration officials, including Clinton, who was secretary of state at the time of the attack, have said the erroneous account was a result of flawed initial reports.

Republicans on the panel said in a press release last week that Kennedy could "shed some light" on delays in the delivery of State Department documents to the panel and address "why security in Benghazi was grossly inadequate."

The committee has interviewed more than 70 witnesses. Gowdy said most have not spoken under oath to other congressional committees.

Democrats dismiss the investigation as a partisan probe aimed at finding dirt on Clinton. That perception has benefited from statements by prominent House Republicans who have touted the effect committee findings have had on Clinton's campaign.