By of the

Madison— The state Supreme Court's newest justice is counting on Milwaukee County Sheriff David A. Clarke Jr. to help raise money for her campaign, having him send a letter to donors three days after he said blacks sell drugs because they are lazy, uneducated and morally bankrupt.

The letter from the sheriff — an African-American — on behalf of Justice Rebecca Bradley comes as he finds himself in the news for other comments, including ones claiming police brutality ended in the 1960s and contending Black Lives Matter would team up with the Islamic State to take down America.

Gov. Scott Walker appointed Bradley to the court last month after Justice N. Patrick Crooks died Sept. 21. She is hoping voters in the spring will give her a full 10-year term.

Bradley declined an interview request. A spokeswoman would not say whether Bradley agreed with Clarke's comments but said she was pleased to have his support.

"Sheriff Clarke is one of a number of bipartisan supporters of Justice Bradley and we are very happy to have his support," Bradley spokeswoman Madison Wiberg said by email.

One of her opponents, Appeals Court Judge JoAnne Kloppenburg, said Bradley should tell voters why she is seeking help from Clarke.

"It's Rebecca Bradley's choice who she wants appealing to voters on her behalf and she can explain why her campaign would choose Sheriff Clarke," Kloppenburg said in a written statement. "There is no excuse for Sheriff Clarke's hateful rants, which are contrary to the values that I and most Wisconsinites share."

Also running for the high court are Madison attorney Claude Covelli and Milwaukee County Circuit Judge Joe Donald. A Feb. 16 primary will narrow the field to two candidates for the April 5 general election.

Andy Suchorski, a spokesman for Donald, criticized Bradley for working with Clarke.

"Anybody who is serious about upholding the law does not associate themselves with David Clarke," he said by email.

Court rules bar judicial candidates from directly soliciting contributions, so they recruit others to ask on their behalf.

Bradley tapped her mom to send her first fundraising letter and followed that up with the one Oct. 27 from Clarke. He praised her for her wisdom and common sense and argued she would not inject her personal views into court decisions.

"There's going to be a lot of national labor union money thrown against Justice Rebecca Bradley, and the Madison Liberals will pony up too," Clarke wrote. "They see the February 16 Primary and April 5 General Election as two opportunities to seek some revenge against the reform agenda that's been implemented in Wisconsin over the past four years or so...."

Clarke's letter for Bradley came three days after he responded in a podcast to a New York Times column contending African-American were overrepresented in prison because of a lack of economic opportunity. Clarke disputed that.

"Let me tell you why blacks sell drugs and involve themselves in criminal behavior, instead of a more socially acceptable lifestyle — because they're uneducated, they're lazy and they're morally bankrupt. That's why," he said.

The weekly podcast, called "The People's Sheriff," airs on TheBlaze Radio Network run by Glenn Beck.

On Oct. 26 — a day before he sent the letter for Bradley's campaign — Clarke said on "Fox & Friends" that police racism and police brutality didn't exist.

"First off, there is no police brutality in America. We ended that back in the '60s," he said, adding that "there is no racism in the hearts of police officers."

The day he sent the letter backing Bradley, Clarke posted a message on Twitter contending the Black Lives Matter movement — which he calls Black Lies Matter — would join with the Islamic State to "(bring) down our (legally) constituted republic."