Democratic presidential candidate Hillary Rodham Clinton, seen June 20 at a U.S. Conference of Mayors meeting, will be at a rally at the Patriot Center at George Mason University in Fairfax on Friday night. (Stephen Lam/Reuters)

Democratic front-runner Hillary Rodham Clinton will make her campaign debut in Virginia on Friday night, her first stop as a presidential candidate in a state that Republicans feel they must win if they are to recapture the White House.

Clinton will headline a Democratic rally at the Patriot Center at George Mason University in Fairfax, which has replaced the annual party dinner in Richmond. Democratic leaders are hoping enthusiasm for the former secretary of state will inspire activists to start mobilizing for this fall.

The visit is one of Clinton’s first forays outside the early primary states, a sign of how critical Virginia is to both Democrats and Republicans in 2016. State legislative elections in November, with control of the state Senate at stake, will be an early sign of which party is better mobilized for 2016.

Virginia Democratic Party spokeswoman Morgan Finkelstein said the goal is for attendees to come away thinking that “the time to kick it into gear has come — it’s not September, it’s not next fall, it’s now.”

[While GOP stammers, Clinton confronts race directly]

Clinton’s task is to deliver that burst of enthusiasm. With the official launch of her campaign earlier this month, she has been shifting from small roundtables to larger rallies. Sen. Bernie Sanders (I-Vt.), her socialist-leaning Democratic rival, is competing with her on that front, drawing huge crowds in Iowa and elsewhere as he attacks Clinton from the left.

“She’s reached Virginia early because Virginia is going to be probably one of the two or three most important states,” said Quentin Kidd, director of the Wason Center for Public Policy at Christopher Newport University.

“If she doesn’t perform well, if she doesn’t energize and kind of send a little bit of energy through the core of the Democratic Party in Virginia, it could just make things in Virginia more difficult for her to get going.”

To repeat President Obama’s success in the state in 2008 and 2012, Clinton will need to in particular turn out Virginia’s Hispanic and African American voters in large numbers.

A spokesman for Clinton’s campaign would not offer any details on her speech, beyond that she will be “sharing her vision for Virginians that will help them get ahead, and stay ahead.”

[Va. GOP battles back — for the White House]

Republicans see the state as equally critical. Republican National Committee Chairman Reince Priebus is giving a news conference Friday afternoon outside the site of the Clinton event, joined by state party chairman and 2014 U.S. Senate candidate Ed Gillespie.

“A quick stop in the state for a Democrat fundraiser won’t win back the trust of the voters still waiting for answers from Hillary Clinton,” RNC spokeswoman Ali Pardo said in a statement.

Gillespie and Priebus have been helping to rebuild a state party that is fractured and financially strained by ideological division. The GOP has been recruiting minority candidates in Virginia in an effort to expand its base.

Gov. Terry McAuliffe (D), a close friend of Clinton’s who will introduce her Friday evening, has said repeatedly that the best way to help her win is to focus on the state’s economy.

[With key elections ahead, Virginia Democrats spend big]

But he has also made several recent moves that will appeal to the Democratic base. He engaged in the state primaries, helping unseat a conservative Democrat and propel his preferred candidates to victory. He is phasing out Confederate license plates in the state, launching a study of whether to bring back parole and easing the restoration of voting rights for ex-felons. In the wake of the Supreme Court ruling on the Affordable Care Act, he is pushing again for Medicaid expansion despite firm Republican opposition.

Thousands are expected to turn out for Clinton, but the shift from a relatively intimate dinner in a hotel ballroom to a giant event has vexed some party activists.

“People were disappointed,” said Harry Wiggins, chairman of the Prince William County Democratic Party, who is not attending the event. “I think a lot of people were surprised that it’s turning into essentially a pep rally.”

Finkelstein said the party was planning to hold a more traditional dinner later this year.

“People do not like change,” said Fairfax Democratic Party Chairwoman Sue Langley. But she said she was looking forward to the Clinton rally, especially because “we don’t have to dress up.”