Endgame: Hollywood sequel in the works to … “It’s a Wonderful Life”

posted at 5:21 pm on November 18, 2013 by Allahpundit

To cleanse the palate, proof that ObamaCare isn’t the most disastrous trainwreck America will have to cope with in 2015.

I’ve been waiting years for our commenters to write these words and now I want to see them: “You were right about atheism, AP.”

The sequel, titled “It’s A Wonderful Life: The Rest of the Story,” is being produced by Allen J. Schwalb of Star Partners and Bob Farnsworth of Hummingbird. The duo are aiming to get the movie into theaters for the 2015 holiday season. Karolyn Grimes, who played George Bailey’s daughter “Zuzu” in the original, will return for the “Wonderful Life” sequel as an angel who shows Bailey’s unlikeable grandson (also named George Bailey) how much better off the world would have been had he never been born. “The new film will retain the feeling of the original, and it simply must be shared,” Grimes said. “I’ve probably read close to 20 scripts over the years suggesting a sequel to ‘It’s a Wonderful Life,’ but none of them were any good. The script by Bob Farnsworth and Martha Bolton was wonderful, and I wanted to be involved with his version of the film immediately.”

The moral of the original is that a good man has everything to live for, as he enriches the people around him in ways he’ll never fully grasp. The moral of the sequel is that a bad man … should kill himself, I guess? Or no, rather, that it’s never too late for him to mend his ways and become the good man that lives within him. Great news: If you’re into Christmas-themed parables about a miserable bastard finding redemption, have I got a book for you.

Is there any way to make a sequel to IAWL that wouldn’t end up being a schmaltzy desecration of the original? I can think of two, arguably. One: Go full A-list on the cast. That wouldn’t make the movie “good,” exactly, but it’d make it an event, and that at least would give it some modicum of stature. The very justifiable fear among IAWL fans (i.e. everyone) is that unless you have serious talent on a project like this, it’s going to end up drowning in a sea of treacle and bad acting. The concept has “direct to DVD” written all over it. Don’t let it happen. Two: Do something subversive with it. If it’s nothing more than a standard-issue Christmas heartwarmer with some stunt casting, it’ll pale dismally in comparison to the original. If you use it as, say, a vehicle for comparing small-town American life then and now, it could be interesting in its own right depending upon how subtle the social commentary is. Odds are it’ll be excruciatingly heavy-handed and cornball; young George will be some sort of Potter-esque corporate raider, bulldozing low-income housing so that he has a place to polo or whatever. Oh, and he’ll drive a convertible sports car, of course. Of course.

Actually, I can think of a third option: Get Dana Carvey and do this movie right. Exit question: Am I wrong in thinking that “Mr. Smith Gets Primaried” would be a fantastic movie?

Related Posts: