It’s understandably hard to feel confident about stocks right now. But selling everything is not a viable investment plan. If you truly want to protect your retirement funds, you need to think about responsible stock investments that can limit your risk in the short-term and provide strong upside potential.

The health care sector is just what the portfolio doctor ordered.

From low-beta megacaps to high-growth biotech stocks with big potential, health care has a lot to offer individual investors right now — particularly if you take a diversified approach across various subsectors, market values and geographies.

The biggest tech fails and what you can do (3:08) Despite a lot of progress, our gadgets still don't perform the way they should. WSJ's Geoffrey A. Fowler and Joanna Stern air their tech grievances and share tips that can help. Photo/Video: Emily Prapuolenis/The Wall Street Journal

Health care stocks tend to be more stable than their peers in other sectors and have some durable long-term trends behind them that point to a bright future. Accordingly, here’s why you should buy health-care stocks now:

1. Safety in troubled times: Do you fear that a crash is in order not just for stocks but for the broader global economy? Health-care stocks are stable. After all, sick patients around the globe will keep spending on medicine and cut back on other expenses rather than jeopardize their health. Consider that in 2008, while the S&P 500 SPX, +0.22% plunged 37%, the iShares U.S. Health care ETF IYH, +0.56% lost 23%. And in 2011, when the eurozone debt crisis caused tremendous volatility and a flat year for the S&P, the iShares ETF tacked on 11%.

2. Earnings strength: While there has been much talk about broad earnings pressure these days, driven mostly by mayhem in the energy sector, health care earnings have been robust. According to FactSet Earnings Insights, 81% of health care stocks have beat earnings estimates to help drive a 9.4% earnings growth rate for the sector. Furthermore, that’s up from a previous estimate of just 4.8% growth in earnings for the sector in 2015’s fourth quarter. To top it off, FactSet reports that health care stocks are reporting the second-highest revenue growth rate of any sector at a brisk 8.5% pace.

3. Fair value: Even with this growth, the forward price-to-earnings of health care stocks is around 14 right now. Sure, there are a few biotechs out there still trading at nosebleed valuations, but the recent rout for many of these momentum names has brought overall valuations in the sector back to earth. In fact, health care as a sector now boasts a lower forward P/E than even utility stocks as a group.

4. Dividends: The income potential of big health care names is also attractive both as a hedge against volatility and as a way to find better yield than investment grade bonds. Take AbbVie ABBV, +1.76% and Pfizer PFE, +0.73% , two Big Pharma stocks that both yield more than 4% and both have sustainable payouts at about half of fiscal 2016 earnings. Or consider hybrid health-care/consumer play Johnson & Johnson JNJ, +0.19% , which offers a 3% yield but is now just one of three companies with the elite triple-A credit rating from Standard & Poor’s. Not only are these dividends better than the alternative in the bond market, they are high-quality payouts that aren’t going away.

5. Obamacare adds health care “customers”: An independent study recently estimated that 17 million Americans have gained health insurance since the Affordable Care Act’s core provisions took effect in 2013. And even Fox News won’t deny that Obamacare has dramatically increased the number of Americans with health insurance. More “customers” with health insurance means more business for health care companies as a result.

6. Demographic tailwind: According to the Administration on Aging, the number of Americans older than 65 will roughly double from about 45 million people in 2013 to almost 100 million by 2060. Global trends are even more dramatic, with the 65-plus population tripling from about 524 million in 2010 to a projected 1.5 billion in 2050, according to the World Health Organization. More aging people means growing demand for doctors, drugs and ultimately consumers of health care in the future.

7. Global growth trends: The World Bank estimates China spent just 5.6% of its GDP on health care in 2013, India spent just 4% and Indonesia spent 3.1% of GDP. Those are three of the four most populous countries on the planet (the fourth being the U.S.), yet their rate of health care spending significantly lags the roughly 10% to 12% that is typical for developed nations such as Germany, Japan, and Canada. Not only should these nations continue to see health care grow as a share of their economy, but they will continue to see brisk population growth, too, creating a massive long-term growth trend for health care.

More from MarketWatch