Expert's new career prescription: Forget about becoming a doctor

'Cost is too great and it's a lousy job,' says leader of program that helps students enter health care professions

The Illinois Institute of Technology-based program is one of the most successful and comprehensive academic efforts of its kind in the country. So imagine my surprise when Jones, a University of Chicago-trained molecular geneticist, told me he no longer recommends that his students, many of whom arrive as high school juniors, pursue a career as a physician.

I was talking to Regnal Jones recently about the Chicago Area Health and Medical Careers Program, where he's been executive director since 1985 and has helped nearly 5,000 students from underrepresented racial and socioeconomic groups enter the health professions.

On the day we talked, a former student, who's now a physician assistant, had come to his home asking for advice regarding whether he should return to school to become a doctor.

"I told him that I don't encourage anybody to go to medical school," Jones said. "Nobody I care about."

I paused.

"Does that surprise you?" he asked me.

It did.

"The cost is too great, and it's a lousy job," he said. "The minute you say to me that you want to be a physician, it's tantamount to saying you want to be an indentured servant."

Jones said he feels so strongly in part because medical school tuition can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars, and the time investment, depending on whether the student wants, for example, to be an internist or surgeon or orthopedist, can consume years of his or her life.

"Then after medical school, you're working 80 to 100 hours a week for about $40,000 a year as a resident," Jones said.

Residencies are usually three to seven years, depending on the specialty.

"Most people think physicians overwhelmingly are rich," he said. "But many of them are saddled with an enormous debt load that takes years to repay. Some never make up the ground."

Jones said another major problem is that there are fewer places for students to do their residencies. In February, the American Medical Association asked Congress to retain Medicare funding for residency programs and increase the limit on the number of available residency slots to address a shortage of doctors.

Last spring, about 900 U.S. medical students weren't matched to a residency.

And, yet, the number of students graduating from medical schools has grown steadily. The Association of American Medical Colleges says that a decade ago, there were 15,531 graduates from U.S. medical schools. In 2012, there were 17,341 graduates.

"You have to do a residency to get a license," Jones said. "There are fewer residency slots available to finish your training today than in 1975. It's a regular supply and demand issue. And hospitals get to pay people what they want and work you however they want."

There has been a lot of talk about the need for more doctors, particularly in light of the health care overhaul. I asked Jones whether the Affordable Care Act, which is expected to bring an estimated 30 million more patients into the health care system, changes his perspective regarding medical school as an option for his students.