Since we (my old man and me, and two Manchester terriers) rented a flat in New York for six months, the days are so utterly changed from the routine of the past 20 years that I’m shocked anew each morning.

I’m shocked by the savagery of the windchill as the snow keeps falling (there’s another big dump promised for the weekend). I’m shocked by middle-aged ladies begging me for “25 cents” and grown men traipsing the streets with Chihuahuas wearing tiny suede boots; shocked by the local cinema staying open till 1am when there’s only three paying customers in it (and a dozen staff); shocked by how much sugar’s in the food. And by the street noise: the shrieks and whup-whups of ambulances and fire engines and police sirens are always in the background when you’re on the phone to people at home, who only have quotidian nee-naws to listen to.

All this mayhem is fine by me. Sole purpose of trip, actually. I wanted a big fat shock to my system, to slap me out of asking myself what it was I’d come over here for five times a day.

Be careful what you wish for. I woke late on Wednesday morning, stiff from some very right-on yoga the night before (many Oms, much chanting), and wondered why somebody hadn’t taken the dogs out yet. Once I saw him, green-faced and sweaty, I realised somebody was ill, and made shift to find out how ill.

“Chest,” he said. “Pain.” Oh, jolly ill, then. His face was so grim, I began to run from room to room (it’s a two-room flat), looking for phones to dial 999. Oh, lord (after a few attempts) it’s not 999! I was stabbing 111 until my fingers ballooned, when I remembered 911. The shriek of the unfamiliar ambulance was the most reassuring thing I ever heard.

A young man and a young woman scooted into the flat and began to stick labelling all over his chest, showing where the entry points for blood-lines were (they took blood, too, very efficiently). They asked all of the what, when, where and how questions, not forgetting the who. They hooked him up to a machineful of graphics detailing heart rate, temperature, oxygen levels and heaven knows. They were from the NYFD – the Fire Department. “It’s just whichever service gets the call, ma’am.”

They were very well trained. Also very human. When she said she was “concerned” that his heart rate was so low (45 or something) and he told her it always was, she said hers only ever went that low when she was training for the marathon. They said I could come with them to the hospital and gave us a choice: Beth Israel or Bellevue. I was so glad they didn’t say Sloan-Kettering or New York Presbyterian, because even though cash can be actually cheaper than insurance, I don’t think there’s that much cash between us. And I ducked the lift because if someone was having a heart event, someone else had to walk the dogs, so I did.

He was on a trolley for a couple of hours before going up to cardiology (17th floor; cracking view of the Empire State Building) where they booked an angiogram for next morning. Dr Coppola came to explain: 1, what he expected to find (clear indication that a stent or two was needed), 2, what he might be lucky enough to find (signs of minor damage) and 3, what “neither of us can expect to find” (no appreciable damage).

The angiogram went into his armpit, not his groin, and Dr Coppola rummaged up the inside of his arm and into his heart for 45 minutes, and found that which neither he nor Frank expected to find: nothing. No suspected polyps, no puddles of platelets, nothing of much interest at all. So the man whom we both thought was dying on Wednesday morning leaves New York’s earliest-built hospital, Bellevue, for the weekend, with no need for stenting, no “appreciable damage” and a bottle of aspirin. (Best when chewed, apparently.)