What’s $14,600 a year and could change your life?

Cholesterol-controlling drug Praluent’s not a college education, but with a potential lifelong dosage requirement, the new drug could easily cost as much or more.

So consumers with high cholesterol may have thought they had cause to cheer Friday’s news that Praluent—approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration just this summer—would be covered by health-care industry giant UnitedHealth Group Inc. UNH, -0.33% The drug is made by France’s Sanofi S.A. SAN, +0.00% and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. SAN, +0.00% REGN, -0.24%

But while all men may be created equal, not everyone with high-cholesterol—or their insurance plan -- is. Below, a breakdown of what it means for you, especially given the December 15 deadline to enroll or re-enroll in Obamacare plans for next year.

If you’ve got high cholesterol, but haven’t tried statins or lifestyle changes: Praluent might be an option for you, but a doctor would propose statins, diet and exercise before the pricey prescription. Praluent and competitor Repatha are intended for people whose levels of so-called bad cholesterol haven’t been adequately reduced by aggressive lifestyle changes or statins on their own. As far as your insurance company is concerned, the drugs are hardly the first line of cholesterol reduction.

But there’s a debate brewing on this: some cardiologists think they could—and should—be used more broadly, to proactively prevent cardiovascular events like heart attacks or strokes. Price tags in the thousands of dollars might not seem so high when compared with the significant economic costs of those medical emergencies, said Elliott Antman, immediate past president of the American Heart Association and a professor at Harvard Medical School.

“This is where we’re at now, but let’s keep our eyes open to a broader perspective,” he said.

If you’ve got high cholesterol and diet, exercise and statins haven’t worked: Praluent and Repatha could help reduce bad cholesterol levels by about the same amount as statins and in the same amount of time, 50% or 60% in about a month, said Kim Birtcher, a pharmacist who co-chairs the American College of Cardiology’s LDL: Address the Risk Workgroup.

Standing to benefit in particular from the two cholesterol-controlling drugs—part of a class called PCSK9 inhibitors—are those with a rare inherited genetic condition called heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia affecting 1 in 200 people, and those with a history of cardiovascular problems like heart attacks, cardiac bypass surgery, or who’ve had stents placed.

Unlike statins, Praluent’s ability to prevent cardiovascular events like heart attacks hasn’t been monitored in the long-term, Birtcher cautioned. Current studies are ongoing, and their results won’t be known for a number of years.

If you have group insurance: Out-of-pocket costs should be lower in the group space, said Nate Purpura, vice president of consumer affairs at eHealthInsurance, an online marketplace for individual health insurance policies. Here, even if a drug is covered, finding out how it’s covered is key, since cost-sharing measures like co-pays can get expensive for more unusual, specialty drugs. For a person who was taking another, non-approved cholesterol-controlling drug and wanted to stick with it, Praluent’s approval by UnitedHealth could make that other drug more expensive, especially the smaller their insurance group.

If you have individual insurance: The jury’s still out on this, according to Purpura. But, because of its high cost, he believes Praluent likely won’t be the preferred brand for people buying their own health insurance. Individual health care plans must cover a FDA-approved treatment for every diagnosis, which means they’ll often cover the lower-cost drugs. Even if individual plans do end up covering Praluent, high deductibles means you shouldn’t expect much of a price-tag reduction, Purpura said: “In a marketplace like that, even if a plan covers your drugs, you’re going to pay a lot out of pocket.”

To find out if Praluent is on your insurance plan’s list of covered drugs, call an agent licensed to sell insurance plans in your state and be sure to ask not only if it’s covered but also if it’s covered before or after the deductible. If before the deductible, you may end up paying the full price or the price negotiated by your insurance company. “Just because a drug is covered doesn’t mean it’s going to be covered at a price you can afford,” Purpura said. And as a recently-approved drug, Praluent likely won’t have a generic version released for about six years.

If you’ve purchased insurance through Obamacare, or are considering it: These plans will closely resemble those offered through individual insurance. Those who are enrolled—or considering enrolling by Dec. 15 for January coverage -- should ask the same kinds of questions when making their decision: Is the drug covered? How much is covered? And how is it covered—pre- or post-deductible?

More from MarketWatch