Topics: From the Wires, News

SIEM REAP, Cambodia (AP) — Michelle Obama urged Cambodian students to finish their education and speak up to demand greater freedoms and more equality on a landmark visit to a Southeast Asian country that has been ruled by an authoritarian strongman for decades.

The U.S. first lady’s comments on Saturday did not explicitly criticize Cambodia’s human rights record or its government under Prime Minister Hun Sen. But she sent a pointed message, and one that she delivered seated beside Hun Sen’s wife, Bun Rany.

Human rights groups praised the remarks as a rare foray into foreign affairs for a first lady.

“Even though Mrs. Obama didn’t name names, it’s more than we have heard in a long time from a first lady on a foreign trip,” said Phil Robertson, deputy Asia director of Human Rights Watch. “Now it’s time for President Obama to state publicly what rights benchmarks he expects to see from Cambodia, and press Hun Sen to commit to it.”

Mrs. Obama wrapped up a five-day trip to Asia Sunday to promote the U.S.-led education initiative “Let Girls Learn,” which she and the president announced earlier this month. The community-based program, to be run by the Peace Corps, is meant to help millions of girls in the developing world stay in school and overcome economic or cultural pressures that force many to drop out.

“Let Girls Learn” is starting in 11 countries, including Cambodia. Mrs. Obama’s visit follows a three-day trip to Japan, which is helping to fund the project.

The trip gave the first lady, who is traveling without her husband, a chance to soak up some of Asia’s rich culture. In Japan, she visited Buddhist and Shinto shrines, and in Cambodia she traveled to Siem Reap, home to the famed Angkor Wat temple complex.

At a high school outside of Siem Reap, Mrs. Obama greeted students with a traditional gesture of hands pressed together and a head bow. She walked the compound’s dirt paths and then met with 10 girls who shared tales of rising early to feed their families and help with farming before heading off on long treks to school and studying late into the night.

“You are role models to the world,” said Mrs. Obama, seated on a wooden school chair beside the students and Cambodia’s first lady. Education brings empowerment, she added, and urged the teens to “finish your education and then follow your dreams.”

“Use your voices to advocate for good things — whether it’s more education, better health care, more freedoms, more equality,” she said. “Not just here in Cambodia, not just here in Siem Reap, but in the world. I hope that you all will feel empowered to do that.”

As Mrs. Obama spoke, Bun Rany smiled and made no comment. However, she expressed Cambodia’s “full support” for the education initiative, and said the government was giving priority to female students for state scholarships.