Not only is it harder to detect cancer in denser breasts, they’re also linked to an increased risk of developing cancer in the first place. (Bob Stone/Corbis)

The statistics are frightening: Women have a one in eight chance of developing breast cancer. And over 200,000 new cases of breast cancer are expected to be diagnosed each year in women in the U.S., largely thanks to screening programs that use mammography to find cancer as early as possible. But while breast cancer screening can help save lives, it’s not as straightforward a process as many women believe.

“The whole breast cancer screening controversy has become more and more of an issue over the past several years,” says Eric Winer, MD, the director of breast oncology at the Susan F. Smith Center for Women’s Cancers at Dana-Farber Cancer Institute, and a spokesman for the American Association for Cancer Research. “It’s far less clear than it once was exactly what a woman, particularly a younger woman, should do in terms of breast cancer screening.”

One of the biggest issues with current screening protocols is that the younger a woman is, the harder it is to tell if she has cancer because her breasts are denser. Breast density is an important factor in mammography — so much so, in fact, that some states like Connecticut actually require radiologists to inform a woman if she has dense breasts. But what exactly does that mean?

Breast density refers to the ratio of fatty tissue, which appears black on a mammogram, to various kinds of fibrous tissue, which appears white. The first trouble with having denser breasts is that cancers appear white, too.

(Susan G. Komen)

“When you have dense breasts, what you see is all white, and that’s why we cannot see the tumors very well,” explains Edith Perez, MD, deputy director at large for the Mayo Clinic Cancer Center and the Serene M. and Frances C. Durling professor at the Mayo Clinic College of Medicine.

Related: Can Birth Control Change the Partner You Choose?

Breast density changes for all women with age. “The older a woman gets, the less dense the breasts tend to be.” Perez tells Yahoo Health. In fact, this is why doctors don’t start screening for cancer until women are 40. “In younger women, the breast density is such that we cannot see tumors when they are present.”

Denser breasts not only make it harder to detect cancers, they are also linked to an increased risk of developing cancer in the first place. Instead of the “one in eight”, says Perez, “it may be one in seven-and-a-half — it’s a slightly increased risk as compared to the general population, but it’s clearly there.”

“Biologically, we think that breast density is tied to estrogen, so the higher estrogen levels you have, the more density you may have,” says Anees Chagpar, MD, associate professor of surgery at Yale School of Medicine and the director of the breast center at Smilow Cancer Hospital at Yale-New Haven. Estrogen levels are higher in younger women, hence why younger women have denser breasts, but they’re also linked to increased cancer risk. But breast density is not as clear-cut in terms of its risk as other factors. “It’s hard to specify an exact risk that density conveys because there’s varying degrees of density,” Chagpar says to Yahoo Health. “From a radiographic standpoint, they’ll talk about heterogeneously dense or extremely dense, and each of these carries a different risk.”

Read More