Government Infographic - State of Small Business Only 24 percent of U.S. small businesses said the government does enough to support them.

Forty-three percent of U.S. small businesses cite employee healthcare as one of their top challenges for 2016, a 14 percent increase over 2015.

The change, which was revealed in the 2016 State of Small Business Report from Wasp Barcode Technologies, comes as small businesses with 50 or more full-time employees must now meet requirements for healthcare coverage as mandated by the national Affordable Care Act.

The challenge hit employers with 100 or more full-time employees first when they were mandated to provide federally-approved coverage plans or face financial penalties in 2015. A year into the mandate, 50 percent of these larger small businesses now say employee healthcare is their top challenge, tied with hiring new employees.

In addition to the number of covered employees increasing in 2016, the costs for employee healthcare have also gone up as businesses face dramatic rate and premium increases passed on by private insurance companies.

Small businesses want more support from the government

The employee healthcare challenges faced by U.S. small businesses might be influencing what they think about government support. Half of all respondents said the government does not do enough to support American small businesses. Only 24 percent said they did, and 10 percent didn’t want the government involved.

The support small businesses seek is not being manifested in the economy. Forty-four percent of them said they have more confidence in the economy than they did 12 months ago, but 25 percent have less, and 30 percent see no change.

Small businesses favor a Republican presidential win in 2016

The State of Small Business Report, which surveyed more than 1,110 small business owners and executives, revealed a little optimism with the upcoming 2016 presidential election. Thirty-nine percent of them said a Republican presidential win in 2016 would have a positive impact on small business growth; 34 percent said a Democratic victory would be favorable.

If a Democrat were to win the White House in 2016, 30 percent of respondents said it would negatively impact their growth while only 22 percent said a GOP win would hurt growth.

About Wasp Barcode Technologies

Wasp Barcode Technologies is a leading provider of small business productivity systems such as inventory control, time and attendance, point of sale, and the supporting mobile computers, barcode scanners and barcode printers used to automate operations. The company is based in Plano, Texas. Learn more at http://www.waspbarcode.com.

About the 2016 State of Small Business Report

The 2016 State of Small Business Report research is based on a random online sample of 1,102 U.S. small business owners/managers with companies with five to 499 employees. The anonymous survey was conducted via the Internet from December 9-14, 2015. The survey has a margin of error of +/- 2.87 at the 95% level of confidence. Sikora Associates provided statistical analysis.

For more information about the 2016 survey or to access last year’s results, please go to http://www.waspbarcode.com/small-business-report. If you require more details or other data points, please contact Media Relations at anna(at)BLASTmedia(dot)com.

Contacts

BLASTmedia for Wasp Barcode Technologies

Anna Julow Roolf, 317-806-1900 Ext. 134

Anna(at)BLASTmedia(dot)com