NASHVILLE, Tenn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--In an effort to bring more consumers greater access to colonoscopies, two Nashville-based endoscopy centers and Brentwood, Tenn.-based MDSave are launching a pilot program to introduce bundled pricing for the procedure. Associated Endoscopy in Hermitage and St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center will offer a fixed cost for colonoscopies to high-deductible, self-pay and under-insured patients at a lower rate than those individuals would typically pay. Those who are insured under the Affordable Care Act’s health care exchange marketplace will also be eligible for the program. Consumers can access these savings through MDSave’s website, www.MDSave.com.

“We are at the forefront of helping consumers and physicians adapt to the ever-changing health care marketplace,” said MDSave CEO Paul Ketchel. “Our shared goal with Associated Endoscopy and St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center is to provide the best quality care at an affordable cost. MDSave’s business model allows them both to accomplish it by using our proprietary technology to deliver affordable, high quality care to more patients.”

Experts recommend colonoscopies for everyone aged 50 and above, and the pilot program will create an option for patients who might otherwise be deterred by the idea that a colonoscopy is financially out of reach. Bundled pricing means that qualified patients will pay a single, set price for all costs associated with the procedure. Without bundled pricing, these patients would receive multiple bills for charges like facility fees and anesthesia fees, which can be confusing and lead to unexpected costs for the patient. This marks only the second time that colonoscopies have been offered with completely bundled pricing – the first being MDSave’s partnership with Digestive Disease Specialists, Inc. (DDSI), a gastroenterology center in Oklahoma City. Going one step further, this program includes any and all diagnostic procedures that take place during the colonoscopy, such as biopsies, in the bundled price. These procedures are not always fully covered by insurance when a screening colonoscopy is ordered.

“Associated Endoscopy has been committed to finding innovative ways to bring the benefits of a colonoscopy to as many people as possible,” said Dr. Donald Lazas, physician at Associated Endoscopy. “This partnership with MDSave allows us to deliver high quality, affordable care to more patients, and potentially reduces the incidences of colon cancer in our area.”

“Raising awareness about the benefits of a colonoscopy is important, but without easy-to-understand pricing, there are many individuals who will not schedule the procedure simply because they believe they cannot afford it,” added Dr. Antonio Granda, physician at St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center. “With this pilot program, we are able to overcome yet another barrier in colon cancer prevention.”

The average cost of a colonoscopy in Nashville is over $5,000 for uninsured patients and over $3,000 for those with a high deductible. With the MDSave partnership, Associated Endoscopy and the St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center are able to reduce those fees to $1,795 for patients who qualify, representing a significant savings to consumers.

“Through this pilot program, we are able to provide Nashville-area consumers with a potentially lifesaving procedure at a more affordable and easier to understand price,” said Paul Ketchel, MDSave CEO and co-founder. “This complements our growing suite of health care services offered in our community and with providers in other areas across the country.”

Both centers will soon introduce bundled pricing for additional procedures. Patients can take advantage of the savings by logging on to MDSave’s website or mobile app, where they will have access to educational resources and can transparently see pricing information, choose a physician, and schedule and pay for their selected procedure. MDSave then quickly passes that payment on to its partners.

About MDSave

Based in Brentwood, Tenn., MDSave is the first health care e-commerce company to offer a single online resource for consumers to research, compare and purchase health services in their communities. Providers offer rates at significant discounts and consumers can select a doctor based on his or her rating from other MDSave users. Launched in June 2012, the company offers a wealth of information on its website about common diseases and procedures. For more information, visit mdsave.com.

About Associated Endoscopy

Associated Endoscopy, LLC is an outpatient, endoscopic facility specializing in colorectal cancer screening and the treatment of various digestive diseases. We believe in compassionate medicine, where patients feel reassured and unrushed. Our Board-Certified gastroenterologists provide high quality care in a friendly, relaxed setting. For more information, visit www.associatedendoscopy.com.

About St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center

St. Thomas Medical Group Endoscopy Center specializes in colon cancer screening and the treatment of gastrointestinal problems. We support safe, quality patient care by using a collaborative team approach between the patient, the patient’s family, physicians and staff. Our outpatient, freestanding endoscopic facility proudly serves the greater Nashville area providing high quality care in a friendly, comfortable setting. For more information, visit www.stmgendo.com.