Sioux Falls, SD

Children like toys, especially 7-year-old Jaiden Bents, who lives with a disability.

"It's very empowering for Jaiden because he knows it's something that he can do independently," Sarah Domangue said.

These adapted toys also help him gain fine motor skills.

"The adapted toys give him a chance to be able to play just like his peers would and they are something that he really enjoys because they have music and they have a lot of movement," Domangue said.

You can use a wide variety of toys and install an adapted switch to tailor the toy to fit your child's needs.

"The push can be located wherever the child is able to use it. They can use a foot or their head or an elbow," Alren Klamm, said.

It's fun and educational for both the parent and the child.

"It's actually a very useful skill because toys are more motivating than a lot of other activities for kids and it's a cause and effect skill they can learn playing with toys," Klamm, said.

While the idea of adapting a toy may sound intimidating to some parents, it's actually very simple and affordable.

"The supplies for each toy are about 50 cents, after you bought some of the tools that you need to do it. And once you have done it a few times you can adapt a toy in about a half hour so the time involved isn't very much either," Klamm, said.

Sarah Domangue is a special education teacher in Harrisburg. She says learning how to adapt a toy will be beneficial at home and at her job.

"I work with kids K-5 that have disabilities and also use a lot of switches so having my experiences with Jaiden at a very early age has helped me to be able to and learn ways that are effective for my students," Domanuge, said.

Adapting electronic toys, just in time for the holidays.

"I will be able to adapt Jaiden's toys for Christmas and his birthday is coming up in December so he gets really spoiled around this time of year so this will be really good for him," Domanuge, said.

There will be a Toy Adaptation workshop next Tuesday, December 2nd at the LifeScape Rehabilitation Center.

They will provide step by step directions on how to make an adaptation to a toy.



http://lifescapesd.org