Gov. Scott Walker has earned a reputation — fairly and justifiably — for being accessible and straightforward when talking about matters of public concern with the media.

But the recently released emails show this is not always the case.

In one instance, it appears Walker even stretched the truth when pressed on an issue he didn't want to discuss.

On Aug. 20, 2010, prosecutors seized the work computer of Walker aide Tim Russell — the first indication that Milwaukee County District Attorney John Chisholm's office was secretly investigating Walker's aides at the county.

The probe would run for nearly three years and lead to six convictions. Prosecutors didn't file charges against Walker or anyone in his current administration.

When asked about the raid two days after it occurred, Walker — then the Milwaukee County executive — said he knew nothing about it.

"Tim's not said anything to me," Walker said.

Asked if the Milwaukee County executive should know that authorities were conducting raids on a staffer's office, Walker dismissed the question.

"I've been busy on other things," he explained.

But the email records from the secret investigation suggest that Walker may have known more — much more — than he was letting on.

Late on the evening of the raid, Walker's county aides sent emails informing Walker and one another that they had been contacted repeatedly by the Journal Sentinel.

"We don't have a comment," Walker said late that evening, without identifying the subject.

"To protect everyone, our comment should be that we don't know anything about it," responded Tom Nardelli, Walker's chief of staff.

Early the next day, then-Walker spokeswoman Fran McLaughlin sent an email to Kelly Rindfleisch, his deputy chief of staff, about Russell.

"I'm guessing Tim's closed-door meeting with Scott had to do with Bice's calls," McLaughlin wrote.

Russell was then Walker's housing director, having previously served as his deputy chief of staff. The two have known each other since college.

Though this wasn't public at the time, Milwaukee County prosecutors took Russell's work computer after finding what they felt was incriminating evidence as a result of a raid on former Walker aide Darlene Wink's house earlier in the month.

Wink pleaded guilty to two misdemeanor counts of raising campaign money for Walker in the county courthouse. Russell was sentenced to two years behind bars for stealing money from a veterans group.

On the afternoon of Aug. 21, 2010 — the day after the raid — Cindy Archer, Walker's county administration director, spoke explicitly about the incident in an email entitled "heads up."

"I am not really in the communication loop with Nardelli anymore so you may already know this ... the DA came in yesterday and took Tim Russell computer???" Archer wrote to Walker. It is not clear whether Walker responded.

A day later, Walker said he hadn't a clue what was going on.

On Saturday, the first-term Republican governor said he didn't recall the situation.

"These are emails from multiple years ago," Walker said when asked at the National Governors Association meeting in Washington, D.C. "I'd have to go back and look at them, but it is not anything I've reviewed."

Elsewhere, the emails show Walker tried to exert a little more control over the press during the tense election year.

On March 27, 2010, Walker instituted a new media policy in which McLaughlin and Nardelli would play good cop, bad cop with the media.

"From this point forward, I want Tom to respond and only after a plan is in place (9 out of 10 requests are going to be traps, so we cannot respond without a plan)," Walker wrote.

The plan, it seems, was to stonewall certain inquiries, even on minor topics.

Late in October 2010, the Journal Sentinel asked for the starting salary for a new county executive, assuming Walker was going to defeat Milwaukee Mayor Tom Barrett in the governor's race. The story looked at potential candidates to replace Walker in Milwaukee County.

Oddly, McLaughlin described the innocuous request in an email as "sneaky."

"If ever there were a time to be nonresponsive, now would be that time," Walker campaign consultant R.J. Johnson instructed the county worker.

Walker was elected four days later.

Journal Sentinel correspondent Jim Myers in Washington, D.C., contributed to this story.

Contact Daniel Bice at (414) 224-2135 or dbice@journalsentinel.com. Follow him on Twitter @DanielBice or on Facebook at fb.me/daniel.bice.