Topics: Affluenza, Johnny Depp, Sting, Wealth, Life News

With a single revelation tailor made to destroy our 35 years of mocking him as a stuffy twit, it turns out Sting is pretty cool.

You know, that Sting. The guy who launched his career sporting a fake Jamaican accent and who in later years became famed for tantric sex stories and the lute playing. The man who “30 Rock” once convincingly described as living on Tan Penis Island. If you do a Google search for his name and “pretentious” you will get nearly 200,000 results. So how did a guy worth roughly $306 million, a man who recently put his seven-bedroom, 8,500-square-foot London home on the market, turn out to be so grounded? In a conversation this weekend with the Mail, the Grammy winner spoke proudly of his six children – aged 37 to 18 — from his two marriages, and how they won’t be counting on the royalties from his old hits to make themselves rich. Reflecting on aging, the 62-year-old said, “I have a story still to tell and part of that is I am facing the end of my life.” And he said he has told his children, “There won’t be much money left because we are spending it! We have a lot of commitments. What comes in we spend, and there isn’t much left. I certainly don’t want to leave them trust funds that are albatrosses round their necks. They have to work. All my kids know that and they rarely ask me for anything, which I really respect and appreciate. Obviously,” he added, ” if they were in trouble I would help them, but I’ve never really had to do that. They have this work ethic that makes them want to succeed on their own merit. People make assumptions, that they were born with a silver spoon in their mouth, but they have not been given a lot.” As they Mail story notes, celebrity chef Nigella Lawson — the daughter of a conservative MP and an heiress – has similarly said, “I am determined that my children should have no financial security. It ruins people not having to earn money.”

Though you might think that expecting one’s adult children to earn their own keep would be a good thing, the headlines regarding Sting’s revelation were far from flattering. Gawker declared this weekend that “Sting is stingy,” the Detroit Free Press reported, “Sting to his kids: Earn your own money!” and Time grimly announced that Sting had said “My Kids Aren’t Getting Any of My Money.”

His stance is certainly a sharp contrast to the glut of parents currently bankrolling the gentrification of your neighborhood with the fancy new condos they’re buying their adult children. It’s a far step away from Johnny Depp, who often pulls down $50 million in a single year and says, “I have to. I mean, it’s not for me. Do you know what I mean? At this point, it’s for my kids. It’s ridiculous, yeah, yeah. But ultimately is it for me? No. No. It’s for the kids.” It’s his money to earn and spend, but let it be noted that Johnny Depp’s kids apparently need superhuman amounts of funding.