'Most of our home owners are getting money back each month'

Will Hauser, assistant site superintendent, cuts 2x4's while working on a home being built by Flatirons Habitat for Humanity in Jamestown, Colorado. ( Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer )

Flatirons Habitat for Humanity is not only providing homes for families in need in Boulder and Broomfield counties — they're building homes that are so energy efficient that they actually make their owners money.

"Most of our home owners are getting money back each month" from the utility providers, said executive director Susan Lythgoe.

Flatirons Habitat began focusing on energy efficiency several years ago as a way to reduce utility costs for occupants. Today, all of the homes built by the organization are built to some of the highest energy standards in the area.

"For us, it's all about affordability," said Lythgoe. "The less utility bills are, the more likely a family can afford to live in a home."

The Christian nonprofit takes advantage of free labor and in-kind donations to keep costs low on green builds. About seven percent of the construction cost on a home goes toward "green" measures — half of the average cost in a private sector build.

Those measures include efficient HVAC systems and appliances, xeroscaping, solar panels and creating a well-insulated house.

A tight envelope is the most important factor in achieving energy efficiency, said Henry Mueller, chairman of the Colorado Green Building Guild.

It's like dressing for winter, he explained. "You've got to make sure you have the best hat (roof) jacket (walls) pants, shoes and socks (foundation and footing)."

Advertisement

That, plus adding a "couple inches" of foam insulation, will created a tight structure that is cheaper to heat and cool.

"It doesn't add a lot of cost, but it's the details you have to pay attention to when you build," Mueller said.

The biggest cost for a green build is the renewable energy source, most often solar photovoltaic (PV) panels.

Most of the Habitat homes are designed to accommodate PV, which are often donated or made available through grants.

The city of Boulder offers a rebate program to refund a portion of taxes paid on material and permits associated with solar installation, and offers grants to nonprofit organizations and affordable housing partners.

Flatirons Habitat does not pass along costs of green construction to residents. Housing prices, dictated by the city as part of affordable housing agreements, have remained the same since the organization began its focus on efficiency.

"So far, we've been able to do this (energy efficiency) within that price," Lythgoe said. "We have to eat that (cost difference), but it's really very minimal."

Ron Flax, Boulder County's sustainability examiner, said that while Habitat's model is hard to apply to the private sector, they are in fact contributing to making green building cheaper.

"As more homes in our community are built to achieve (energy efficiency), contractors and designers become more familiar with the necessary construction details (and) materials become regularly stocked items in our lumber yards," Flax said.

"That helps drive down the costs for everyone."

Shay Castle: 303-473-1626, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle