Thursday night, with the score tied 1-1 in the third period, the New York Islanders’ Thomas Greiss made a save on the Avalanche’s Carl Soderberg and the puck rebounded to the left corner, behind the goal line.

Colorado defenseman Francois Beauchemin, charged with being the responsible stay-at-home blueliner when partner Erik Johnson joins or even leads the rush, chased down the puck.

Yes, in the corner. Behind the goal line. In the offensive zone.

“Every time on the (sides), that belongs to the D,” Avalanche coach Patrick Roy said. “That’s their responsibility. If the D goes down, the forward’s going to come up, and that’s exactly what happened on that play.”

Beauchemin threw the puck toward the net, and in the crease it caromed off the skate of the Islanders’ Mikhail Grabovski and in for Beauchemin’s second goal of the night — and it stood up as the game-winner.

“I’m not going to be there every game, but if I read that I can be first on the puck and make a play, I’ll do it,” Beauchemin said Friday, looking back. “Even though I’m a defensive-minded defenseman, I still have the offense in me that I can read plays and make something happen.

“That’s hockey sense. When you know you can get there and do something, you just go. … We talk about getting our D’s involved in the offensive zone too. That’s one thing we practice every day, with our forwards backing us up.”

The Avalanche could have been, and should have been, more aggressive in bolstering its defense in free agency the past couple of offseasons. But the major signing there — of Beauchemin to a three-year contract worth $13.5 million — so far is working out.

There are a few asterisks: He’s no gazelle, he’s 35, and it’s not out of line to argue that he would be more effective in a second pairing than in a first entrusted to be out against opposing top lines. But in this situation, the Avalanche doesn’t have much choice, and he has been solid in developing a chemistry with Johnson.

Beauchemin is averaging 24 minutes of ice time, which would be his highest figure since the 25 minutes he played per night for Anaheim in the 2011-12 season.

“I love it,” he said. “The more I play, the better I feel.”

The risk in signing unrestricted free agents in their mid-30s is that the winner at times has offered that “extra” or “clinching” year, extending the risk beyond money to commitment in a hard-cap sport. That’s starting to be a concern for the Avs with Jarome Iginla, who has another season left on his three-year deal, and could with Beauchemin down the road. Understandably, Beauchemin doesn’t think it will be an issue with him.

“Being 35, I know that because of the way I play and my health, I have at least three more years,” Beauchemin said. “I keep telling E.J., ‘It’s up to you whether I play after that.’ “

Footnote. Avalanche radio play-by-play man Marc Moser and game-night anthem singer Jake Schroeder do praiseworthy work helping escort World War II veterans to the sites of their service in Europe. Last week they were visited in Denver by Ralph Peeters, a remarkable Dutchman they have met in their travels. Peeters discovers, adopts and tells the stories of U.S. World War II casualties who are buried in the Netherlands. His website is storiesbeyondthegraves.com. I met Peeters when he came to an Avalanche skate at the Pepsi Center with Moser, but I couldn’t get him to comment on the power play.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or @TFrei

Spotlight on …

“.500 hockey”

When: Whenever an NHL team, including the Avalanche, wins a game and gets back to having the same number in the first two columns of the standings — wins and losses — we’re told the team has scratched and clawed back to “.500.”

What’s up: For about 18 reasons, that’s ridiculous at worst and misleading at best, and anyone who goes along with it representing some kind of “break-even” point, or middle ground, has bought into one of the great myths of professional sports.

Background: Whether deliberately or inadvertently, the NHL and commissioner Gary Bettman came up with a standings system that makes everyone look as if they’re doing better than they are. That’s because some games are worth three points, some two, and a win in overtime or a shootout counts as a win and a loss in overtime or a shootout still is worth a point to the loser — and it doesn’t show up in the “L” column. Percentages don’t show up in the points-based standings at all, so going along with the “.500” myth requires gullibility in accepting the NHL propaganda.

Frei’s take: You think 37-37-8 is “.500”? Something to crow about because a team has attained half its maximum points possible? If that’s .500, 24 of the 30 teams in the NHL were above “.500” last season because they had more wins than losses. For heaven’s sake, the Avalanche had an awful season, but its record was 39-31-12 — well above, ahem, “.500.” The point is, because of those three-point games, the NHL average, or the true break-even point, is about 92 points in a season — or a little more than 1.1 points per game. The solution is to just scoff at all references to “.500 hockey,” until nobody is insulting enough to try to foist them on us.