Kevin Cappelen, a Naples, Fla. dentist originally from Kenosha, shows off his gear to Green Bay Packers coach Mike McCarthy at a fundraiser for the Greater Naples YMCA Sunday night. Credit: Greg Stanley

SHARE Hudson Fry, 10, of Naples, Fla. tries on Green Bay Packers great Dave Robinson’s Super Bowl I ring. Hudson was 6 years old when the Packers won Super Bowl XVL, the same age his dad, Karl Fry, was when Robinson and the Packers won the first Super Bowl. “We're locked in as Packer fans for life,” Karl Fry said. Greg Stanley Frank Winters, the Packers’ center from the 1990s, signs a football at a fundraiser for the Greater Naples YMCA Sunday night. Greg Stanley

By

Scattered rain fell outside as a few hundred Green Bay Packers fans, all decked in green and gold, poured into the Greater Naples YMCA on Sunday night. They filed past a two-piece band, over a rowing machine, and past the collectibles set up for a silent auction for a chance to meet or get a picture with some of the great legends of a franchise haunted by them.

Dave Robinson, still tall and square, walked gingerly down a hallway as the crowd started to recognize who he was. The Hall of Fame linebacker, who prowled alongside Ray Nitschke during the Ice Bowl and anchored Vince Lombardi's great defenses of the 1960s, popped off his Super Bowl I ring for anyone who wanted to hold it. He signed helmets and footballs.

"I want a raise, Madam Owner," Robinson, 73, told one fan, as he signed her Packers stock certificate.

The newly rebuilt Y on the corner of Airport Pulling and Pine Ridge roads became a part of Packerland. Head coach Mike McCarthy, who heard about the 2013 fire that destroyed much of the building, is spearheading a golf tournament Monday to raise money for the organization.

Now that the building is almost entirely rebuilt, the money raised by McCarthy and the Packers alumni will help hundreds of kids make it to the Y's various summer camps, CEO Paul Thein said.

McCarthy, soft-spoken and ready to smile, said he wasn't surprised by the number of Wisconsin license plates he's seen in Naples, or by the number of fans here ready to support a team more than 1,000 miles away. A line of those fans reached out the door waiting to get a picture with him.

"They're everywhere," McCarthy said. "Man, I tell you, I was in London and I was stopped by 10 or 15 Packer fans."

Blue-eyed Jerry Kramer, the 79-year-old All-Pro offensive lineman who chronicled the Lombardi teams in his best-selling book, played his last game of football in 1968, 47 years ago. As an offense lineman, he said he expected to stop being asked for autographs and become relatively forgotten about 45 years ago.

"I wrote back then that I'd be remembered for a couple years and then go back to Idaho and drift off into the mist of time," Kramer said. "That was logical."

But the mystique of the Lombardi years never quite faded. Neither did Kramer's role in lore, even though he played the typically unheralded position of offensive guard. Kramer was one of two linemen who were key to the "Packer Sweep," a play drawn up by Lombardi, not for its complexity or misdirection. It was just a play that was executed so well and so often that opposing teams knew it was coming, but still couldn't stop it.

What's still striking about that team, Kramer said — and a lesson that transcends sports — is that the year before Lombardi arrived, the Packers had their worst season in history. Even with an unfair amount of talent — 14 future Hall of Famers or should-be Hall of Famers — the team was awful.

The faces didn't change under Lombardi, Kramer said. But the attitude did.

"It was magical," said Kramer, who is not in the Hall of Fame. "It's almost like the Lord prepares us only halfway and it's up to us to do something with the other half. You try to do it with a touch of flair and quest for excellence. If you can, you'll be among the top 10 percent of people in this country no matter what it is you do."