They arrested Oneal Cotton, as well as Chameka Williams and Tia Smith who were also in the home.

The Village Police busted a drug house this week, and the accused drug dealer dove out of a window half-naked to escape.

The chief said it is one of the larger drug busts they have had, and the suspect's neighbors had no idea it happened.

Oneal Cotton was arrested on four drug complaints, as well as complaints of concealing stolen property, obstruction and possession of a firearm after a felony conviction.

According to the probable cause affidavit, officers found in Cotton's home 34 one-pound bricks of marijuana, a jar of marijuana, seven grams of cocaine, $8,679 in cash, scales and packaging material, as well as a 9MM reported stolen out of Oklahoma City.

"I was completely shocked," neighbor Kyle Sanders said.

Sanders said Cotton was always very friendly with the neighbors on Downing Street, but that he never knew his children were playing near a drug house.

"Me and my wife had an argument or two, and he's been right there to talk to us and say, 'Hey, guys calm down,'" explained Sanders. "I'm just, I'm blown away by it."

The Village Police were tipped off by a concerned citizen.

The caller reported cars constantly driving up to Cotton's house and stopping for a short while, then leaving.

The affidavit said those are indications of a drug house.

Police decided to collect Cotton's trash on five separate occasions and said each time they searched the contents of the trash, they found evidence of drug activity.

That lead to a search warrant that was executed Monday.

"One of the larger ones we've had for marijuana," said Chief Steve Jagosh. "This is 34 pounds individually packaged, and it's one of the larger ones we've had."

Officers said Cotton dove out of a back window and ran from them wearing only boxers when they served the search warrant.

They arrested him, as well as Tia Smith and Chameka Williams who were also in the home.

"He was the one who was getting a large quantity of the marijuana and breaking those up to individual packages and giving to dealers to sell," Chief Jagosh explained.

Chief Jagosh said this case is a perfect example of community policing -- citizens keeping an eye out for suspicious activity and calling police to investigate it.