The rent is too damn high—and so are the utility bills. Fortunately, Seattle offers discounts to poor households.

Related Content

Unfortunately, few are enrolled. Although Seattle’s Utilities Discount Program (UDP) could halve the utility bills of roughly 72,000 eligible Seattle households, only about 17,600 households are enrolled in the program.

The Human Services Department handles enrollment and outreach for UDP on behalf of City Light and Seattle Public Utilities (SPU), at an annual cost of $1.5 million. Human Services managed to bump up the number of net new enrollments by a record-breaking 3,000 last year—but the lion’s share of that bump happened in early 2014. Since then, enrollment growth has slowed.

“That’s good,” says city councilmember Sally Bagshaw. “They got 3,000 [households] enrolled in a year.” Then her voice drops to a whisper: “But Metro just got 9,000 [people] done in 90 days.”

She’s referring to Metro’s infant ORCA-LIFT program, which made national news as a bold experiment in economic progressivism and has become the UDP’s embarrassingly successful younger sibling. LIFT discounts ORCA transit passes by more than 50 percent for poor riders. Metro contracts with Seattle/King County Public Health for outreach and enrollment, just as SPU and City Light contract promotion of UDP to Human Services.

But where UDP’s enrollments fluttered, LIFT’s skyrocketed—it’s on track to recruit 40,000 people by the end of its first year. To be fair, UDP enrollments are counted by household, LIFT’s by individual, so a side-by-side comparison of enrollment numbers is unfair to UDP. It also means that UDP can’t easily piggyback on other programs—such as LIFT—that have already verified individuals’ income.

Still, this enrollment disparity has raised eyebrows at City Hall. At a recent meeting of the Public Utilities and Neighborhoods Committee, which Bagshaw chairs, she was briefed by city employees on UDP’s lackluster enrollment—and then by county employees on LIFT’s stellar enrollment. It was, by all appearances, a frustrating experience for the District 7 incumbent.

“We are paying, between Seattle City Light and Public Utilities, $1.5 million” per year to Human Services to do outreach and enrollment for UDP, she told county representatives during their briefing. “So you can understand that I’m over here having a small fit, thinking that you are doing what you’re doing at almost a quarter of the cost.”

Bagshaw has been steadfastly Seattle Polite in discussing the programs. “This is not my effort to try to cast aspersions on any department or on the mayor,” who oversees Human Services, says Bagshaw. “I really want us to be working together, and I can’t say that loudly enough.”

But you know what they say about protesting too much. At that same committee meeting in May, she told Metro representative Matt Hansen that “I’m looking at the comparison of the city of Seattle slide, a historical enrollment of clients in the [UDP] program which is just about flatlined, until 2015 where we’ve added some, and what you’ve done in 90 days. I mean, I hate to compare, but this is extraordinary.”

Why has UDP enrollment been so disappointing? In the middle of a city housing crisis, you’d think there would be a line out the door for any government programs offering subsidies.

One answer: Enrollment is an onerous crawl through paperwork hell. “Analysis and client feedback,” an internal review of the program published in May notes, “indicated a lack of available access and information regarding UDP, and frustration with the length of time from application to confirmation of enrollment because of the paperwork required to validate eligibility.”

By comparison, ORCA LIFT applicantscan walk into a Public Health office (or an office of one of their eight agency partners), slap down their ID, and quickly get enrolled in a variety of programs. LIFT has been able to do this by using data collected during the rollout of the Affordable Care Act. If someone has already qualified for a program with comparable income requirements (say, Medicaid), then Public Health employees can deduce that their income also qualifies them for LIFT.

Daphne Pie, who coordinates LIFT outreach at Public Health, says that using pre-existing databases to verify income eligibility allows Public Health to “say to the client, let us look at the existing systems first . . . and look at your eligibility there, so that we reduce that paperwork nightmare that clients have to go through in order to get eligible for a program.”

Human Services has begun to streamline paperwork requirements for UDP, looking for common-sense ways to make it easier for Seattleites to get into UDP and stay there. Human Services managed to hang onto 346 enrolled households by no longer making people reapply to UDP when they move to a new address, and they say they’ve managed to get the time from an application’s submission and its first look-over by staff down to less than three weeks.

“We want to find ways to [coordinate with Human Services] even more,” says Public Health’s Jerry DeGrieck. “I think that the city of Seattle and HSD and Public Health are very motivated to make improvements at UDP . . . as soon as possible”—potentially within months.

Jason Johnson, the Human Services deputy director in charge of UDP, agrees, saying that he expects an agreement with Public Health by the end of the year that will grant Human Services access to the same state and federal databases that Public Health has used to quickly verify LIFT income eligibility.

But for Bagshaw, the changes so far are just nibbling at the edge of a problem that deserves voracious mastication. The application form “really set me back on my heels,” she told the city briefers. “I don’t know if you’ve looked at this,” she told them before reading the form’s list of 10 different income categories. “If I had to provide that stuff myself, with files and Xerox copy machines available, I’m not sure how I would do that, let alone if you’re under stress of income deprivation.”

cjaywork@seattleweekly.com