Welcome to the world of GIFs, Mr. President.

President Barack Obama will host a live Q&A on Tumblr called #ObamaIRL on Tuesday to discuss education, college affordability and student debt.

See also: White House Science Fair Kids Are Smarter Than Obama, Says Obama

David Karp, Tumblr's founder and CEO, will field questions submitted by Tumblr creators.

The Q&A will follow Obama's announcement on Monday concerning the expansion of the Pay As You Earn repayment program, which started in 2012 as a way to limit a borrower's monthly payments to 10% of his discretionary income. Though the White House believes "most" current borrowers will now qualify for the program, only 1.6 million of the 37 million Americans with student loan debt are currently enrolled in the program.

With college tuitions tripling over the past three decades and 71% of students taking out an average of $29,400 in student loan debt, receiving input from those directly affected — the students — is more pertinent than ever for the Obama administration.

More than 40% of Tumblr's users are between the ages of 18 and 34, according to White House officials, meaning issues concerning access to higher education and student loans is particularly relevant.

"Community Q&As like this allow us to reach large, engaged audiences around specific issues they care about, and Tumblr's demographics make it a great place to reach younger Americans on education and college affordability," a White House official told Mashable.

Image: White House

Image: White House

Image: White House

Image: White House

Obama is no stranger to answering questions online. In 2012, Obama was the first sitting U.S. president to participate in a Reddit AMA (Ask Me Anything). It instantly became one of the most popular AMAs the site has ever seen. In January, Obama hosted a Google+ Hangout, answering questions about his State of the Union address. And in March, Obama took to Quora, a question-and-answer social network, to talk about the Affordable Care Act.

You can watch the live stream on the White House's Tumblr page on Tuesday at 4 p.m. ET.

Have something to add to this story? Share it in the comments.