Wide receiver Davante Adams was a second-round pick for Green Bay in 2014. Credit: Mike De Sisti

By of the

Green Bay— Just because the Green Bay Packers are scheduled to wait about three hours Thursday night before selecting a player in the first round of the National Football League draft doesn't mean they need to feel the least bit anxious.

An executive in personnel for another team last week said the Packers' No. 30 slot wouldn't preclude them from addressing one of their defensive needs if general manager Ted Thompson so chooses.

"I think they're sitting pretty," the personnel man said. "For picking as late as they are, they have to feel good about it.

"Ted will get a corner and a defensive lineman and a rush linebacker. It's just a matter how they've got their board stacked."

For Thompson's 11th draft in Green Bay, he has the team's own choice in each of the seven rounds plus two more sixth-round choices as compensation for free-agent losses in 2014.

"I think he feels he can trade down and get another pick and still get a good player at the top of the second round," the executive said. "It'd be as good a player as he would get at 30. This is a second-round draft in the first round.

"Or, he could package something and move up from the bottom of the second (No. 62) if he wanted to and assure himself of getting another good player."

The executive agreed to assess the status and degree of need at each of the Packers' positions:

Wide receiver: "They've got their starting three receivers. There's been solid, productive players there. Looks like they've got depth. (Davante) Adams is a second-round pick. They're in good shape there, but they've got a lot of picks. If you stick to the board maybe there's another guy that comes up, but it's not a glaring need."

Tight end: "They've got (Andrew) Quarless, they've got (Richard) Rodgers who was a third-round pick last year. Looking at the draft, this is not the year to be jumping on a tight end. This is as thin as probably ever. But they may slide somebody in late. Unless they think this kid from Minnesota (Maxx Williams) fits. I don't think there's a consensus out there that you've got to have that guy."

Tackle: "They don't really have a lot of draft choices sitting behind the front five. Only one. There are very capable guys that can develop and be great swing tackles. I think their starters are set, but they definitely need to put somebody in the pipeline. This is the year to do it, and they could very well do it at 30. It's just a matter of how their board falls."

Guard: "They're going to take an offensive lineman or two. It's just a matter of where. I don't think they have a backup on the O-line they feel can be a starter."

Center: "They've got a fourth-rounder (JC Tretter) right behind him (Corey Linsley) so they're set. That's the one area on the line they're comfortable because they have a draft choice. That's probably the best position on the offensive line."

Quarterback: "They've got two quarterbacks. It's not a draft to really be thinking about it. They could probably get somebody to be a third guy or practice-squad guy but they're set at quarterback. (Scott) Tolzien is developing. He got better. He had to play the year before and it wasn't good. This year, outstanding preseason and then he didn't have to play. I thought (Matt) Blanchard was a good pickup. That's another one that could potentially develop."

Running back: "They're set. Those two backs are solid backs. They also got a college free agent in (Rajion) Neal. This is a good year to draft a running back. They could pick up another guy. I think they'll wait on that position."

Fullback: "How many plays did he (John Kuhn) average? Ten plays a game (actually, 13.6)? You've got to develop fullbacks. But they've got picks if something falls right."

Defensive end: "They got (Josh) Boyd at 5-technique, and Daniels at right defensive tackle, or 3-technique. They've got a first-round pick in (Datone) Jones and a third-round pick in (Khyri) Thornton. They've obviously done some work at that position. They've got some expectations there. I think it's a need."

Nose tackle: "They brought (B.J.) Raji back. They've got to upgrade. They're kind of so-so there. They got (Letroy) Guion but he got in trouble and has some issues. It's a glaring need."

Outside linebacker: "Obviously, (Julius) Peppers had a great year. That's what he usually does. He has a great first year and then tapers off. They've got a first-round pick in (Nick) Perry and a huge sum of money being paid to Peppers. They have two outside guys with the luxury of moving Clay (Matthews) outside in nickel. So in their minds they have three outside rushers, especially on third downs. (Mike) Neal is a role player."

Inside linebacker: "They would like to have another inside guy to replace (A.J.) Hawk. I like the (Carl) Bradford kid inside. Will they be looking for another guy inside? Absolutely they will. But I think they're comfortable playing Clay inside. As long as Peppers is playing at a high level, that protects Clay."

Cornerback: "They've lost some people and they have to replace them. They lost a corner (Tramon Williams) to the Browns. They've got a second-round pick in (Casey) Hayward. Sam Shields has been there forever, basically. You've got to have three corners, right? They need a corner. I don't think (Micah) Hyde is a corner for them. Obviously, they do (see Hayward as a starter)."

Safety: "They got the safety (Ha Ha Clinton-Dix) last year, which was big. I think they solved that issue last year. Hyde is kind of a tweener. They've got three. That's a strong safety position. They just locked it up (by re-signing Sean Richardson). (Safety) was a bad position to take this year."

Kicker: "Same guy (Mason Crosby) they've had, right? There's no draftable kickers. The combine was probably the worst display of kicking talent I've ever seen. It was, like, 'Are you kidding me? You can't develop a kicker?'"

Punter: "I don't think they're going to get any help coming out of college. There's no sure bets coming out at punter."

Return specialist: "There's some unique players that can return kicks at wide receiver. I don't think it's an option at 30, but there's guys like the kid from Miami (Phillip Dorsett) that can come in and do it."

Long snapper: "Been there a while, hasn't he (Brett Goode)? Those guys last forever."

Special-teams ace: "In their minds, they changed the coach. The coach (Shawn Slocum) went with his guys, and now the coach is gone and his guys went with him. They were 32nd in the league? I think they opened it up for some rookies."

Round

Pick

Overall 1 30 30 2 30 62 3 30 94 4 30 129 5 30 166 6 30 206 6* 34 210 6* 37 213 7 30 247

* Compensatory selections for losing free agents Evan Dietrich-Smith, James Jones and C.J. Wilson; can't be traded