Second annual diorama contest draws upon literary themes

A diorama based on "Hell is Other People," a scene from Jean-Paul Sartre's play "No Exit," a Best Adult Diorama entry into the Longmont Library's second annual Peeps Diorama contest. ( Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer )

When Danine Robertus thinks about her Peep diorama, she likes to imagine French playwright Jean-Paul Sartre examining it cross-legged, smoking, with trademark glasses in place.

The 37-year-old Barbed Wire Books employee used Sartre's "No Exit" play, with the famous line "Hell is other people," as her inspiration for "Hell is Other Peeps." Nothing conveys the depth of that particular piece of work more appropriately than perfectly posed marshmallow candies.

If you go What: Peeps diorama competition When: From now until Friday. Hours vary. Where: Longmont Public Library, 409 Fourth Ave., first floor lobby. Cost: Free. More info: Go to longmontcolorado.gov/library

It's all part of the Longmont Public Library's second annual Peep diorama competition and, while the Washington Post has been running a Peeps Diorama Contest for years with often times spectacular results, the Longmont library has been harvesting some (literally) sweet art too.

It's frankly incredible just what can be done with this little (usually) yellow marshmallow animal. There are apparently no limits beyond what the budding artist can imagine besides, according to Longmont artist Cole Brenner, shrinkage.

Advertisement

"Honestly, I've never worked with marshmallow," said Brenner, of Superhero Nap Time art studio. "I'd imagine it could shrink, though."

The library's competition, which has a "literary works" theme, is split into two categories — 16 and under, and over 16 — and librarian Josie Brockmann said that the competition is proving very popular with local kids.

"Last year, we had 40 entries overall," Brockmann said. "We're hoping for a similar number this year. Some people work as a family, while some of the children worked on their dioramas here at our second-Saturday event."

At the time of writing, there had been 25 children's submissions and seven adult submissions, including Robertus' entry.

Those familiar with the play will recall that it deals with three deceased characters, punished in the afterlife by being locked in a room for eternity together. Here, the Peeps are posed in a wonderfully true recreation of that room, complete with a Peep bust.

"I love philosophy, and the play 'No Exit' is about how we have to deal with people in real life," Robertus said. "Sometimes we don't want to be in the same room with people we don't like, but we just have to. It's a lot about how to keep some perspective on the fact that not everybody is going to like you and you're not going to like everybody."

It's a widely adored and critically acclaimed play, tackling tough issues but making them accessible and entertaining to the every man. Perfect fodder, then, for a marshmallow re-creation.

"I don't like marshmallows," Robertus said. "I was bitter because I had to pay $1 for each package, and would never eat them. But then, I don't have to like every candy, so I guess it fits."

Peeps characters battle with miniature lightsabers in a diorama based on the Star Wars Death Star battle. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

There have been some epic entries in the children's categories, such as Abdullah's "Hop on Pop," inspired by the Dr. Seuss book of the same name; and Jayden's "Death Star Battle," in which Darth Vader and Obi Wan Kenobi Peeps having a little Peep lightsaber fight. In all fairness, there's something glorious about an epic and iconic scene from Hollywood's rich and illustrious history reduced to two marshmallows balancing in a shoebox.

A genuinely incredible piece — Alexis' "To Serve Peeps" — recreates and expands upon the classic "Twilight Zone" episode, "To Serve Man," in which aliens land on Earth and help humanity solve the world's greatest problems — and leave behind a book with the title "To Serve Man." Only after a number of humans have agreed to go back to the aliens' home planet does a code-breaker arrive at the true interpretation of the title. It's a cookbook!

"How to Serve Peeps" is based on the The Twilight Zone episode titled "How to Serve Man." (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

The episode has passed into American pop culture folklore and has been parodied numerous times, including notably on "The Simpsons" with the "Hungry are the Damned" episode (complete with the "How to Cook for Humans" gag). So it seems entirely appropriate to see it in a diorama setting, complete with Peep aliens and people — and a little bit of Peep on a plate.

Elsewhere, there were Peep dioramas based on Scott O'Dell's "Island of the Blue Dolphins," submitted by Team Digby Goodchild, and a spider's web-related scene called "Other Mother" from "Coraline."

The work is wonderful and, again, proves that if you combine great literature with some imagination, and whole lot of marshmallow critters, you're likely to strike gold.

The competition is now closed to new entries, but the dioramas are on display in the library's first floor lobby until Friday. The public can vote on their favorites during the week, and employees from the Longmont Museum will judge the winners.

Brett Callwood: 303-684-5274, callwoodb@timescall.com or twitter.com/city_slang