For the first time in 16 years, voters in the 12th Congressional District are guaranteed a new representative and the leading candidates are a familiar face from the Legislature and an outspoken opponent of federal health care policies.

U.S. Rep. Rush Holt announced in February that he would not seek re-election to a ninth term in Congress, citing “many reasons, all hopeful and positive.” Running to replace him are Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Mercer) and Republican candidate Dr. Alieta Eck, of Franklin Township.

For both candidates, finding new ways to grow the economy – and bring more jobs to New Jersey – remains the chief issue on the campaign trail this year.

In addition to standard tax credits offered to large businesses as an incentive to stay on American soil, Watson Coleman suggested offering tax credits specifically for research and development companies.

“We need a reliable plan of action to allow these start-up companies to analyze what they’ll have in terms of support so they can make us a go-to place for job creators like this,” Watson Coleman said in an interview last week.

Throughout her campaign, Watson Coleman has focused on the importance of investing in infrastructure, which provides numerous jobs that often last longer than standard temporary work, she said.

“It creates jobs for people that help them feel secure. They’ll in turn use that money and create a desire for more consumables, which drives up the economy and creates more jobs in small businesses,’ Watson Coleman said.

At the same time, the resulting transportation network not only helps to attract businesses — and more jobs — but, in the case of mass transportation, helps the environment as well.

“All of these different strategies get cars off the road and decrease pollution in the air. It’s a win-win-win,” she said.

For Eck, the key to economic growth comes from going a bit further than tax credits, which she said she supports.

In addition to tax credits, Eck has called for removing “burdensome” regulations placed on businesses that she said have bogged down entrepreneurs enough that they’re avoiding New Jersey.

“New Jersey just happens to be the state with the highest property taxes and highest cost of living, so it’s hard to attract companies. We need to make our government more efficient and just smarter,” Eck said.

But like many issues she’s focused on during her campaign, Eck said the best way to bring back jobs is through re-examining and changing President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. Small businesses are less likely to hire that dreaded 51st employee, which requires employers to offer health insurance or face fines, and others are more likely to lower wages or lay off workers.

“People are being cut from full-time to part-time because of the act. Their wages can’t go up if their employers are now asked to spend that much more on health insurance,” Eck said. “They already can’t afford health insurance and now their premiums will be higher and wages lower.”



Eck hasn’t pulled any punches when discussing the act, calling it at an Oct. 22 debate against Watson Coleman “anything but affordable.”

The law has made health care an even more convoluted process for beneficiaries while simultaneously placing more of a burden on taxpayers by placing more people on Medicaid, Eck said.

When discussing potential cuts in government spending, Eck immediately pointed to the $7 billion added in new Medicaid enrollment since the act was rolled out.

She recalled one retired woman at her Piscataway practice who had been spending $500 each month on her health insurance plan that, after the act was rolled out, was voided.

Instead, the woman was placed on Medicaid, Eck said.

“That’s ridiculous. This woman is perfectly willing to pay $500 per month and is now paying nothing. The taxpayers are paying it now,” Eck said.

Watson Coleman said she was still in support of the act, which she said took a “big step forward” in providing health insurance for those who would otherwise be without.

But there are definitely issues that need to be addressed, she said, including implementing an easier sign-up process, looking at additional surcharges and fees placed on previously existing plans and the removal of families from much-needed plans such as the Child’s Health Insurance Program.

“There’s issues from insurance providers, medical providers and beneficiaries,” Watson Coleman said. “It’s the most comprehensive health care policy we’ve experienced since Medicare.

“Medicare has undergone improvements, Social Security has undergone improvements and so will this. But the notion of scrapping it and starting again is absolutely unacceptable,” she said.

On other issues, Watson Coleman and Eck remain far apart, as expected. Watson Coleman has called for stricter gun laws, including bans on assault weapons and high-capacity magazines, while Eck has said new gun laws wouldn’t curb violence, only put more restrictions on law-abiding gun owners.

Both candidates have said the education system needs improvement, with Watson Coleman calling for more funding for science, technology, engineering and mathematics programs while Eck supports school choice programs.

“You should put tuition in a child’s backpack so you decide where they can go, where the better location is for this child,” Eck said. “It might make those failing public schools go out of business, but I don’t think that’s terrible.”

Their backgrounds are different and each has used her experience as a talking point on the campaign trail.

Watson Coleman was first elected to the state Assembly in 1998, serving as majority leader from 2006 to 2009 while also serving as chairwoman from the state Democratic committee from 2002 to 2006.

“Collaborating with people, sponsoring legislative initiatives and advocating for issues are things that I’ve already ha experienced on the statewide level. That will be very helpful to me in hitting the ground running,” Watson Coleman said.

Eck has never served in an elected office, running unsuccessfully for the Republican nomination in the 2013 special U.S. Senate election.

A practicing physician who runs a private practice in Piscataway and free clinic in Franklin Township, Eck said her private-sector experience makes her a “spokeswoman” for patients, physicians and taxpayers.

“I’ve been in the private sector, balanced budgets and solved problems,” Eck said. “I see the people who are hurting all the time and the public policy issues that are hurting them. I have to work to solve that hurting.”

Upon victory, either candidate would become the state’s first congresswoman since former U.S. Rep. Marge Roukema (R-5th Dist.) left office in 2003. If Watson Coleman wins the seat, she will become the state’s first African-American congresswoman.

Although Holt was elected by close margins in 1998 and 2000, the 12th District has since been redistricted twice and leaned strongly Democratic ever since. Since 2001, Holt has won re-election with an average margin of about 25 percentage points.

But Eck said she represented unaffiliated voters who weren’t as likely to simply vote for the same party now that Holt is leaving office.

“More than half our district have no party affiliation and those are the people I believe I can attract this year,” Eck said.

Mike Davis may be reached at mdavis@njtimes.com. Follow him on Twitter @byMikeDavis. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.