Nevada Gov. Brian Sandoval, a Republican, has taken his name out of contention in President Obama’s search for a nominee to fill the current Supreme Court vacancy.

In a statement Sandoval provided Thursday to Nevada political reporter and commentator Jon Ralston, the governor said:

Earlier today, I notified the White House that I do not wish to be considered at this time for possible nomination to the Supreme Court of the United States. … The notion of being considered for a seat on the highest court in the land is beyond humbling and I am incredibly grateful to have been mentioned.

Sandoval, 53, said he had spoken with three key senators—Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, R-Ky.; Minority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.; and Dean Heller, R-Nev.—and “expressed the same desire” not to be considered.

Obama is pondering a nominee to succeed Antonin Scalia, the 29-year conservative standard-bearer on the Supreme Court, who died Feb. 13.

Political observers speculated the White House was using Sandoval to pressure Senate Republicans who don’t want to move to fill the Scalia seat while Obama remains president.

Among Ralston’s initial tweets on his scoop:

Breaking: Sandoval takes himself out of consideration for SCOTUS. — Jon Ralston (@RalstonReports) February 25, 2016

Bottom line: Once Sandoval saw strategic leak to Post of only his name, he got the game that was going on, got out before he got bludgeoned. — Jon Ralston (@RalstonReports) February 25, 2016

News of Sandoval’s withdrawal from consideration came one day after NARAL Pro-Choice America issued a statement opposing Obama’s potential nomination of Sandoval, a centrist who advocates a woman’s right to have an abortion, citing what it considers his shaky record on the issue.

“We find it hard to believe that President Obama, who shares the value of reproductive freedom for all Americans, would put forward Governor Sandoval as a serious contender for the Supreme Court nomination,” NARAL President Ilyse Hogue said in the statement.

“But if he were, Sandoval’s checkered history on reproductive freedom should raise some serious flags—it certainly has for us.”

Hogue and her organization cited no specifics to explain the “checkered history” charge.

>>> Democrats Predict Republicans Will Back Down on Scalia Seat

The Washington Post was the first of many news outlets reporting Wednesday that the Obama administration was vetting Sandoval as a potential nominee to succeed Scalia, who died at age 79. The Daily Signal reported Monday that Sandoval’s name was prominent in speculation about Obama’s potential choices.

More Senate Republicans on Tuesday backed their leader, McConnell, in saying they would not consider any nominee to the Supreme Court this year, but Obama indicated Wednesday he would try to convince GOP members to change course.

“I think it will be very difficult for Mr. McConnell to explain, if the public concludes that this person is very well qualified, that the Senate should stand in the way simply for political reasons,” Obama told reporters in the Oval Office.

Sandoval was never a serious consideration but WaPo and others did Admin's bidding anyway knowing that full well — Stephen Miller (@redsteeze) February 25, 2016

I am shocked SHOCKED that Brian Sandoval isn't going to be Obama's SCOTUS nominee. — Chris Cillizza (@TheFix) February 25, 2016

Although Sandoval is a Republican, the former federal judge has broken with the national party leadership on some issues, leaving in question the possibility of his confirmation even among GOP senators.

Sandoval was elected Nevada governor in 2010. He has supported pro-choice policies and last year affirmed the Supreme Court’s decision on same-sex marriage as settled law.

“The mere rumors of his nomination brought swift pushback from a GOP so committed to obstructing the process and letting President Obama do his job that they don’t even want to let one of their own get a hearing,” NARAL’s Hogue said.

Brian Sandoval takes himself out of running for job he was never going to be offered. #notshocking — John Bresnahan (@BresPolitico) February 25, 2016

that was a fast 15 minutes #sandoval https://t.co/soKKZ0iO0Q — Kate Bennett (@KateBennett_DC) February 25, 2016

A Sandoval spokesman earlier told The Washington Post and other news outlets that the White House has not yet contacted the governor regarding a potential appointment to the Supreme Court.

In Nevada, Sandoval had the backing of Reid and also had met with Heller regarding the open seat.

While in Washington, D.C., last weekend for the annual National Governors Association meeting, Sandoval spoke with the two senators and told reporters he was “honored” his name had been mentioned as a potential successor to Scalia.

I gather Sandoval realized he was was a pawn and wanted no part of it. He wants a judicial or Cabinet post someday. pic.twitter.com/e5ySKReaut — Jon Ralston (@RalstonReports) February 25, 2016

[Insert clever, Internet-melting take on #Sandoval #SCOTUS withdrawal here] — John T. Bennett (@BennettJohnT) February 25, 2016

>>> This Pro-Choice GOP Governor Wants to Succeed Scalia

Sarah Sleem and Ken McIntyre contributed to this report.