The federal Health Insurance Marketplace opens today for health coverage starting Jan. 1.

This marks the third year for the federal program brought forward by the Affordable Care Act, and a U.S. Department of Health and Human Services official says that despite a slight decrease in plans nationwide due to product demand, the market is still “robust.”

“Shopping plans can save you money,” Richard Frank, assistant secretary for Planning and Evaluation for the U.S. Department of Health & Human Services, said in a press conference call Friday. “The 2016 marketplace is competitive and price competition remains robust.”

Overall, Arkansans who use the federal Marketplace will see an average 4.3 percent increase in price for the second-lowest-cost silver plan, considered the benchmark. This comes after a 2 percent decrease last year. Eligible consumers may receive tax rebates that make up for a price increase.

Arkansas consumers who return to the federal Marketplace to comparison shop, however, could save money. According to Friday’s report from the HHS, “91 percent of returning Arkansas Marketplace consumers could save an average of $234 annually in premiums before tax credits for a plan in the same level of coverage by returning to shop.”

There are five insurance issuers in Arkansas this year with an average of 40 plans: Arkansas Blue Cross Blue Shield, Celtic Insurance Company (Ambetter), QualChoice/QCA Health Plan (both owned by QualChoice Holdings – QualChoice offers POS plans; QHC Health Plan offers PPO plans), and UnitedHealthcare of Arkansas.

Small business owners

Arkansans who do not get insurance through their employer or a new state-based program for small businesses called SHOP (Arkansas Small Business Health Options Program) at www.myARinsurance.com, may use the federal Health Insurance Marketplace at HealthCare.gov.

The former Arkansas Health Connector was disbanded this year to create the Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace.

Bruce Donaldson, a broker/navigator and outreach manager with Arkansas Health Insurance Marketplace, said it does not cost business owners any more to go through a broker/navigator than it would independently for SHOP. He advised using a broker/navigator to make sure everything is done correctly.

Ryan James, spokesman for the Arkansas Insurance Department, said the new state-based SHOP program for small businesses serves as a template for a possible state-based program for individuals in 2017. Currently, a state-based plan for individuals is on hold until a governor-appointed task force gives it a green light.

Employees of companies going through SHOP do not have to go through the state-based program, James added. A test run in Jonesboro showed that eight of 10 employees opted in, while one went through their spouse’s employer and another remained on the state’s Private Option for Medicaid expansion, James said.

Shop around

According to HealthInsurance.org, for the three carriers that were already offering plans in the Arkansas exchange, the average rate changes are a 7.15 percent increase for Arkansas BlueCross BlueShield, 0.08 percent increase for Celtic (Ambetter), and 8.2 decrease for QualChoice/QCA Health Plan.

“Arkansas BCBS has the bulk of the current enrollees, with 79 percent of the state’s current individual market share,” the HealthInsurance.org site states. “But almost 9 percent of Arkansas’s individual market enrollees have a plan through one of the QualChoice Holdings carriers, and those policies will see rates decrease more than 8 percent next year.”

In Arkansas there are six more plans on average than in 2015 for consumers to choose from, according to HHS. Each issuer reduced its number of plan offerings by one, on average.

“This likely reflects issuers’ experience in the Marketplace and their understanding of consumer preferences,” the HHS release adds. “Nationwide, enrollment in silver level plans is much higher than other metal level plans – 69 percent of enrollees chose a silver plan for 2015 coverage.”

Tax Credits

Nationwide, nearly eight in 10 Marketplace-eligible uninsured consumers can qualify for tax credits to help make premiums more affordable, and in Arkansas 66 percent of returning enrollees could find plans for $75 or less in premiums per month after tax credits, HHS Secretary Sylvia Burwell said in a news release.

In 2015, roughly 85 percent of Marketplace consumers nationwide received tax credits to make their coverage more affordable. According to HHS, a 27-year-old in Arkansas in 2016 with an income of $25,000 a year will on average get a tax credit of $101 a month — compared to $92 in 2015.

A typical family of four with an income of $60,000 will on average receive a tax credit of $478 a month — compared to $444 in 2015. Marketplace tax credits are structured so they keep pace with premium increases in the benchmark silver plan.

Participation influence

Fridays’s HHS report includes information on affordability and choice for consumers living in the 37 states that used the HealthCare.gov platform in 2015 and 2016.

Based on participation levels, each state saw increases or decreases in premiums for the benchmark silver plan in the federal Marketplace. Oklahoma saw the highest increase in the nation for the silver plan at 35.7 percent, followed by Alaska’s 31.5 percent. Tulsa and Oklahoma City are each seeing 35 percent increases in the silver plan due to lower participation.

There are about 9.1 million people in the federal Marketplace for the year 2015 and the HHS goal is to have 10 million by the end of 2016, Frank said. A 2016 Marketplace Affordability Snapshot put “total plan selections at the end of 2015” for open enrollment at about 8.8 million.

Across all markets in the 37 states using HealthCare.gov, the cost of the benchmark plan will increase an average of 7.5 percent.

Indiana and Mississippi saw the largest decreases for the silver plan at 12.6 and 8.2 percent, respectively.

According to Gallup data, the uninsured rate in Arkansas in 2013 was 22.5 percent. By the first half of 2015, it had fallen to 9.1 percent – a 60 percent drop. The 13.4 percentage point drop was the largest of any state in the country.

IRS wants to know

An Internal Revenue Service news release Friday noted those who are enrolled in insurance coverage through the Health Insurance Marketplace are required to report life changes to the Marketplace when they happen because they may affect eligibility for the advance payments of the premium tax credits.

Changes in circumstances that you should report to the Marketplace include, but are not limited to: increases or decreases in household income, including lump sum payments like a lump sum payment of Social Security benefits; marriage or divorce; the birth or adoption of a child; starting a job with health insurance; gaining or losing your eligibility for other health care coverage; changing your residence.

For the full list of changes, visit HealthCare.gov.