'An early Christmas present for us all'

Encana Oil & Gas announced Friday night that it plans to cease operations at the Pratt well site in Erie until noise issues with the current rig can be resolved. Residents in the area had complained in recent days that noise from the location is causing them to lose sleep.

State regulators told the Camera on Wednesday that noise levels at the site exceed state-mandated levels, despite new mitigation efforts announced this week.

Christiaan van Woudenberg, who lives directly adjacent to the drilling site, said he noticed crews packing up equipment early Saturday morning. Encana's announcement stated that the company anticipates "rig down" activity starting within the next seven-to-10 days.

"I'm cautiously optimistic. Once they clear out it'll be quiet for a few months," van Woudenberg said. "It's a step in the right direction. An early Christmas present for us all."

"I'm happy that they started listening to the residents," said Mark Kadlecek, who lives about 1,000 yards away from the site. "Unfortunately, it took them a little too long to respond to the first complaints."

Kadlecek added, "I just hope that both Encana and the landowner think twice about drilling in such close proximity to a neighborhood next time they attempt this."

Van Woudenberg said he thought the current regulations are not enough to protect the quality of life of residents close to drilling operations.

"They were allowed to set up shop 600 feet from my back door," van Woudenberg said.

Van Woudenberg claimed that the whole neighborhood was fed up with Encana.

"It's the entire community. We're the ones that were affected. There's a lot of people invested in this," van Woudenberg said.

A news release from Encana also announced that a rig that was supposed to begin operations at the Waste Connections site, also in Erie, in late December will be moved to a different location.

"Our intention is to take this time to develop a solution to the low frequency noise issue and return to these locations in the future," the release said.

"We've always worked hard to be a good neighbor and will continue to do so," the release also stated.

Encana said it would consult with state regulators prior to returning the affected locations.

"Once oil goes back up to 80 bucks a barrel they'll be back," van Woudenberg said.

Kadlecek said he didn't believe Encana performed enough analysis to see how noise from the rig would travel in the area.

"I'm hoping there will be changes made," Kadlecek said.

Encana senior communications advisor Wendy Wiedenbeck said on Saturday there wasn't any information she could add that wasn't stated in the company's release.

The decision by Encana gave some satisfaction to neighbors of the Platt operation that their voices had been heard.

"The power of a community to affect change, however small, is a force to be reckoned with," van Woudenberg said. "And we're not done."