If you are afraid to try the real thing, check out Lulu DK jewelry tattoos. ( Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer )

1. Michael Stars jumper at the Eleanor women's clothing store in Louisville. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

My father-in-law says he's an adult stuck in a 12-year-old's body, and that enthusiastic, playful zest for life is what makes him the jolliest fellow you've ever met. He never complains or frowns or even mumbles, grumbles or groans.

He just chuckles, plays his blue ukulele, whittles things out of wood and is ever overjoyed to show you his collection of meat photos on his phone. Yes, photos of meat. He loves grilling. He loves meat. He loves being outside. He loves sunshine. He loves air. He loves The Whole Entire World so much.

Except hand tattoos. Hmmpf. That's the one time I've heard him grumble. That's his line.

2. Yoli Rapp fur jacket, Fred & Basha cross-body bag, Mother denim and a 3 Angels Necklace at Eleanor. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

My husband has promised not to get a hand tattoo, which is actually a legitimate challenge for an impulsive tattoo artist, and naturally the idea never crossed my mind — until my bestie, who happens to hail from India, painted an amazing Mendhi design on my left hand in October.

Judge my sanitation; I didn't wash my left hand for as long was safely possible.

Maybe the henna plant seeped into my brain, but I began fantasizing about making it permanent. Only this time, my husband put down the line, which shocked me because, like his dad, my husband never complains or frowns or mumbles, grumbles or groans (and he also can whittle a mad walking stick). He told me he wouldn't tattoo an Indian design on his whitey wife, no matter how mean of a curry I can cook.

Luckily, I found a hand tat hack, and it doesn't require buying stock in henna plants and sitting for an hour every week while my friend paints me.

Eleanor, the designer boutique in downtown Louisville, sells Lulu DK "jewelry tattoos," $22 for two sheets of mostly gold temporary tattoos that happen to look stunning (and shockingly sophisticated) on your hands and fingers, and they last for up to a week. Most patterns are Indian and Native American influenced — a far difference from the childish and cheesy temp tattoos you see in novelty stores.

3. Denim jacket, Mother denim jeans and Free People bralette at Eleanor. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

Bonus: They only take a few seconds to apply, and I can still rock Bollybling without trying to bribe the husband. And I can wash them off when I go to Monday night dinner (with all that photogenic grilled meat!) with the in-laws.

While at Eleanor, I discovered six other fantastic fashion trends for spring. Update your wardrobe with these inspirations:

1. Jumpers. You know, with the top and bottom are connected. They've been big in LA for two years, and finally Boulder's getting behind them. Try the black Michael Stars rayon zip-neck jumper at Eleanor for $223. Wear it with high black heels, ankle boots or roll up the cuffs to go casual.

4. Michael Stars two-piece wide-leg pants with Stringer's Jewelry Designs. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

2. Ivory faux fur with a cross-body fringe bag. Wear your faux fur into the spring. This Yoli Rapp jacket is $121 and softer than a baby alpaca's bum. Or try the faux fox vest to add dimension to your jeans and tee. Pair with a Fred & Basha cross-body bag with fringe accents. Fringe like this adds texture without being too outlandish.

3. Denim on denim. What? Last I knew, on "Super Troopers" this was called the Canadian Tuxedo, but Denim Dan is cool now. Make sure you wear two distinctly different colors of denim, like this jacket and Mother jeans, with a Free People bralette, pictured.

5. Michael Stars cropped tee and Velvet jogger pants at Eleanor. (Paul Aiken / Staff Photographer)

4. Wide-legged pants. Although skinny jeans (especially "destructed" denim) are still hot, this spring try high-waisted, wide-leg pants with a crop top, or an intentionally matching two-piece, like the Michael Stars piece with a tulip-cut back, $118 for the top and $178 for the bottom.

5. Jogger pants. These are my personal fave for spring. Find these baggy pants with ankle cuffs on every coast, and please let's bring more of them to Colorado, guys. Pull up the cuffs a bit and let them blouse at the ankle. Wear them with a fitted top, like this Michael Stars cropped tee in grey-lavender, $48. Find Velvet jogger pants at Eleanor, $128. Ladies of all ages, wear them with ankle boots or heels.

6. Monochromatic (or matching pattern) shorty skirt in rayon. Although it's not big in Colorado yet, you've seen this style on Taylor Swift: a matching top and bottom that almost looks like a dress. The rayon for this printed Sam & Lavi outfit ($139 top, $147 bottom) has tons of movement and is lightweight and simple, perfect for spring.

Aimee Heckel: 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay