Sioux Falls, SD

Brett Roemen will never forget the day his older sister was diagnosed with breast cancer.

"Going through that battle with her… and watching her; and watching her, the strength she had. It was inspiring. It was inspiring at a negative time to see someone who stayed so strong," Roemen said.

Wendy Moe went through eight rounds of chemotherapy and 28 radiation treatments.



"I'm the type of person that doesn't like to ask for help so it's a very humbling experience. But you definitely can't get through this without friends and family and I've been very lucky to have that," Moe said.

As Breast Cancer Awareness Month rolled in, Roemen wanted to support his sister's courageous fight.

"I thought about it and I said what a great way to do it. We're giving away a dollar for every car wash in the month of October," Roemen said.

A local sponsor is matching donations dollar for dollar.

"You see way too much of this and in way too young of women. So, it's, anybody that can help with that and hopefully change this someday would be great," Moe said.

Roemen says he's not exactly sure how many cars have gone through the car wash this month. But he does estimate the number to be somewhere between 5-6,000.

The money will benefit breast cancer research at the Edith Sanford Breast Center.

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.