Western Pa. companies contend with how to afford requirements of health care law

At a glance • The health law required companies with 100 or more employees to offer coverage or face fines of $2,000 or more a year. • Smaller companies received a one-year reprieve from the mandate, which doesn't apply to companies with fewer than 50 workers. • The average annual premium for employer-sponsored family coverage this year is $17,545, up 4 percent from 2014. Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Even though she doesn't feel good about it, Tricia Herring plans to cut the work week for part-time employees at JE Herring Motor Co. next year so she won't have to offer them health insurance.

The change means five of the 62 employees at the Somerset towing and truck repair company Herring runs with her husband will lose as many as 10 hours of pay a week, dropping below a 30-hour trigger for health coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

“I see both ends of it. People are working for a living and they are entitled to health insurance,” said Herring, whose part-time employees work as many as 39 hours now without qualifying for the company's health coverage. “But for us, you can't afford to pay health insurance on everyone.”

Herring is reluctantly making the decision to cut hours for part-timers because the 2010 federal law that mandates insurance coverage for full-time employees is expanding its reach to more businesses. It will include companies with 50 to 99 employees, such as Herring Motors, starting Jan. 1.

Herring worries that part-timers will quit if they are unhappy with what essentially will be a reduction in their income when hours are reduced to avoid triggering health benefits under the law. The company currently offers coverage to full-time employees who work 40 hours a week.

“They're going to look for another job,” she said.

The health law required companies with 100 or more employees to offer coverage or face fines of $2,000 or more a year. Smaller companies received a one-year reprieve from the mandate, which doesn't apply to companies with fewer than 50 workers.

The law requires workers who don't receive health benefits from their employers to buy coverage, which they can shop for online at federal or state marketplaces. The websites provide subsidized health plans for low-wage workers. Individuals face fines for not having coverage.

Small companies across Western Pennsylvania and the country are struggling with employee benefit costs and looking for ways to hold health insurance premiums steady, said Marilyn Landis, owner of North Side small-business consulting firm Basic Business Concepts Inc.

“They're desperately trying to figure out how they're going to afford this,” said Landis, a past president of the National Small Business Association's Leadership Council.

Health insurance costs have been rising and employers have responded by passing along more costs to workers through premium contributions and higher deductibles and other out-of-pocket costs.

The average annual premium for employer-sponsored family coverage this year is $17,545, up 4 percent from 2014, according to a survey from the Kaiser Family Foundation, an independent research organization in California.

Employees are responsible for contributing an average of $5,000 toward premiums, the foundation said. Sixty-three percent of workers have a deductible of $1,000 a year or more.

Of companies with 50 to 99 workers, 89 percent offer health care benefits, Kaiser's survey found this year. Among employers with 100 or more workers, 97 percent provided coverage.

Landis said the majority of small businesses want to offer health benefits because insurance helps workers stay healthy and is a benefit that aids in employee retention.

“They want qualified, dedicated workers who show up,” she said. “They want to do everything they can to retain them, but the price to do that can become more than they can pay.”

Kevin Shivers, state director for the National Federation of Independent Business in Pennsylvania, said many small businesses find health care costs crushing and the law limits them from reducing coverage to keep prices in check. The law requires minimum coverage levels and a list of essential benefits that critics say drive up costs.

“It's a pretty big challenge right now,” Shivers said.

Herring Motors this year raised its annual deductible to $3,000 to partially offset a 45 percent premium hike, Herring said. The company managed to hold off asking employees to contribute toward premiums, which cost the business $400 a month for individuals and $1,020 a month for family coverage, she said.

“If it keeps going up, we won't be able to; they're going to have to pay,” she said.

The company has hired a consultant to help it meet reporting requirements under the law, she said. Companies must file tax forms with the Internal Revenue Service by Jan. 31 detailing the costs of their coverage along with the names and Social Security numbers of employees and their dependents.

“It's more time-consuming for us and our accountant,” Herring said. “That's another expense that we have.”

Alex Nixon is a Trib Total Media staff writer. Reach him at 412-320-7928 or anixon@tribweb.com.