By Caleb Bedillion

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Legislation is winding its way through the Capitol to send Mississippi cities a larger share of sales tax revenue, but that extra money would be earmarked for infrastructure projects such as water and sewer repairs as well as road resurfacing.

Cities currently receive 18.5 percent of the state sales tax collected within their boundaries. Last week, the state Senate passed a bill that would eventually send an additional 1.5 percent of sales tax back to the city where the tax was collected – that is, an additional one and one-half penny for every dollar of sales tax.

The bill now waits for House approval before it can be considered by the governor and signed into law.

The 1.5 percent increase would be implemented over three years in increments of one half of 1 percent.

Tupelo Chief Financial Officer Kim Hanna said city leaders are closely watching the bill’s progress.

The additional revenue would “absolutely” be beneficial, she said.

Cities could continue to treat the 18.5 percent they already receive as general fund revenue. The additional 1.5 percent, however, would come with restrictions.

According to the bill as passed by the Senate, the additional monies can be used “solely for water and sewer system projects and road, street and bridge repair, reconstruction and resurfacing projects.”

The Mississippi Municipal League calculated how much additional revenue the 1.5 percent diversion could garner cities.

The city of Tupelo would have received about an additional $1.5 million in fiscal year 2015, according to those calculations.

In fiscal year 2015, which ended last September, Tupelo received about $18.6 million in sales tax diversions from the state, according to the MML.

If fully enacted, the 1.5 percent increase would have bumped that total up to a little over $20 million, though, as noted, the extra $1.5 million could only have been used for infrastructure improvement.

District 7 Sen. Hob Bryan, D-Amory, wanted to send the additional 1.5 percent diversion back to cities based upon population rather than based on the point of collection. An amendment he offered to do just that failed, however.

caleb.bedillion@journalinc.com

Twitter: @CalebBedillion