Buy Photo Ron Eachus is a Statesman Journal columnist. (Photo: TIMOTHY J. GONZALEZ /Statesman Journal)Buy Photo

The tone of the Republican appeal for the presidency is distinct and unmistakable. We are not only going in the wrong direction, we are going down the drain, headed to ruin, with an economy that’s a disaster.

Now admittedly, sense of direction is subjective. Your view of gay marriage, Citizens United or income inequality may determine which direction you think we’re going. There’s room for debate on all current policies, but are we really in as bad a shape as the Republican candidates would have us fear?

Should we go back to better times, like the Great Recession and the deficits of the Bush years?

It hasn’t been as fast as we’d like, but the economy has grown since then and we have recovered. We’ve added as many jobs as Mitt Romney said he could add when he ran in 2012. Is this going in the wrong direction?

They say the deficits will ruin us. But for the past six years, the federal budget deficits have declined. The deficit last fiscal year was equal to 2.5 percent of Gross National Product, down three-quarters from 2008.

According to the Treasury Department’s Office of Management and Budget, the federal deficit for the fiscal year ending Sept. 30, 2015 was the lowest since 2007, before the Great Recession. As a percentage of GDP, it has consistently declined since 2009 and is now below the average for the last 40 years.

That’s just ruinous, isn’t it?

Budget analysts do predict the deficit will begin growing again due to health and retirement costs for an aging population. And they say it will begin sooner than previously predicted.

But that’s in large part because of the permanent extension of tax cuts — something Republican leadership supported and insisted didn’t have to be paid for by offsetting tax increases or spending cuts.

And every tax plan from the Republican candidates has military spending and tax cut policies that will make deficits worse, not better. Estimates are that Donald Trump’s plan with a cost of about $10 trillion over 10 years will double the projected total deficit increase over that time.

Is this what happens when we change direction?

Nothing has been more maligned than Obamacare. The standard line is that it has cost millions their jobs, something fact-checking organizations have been dubbing pants-on-fire for years. Some of the rollout of the Affordable Care Act could be characterized as disastrous, but once implemented it’s a different picture.

Data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics show that the number of jobs grew from 139.2 million in April, 2010 to 149.9 million in 2015. Unemployment went from 9.9 percent in April, 2010 down to 5 percent in December, 2015. The number of unwilling part-time employees dropped from a high of 9.2 million in September, 2010 to 6 million in December, 2015.

In the meantime, the number of uninsured Americans, which has been above 15 million since 1986, dropped from 19.2 million in 2010 to 10.7 million in 2015.

Republican candidates have been so eager to discredit Obamacare, without offering any real alternative, that even Ted Cruz can’t get the facts of his own health insurance right. Cruz told an audience in New Hampshire he lost his own health insurance due to Obamacare and his family was now going without because Blue Cross Blue Shield quit offering policies in Texas.

Turns out Blue Cross Blue Shield did quit offering Preferred Provider Plans due to market changes, but it switched policyholders over to an HMO plan and offered other alternatives. The company proudly says it offers plans in all Texas counties, and Cruz wasn’t without insurance for his family.

You’d think a U.S. senator running for president would know that, but facts aren’t important when you’re trying to make a case for disaster. When confronted by Fox News’ Chris Wallace about the job growth while Obamacare has been in effect, he gave the standard Fox News response: the fact checkers are all part of the liberal media.

All of which makes one wonder if things are really as bad as they say, or whether the only way they can justify their direction and their election is to raise the specter of disaster no matter what the reality.

Ron Eachus of Salem is a former legislator and a former chairman of the Oregon Public Utility Commission. His column appears on Tuesdays. Send email to re4869@comcast.net.

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1WYZ4rM