Obamacare website enrolled 100,000 in November, but total nationwide sign-ups are less than HALF of the White House's goal

Obama White house set target of 800,000 enrollments by Nov. 30, but a best-case scenario looks more like 355,000 so far



HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius begged USA Today readers on Monday: 'Please do not give up'

The administration boasts healthcare.gov is up 95 per cent of the time, but a former senior adviser says Obamacare might not work right until 2017

CNN's medical producer tried another on-air test of the website Sunday morning, and got another dreaded error message



An unflappable President Barack Obama is facing increased pressure as his signature legislative achievement hobbles under the weight of unmet goals and lowered expectations

The Obamacare website's performance in November showed improvement over October's dismal start, but the total number of Americans taking advantage of the Affordable Care Act is less than half what the Obama administration projected.

And President Obama's top cheerleaders are showing cracks in their armor, with the Health and Human Services secretary advising consumers in a USA Today essay to use healthcare.gov during 'off-peak hours.'

'Please do not give up,' Secretary Kathleen Sebelius pleaded.

The Department of Health and Human Services set an Obamacare enrollment target of 800,000 by the beginning of December. So far, according to published estimates, it has reached between 300,000 and 350,000.

Bloomberg reported Monday morning that when government releases the final numbers for healthcare.gov in November, it will hover at around 100,000. And NBC News reporter Chuck Todd tweeted two hours later that the nationwide total would reach '200-250K w/states.'

That larger number would include the Obamacare enrollments from the 14 states, plus the District of Columbia, that are running their own insurance exchanges.

In October, just 26,794 people signed up for health insurance plans via the federal government's online portal. Another 79,391 enrolled through the state-based websites.

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEOS

Not ready for off-peak hours? CNN early morning medical producer Matt Sloane couldn't get coverage through healthcare.gov, just as the government was announcing that the website was new and improved

Sometime in 2017: David Plouffe, a long-time former senior adviser to President Obama, said Sunday that the Affordable Care Act might only function properly years from now

Fed web site signed up 100K in Nov, according to Bloomberg. http://t.co/l4mi8DHPwW 200-250K w/states — Chuck Todd (@chucktodd) December 2, 2013

If the published estimates are correct, a best-case scenario for the White House would see a national total of about 356,000 enrollments.

In addition to falling short of the administration's two-month projection, that number is just 5.1 per cent of the 7 million sign-ups the White House needs by the end of March in order to ensure the program's solvency for the first year.

Meanwhile, more than one-third of the enrollment period has already elapsed: Americans who want government help to obtain coverage for 2014 have until March 31 to apply and select plans.

Those who want their coverage to begin on January 1 have just two weeks left to enroll.

The Obama administration expects enrollment rates to increase significantly as the March deadline approaches.

David Plouffe, a long-time former Obama senior adviser – now an ABC News contributor – told network host George Stephanopoulos on Sunday that the Affordable Care Act will 'work really well' when all 50 states are running their own health care exchanges and have fully expanded Medicaid.

'It may take until 2017 when this president leaves office,' he said. But 'it'll work really well then.'





Jeffrey Zients, the administration's former budget director and newly minted point-man on the Obamacare website's fixes, told reporters on Sunday that the online portal is running vastly better than before Washington, we have a problem: Boasting the Obamacare website's 95 per cent up-time still leaves room for it to crash for 1 out of every 20 users -- plus more down-time for 'scheduled maintenance'

It's not working well now. Despite Sebelius' suggestion that off-peak hours would see better website performance, CNN saw familiar error messages shortly after 6:00 EST Monday morning .

'Testing it Ourselves': Don't look now, but Obamacare is crashing again -- live on CNN

'We've been trying to get into the site since October 1 on and off again,' said CNN medical producer Matt Sloane. 'I have to say it did work a lot more smoothly this morning. I got through. I picked my state. I put in all of my information and I got through the whole process in eight minutes.'

'And then it said my status was in progress. So I went to refresh it and I got the error message.'



The White House has not released any demographic numbers showing who is signing up for the government-brokered insurance plans. The most important group is young people, whose relative good health is expected to allow the system to pay for older and sicker Americans' health care.

In a Sunday morning report seemingly timed to bury bad news in the middle of an extended holiday weekend, the administration boasted about its tech team's ability to fix software errors but conceded that healthcare.gov is still failing 5 per cent of the time – not including hours of scheduled down-time.

'While we strive to innovate and improve our outreach and systems for reaching consumers, we believe we have met the goal of having a system that will work smoothly for the vast majority of users,' the report from HHS read.

It acknowledged that overall, only about 80 per cent of users are able to successfully navigate the website in its current form.