Jesse Hay (Photo: OCEAN COUNTY PROSECUTOR’S OFFICE)

Police accused a South Plainfield man of contributing to a drug overdose death in Brick.

On Dec. 19, about 6:45 p.m., Brick Township Police and EMS went to a Marilyn Drive home to find 24-year-old Anthony Busby unresponsive, according to a release from Ocean County Prosecutor's Office. A doctor from Newark Beth Israel Hospital pronounced him dead over the phone about 7:20 p.m.

Police arrested Jesse Hay, 25, on Dec. 23, the release said. They accused him of possession of fentanyl, a prescription opiate, as well as possession of fentanyl with intent to distribute and distribution of fentanyl.

"As much as we have a fear for heroin, there is another storm brewing," Ocean County Prosecutor Joseph Coronato told the Asbury Park Press in March. "And that's fentanyl."

Coronato said fentanyl is much stronger than heroin. He called it "pure death."

Police scrutinized the scene of Busby's death, gathering evidence of drug activity. They found several white wax folds stamped "730 Virus" in green ink and another 10 wax folds stamped "Strike Dead" with the picture of the grim reaper in red and black ink.

The Ocean County Medical Examiner's Office determined Busby died from an overdose of fentanyl, the release said.

The medical examiner's report confirmed that the wax folds stamped "730 Virus" and "Strike Dead" both contained fentanyl.

Hay has remained in custody since his December arrest. He was served with a drug-induced death arrest warrant at 12:45 p.m. Thursday at the Middlesex County jail, the release said.

In addition to the drug possession and distribution charges, Hay faces a charge of strict liability for drug-induced death and reckless manslaughter, the release said.

His bail was set at $250,000 with no option to pay ten percent.

The Ocean County Prosecutor's Office has done 19 drug-induced death investigations since the appointment of Prosecutor Joseph Coronato in March 2013. Six defendants have pleaded guilty to strict liability charges and two co-defendants have pleaded guilty to drug charges in the 19 cases.

Andrew Ford: 732-643-4281; aford@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1FpwIPt