Northeast Ind. (21ALIVE) --- It's tough winning a seat in Congress, but it's even harder when you're trying to get elected in an area where you haven't had time to set down firm roots.

But that isn't stopping former Wisconsin State Senator Pam Galloway from working to get her message out to voters in northeast Indiana.

We sat down with Galloway at her home near Warsaw.

One of her top priorities is an issue that corresponds to her career in medicine.

Galloway is a former surgeon, and she would like nothing better than to see the country dismantle the Affordable Care Act that was championed by President Obama.

Galloway has a major endorsement in her bid to be the 3rd District Republican congressional nominee.

But it's from an unusual source, Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker.

On her campaign web site, she says she helped Walker put through reforms limiting collective bargaining rights for unions.

She served in that state's legislature from 2010 to 2012, before retiring to Kosciusko County in Indiana.

She claims to have logged 17,000 miles on the road to do door-to-door campaigning in this primary contest.

She says she's a staunch defender of gun rights under the Second Amendment.

But she's not keen on talk of forcing employers to pay more for lower skilled help.

"Raising the minimum wage actually punishes the people that it's purported to benefit. It really punishes the lower skilled workers because then they find it more difficult to find employment, so I wouldn't be in favor of raising the minimum wage," Galloway said.

She doesn't like the idea of monetary penalties for companies that export jobs.

Rather, she thinks the problem is a corporate tax rate that is too high in the U.S.

She says it motivates employers to seek a kinder, gentler tax climate someplace else.

Even though it's not really the job of the U.S. House of Representatives to work out deals like NAFTA, she does support the notion of trade agreements like NAFTA being re-negotiated to better protect the interests of American companies and workers.