UPDATED: As Washington’s Andre Miller was about to enter the game for the first time Sunday at the start of the second quarter. he and Denver coach Brian Shaw touched hands near the scorer’s table and briefly chatted.

A little less than an hour before the Nuggets-Wizards tipoff this afternoon, Andre Miller more directly than before commented on the fallout from his dispute with Nuggets coach Brian Shaw and why he didn’t rejoin the team before his trade to Washington.

“It was a decision made by both sides, to benefit both sides,” Miller said in response to my question in the Pepsi Center’s visiting dressing room. “I said I wanted to stay away and they granted it. I wasn’t like it was made out to be, ‘He’s disgruntled, he’s exiled from the team.’ That wasn’t the case. I had a choice.”

Why did he make that choice?

“Just where I was at,” he said. “Where my thoughts were, how I felt. I thought it was best for me just to mve on.”

I asked him if he wavered when injuries mounted. (At one point, the Nuggets had no point guards.)

“No, I knew I was staying away,” he said. “I was asked to come back, but I decided to stay away and continue to work out and be prepared for whatever happens. I’d say I wish I could be out there with my teammates, but I just made the decision for myself just to stay away. I didn’t want to bring any more attention to the organization or to the players to distract them from moving foward. So I just kind of stayed away.”

He added, “I just kind of flipped the page. The only lingering part was me just sitting around. That was probably the most irritating part. The learning experience, you can continue to learn no matter what year you are in the NBA. Whether you did right or wrong, you learn from it and move on.”

I asked if he planned to try to have any closure with Shaw Sunday.

“I’m here to play the game and get on,” Miller said. “We’re at a point in the season where we need to get this win. That’s where my focus is.”

A bit earlier, at his pregame session with the media this afternoon — the home coach’s usual session 105 minutes before NBA gametime — I asked Shaw if he would shake hands with Miller, wave at him, speak with him or otherwise seek a bit of that closure.

“I feel that we have closure,” Shaw said. “I’m not going to go out of my way to not make contact. If we cross paths, I have no problem with speaking to him. I don’t think either of us have taken this situation personally. It’s an unfortunate situation that happened. Neither of us wanted it to happen. I don’t have any problemw with him. I’ve said all along I’ve had the utmost respect for him and still do as a player.

“Once again, it was unfortunate. But he’s moved on. He’s in a better place in terms of his situation. His team’s going to be in the playoffs. He’s going to be able to contribute to that. I’m happy for him to be in that situation. For us, we’ve gotten to develop some of the guys who were playing behind him more time so that we can see what they can do. That’s a positive that I take out of that situation as well…It’s not the first time that these things have happened. So at least on my end, there’s nothing personal at all. This will be the first time that we’ve actually laid eyes on each other since the first of January when the incident took place and the first time we’ve spoken.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com

Meet the Blogger