President Barack Obama’s decision to unilaterally reform the immigration system is by and large right on the substance, but I fear he is dangerously wrong on the precedent he is setting.

Those cheering his decision should imagine a GOP president exercising similar authority in 2017 or 2021, but on a different issue. It’s immigration now, but, as commentators as disparate as New York Magazine’s Jonathan Chait and George W. Bush administration executive power maven John Yoo have pointed out, for a future president it could be taxes, environmental laws, workplace safety protections or elements of Obamacare that get nonlegislative overhauls when an administration uses its prosecutorial discretion (the executive tool of the moment) to curb enforcement of those laws. Stymied by gridlock? No longer – presidents are finding new and inventive uses for their executive powers. “It can’t be that we’re not allowed to lift a finger to fix the broken immigration system until Congress acts,” Homeland Security Secretary Jeh Johnson said Wednesday. The administration certainly has latitude in this area but at some point lifting a finger becomes building enduring detours around the legislative process.

[SEE: Political Cartoons on Barack Obama]

As I said, Obama is right on the substance of the policy; the immigration system needs fixing and what he plans – deferring deportations for up to 5 million people here illegally, giving some of them work permits – is a good step. Republicans argue that he had his chance when Democrats controlled both houses of Congress and that he should now wait for Congress to “work its will.” But the GOP, too, has had its chance – the House couldn’t be bothered to vote on a bipartisan Senate bill which, no small matter, almost certainly would have passed.

And Obama might be right on the politics. While a Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll out this week shows people disapprove of him acting alone, process issues rarely move voters, a fact underscored when they expressed their frustration with gridlock by giving the filibuster party a Senate majority. Assuming voters don’t suddenly develop a keen interest in process, Obama’s baiting the 2016 GOP primary field: Which prospective nominee can most loudly promise to roll back Obama’s “amnesty”?

But one problem eclipses the substance: The president is redirecting our national immigration policy by himself. As the New York Times noted this week, no less an authority than Obama has in recent years said that what he’s doing was beyond his authority. “The problem is that, you know, I’m the president of the United States, I’m not the emperor of the United States,” he said on a Google Hangout last year. “My job is to execute laws that are passed.” And execute them faithfully, at that, and with care – not simply as is convenient or even compassionate.

The president’s plan is the latest example in a disturbing trend of political norms – “an implied understanding of what sort of behavior is acceptable,” as Chait nicely sums it up – being dispensed with in this era of any-means-necessary politics. These were the unwritten rules of governance: The filibuster was used rarely, not as a standard requiring a 60-vote supermajority to pass anything in the Senate, for example, while the notion of using the prospect of a government shutdown or debt default as a tool of extortive policymaking was unheard of. So, too, prosecutorial discretion was less a matter of policy development than efficiency.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Immigration]

Obama defenders note that previous presidents – including Ronald Reagan and George H.W. Bush – have used executive authority to unilaterally extend amnesty along the lines that the current president reportedly plans to. But this reading of history is akin to the GOP’s pointing to instances of policy changes accompanying debt ceiling increases as precedent for their attempts at economic hostage-taking: It is superficially true but lacks context and scope. Prior debt ceiling deals involved marginal issues, not the major policy concessions that Republicans wanted to extract from Obama. Likewise, as The Associated Press reported this week, neither Reagan nor Bush “faced the political uproar widely anticipated” in the run-up to Obama's action. “Their actions were less controversial because there was a consensus in Washington that the 1986 law needed a few fixes and Congress was poised to act on them.” This wasn’t a redirection of policy, in other words, but a refinement.

Prosecutorial discretion isn’t a new tool in the executive toolbox, but it’s being used in a new way. How will a President John Kasich or a President Scott Walker or, heaven help us, a President Ted Cruz use it? On one level, the devil is in the details. Obama has articulated authority in immigration law that may be absent in other areas, though it’s worth noting the last Republican president had no problem relying on inherent executive authority.

Tellingly, when White House senior adviser Dan Pfeiffer was asked about this scenario at a breakfast this morning sponsored by the Christian Science Monitor, he dodged the question, first arguing the Obama's action on immigration is in keeping with his predecessors and then adding, "We live in a world where there is nothing the president does … that comes without significant Republican opposition. ... Getting out of bed every morning comes with Republican opposition. So if the test is that you can only do things that are not going to get make some Republicans very mad we would do nothing. That may be what they want but that’s not how we’re going to act." No answer, in other words, to the question of how Democrats will feel when a Republican president takes the same attitude.

[READ: Obama's Immigration Power Grab Will Backfire]

More broadly, you can be sure the 45th president, regardless of party, will follow the path trod by his or her 21st-century predecessors in finding extralegislative ways to enact their policies. George W. Bush did it quietly, with his signing statements. Obama has turned such executive action into a kind of political performance art. Does anyone really think that future presidents will be content to flail helplessly in the face of an uncooperative Congress? That would run contrary to the history of the modern presidency, which has been one of steady (and then rapid) accumulation of executive power. Harry Truman running against the “do-nothing” Congress won’t be the model any more, it’ll be Obama bypassing it.