Photos: North Jersey commemorates Martin Luther King Jr. Day

The Rev. Martin Luther King Jr. would have celebrated his 85th birthday this year and on Monday North Jersey residents remembered the civil rights leader’s legacy through prayer, songs, and spirituals.



In Bergen and Passaic counties there were a handful of events, including church services, a dedication ceremony, and lectures, a few peppered with King’s inspiring phrases. Some attendees also took the time to reflect on what has been achieved and what still needs to be realized, and vowed to continue to work toward King’s dream of economic justice, racial equality, and human rights for all.



“Martin Luther King has done so much, giving his life, giving of his time throughout the years, he and so many others so we can have equal rights, become one, stand as one, and respect each other as a whole, and we have to work toward having equality for all,” said Michele Tullis-Campbell, who participated in an annual Martin Luther King Jr. Day march in her hometown of Englewood. “I’ve seen some changes throughout the years, and it seems to me that we still have a long way to go.”



New Jersey Senators Robert Menendez and Cory Booker both made appearances at Bergen County events paying tribute to King. Menendez attended an event at Mount Olive Baptist Church in Hackensack, while Booker made a morning stop at a church service at Ebenezer Baptist Church in Englewood following the church’s annual march. Booker reminded the more than 200 people in attendance that change starts at the community level.



“We did not get civil rights legislation because it was led from the Senate, we did not get voting rights legislation because it was led by a president, we didn’t get the 13th or 14th Amendments because of actions by Congress,” he said. “All great change in society happens from the grassroots up.”



Booker, the first black senator from New Jersey, also talked about the large number of blacks in the state’s prisons, and criticized recent votes by legislators in the nation’s capital to cut food stamps for the poor during the country’s economic hardships.



“Many people want to make Martin Luther King’s activism simply about racial equality,” he said. “We know it is not. The March on Washington, the principle demand was economic justice.”



Comparing King’s message to that of Jesus, the Rev. Gregory Jackson of the Mt. Olive Baptist Church said people all too often repeat King’s words but fail to take action in their lives.



“Don’t put everything on Jesus,” Jackson said. “You and I need to do what we can do and pray to God for what we can’t.”



Menendez made a similar call to service, saying he agreed with one of King’s statements that, too often, the “children of darkness” are more zealous than the “children of light.” He said the resistance to President Obama was the “most virulent opposition” he’s seen to a U.S. president. But Menendez said he fights for education and prison reform and continues advocating for the president’s health care law, the Affordable Care Act.



“Some derisively call it Obamacare — I just know that Obama does care,” he said to a round of applause.



The keynote speaker, the Rev. Damien Conners, executive director of the Southern Christian Leadership Conference, which was founded by King, preached passionately about the poor, criticizing the black church at length for "taking a back seat" in the national dialogue about poverty, healthcare, overcrowded prisons and unemployment.



He also blasted pastors for caring more about "profit than being prophets." Meanwhile, he ticked off a series of stark realities for African-Americans that show King's fight for racial and economic justice is far from over: 28 percent live in poverty, 13 percent are under or unemployed and 900,000 black men are in prison.



"It seems like the cries and screams of our community are met with silence," Conners said.



A few hours and miles away in Paterson, city officials gathered at Auburn Street to dedicate a vacant lot the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Plaza. The vacant parcel is located across the street from the church that King visited the last time he was in Paterson, which was a week before his assassination.



Besides paying tribute to King with marches and church services, some North Jersey residents use the day to volunteer on the holiday, which was designated as a national day of service in 1994 by President Clinton, as a way to recognize King’s legacy of service to the community.



Carrying a sign that read “Equal Rights for All,” Tullis-Campbell joined more than 20 others in the morning at Englewood City Hall where the nearly one-mile march to Ebenezer Baptist Church began. Escorted by police, the participants sang “We Shall Overcome” and “This Little Light of Mine” and chanted “No Justice, No Peace” as they walked on Palisade Avenue and Williams Street. Those songs were often sung during the civil rights movement of the 1960’s.



”He set the bar for equality and justice and as we go forward as a people united living in his legacy and trying to emulate what he was about, as we should, because only that way we will become the true America that we should be,” said Assemblyman Gordon Johnson before the march started.



It was the first time that Adrian Bickham, a social studies teacher at Dwight Morrow High School, participated in the march. She said she wanted to set an example for activism for her students , who may not be as connected to the civil rights struggle of decades ago.



“I want my students to be aware that activism is important,” she said, before the march, which has been held annually since 1970.



More than 100 people of various faiths along with a dozen religious leaders from Glen Rock and Ridgewood gathered at the Ridgewood United Methodist Church to also reaffirm King’s principles. Through prayer and song, attendees were reminded of the ongoing battle for equal human rights worldwide.



“We remember the restless and unrelenting commitment of Dr. King,” said the Rev. Greg Lisby, of Christ Episcopal Church in Ridgewood at the event which celebrated its 32nd year. “ … insisting that the demand for justice, freedom and human dignity applies to all children in Southeast Asia as well as the South Bronx, in Newtown, Conn., and in all places where injustice and violence oppress others.”



The indoor celebration was immediately followed by an outdoor rally, where nearly 50 people followed Ridgewood Mayor Paul Aronsohn and Glen Rock Mayor John van Keuren on a brief and symbolic march around the village’s downtown. Motorists on busy East Ridgewood Avenue paused as Ridgewood police escorted the procession around town.



“I think it’s wonderful they do this,” said Alaina Arinsburg, a passerby from Washington Township who was visiting Ridgewood on her day off from work. “Many people are happy to be out of the office or school today, but they almost always forget the reason behind this day. It’s important to remember everything that Martin Luther King did for everyone.”



Staff writers Jeff Green and Darius Amos contributed to this article. Email: alvarado@northjersey.com