Trump's Medicare plan less than it appears

With help from Sarah Karlin

TRUMP'S DRUG PLAN: LESS THAN MEETS THE EYE? — Donald Trump's surprise proposal to let Medicare negotiate drug prices is the talk of the health policy world — and it has "alarmed" pharma companies, POLITICO Pro's Sarah Karlin, Paul Demko and Brett Norman report. According to Trump, his plan would save Medicare $300 billion a year. Here's the story for Pros.

Story Continued Below

Trump's proposal is newsy and breaks with party orthodoxy; Republicans historically don't push for Medicare drug negotiations, Democrats do. But there are more than a few caveats behind his big talk.

— Some perspective on the plan. First, a reminder that candidates often make health care promises that they don’t — or can't — keep in office. In the 2008 campaign, Barack Obama took swings at his rivals' health plans, before co-opting their ideas (notably the individual mandate) as part of the Affordable Care Act.

Second, Trump's policies are especially ill-defined. When I pushed the Trump campaign six months ago to explain the candidate's health care plan, I got back mostly platitudes.

And it's tough to know exactly what Trump would do, if elected. His unpredictability "is what scares folks the most," one drug lobbyist told my POLITICO colleagues, adding "You'd be hard pressed to find an industry that is not concerned about what a Trump Administration would mean for them." Several other lobbyists said they weren't even sure how to open a dialogue.

Third, it's unlikely that simple negotiating authority would accomplish Trump's promised savings. As former OMB director Peter Orszag pointed out, it's hard to imagine these savings without creating a Medicare formulary or the ability to set prices administratively.

And fourth, Congress may not even be receptive to the idea — especially if Republicans retain control of one or both chambers, as expected.

— Still a big deal. At the same time, we're in a rare moment when the drug pricing debate has unexpectedly moved to the top of health reformers' agenda. And Trump styles himself as a dealmaker, promising to bring new energy — and populist support — to economic issues that have long bedeviled Washington.

But to get pharma drug pricing through Congress, especially when Democrats have tried and failed for years? Well, that would be a very big deal — even from a dealmaker.

DO ABORTION FOES TRUST TRUMP? — Not yet. Trump — who was "very pro-choice" as of 2000 — now claims he's anti-abortion. But some of the most active anti-abortion groups are skeptical of his conversion and furiously lobbying for anyone but Trump. Trump's position on abortion was mostly overlooked until this week, when rival Ted Cruz began hitting Trump with television ads about his one-time support for partial-birth abortion. Jen Haberkorn has the story.

— Trump did not answer when a reporter at a testy news conference in Iowa attempted to ask him about abortion. The NYT has an account: http://nyti.ms/1QBaqSh

WELCOME TO WEDNESDAY PULSE — Want to live like a presidential candidate — even a failed one? Then Scott Walker has a deal for you: The Wisconsin governor has listed his home for $338,000, as Walker and his wife prepare to downsize into a smaller home. Just watch out for those pesky cabinets.

Got news, notes, and tips on whether Lincoln Chafee's house is on the market too? Find me at ddiamond@politico.com or @ddiamond on Twitter.

WHITE HOUSE EYES ZIKA VIRUS — President Obama on Tuesday met with his health and national security teams to discuss the spread of Zika and other mosquito-born viruses. The usual public health advisers — HHS Sec. Sylvia Burwell, CDC director Tom Frieden and NIAID’s Tony Fauci — updated Obama on travel advisories and guidance being given to US health care providers. The White House said the group also discussed the potential economic effects and Obama emphasized the need for more research for diagnosis and treatment. The White House released a statement and photo — and while it didn’t mention Ebola, we get the preparedness message.

— On tap today: Obama pushes enrollment. The president is doing a series of interviews this afternoon with local TV stations in Denver, Los Angeles, Milwaukee, Oakland, Philadelphia, Richmond, and Salt Lake City to push ACA sign-ups ahead of the Jan. 31 deadline.

** A message from PhRMA: Coverage does not necessarily mean access to care. More medicines are being excluded from coverage, deductibles and copays are going up and insurance companies are increasingly imposing other barriers to access. Know the 5 reasons you may not get the medicine you need. Learn more at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

CMS SPOX: DON'T COUNT ON A SIGN-UP EXTENSION — There are rumors around snowy D.C. that next week's Obamacare open enrollment deadline will get pushed back, given bad weather (and poky uptake). But CMS spokesperson Aaron Albright tells Pro's Rachana Pradhan there are no planned delays. "Open Enrollment for 2016 coverage ends on January 31," Albright emails. "We've kept a close eye on the impact of the storm. With the call center and Healthcare.gov open for business throughout and based on everything we have seen, consumers were able to sign up for coverage, so we don't have any plans to extend the deadline due to the blizzard. We're encouraging people not to miss their chance to get covered."

— What about the non-Healthcare.gov states? A tipster emails about rumblings around a delay and asks, "If such an extension occurs, will some or all of the state exchanges follow suit?" We've heard some buzz about two states — one of which wasn't socked in by snow — but nothing confirmed. It's worth noting that state exchanges aren't beholden to Healthcare.gov, and they've tended to stagger their deadlines because of various weather and implementation issues in past years.

URBAN INSTITUTE: HOUSE LAWSUIT COULD CAUSE 'CHAOS' — An Urban Institute paper posted today projects that the House v. Burwell lawsuit that challenges the legality of Obamacare's cost-sharing reductions could have major ramifications for the insurance marketplaces.

According to Urban's Linda J. Blumberg and Matthew Buettgens, a ruling that halts those payments in the middle of a plan year "could create chaos for enrollees and significant financial losses for insurers." Using Urban's simulated model, they conclude that premiums for silver Marketplace plans would be $1,040 per person higher on average this year if there was no federal funding for cost-sharing reductions, with a slew of other negative ripple effects.

ANOTHER PUSH TO PRESERVE MEDICARE ADVANTAGE — The Better Medicare Alliance — a group that was originally created by insurers defecting from AHIP last year and which now counts 43 member organizations — on Tuesday announced its new campaign to promote Medicare Advantage's benefits ahead of CMS's upcoming rate announcement. See BMA's fact sheets here. CMS is expected to announce its preliminary 2017 rates for Medicare Advantage on Feb. 19.

FIRST IN PULSE: DOXIMITY'S NEW SALARY DATA — Doximity, an online professional network for physicians, will release a new income study today that draws from 35,000 member doctors. Some of the findings are depressing, though not surprising: Male physicians tend to make an average of 21percent more than their female counterparts, Doximity says.

Doximity also concludes that physicians who work in sought-after cities like San Francisco and Washington, D.C., take a salary hit as a result. "When it comes to average annual income, Minnesota and Indiana seem to fare the best — both are 13 percent over national average for all specialties," writes Doximity's Joel Davis. "So, if you really want get the most return on your medical school investment, head to the heartland."

IF BLOOMBERG RUNS … SAY GOODBYE TO YOUR SODA? — With Michael Bloomberg weighing a presidential run, STAT’s Ike Swetlitz examines how the former New York City mayor's campaign could shape national public health debate. As Swetlitz points out, some of Bloomberg's policies introduced during his terms as mayor of New York have gotten some national traction — menu calorie counts, for instance — but other ideas like banning oversize sodas have fallen flat.

HOW THE VEEP HELP START 'DATA PARASITES' FIGHT — Tuesday's Pulse flagged a jaw-dropping New England Journal of Medicine editorial that criticized the rise of "data parasites" in medical research. In a new story, Pro's Arthur Allen investigates how Joe Biden's cancer "moon shot" quest helped trigger the controversial editorial and what it says about the state of science.

"The debate underscores worries rippling through the research community in an era of genomes and super-computing," Arthur writes, noting that the rise of big data and questions about the reproducibility of medical papers are shaking the foundations of traditional biomedical research. The story for Pros.

AIDS GROUP SUES GILEAD OVER HIV DRUG PATENTS — The AIDS Healthcare Foundation filed suit in federal court against Gilead on Tuesday, accusing the company of illegally attempting to maintain a monopoly on its AIDS drug Tenofovir, Pro's Sarah Karlin reports. In its complaint, the foundation alleges it has paid millions of dollars more than necessary because Gilead engaged in patent "evergreening" — making minor changes to older products to obtain new monopoly protection and only making Tenovfovir, an older drug, available in combination with newer drugs with stronger patent protection. The AIDS group is seeking a jury trial and wants the court to invalidate Tenofovir's patents and award damages. The complaint: http://politico.pro/23rWE9M

— Gilead's response? It said that the two patents are "valid and enforceable."

ARE OBAMACARE'S HOSPITAL PENALTIES UNFAIR? — That's the clear implication from a new Association of American Medical Colleges paper that concludes the value-based payment, readmission, and hospital-acquired condition penalties disproportionately hurt hospitals that treat poorer populations. "These results raise questions and concerns about … whether patient population characteristics are sufficiently adjusted for in quality measuring," the report argues.

FIRST IN PULSE: MEET 'THE VAPOR TECHNOLOGY ASSOCIATION' — A new trade association for the e-cigarette industry formally launches today, and its website — vaportechnology.org — goes live at noon. The group will pursue "strict industry standards and responsible regulations that protect children and ensure the safety of consumers while aggressively pushing back on any misleading information," said Tony Abboud, the national legislative director.

AROUND TOWN: APCO ADDS EXPERTISE — Both Cybele Bjorklund, a longtime Democratic staffer on Capitol Hill, and Anita Manning, a former USA Today reporter, are joining APCO's Health Advisory Board. APCO also recently hired Niko Stemple, formerly of PhRMA, to join the firm's health care and policy practice.

WHAT WE'RE READING, by Rachana Pradhan

Michigan Gov. Rick Snyder wants Medicaid coverage for all Flint residents up to age 21, regardless of income, because of the city's water crisis. From the Detroit Free Press: http://on.freep.com/1JDsytg

The Wall Street Journal editorial board argues that Obamacare "is becoming less stable and less entrenched," citing issues insurers are having with the exchanges. http://on.wsj.com/1OOljNW

Charges against the makers of the Planned Parenthood sting videos say they used fake driver's licenses to infiltrate the organization, the Houston Chronicle reports. http://bit.ly/1PRG4WK

On a somewhat related note, the Washington Examiner writes that David Daleiden's indictment isn't a game-changer for abortion opponents. http://washex.am/1nmWDTp

Kentucky Gov. Matt Bevin's proposed two-year budget exempts Medicaid from spending cuts, according to the Lexington Herald-Leader. http://bit.ly/1PiT6R2

** A message from PhRMA: The medicine you need may not be covered by your health insurance plan or plans may require very high cost sharing. Insurers are increasingly making it hard to get the treatments you need to live a longer, healthier life by increasing deductibles and copays and creating other barriers to access. Here are 5 ways insurers may prevent you from accessing the medicine you need: (1) Prior authorization (2) Step therapy (3) Non-medical switching (4) High out-of-pocket costs (5) Not covered at all. When you’re choosing coverage be sure to look carefully at how — and if — the medicines you and your family need are covered. Learn more about these terms at AccessBetterCoverage.org - http://onphr.ma/23fm1LW **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): While approximately 80 percent of prescription drugs dispensed are generic drugs, the reimbursement system for these medications is largely unregulated and a mystery to pharmacists and patients. The lack of transparency also raises questions as to whether drug plan middlemen, pharmacy benefit manager (PBM) corporations, are overpaid by Medicare and other federal health programs. Moreover, when generic drug prices spike, PBM corporations are slow to update reimbursement rates, leaving community pharmacies with payments that don’t cover costs and unsustainable financial losses. H.R. 244 would increase transparency and facilitate timely payment updates. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacyaccess. **