Written By Emily Hull Posted: 08/24/2015, 12:30pm

The personal training industry has existed for almost 50 years, and nearly all of that time it has been unregulated.

In the nation’s capital, a new business to regulate: D.C.’s personal trainers http://t.co/eDkSZGbAqq pic.twitter.com/IJ1y519UiX — Crossfit (@CrossfitRR) August 24, 2015

That’s all about to change.

According to the Washington Post:

The new regulations, being written by and for the nation’s capital city, will create a registry of all personal trainers in the District only. But they are expected to become a model that winners and losers in the fight believe will be replicated elsewhere. The credit — or blame — for the newfound urgency can be traced in part to President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. A variety of workplace wellness programs and preventive health-care initiatives called for in the law could soon translate into rivers of billable hours for those with credentials to keep American waistlines in check.

These regulations could eventually lead to the ability to bill insurance companies for services much like such professionals as dieticians and physical therapists, putting millions of dollars at stake.

The problem here is that there are no standards for personal training everywhere. Gyms and clinics everywhere have their own rules.

These standards could cause some facilities to close so trainers can obtain certification.

“The term ‘personal fitness trainer’ is not true for everyone in the industry,” Phillip Godfrey, a medical exercise specialist in the District told the Washington Post. “That’s a known title, but there are kinesiologists, corrective specialists . . . literally hundreds of titles and sub-specialties. Setting one pathway, one test, one methodology to train individuals — that can be problematic. It may work for some and not others.”

The Washington Business Journal reported:

The Post reports this move has some of the best-muscled voices in the industry making noise, questioning the process and asking lawmakers to slow it down or even bring it to a complete stop, threatening legal battles if necessary. One of the most vocal opponents is CrossFit, the brand of high-intensity workouts that some swear by, and others say leads to injury. The cost to revamp CrossFit’s courses could go into the tens of millions, the company says, if it’s forced to do it throughout the country.

The District’s Board of Physical Therapy is expected to release its new regulation next month.