Clinton rallies in Tampa ahead of March 15 primary Politics Clinton rallies in Tampa ahead of March 15 primary Tampa takes center stage for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders Thursday. The Democratic presidential contenders are each holding rallies ahead of the March 15 Florida Primary.

- Tampa takes center stage for former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and Senator Bernie Sanders Thursday. The Democratic presidential contenders are each holding rallies ahead of the March 15 Florida Primary.

It takes 2,383 delegates to secure the party's nomination. Both candidates are vying for the state's 214 delegates.

Clinton's "Get out the Vote" rally took place early Thursday afternoon at the Ritz in Ybor City. After being introduced by Mayor Bob Buckhorn, she covered a wide range of topics, from climate change to college tuition costs, to jobs creation.

"Most of our jobs come from small businesses and the fastest growing small businesses are headed by minorities and women," Clinton said, taking a shot a Gov. Rick Scott in the process. "You need a president and, frankly, you need a governor who want to help you create those jobs."

Clinton also reaffirmed her support of the Affordable Care Act, gay marriage and for "common-sense gun safety measures."

The frontrunner for the Democratic nomination, who is polling at a commanding lead in Florida, also touched on several infrastructure issues that might hit close to home for folks in Tampa Bay, including the Port of Tampa and a high-speed rail line.

"Right here in Tampa and in front of the mayor, I want to tell you, if I'm your president, we're going to make investments in this port. We're going to go back and look at high-speed rail," she said.

This marked the first time Clinton has visited the area since 2008.

At times, the former Secretary of State referenced the Republican field.

"People ask me all the time, 'who do I want to run against?' That's not for me to decide. But given what they've all said, I'll take any one of them," Clinton said.

Sen. Sanders, meanwhile, is planning a "Future to Believe in" rally at 7 p.m. at the Florida State Fairgrounds.