One family with property in Inlet Beach is speaking out against a potential project that a developer is looking to build in the area.

The Kidd family had one of the first cottages ever built at Inlet Beach, but lost their cottage and over half of their land when U.S. 98 was turned into a four-lane road.

They, along with the Inlet Dunes Condo Association say this proposed project will inflict tremendous financial damage to both their properties.

The developer is proposing to build a six lot residential subdivision adjacent to the Kidd property and the Inlet Dunes Condo property.

Plans show that they developer is proposing to use the old government easement across from the Kidd family's property and the easement across the northern boundary of the Inlet Dunes Condos to access his northern three lots.

The Kidd family states, while the subdivision has more than adequate access from West Park Avenue, the proposal demands a second entrance for three lots of the subdivision.

If approved, the new road would cut through the Inlet Dunes Condo gate, and cause the condo to lose landscaping, many indigenous trees and six parking spots. This would also force them out of compliance with the building code.

Long before the developer, Joseph Steffen, submitted his proposal, the Kidd family and the Inlet Dunes Condo Association had submitted a request to planning to have that easement abandoned.

The developer's proposal was scheduled to be heard at Tuesday’s Walton County Commissioner meeting but it was continued until August 11.

"We feel that he should come in from the front of the property and not try to open up the easement through Inlet Dunes condo and our property,” said Melinda Kidd Anderson, an Inlet Beach property owner. “So we own lots 146 and 147, and it would greatly impact us on our 33 feet. And that is 33 feet by approximately 300 feet that would put a huge gash through that community just to provide a developer, so to speak with a six lot subdivision with a second entrance.”

The Kidd family also stated they were never notified by the planning board when this item was up for discussion, and say they have been left in the dark regarding the whole project that would severely affect their property.