Jovy Mann of Costa Mesa and Tomas Zurita of Irvine were awarded scholarships from United Health Foundation’s Diverse Scholars Initiative to pursue careers in primary health care.

Mann is studying pediatric nursing at Cal State Channel Islands, and Zurita is studying public health science at the UC Irvine.

United Health Foundation’s Diverse Scholars Initiative, through its partner organizations, will award nearly $2 million in scholarships during the 2014-15 school year to students from diverse, multicultural backgrounds. The initiative aims to increase diversity in the health care workforce by supporting promising future health professionals as they pursue their education. This is part of United Health Foundation’s ongoing commitment to build a more diverse health workforce.

Since 2007, United Health Foundation has awarded more than 1,400 scholarships totaling $9.3 million to support diverse students pursing health careers, with 240 scholarships awarded in California.

“United Health Foundation is honored to support these outstanding students as they prepare to bring their expertise and enthusiasm to our health care system,” said Kate Rubin, president of United Health Foundation.

United Health Foundation announced the 2014-15 scholarships at its sixth annual Diverse Scholars Forum. This year’s forum is the largest yet, bringing more than 100 scholarship recipients to Washington, D.C., from July 23 to 26, to celebrate the scholars’ accomplishments and inspire them to work toward strengthening the nation's health care system. This year’s forum provides the scholars with opportunities to hear from members of Congress and leaders in a variety of health fields and to network with and learn from one another.

“The United Health Foundation scholarship will help me pursue a career in pediatric nursing,” Mann said. “I enjoy working with kids and would like to make a difference in their lives by assisting them medically and treating their illnesses.”

“I want to help children and help reduce childhood obesity and diabetes,” Zurita said. “The United Health Foundation scholarship will help me pursue my goal to attend medical school and become a pediatrician.”

The Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) predicts that the United States will experience a severe shortage of physicians, nurses and other medical care providers over the next two decades. According to AAMC, the country will need 124,000 more physicians, 157,000 more pharmacists and 1 million more nurses to meet growing demand for health services, in part because of expanded coverage under the Affordable Care Act.

For more information about the Diverse Scholars Initiative, visit unitedhealthfoundation.org/initiatives and click on “Diverse Scholars.”

– Submitted by the United Health Foundation