In some ways, “The Last Five Years” tells the love story that everyone knows all too well. Boy meets girl, falls in love, marries her, argues with her and ultimately leaves her. And that’s exactly what the audience gets in this play. Well, partially.

The main thing that makes “The Last Five Years” different is that it has both a linear and non-linear narrative comprised of dueling monologues — his moving forward in time, from the beginning of the relationship to the end, hers moving backwards, from the end to the beginning with the two progressions intersecting at the couple’s wedding. Therefore, the audience knows that the relationship falls apart in the first minute of the show with the woman’s opening song. It’s a show not about anticipating or wondering what happens next but a piece that delves deeply into the complexities of modern relationships. The show is almost entirely musical, with each song presenting a snapshot of the relationship at different moments in its development.

With a minimalist set and a three-piece band, Footlight Players’ production undoubtedly pulls off this structure with power and emotion. The two local actors were so on point that it became almost difficult to watch at times — it was often too realistic and painfully relatable. But then again, it’s hard to take your eyes off these dynamic actors.

Rebecca Weatherby, a choral music education major at Charleston Southern University, plays Cathy Hiatt, a struggling actor who feels neglected by her husband’s successful writing career. The strongest aspect of Weatherby’s performance is her voice which rivals, and perhaps outshines, that of Broadway veteran Sherie Rene Scott’s on the original cast recording. Weatherby is appropriately subtle and sad in the show’s opening song, “Still Hurting,” and then jaw-droppingly intense as she belts out her frustrations in her second song, “See I’m Smiling.” She’s hilarious and playful in the comedic “A Summer in Ohio” and tragically hopeful in the show’s closing number “Goodbye Until Tomorrow.”

Caleb Copper plays Jamie Wellerstein, who early on gets the “singular impression things are moving too fast” in both his career and love life. Copper portrays the excited and naive 23-year-old with perfect lightness; his conflicted 28-year-old is somehow the most heartbreaking and touching of the two characters, even if Cathy is more the victim of the relationship’s demise. His best scene is midway through the show when Jamie encourages Cathy to pursue her acting career through an imaginative telling of a story he’s written, “The Schmuel Song.”

Even for the theatergoer who typically stays away from musicals, this show is a Piccolo must-see. (Unless you are going to the theater to escape your marital problems, in which case, maybe not.) The show is certainly not a form of escapism and you won’t leave feeling any happier than you did before you arrived. It’s more a lesson on perspective, a reminder that everyone has a story.

The show continues at 8 p.m. June 3, 4, 5 and 6 at Footlight Players Theatre, 20 Queen St. Tickets are $25 for adults, $20 for seniors and military, $17 for students. Go to www.piccolospoleto.com.