Charles Krauthammer told viewers Thursday on “Special Report with Bret Baier” that President Obama’s proposed fix -- telling health insurers that they don’t have to cancel plans next year because of ObamaCare -- is a “sham.”

Krauthammer said that the move is designed to shift blame to insurers and provide a way out for embattled Democrats in Congress.

“He pretended to want to restore the plans to people who lost them, because it is a sham, it was only intended to shift the blame," Krauthammer said. "His intent is for these plans not to be renewed.”

On Friday, the House voted 261-157 to pass a bill sponsored by House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Rep. Fred Upton, R-Mich., called the “Keep Your Health Plan Act,” allowing insurance companies to continue offering plans that don’t meet ObamaCare's standards.

Thirty-nine Democrats joined in voting for the bill and Krauthammer, a syndicated columnist and Fox News contributor, said that without the president’s concession Thursday, that number would have been exponentially higher.

“If he hadn't done that, shift the blame without really changing what happens on the ground, who gets this policy or not, there would have been 100 Democrats, or 120. That would have been a huge embarrassment," Krauthammer said.

“That's why he had to do the press conference because that would have been a rebellion against him and he would lose as a second term president complete control of the party, and been a lame duck less than a year into the second term. So, I would say the 40 is a substantial number.”

Krauthammer also told viewers that the problem now lies with Democrats in the Senate, particularly vulnerable incumbents facing re-election next year:

“The ones who are really in trouble and who need a bill so they can have a vote on the record that says 'I voted to maintain the plans.’ If they don't, their opponent in the election next year are going to play over and over and over their own statements, the Democrats statements, 'if you like your plan you can keep it' and they will all lose.”