American-Jewish groups were split in their reaction to the Supreme Court’s ruling on marriage equality, now becoming law of the land.

The Supreme court ruled on Friday by a 5-4 majority that the Constitution’s guarantees of due process and equal protection under the law mean that states cannot ban same-gender marriages.

President Barack Obama, appearing in the White House Rose Garden, hailed the ruling as a milestone in American justice that arrived “like a thunderbolt.”

“This ruling is a victory for America,” said Obama, “This decision affirms what millions of Americans already believe in their hearts. When all Americans are treated as equal, we are all more free.”

In a statement,the National Jewish Democratic Council said that they “rejoice in this historic day, and reflect on the significant place human rights has in our Jewish values.”

“It is a vital, active imperative for the Jewish people to be on the front lines of issues protecting and promoting the rights of any group being treated unfairly. The fight for marriage equality is a symbolic manifestation of the Jewish value of seeking justice for the vulnerable,” the NJDC said.

They also pointed to last year’s poll by the Public Religion Research Institute, which found that 83% of American Jews – by far the highest of any religious group – supported marriage equality.

The Anti-Defamation League (ADL) called the historic ruling “one of the most significant civil rights decisions in recent memory.”

The Orthodox Union, on the other hand, criticized the decision, which may force religious institutions to lose their tax exemptions, stating the historical position of the Jewish faith, enunciated in the Bible, which condemns the institutionalization of such relationships as marriages. “We are grateful that we live in a democratic society, in which all religions are free to express their opinions about social issues and to advocate vigorously for those opinions. The reason we opt to express our viewpoint in a public forum is because we believe that our Divine system of law not only dictates our beliefs and behaviors, but also represents a system of universal morality, and therefore can stake a claim in the national discourse,” the OU said in a lengthy statement. “We also recognize that no religion has the right to dictate its beliefs to the entire body politic and we do not expect that secular law will always align with our viewpoint. Ultimately, decisions on social policy remain with the democratic process, and today the process has spoken and we accord the process and its result the utmost respect.”

“Will the laws implementing today’s ruling and other expansions of civil rights for LGBT Americans contain appropriate accommodations and exemptions for institutions and individuals who abide by religious teachings that limit their ability to support same-[gender] relationships?” the the leadership of the Union of Orthodox Jewish Congregations of America said.