Loveland/Berthoud Salvation Army seeking to fill slots for bell ringers for the 2015 Red Kettle Campaign

Salvation Army bell ringer Gary Manley, right, greets Harry Weber as he drops money into the kettle Wednesday outside the King Soopers in south Loveland. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

If you go What: Bell ringers needed for the 2015 Red Kettle Campaign. When: Daily through Thursday, Dec. 24, except Sundays. Where: The two King Soopers stores in Loveland, both Loveland Walmarts, Safeway, Sam's Club and Hays Market in Berthoud. To schedule a time: Call 699-8380 or email iwant2ring@msn.com. More info: Visit www.salvationarmyloveland.org.

Every year, Ann Aggers likes to put on her red apron and red Santa hat and stand next to a red kettle ringing a bell.

Aggers is a volunteer ringer with the Loveland/Berthoud Salvation Army who rings at the south Loveland King Soopers. She likes to volunteer when she has free time from her subbing work after teaching elementary school for 29 years.

"I can be outside, and the people are friendly," Aggers said. "I love to see the little children come and put their money in the kettle. ... People in Loveland are just very generous."

Aggers is one of the regulars at the Salvation Army, but the nonprofit needs more ringers to finish out the 2015 campaign season ending Dec. 24. So far, 950 hours have been filled at seven locations, but there are a total of 2,300 hours for the season that began Nov. 20.

Advertisement

Dan Lucero, chairman of the Loveland/Berthoud Salvation Army, hopes to sign up ringers for at least 1,200 hours.

"Anything beyond this is just a blessing," Lucero said. "We feel we're at the same point as last year with number of hours ringing and donations."

Last year, the volunteer ringers put in 1,100 hours and raised $74,000. The average is about $80,000, which is the goal for this year, Lucero said.

"The first few days were slow just because it was kind of chilly," Lucero said.

Salvation Army bell ringer Ann Aggers, left, smiles as Benjamin Barton, 4, drops money into the kettle Wednesday outside the King Soopers in south Loveland. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

Ninety percent of what the volunteer ringers raise will remain in Loveland and Berthoud, and the rest will go to the regional and national offices to help support disaster relief.

This year, Lucero has seen some large denominations being placed in the kettles, he said.

"People have been pretty generous," he said. "It means a lot to them to contribute."

The ringers also are contributing with their time, Lucero said.

"A couple hours of ringing can help a family with a meal," he said. "You just feel like you're helping. You know it's going to go for a good cause."

The ringers are ringing at the two King Soopers stores in Loveland, both Loveland Walmarts, the west Safeway, Sam's Club and Hays Market in Berthoud. They ring Monday to Saturday, typically for two-hour shifts as individuals, couples, friends or family groups, and groups from civic organizations, churches and businesses.

Nancy Patterson has been ringing for the past four to five years and likes to ring at the south King Soopers, she said.

"It's beautiful to watch and see the joy people have in sharing," Patterson said. "Everyone seems to want to do something to help our community, and this is a great way to do it, because all of the money pretty much stays here."

The Salvation Army partners with several Loveland area agencies, including the House of Neighborly Service, 137 Homeless Connection, Neighbor to Neighbor, Alternatives to Violence, Loveland's Community Kitchen, the Boys & Girls Clubs of Larimer County, Disabled Resource Services, the Thompson Education Fund, Loveland Police Chaplains and Christ Church of the Rockies.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm