SAN FRANCISCO, February 22, 2016 /PRNewswire/ --

The global Breast Pump Market is expected to reach USD 1.20 billion by 2020, according to a new report by Grand View Research, Inc. Increasing awareness about breast feeding and the need to supply mother's milk for a period 6 months to 1 year after child birth is a key driver for the market growth. Growing global population and rising birth rates in emerging and underdeveloped economies with large untapped opportunities are clear indicators of a constantly widening consumer base for breast pumps over forecast period.

(Logo: http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150105/723757 )



Working women, who are lactating mothers, are under stress due to the fact that they need to return to work place within weeks after the child's delivery, and at the same time they also need to ensure that the child is breast fed to grow as a healthy child. These breast pumps which enable mother's to retrieve and store the breast milk are an ideal solution, as they can manage their both professional and personal life. Furthermore, these breast pumps also address the needs of lactating women in hospitals, home care and other lactating centers.

Browse full research report with TOC on "Breast Pump Market Analysis By Product (Open System, Closed System), By Technology (Manual, Battery-Powered, Electric Pump), By Application (Personal Use, Hospital Grade) And Segment Forecasts To 2020" at: http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/breast-pumps-market

Additionally, various government initiatives to promote breast feeding and improve the healthcare outcomes are expected drive market growth. In the U.S., the Affordable Care Act has certain provisions which provide reimbursement for acquiring a breast pump and also covers the consultation charges.

On the basis of product, the market is segmented as open system and closed system. In 2013 closed breast pump system held the maximum share of nearly 82%. The closed devices are highly utilized as these devices provide better safety to the child, eliminate impurities and prevent the milk contamination.

The market is segmented on the basis of technology as, battery powered breast pump electric breast pump and manual breast pump. The battery powered breast pumps accounted for the maximum share of more than 55% in 2013. The battery powered breast pumps are highly preferred by women who extract milk several times a day and store it for a longer duration.

Further key findings from the report suggest:

In 2013, North America was the largest market with more than 63% share in global Breast Pump Market. Key reasons attributed are high awareness levels, large women working population and strong encouragement from various stake holders to increase the breast feeding coverage and improve the pediatric healthcare.

was the largest market with more than 63% share in global Breast Pump Market. Key reasons attributed are high awareness levels, large women working population and strong encouragement from various stake holders to increase the breast feeding coverage and improve the pediatric healthcare. However, Asia Pacific is expected to be the fastest growing market owing to high economic development, rising disposable incomes and high unmet needs. The developing countries of Asia Pacific region are expected to increase the public and private healthcare expenditure, and also implement various UNICEF and WHO programmes for breast feeding thus boosting market growth.

is expected to be the fastest growing market owing to high economic development, rising disposable incomes and high unmet needs. The developing countries of region are expected to increase the public and private healthcare expenditure, and also implement various UNICEF and WHO programmes for breast feeding thus boosting market growth. Key market players include, Buettner-Frank GmbH Ltd., Energizer Holdings Inc., Ameda Breastfeeding Solutions, Whittlestone Inc., Linco Baby Merchandise Work's Co.Ltd, Medela,Inc., Bailey Guangzhou Happy Baby Products Medical Engineering, Philips AVENT, Hygeia Medical Group II, and Lansinoh Laboratories, Inc. Furthermore, entry of new players with technologically advanced products is expected to propel usage rates over the forecast period.

Grand View Research has segmented the Breast Pump Market on the basis of application, and region:

Global Breast Pumps Product Outlook (Market Revenue in USD Million, 2012 - 2022) Open System Closed System

Global Breast Pumps Technology Outlook (Market Revenue in USD Million, 2012 - 2022) Battery-powered Breast Pumps Electrical Breast Pumps Manual Breast Pumps

Global Breast Pumps Application Outlook (Market Revenue in USD Million, 2012 - 2022) Personal Use Hospital Grade

Breast Pumps Regional Outlook (Revenue, USD Million, 2014 - 2022) North America Europe Asia Pacific RoW



Browse related reports by Grand View Research:

Biosimilar Market - http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/biosimilar-market

Proteomics Market - http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/proteomics-market

Hospital Supplies Market - http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/hospital-supplies-market

Cell Counting Market - http://www.grandviewresearch.com/industry-analysis/cell-counting-market

About Grand View Research

Grand View Research, Inc. is a U.S. based market research and consulting company, registered in the State of California and headquartered in San Francisco. The company provides syndicated research reports, customized research reports, and consulting services. To help clients make informed business decisions, we offer market intelligence studies ensuring relevant and fact-based research across a range of industries, from technology to chemicals, materials and healthcare.

Read Our Blogs - mediafound.org, grandviewresearch.blog

Contact:

Sherry James

Corporate Sales Specialist, USA

Grand View Research, Inc

Phone: 1-415-349-0058

Toll Free: 1-888-202-9519

Email: sales@grandviewresearch.com



Web: http://www.grandviewresearch.com





SOURCE Grand View Research, Inc.