The online brokers’ websites offer an experience similar to HealthCare.gov. | REUTERS Web brokers wait to sell Obamacare

The Obama administration has enlisted a small army of online brokers to help sell new Obamacare health plans, but those sites have been sidelined in the health care law’s first two weeks as the feds struggle to sort out their own glitch-filled website.

The federal agency in charge of the exchanges signed agreements this summer with several e-brokers to sell health plans in the 36 states where the feds are running the new individual marketplaces. But the online brokers, eager to tap a new market of people who’ll qualify for federal subsidies, learned shortly before the Oct. 1 launch that they wouldn’t be able to offer exchange plans right away.

Story Continued Below

The brokers say the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services didn’t act fast enough to let them integrate their websites with the IT systems supporting the federal insurance marketplaces. They hope to get everything linked up with the feds in the coming weeks.

“I think it just comes down to they weren’t ready,” said Michael Mahoney, vice president of consumer marketing for Web broker GoHealth. “Like anybody else, when they realized they weren’t going to be ready with a variety of things, they have to look at circumstances and prioritize.”

( PHOTOS: 25 unforgettable Obamacare quotes)

The online brokers’ websites, which predate the health care law, offer an experience similar to what HealthCare.gov is supposed to provide. They allow consumers to shop and compare health plans — until now, only for insurers they’ve had financial partnerships with. They’ll now have to offer all the plans available on the federal-run exchanges, even if they don’t financially benefit from the enrollment. And they’ll let consumers know whether they can get government help to purchase insurance.

The Web brokers say system integration is the last step they need to take before connecting to the federal-run portal known as the data hub, which links several government agencies to determine subsidy eligibility. CMS says it’s working closely with the Web brokers to bring them on board.

“Web-based brokers are one of many ways in which consumers can comparison shop for health coverage,” CMS spokesman Brian Cook said. “We’ve taken steps to make brokers’ ability to sell marketplace plans as seamless as possible — giving them an application programming interface, user agreements and a public use file before the marketplace opened.”

The online brokers are counting on new business from their partnerships with CMS, so they aren’t ready to write HealthCare.gov’s obituary just yet.

( PHOTOS: Obamacare online: File not found)

“These government exchanges will work … there are no ifs and buts about it,” said eHealthInsurance CEO Gary Lauer, whose company lobbied the administration particularly hard to secure regulatory approval to offer subsidy-eligible health plans. “The real question is how well they work and how effective are they going to be.”

Lauer said his own website has seen an uptick in traffic since the health care law’s Oct. 1, launch. EHealth is still offering individual health plans, just off the exchanges so they aren’t subsidy eligible. But those plans still must comply with Obamacare’s new insurance market rules — including a ban on discriminating against pre-existing conditions and a mandated set of benefits.

Chini Krishnan, the CEO of Web broker Getinsured, said his company is preaching patience, pointing out that consumers can wait another two months to enroll and still get benefits when they kick in on Jan. 1. Though the open enrollment period lasts through March, Dec. 15 is considered the last day to enroll to receive benefits starting after the new year begins.

( WATCH: Obamacare timeline)

“We’re educating them that you have all the way until Dec. 15,” Krishnan said. “In these first two weeks, what’s more important is to educate yourself and understand [your options].”

Trying to leverage new Obamacare opportunities, the Web brokers also have announced private-sector partnerships in recent weeks. Walgreens will direct customers with coverage questions to GoHealth. Meanwhile, tax preparation company Jackson Hewitt will help customers determine eligibility for premium subsidies, then send them to Getinsured for more information about health plan choices.

The Web brokers are willing to give the Obama administration some room to address the HealthCare.gov problems — those that instantly became apparent and those still undiscovered. But they said they wouldn’t have rolled out such a glitch-filled product.

“All I can say is in the private sector, in the e-commerce world, that wouldn’t work,” Lauer said.