Physician takes top spot at St. Vincent's

BRIDGEPORT -- Dr. Stuart Marcus has a copy of the Hippocratic Oath hanging in his office at St. Vincent's Medical Center, just feet from his desk.

It's the oath he took nearly 30 years ago when he became a doctor -- the one that starts "First, do no harm."

"That oath is very sacred to me," said Marcus, 52, of Easton.

It's an ideal, he said, that he's carried with him on every step of his career, from his early days as a physician to his work as chief medical officer and chairman of oncology at St. Vincent's.

Marcus has continued to climb up the ladder at the hospital, being named president of the medical center in 2012. This month, he was named president and CEO of St. Vincent's Health Services, a $500 million healthcare system that includes the hospital, St. Vincent's College, St. Vincent's Special Needs Services and St. Vincent's Medical Center Foundation.

He will succeed Susan L. Davis, who is transitioning to a full-time role as president and CEO of Sacred Heart Health System, based in Pensacola, Fla. Sacred Heart is part of Ascension Health, the same chain that owns St. Vincent's.

More Information Vital stats

Name: Dr. Stuart Marcus

Age: 52

Residence: Easton

Title: President and CEO, St. Vincent's Health Services

Former St. Vincent's posts: Physician, chief medical officer and chairman of oncology.

Twitter account @StuartMarcusMD

Until recently, Davis had split her time between Florida and Bridgeport. She said she had been asked multiple times to work full-time in Florida, but was reluctant to leave Bridgeport. Ultimately, Davis said, she decided to move largely because of her faith in Marcus' abilities.

"I saw what a great job he was doing," she said.

Marcus is the first doctor to hold his current position at the hospital, and one of only three physician administrators at hospitals in the state. The other two are John Murphy, president and CEO of Western Connecticut Health Network, and Stuart Markowitz, president of Hartford Hospital.

"There aren't a lot of physician executives in health care," Marcus said. He expects that to change, as many hospitals that are considered exemplary, including the Mayo Clinic, have doctors in charge. "It's become apparent over time that there are advantages to being a physician leader," he said.

Davis agreed. She said the culture of health care is changing dramatically -- likely due in large part to the sweeping health-care reform legislation known as the Affordable Care Act -- and having a physician in a leadership position will likely help smooth the transition. "I think the changes that are happening in health care require someone with a clinical background to put together the changes that need to be made," Davis said.

The past year has been a tumultuous one for St. Vincent's which, in June, eliminated 100 positions and laid off about 50 workers.

The hospital, like others in the state, also faced a dip in expected funding on the state and national levels. And Marcus said the climate of health care in general is shifting away from hospital care, and toward lower-cost options, which can take a toll. At this point, he said, he doesn't anticipate future layoffs, but "it's hard to predict what the future will hold."

Marcus said his training and experience as a doctor have served him well as an executive, helping him put a greater focus on improving patient safety and patient care, and the way services are delivered. For instance, he played a key role in developing the hospital's Elizabeth M. Pfriem SWIM Center for Cancer Care, which opened in 2010. Previous to that, he said, cancer care at the hospital was fragmented, with various cancer services scatter throughout the hospital.

"What we did as a team was start bringing the fragments together" to create a centralized cancer resource for patients, Marcus said.

His colleagues have experienced his dedication to patients firsthand, including Dale Danowski, hospital senior vice president, chief nursing officer and chief operating officer.

"His focus on the patients and staff is incredible," she said. "As a physician, he connects very easily with people."

Danowski remembered a recent incident where she was walking with Marcus to a meeting. On their way, they walked by a waiting room full of patients. To Danowski's amazement, Marcus stopped and apologized to every one of the waiting patients.

"He's a very captivating leader," she said. "People trust him."

As he takes his new post, Marcus said he's looking forward to further improving care at the hospital and educating the public about health.

One way in which he hopes to do this is through social media, of which Marcus is an active user. He regularly updates his Twitter account, @StuartMarcusMD, which has more than 500 followers. Posts include links to health research, news about the hospital and even the occasional personal tidbit, such as his relief at recovering a cellphone he left on a recent airplane flight.

"It's a good way to let people know what's happening," Marcus said.

He said the skills he's developed through social media also help make him a better leader.

"It helps you think succinctly," Marcus said. "If we can teach and communicate in the age of Twitter, think how much more effective we can be."

acuda@ctpost.com; 203-330-6290; twitter.com/AmandaCuda;http://blog.ctnews.com/whatthehealth/