The J.S. Clark Class of '65 celebrated its 50th reunion in September. (Photo: Submitted photo)

Campus News appears Wednesdays and Sundays in the Daily World. To include news about your school, please send notices to news@dailyworld.com.

Washington Elementary School

Students will be out of school during the week of Nov. 23-27 due to the Thanksgiving Holiday. Classes will resume on Monday.

After-school tutoring will resume Monday.

Opelousas Catholic School

The Academic Council’s Spirit and Resale Shop is available on Monday from 2 to 6 p.m. in the school library.

The PTO is holding its annual “Movie Night” for the Opelousas Catholic elementary students and their families on Tuesday evening at 6 p.m.

School volunteers are reminded about the “Safe Environment Initial Training” on Tuesday at 5:30 p.m.

On Wednesday, an all-school Mass will be held at 8:40 a.m. in St. Landry Catholic Church.

Basketball and soccer season is underway. Check the Opelousas Catholic School website for a scheduled of games, and go out to support the Vikings and Lady Vikings!

Opelousas High School

Football season has ended and winter sports are taking over OHS. Basketball and soccer are both practicing getting ready for opening games. Basketball this year will be under the supervision of new coaches Brad Boyd and Robbie Brown. Soccer continues with coaches David Houser and Jacques Joubert. We are all looking forward to much success in these two sports.

A new organization at OHS is the Library and Book Club. The purpose of the club is to promote reading and reading comprehension, to provide a positive forum in which students can be creative, innovative, and marketable in their prospective area or interests and to provide students with the tools needed to increase their ACT scores in reading. General meetings will be held the first Wednesday of each month in the library in the morning. Activities will be planned and discussed at meetings. Community service project ideas are encouraged and welcomed.

The OHS Magnet Academy of Biomedical Sciences is selling candy bars to raise money for their end-of-the-year trip to St. Jude’s Medical Center in Memphis, Tennessee. At St. Jude’s, the students will facilitate science activities with the children being treated at the medical center.

The OHS Beta Club is currently selling donuts to raise money to attend State Beta Convention in January. Donuts are $6 per dozen. Orders are due today and will be delivered Wednesday.

Opelousas High School Science Club sponsored a Thanksgiving Basket Project to help several needy families in the Opelousas area. Each basket contained a turkey with a variety of side dishes. All baskets were created with care and will be delivered to 10 families. Items for the completed baskets were donated by club members, the school and community donors.

Magnet Academy for Cultural Arts

The 11th annual Magnet Academy for Cultural Arts Christmas concert will be held Tuesday, Dec. 8, at 6 p.m. in the MACA auditorium. The school is located at 1100 E. Leo St. in Opleousas. Admission will be $5 for adults and $1 for students.

Read or Share this story: http://www.dailyworld.com/story/news/local/2015/11/28/campus-news/76448546/