Mary Thomas kicked off her campaign for Congress today with a news conference in Tallahassee.

Buy Photo Tallahassee attorney Mary Thomas kicked off her campaign for Congress today. (Photo: Jeff Burlew/Democrat)Buy Photo

5:20 p.m. update

Saying North Florida needs a fresh, conservative voice in Washington, state-government attorney Mary Thomas kicked off her campaign for Congress on Wednesday.

Thomas, a Tallahassee Republican seeking the 2nd District seat held by Rep. Gwen Graham, D-Tallahassee, laid out her priorities during a news conference at the Florida Press Center, including cutting taxes, ending illegal immigration, dismantling the U.S. Department of Education and ending Common Core standards.

"Let's cut taxes," she said. "Let's eliminate unnecessary regulations. Let's cut wasteful spending. Let's force Congress to reclaim its constitutional authority to reign in the executive. And let's adopt a flat or fair tax to stimulate economic growth."

Thomas, who turns 37 on Saturday, introduced herself as a first-generation American, the daughter of legal immigrants from India, a wife, mom and Christian. Thomas, a native of Charleston, S.C., who relocated with her family to Florida as a child, is hoping to become the first Indian-American elected to Congress, something she said "would truly be an historic event."

Her parents, both doctors, legally immigrated to America in 1972. She said the issue of illegal immigration is "deeply personal to me and my family."

"My parents came to this country legally," she said. "They were willing to follow the law so that their children could have a better life, so that I could be here before you today the proud descendant of immigrants. So when President Obama grants illegal and unconstitutional amnesty to millions of illegal immigrants, it is an outrage to me, my parents and to all of the immigrants waiting in line to become Americans legally."

Thomas works as general counsel for the Florida Department of Elder Affairs, though she said she plans to step down from the post to campaign full time. She said she's worked in state government since Gov. Rick Scott's election in 2010 and that the governor has been "very supportive" of her campaign. She bragged about the governor during the news conference, saying it's been an honor to work with him.

"Gov. Scott and his administration have proven that free market principles work," she said. "Washington could take a few lessons from what we've done here in Florida."

She criticized the U.S. Supreme Court for recent rulings upholding the Affordable Care Act and legalizing gay marriage, decisions she called "an abomination." She also criticized Graham, who's serving her first term in Congress, for supporting the president's stance on immigration and other issues, including the Affordable Care Act. Graham, during last year's campaign and in more recent statements, promised to fix problems with the health-care law and support bipartisan proposals to improve it.

"I do not think that Gwen Graham represents the values, beliefs and interests of this district," Thomas said. "And I think that can clearly be seen by the votes that she has taken."

Graham responded by saying the families she's talking to in North Florida are concerned with making government work, "not an election 15 months away. I'm going to continue focusing on bringing the North Florida Way to Washington — and that means working with Democrats and Republicans to get things done."

One unknown in the campaign is how redistricting will affect the 2nd District. Last month, the Florida Supreme Court ordered lawmakers to redraw lines for eight districts, which could lead to a redrawn District 2 that's more favorable to Republicans. Recently, former Rep. Steve Southerland, R-Panama City, whom Graham defeated last year, has said he's considering running for the seat.

Thomas said she's committed to running in the district.

"I think if I go up against Gwen Graham or any other candidate, the same qualities that I bring in the race against Gwen Graham and make me a good candidate and someone who can beat her are the same qualities that I would bring to competition against any other candidate," she said. "I think I am the best candidate."

1:05 p.m. update

Surrounded by family members and supporters, state-government attorney Mary Thomas kicked off her campaign for Congress today.

Thomas laid out a number of her priorities should she win the 2nd District seat in 2016, including ending illegal immigration and dismantling the U.S. Department of Education.

"Let's cut taxes," she said. "Let's eliminate unnecessary regulations. Let's cut wasteful spending. Let's force Congress to reclaim its constitutional authority to reign in the executive. And let's adopt a flat or fair tax to stimulate economic growth."

Thomas, who turns 37 on Saturday, works as general counsel for the Florida Department of Elder Affairs and is a personal friend of the governor. While she said Scott offered no advice on her first political run, she said it's been an honor to work in his administration.

"Gov. Scott and his administration have proven that free market principles work. Washington could take a few lessons from what we've done here in Florida," she said.

Thomas is hoping to become the first Indian-American woman ever elected to Congress, something she said "would truly be an historic event." Her parents legally immigrated from India to America in 1972. Thomas was born in Charleston, S.C., but her family relocated shortly thereafter to Florida.

"Democrats say that people like me can't make it in America without a handout from government," she said. "But when I look in the mirror , I see someone who has lived the American dream. I see someone who has a deep respect for the core values that have made our country so great -- life, liberty and the constitution as our framers intended it. These are my beliefs and they are the key to a better and more prosperous future for all Floridians."

Thomas criticized incumbent Rep. Gwen Graham, D-Tallahassee, for her stance on issues from immigration to fishing regulations.

"Gwen Graham supports Obamacare, and she supports the activist decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court on Obamacare and traditional marriage," Thomas said. "As a member of the conservative Federalist Society, I can tell you that the recent decisions by the U.S. Supreme Court are an abomination. They tear at the very fabric of American society. We must repeal Obamacare and defend the constitution. Nothing less will suffice.

Thomas added she would better represent the district's interests.

"We need strong leaders in Washington who will stand up for and fight to protect the American dream for the next generation," she said.

Graham, responding to Thomas' remarks, issued a statement saying, "The families I'm listening to in North Florida are concerned with making government work, not an election 15 months away," she said. "I'm going to continue focusing on bringing the North Florida Way to Washington — and that means working with Democrats and Republicans to get things done."

Morning update

Mary Thomas, general counsel for Gov. Rick Scott's administration, has confirmed she is running for the District 2 congressional seat in 2016.

Thomas unveiled her garnet-and-gold campaign logo on her Twitter feed Tuesday, saying, "As U can C by my NEW logo, I'm a proud graduate of @floridastate Law. Sorry if that offends some people :) #GoNoles!" The logo says, "Conservative Mary Thomas for Congress," over an outline of the state of Florida.

She is scheduled to hold a news conference at 11 a.m. at the Florida Press Center in Tallahassee to discuss her candidacy. She appeared earlier this morning on "The Morning Show with Preston Scott" to talk about her run.

Thomas, a Tallahassee Republican who wants to make history as the first Indian-American woman to win a congressional seat, is challenging Rep. Gwen Graham, D-Tallahassee. And she is already drawing distinctions between herself and the incumbent.

"I'm a daughter of LEGAL immigrants," she said in a tweet. "Liberal @RepGwenGraham supports Obama's amnesty. That's wrong!"

The campaign for District 2 could become complicated by redistricting. The Florida Supreme Court earlier this month ordered lawmakers to redraw a number of districts, including that of Rep. Corrine Brown, D-Jacksonville, whose new district could stretch into Tallahassee, potentially making a redrawn District 2 more favorable to Republicans. Former Rep. Steve Southerland, R-Panama City, whom Graham defeated last year, has said he's considering running for the seat as well.

Check back with Tallahassee.com for more on this story.

Read or Share this story: http://on.tdo.com/1RQ9FXm