Who is dropping out of Obamacare? Avik Roy, Manhattan Institute senior fellow, says the data will come in about the next 6 months. Dan Mendelson, Avalere Health CEO, explains why people may be dropping out.

Lambrew's note pointed out a potential problem with how customer service representatives were dealing with callers who were trying to navigate HealthCare.gov, the federal Obamacare exchange that enrolls people in health insurance plans.

At the time, HealthCare.gov—which CMS operates—was effectively unable to enroll any significant number of people because of serious software problems that came to light on the Oct. 1 launch.

"There may be a problem with the CSR [customer service representative] training or script," Lambrew wrote. "I tried again. I was told that they could take my information, depending on how complicated my circumstances are and whether they could [verify] information, it could take 20-30 minutes."

"When I pushed and asked if I could enroll without going to the website, I was told no, at some point I would have to create an account on HealthCare.gov," Lambrew wrote.

In fact, assistance was and is available for people who cannot, or refuse to use that website.

After Tavenner got the email, she wrote Bataille, and copied in a number of other CMS staffers. While she asked Bataille to delete Lambrew's missive, Tavenner also wrote, "but please see if we can work on a call script."

Another brief sentence, or sentences, were blacked out in the email sent to Bataille, which was turned over to the House Energy and Commerce Committee.

Bataille had never deleted the email from Tavenner, according to a CMS spokesman.

Read MoreNew twists ahead for your employer's health plan



Bataille left CMS last month to purse other opportunities and her departure was not linked to the email, according to the department.



On Friday, when CMS was asked about Tavenner's email, current CMS spokesman Aaron Albright said: "The administrator forwarded this email to a press staffer for her awareness. She also copied her immediate staff, and the email was therefore preserved."

In a letter to Tavenner on Friday, Reps. Fred Upton, R-Mich., and Tim Murphy, R-Pa., noted that in an Oct. 10 request they had asked Tavenner's then-boss Kathleen Sebelius to provide the committee "all communications, including email," to and from CMS and the U.S. Health and Human Services Department "that refers or relates to any problems, flaws, testing plans, testing results, or any other issue related to" HealthCare.gov.