Angela Iannone (left) and Alicia Berneche sing in a scene from the Milwaukee Chamber Theatre’s spellbinding production of “Master Class.” Credit: Mark Frohna / Milwaukee Chaber Theatre

By ,

Just after intermission during Friday's opening performance of Terrence McNally's "Master Class," Angela Iannone abruptly left the Cabot Theatre stage, snatched a playbill from a patron reading it rather than watching her, returned to the stage and hurled the playbill into the wings.

Brava — and true to the character of the great artist Iannone plays in this spellbinding Milwaukee Chamber Theatre production: soprano Maria Callas, during the year that she conducted master classes for opera singers at Juilliard, in the twilight of her storied career.

From the minute this Callas stages her first dramatic entrance — having made us wait, along with her accompanist (a delightfully droll Brian Myers, doubling as music director) — it's all-out war on anyone or anything that isn't sufficiently reverent in what she'll tell us is a "holy place": the theater.

Within minutes, Callas has decried amplification and an audience's increasing inability to listen. Our insufficient attention to detail. Our lazy search for shortcuts.

Our defensive unwillingness to take ourselves seriously. And our consequent inability to appreciate the art and artists we're privileged to watch.

The opening-night audience initially responded to this cri de coeur with laughter. Iannone herself hams it up in the beginning, wryly alive to the comic irony inherent in the disconnect between Callas' expansive vision and all the ways life continually falls short.

But even as this Callas flirts with the diva stereotype and knowingly winks at us — repeatedly breaking the fourth wall while tacitly recognizing she can appear overbearing — it's clear that she isn't joking when she envisions performance as a battle.

The audience, she tells one of the three students we meet, is an "enemy" that needs to be brought to its knees, putting aside distractions like playbills and personal electronic devices so that it can pay proper homage to the alchemy taking place on stage.

In a collaboration involving Milwaukee Opera Theatre and Carroll University, co-directors Jill Anna Ponasik and James Zager work with very good singers — sopranos Melissa Cardamone and Alicia Berneche as well as tenor Edson Melendez — to stage three iterations of such magical transformation.

Under Callas' tough love all three singers grow before our eyes, escaping their overly imprisoning selves by surrendering to the music.

Iannone's Callas movingly sketches the same dramatic arc, taking us beyond lengthy digressions involving Callas and her love life — what's least interesting or convincing about this show — to the transcendence she achieved through her art.

Accompanied by Callas' recorded voice, Iannone goes all out, passionately embodying Amina's final aria from Callas' legendary 1955 "La Sonnambula"; later, Iannone will relive the letter scene as Callas' Lady Macbeth.

The students who had been singing these roles fade into the background; Chris Guse's projections, abetted by Eric Appleton's lighting design, transport us to La Scala itself, alongside a singer who had actually quit the stage years earlier after losing her voice.

In such thrilling and sacred moments, Iannone does what this courageous, go-for-broke artist regularly does: She vanquishes time itself — much as Callas insisted on eliminating all obstacles standing between her and her music.

That music endures much as this show will live on in the mind — an intimation of immortality that validates all titanic struggles to make great art.

IF YOU GO

"Master Class" continues through Aug. 24 at the Broadway Theatre Center, 158 N. Broadway. For tickets, call (414) 291-7800 or visit www.milwaukeechambertheatre.com/.