Carlton L. Solomon Jr., 19, of Langston Drive on Johns Island, is accused in the shooting death of a woman in the Red Top community on Jan. 11.

Carlton L. Solomon Sr., 56, of Johns Island, runs a tight ship.

To offer tips Anyone with information about the shooting can call the Sheriff’s Office at 202-1700 or Crime Stoppers at 554-1111.

No drugs or alcohol are allowed in his household. For the family of scholars, he said, education always comes first.

So on Saturday, after watching his 19-year-old son, Carlton L. Solomon Jr., appear before a judge on murder and other charges, Solomon Sr. said he could only speculate about what led the teen so far astray from the path he had envisioned for him.

“We’ve often said you don’t know the future of a child, but you can look at the people he’s around,” said Solomon Sr. “Something’s going on with my son. Somehow or another these people have been able to drag him away from his family structure.”

A judge on Saturday denied bail for the teen accused in a home invasion and shooting that killed a woman last week in the Red Top community.

Solomon Jr., of Langston Drive on Johns Island, is charged with murder, kidnapping, possession of a firearm during the commission of a violent crime, and first-degree burglary.

Magistrate Priscilla Baldwin presided over Solomon Jr.’s bail hearing.

As a magistrate judge, Baldwin cannot set bail on murder charges. So bail was denied on that charge until a circuit judge can consider it. Baldwin set bail of $100,000 on the firearm possession charge and denied bail on the other two charges.

Charleston County sheriff’s deputies on Friday named Solomon Jr. as a suspect in the shooting death of Donetta Heyward, 27, of Charleston.

On Jan. 11, authorities responded to a Greenland Road home shortly after 2:30 a.m.

A 25-year-old resident told Charleston County sheriff’s deputies that three gunmen seeking money kicked in his home’s back door and assaulted him and his sister, Heyward.

Arrest warrants for Solomon Jr. say the men were armed with a shotgun, pistol and a semi-automatic weapon.

Two of the invaders forced Heyward outside while the third struck her brother on the head, her brother told deputies.

Heyward’s brother heard two or three rounds fired outside.

One of those shots struck Heyward, deputies said. She died at Medical University Hospital from a single gunshot wound to her pelvis.

An older model, green, four-door Honda was seen leaving the area shortly after the gunfire, deputies said.

A photo lineup was used to identify Solomon Jr. as a suspect in the shooting, a detective stated in an arrest affidavit. Two other suspects in the case have not been publicly identified.

Solomon Sr. would not say whether he believed the accusations against his son. “I don’t want to say one thing and end up regretting it later,” he said.

His son did not yet have an attorney, he said.

“You can raise a child who went to church, was on the choir, who didn’t need anything, wasn’t hungry, not filthy, had clothes on his back and the supervision of a significant family structure, but the street can still draw them in,” Solomon Sr. said. “I told my son, ‘You’ve got to be careful out there.’ But those influences are great. The next thing you know, you’re on the opposite end of the law.”

The incident remains under investigation, deputies said.

Reach Christina Elmore at 937-5908 or at Twitter.com/celmorePC.