ST. PAUL - The author of the controversial MNsure health insurance program is ready for a redo.

Sen. Tony Lourey, D-Kerrick, does not want to overturn the mostly online health insurance sales service, as many Republicans suggest. Instead, he wants it transformed from being a mostly independent organization into a state agency like those that govern transportation, tax, human services and other state programs.

"It's a tough call what governance structure to use," Lourey told a Senate committee Wednesday before it voted 8-4 to advance his bill, with Republicans opposed.

Making MNsure an agency with a governor-appointed commissioner would give the governor and Legislature more control over it, he said, and, thus, more accountability.

Giving it an independent governor-appointed board when formed two years ago was meant to remove MNsure from politics, but Lourey said that did not work as it has become one of the most politically charged issues in Minnesota. His new proposal, which has multiple Senate committee stops in front of it, does not have a House version, although Lourey said he has held private talks with representatives who are interested in the bill.

Republicans want MNsure to be dismantled or, at least, drastically changed. They opposed its formation two years ago, which Sen. Dave Thompson of Lakeville brought up Wednesday.

He said that two years ago, MNsure was "rammed through on a completely partisan basis and here we are again."

MNsure was established as Minnesota's response to the federal Affordable Care Act, better known as Obamacare. It is a website used by Minnesotans to buy health insurance, both from private companies and subsidized state policies available for the poor.

Its launch in late 2013 was a disaster, which even its supporters admit, with computer and other problems. MNsure CEO Scott Leitz told a Senate committee Wednesday that the current enrollment period, which ends Feb. 15, is going much better than the first effort.

Among problems Leitz said remain are finding enough insurance agents and others who can help Minnesotans sign up for insurance, especially in greater Minnesota. Agents cannot connect to the state computer system, he said, but he promised to fix that for an enrollment period late this year.

Sen. Gary Dahms, R-Redwood Falls, said even with MNsure admitting to problems, "this disaster may have been sugar-coated a little bit."

Senate Commerce Chairman Jim Metzen, D-South St. Paul, said MNsure still needs work. "We are not at the 100-yard line yet; we probably are at the 70-yard line."

Lourey said that he is not sure how his proposal to move MNsure into the governor's administration will fare, but said that his plan from two years ago needs to be changed.

"I've done the soul-searching," he said.

Under his new proposal, the governor and Legislature would approve all funding, like for other state agencies.

Some senators wanted to delay action on the bill until after a state audit is released the week of Feb. 16 to see if it provides any insight into how to better organize MNsure.

State Legislative Auditor Jim Nobles told reporters that while the audit will provide lots of suggestions for improving MNsure's operation, it will not touch the issue about whether it should be run by an independent board or a governor's commissioner.

Thompson said he is concerned about MNsure's fiscal viability, given that 91 percent of those using it are on government-funded programs. He said that’s far more than expected and the lack of paying customers likely means the state will need to subsidize MNsure.

Lourey said that people searching for private insurance policies have opted to buy them from agents, not from MNsure because of the state program's higher cost and technical problems.