Topics: aol_on, Generation X, Marco Rubio, Entertainment News

At least since he officially announced his race for the presidency in April, Marco Rubio has been playing himself up as the young guy in the mix.

“The time has come for our generation to lead the way towards a new American century,” he said at Miami’s Freedom Tower. “Before us now is the opportunity to author the greatest chapter yet in the amazing story of America. But we can’t do that by going back to the leaders and ideas of the past.”

Referring to Hillary Clinton, he continued: “Just yesterday, a leader from yesterday began a campaign for president by promising to take us back to yesterday. Yesterday is over, and we are never going back.”

He’s directed the same kind of rhetoric toward Jeb Bush back when he was a threat.

So whether he’s claiming to be the youngest guy in the room or pledging his Gen X bona fides – like his fondness for Dr. Dre, Tupac Shakur, and West Coast hip hop – Rubio has shrewdly positioned himself as the youthful (for the office, anyway) alternative to the Boomer candidates. (Is a Pavement T-shirt and a crush on Winona Ryder next?)

Some observers have doubted he can get anywhere with his pitch, though. Ana Marie Cox, for instance, called him a “Gen-X Fraud.”

Take away Rubio’s biography and look at his positions and he becomes less the voice of his generation and more Benjamin Button. If I told you about a candidate that was anti-marriage equality, anti-immigration reform (for now), anti-pot decriminalization, pro-government surveillance, and in favor of international intervention but against doing something about climate change, what would you guess the candidate’s age to be? On all of those issues, Rubio’s position is not the one shared by most young people. The Guardian dubbed him the “John McCain of the millennial set,” which isn’t fair to McCain, who at least has averred that climate change exists.

It’s not clear if his fellow Xers are persuaded. But weirdly, Rubio seems to be getting through to millennials much better than we’d expect, given their reputation for liberalism. An insightful Slate story based on a new NBC News poll describes Rubio but matching Hillary Clinton with voters from 18 to 34 — despite the tendency of Democrats to capture the young — and slightly beating her (48 to 45 percent) among all voters.

As friendly and sane as Rubio might appear on the surface — considering the current GOP competition — the idea of him becoming president is chilling.