President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act into law on March 23, 2010. The White House has proposed numerous changes to the ACA since, but few have passed Congress.

WASHINGTON -- The Affordable Care Act is nearly six years old, and over that time it's made real headway accomplishing some of its key goals.

The uninsured rate is the lowest ever recorded, health insurance coverage is now guaranteed to everyone regardless of their pre-existing conditions, low-income people have access to low-cost or even no-cost coverage, and national health care spending has grown at a historically low pace.

But as anyone who has paid attention to Obamacare knows, the law is far from perfect. Tens of millions of Americans remain without health coverage and the insurance policies sold on the exchange marketplaces are still unaffordable to too many people, even with subsidies. Shopping for health insurance continues to be a headache, especially in an era of high deductibles and narrow networks of providers.

These are just a few of the shortcomings of the American health care system that the Affordable Care Act either didn't address, failed to resolve or even created. There has been a lot of progress toward a more equitable, stable and accessible health care system, but more is needed.

President Barack Obama knows this, even as he brags about the benefits of the Affordable Care Act. While Congress has been busy repeatedly attempting to repeal Obamacare, the White House has proposed a series of fixes that could make it work better.

Obama signed off on a bunch of small changes to Obamacare and reluctantly agreed to delaying some key provisions last year, but most of his ideas for further reforming the health care system aren't likely to get so much as a hearing in today's rancorously partisan political atmosphere.

Drawn mainly from the budget request the White House released this week and proposals from previous years, here are some of the big ways Obama would improve Obamacare if he had his way:

Expand The Medicaid Expansion

The most important part of the Affordable Care Act for low-income people was its expansion of Medicaid to anyone earning up to 133 percent of the poverty level, which is about $15,700 for a single person. But the Supreme Court ruled in 2012 that states could refuse to participate, and 19 states still haven't taken part in the expansion, which leaves their poorest residents with no access to affordable health care.

A key incentive to expand Medicaid is that the federal government pays the full cost of expansion from 2014 to 2016, then gradually decreases its share to 90 percent by 2020. Obama wants to alter this policy so that states get three free years of Medicaid expansion regardless of when they put it into place. This could go a long way to further reducing the uninsured rate.

Simplify Health Insurance Plans

In most states, the sheer number of health insurance plans available on the exchanges can be daunting for consumers, particularly since it can be really hard to tell one Bronze plan from the next. The White House has proposed to further standardize plans -- which might reduce the number of products on the exchanges, but would make it easier to differentiate one from another and make things like copayments more consistent from policy to policy. California has already done this in its successful exchange.