Topics: aca, Antonin Scalia, Editor's Picks, Hobby Lobby, interview, mariuana, Mike Huckabee, Obamacare, Rick Perry, Rush Limbaugh, Sandra Fluke, SCOTUS, Business News, News, Politics News

For 90 minutes Tuesday morning, the Supreme Court will hear arguments over whether a for-profit company’s religious objections should trump the Affordable Care Act requirement that insurance plans include contraception.

That decision, Hobby Lobby v. Sebelius, “has the potential to be very disastrous,” said Sandra Fluke, the activist attorney and state Senate candidate who became a national name when Rush Limbaugh attacked her advocacy for contraceptive coverage. In an interview late last week, Fluke warned of far-reaching consequences for women’s and workers’ rights; responded to arguments from Ted Cruz, Mike Huckabee and Rick Perry, and weighed in on California’s intra-Democratic disagreements over fracking, prisons and labor. A condensed version of our conversation follows.

What is the worst-case scenario here in terms of what the court could do?

Well, unfortunately, the worst-case scenario is a really frightening scenario …

This decision by the Supreme Court has the potential to be very disastrous. Not only for the women who could lose access – affordable access – to comprehensive reproductive healthcare, because their for-profit bosses could decide to deny that access. But also because it could really damage the careful balance of our religious liberty protections, which we’ve all fought to create for so long.

There’s real possibility for damage here, in that it could allow for-profit corporations and their owners to decide which types of healthcare are important enough to be covered on insurance for their employees. And given that the vast majority of us get our insurance … through our employers, this could have grave consequences for health insurance access — for affordable healthcare access. But also for a host of other legal protections …

The same reasoning that protects the laws that are at stake on Tuesday is the reasoning that protects our non-discrimination laws. And we’ve seen in the past employers who have said that they should not have to pay women and men equal wages, because that was against their belief … We’ve seen even recently challenges saying that they should not have to employ persons who are gay.

There could be wide-ranging impacts.

Ted Cruz and a few of his Senate colleagues submitted an amicus brief arguing the Obama administration has been “refusing to enforce” other ACA provisions for “its own secular policy reasons,” and “The federal government cannot grant special favor to the secular over the religious. Accordingly, the contraception mandate cannot withstand scrutiny under either the First Amendment or the Religious Freedom Restoration Act.” What do you make of that argument?

I think that the Affordable Care Act is a massive piece of legislation that needs to be implemented in a careful and thoughtful manner. And that’s what all of us as advocates are pushing for. And I believe that that’s what the administration is striving to do. And that any provisions that have been temporarily delayed or altered, that’s to make the law function smoothly and to ensure that the most people have affordable access to health insurance coverage.

And it’s not about prioritizing one group of citizens over another. It’s about how to roll out this implementation in a way that is beneficial for the most folks.

The idea that the government is trying to “grant special favor to the secular over the religious” – do you see any grounds for that?

No.

In the past couple of years, we’ve seen a Supreme Court decision finding that the “ministerial exception” protected a church-run school even if it fired a teacher for asserting her rights under the Americans With Disabilities Act; we’ve seen a firestorm of controversy over the vetoed Arizona bill that would have strengthened the right to deny people service due to religious convictions; we’ve seen debates among supporters of the Employment Non-Discrimination Act about how broadly to exempt religious employers; and we see this Supreme Court challenge to the contraception mandate. Is there any guiding principle you bring to bear in considering each of these cases?

I think that we have to protect religious beliefs of individuals, but a corporation does not have religious beliefs. A corporation is not a person.

And this — many of these cases — are really trying to build upon the damage done by the Citizens United decision. So I believe in protecting the religious beliefs of individuals, but not in corporations.

And I believe that when you enter into the marketplace as a corporation, and choose to do business with the public and have employees, then the public and those employees also deserve protection. And it’s about finding the right balance of ensuring everyone’s health and safety and access to healthcare, and that other people are able to access the services and employment that they need, while continuing to protect the religious beliefs of individuals.

Should there be civil rights protection in public accommodation for people who are LGBT?

Absolutely.

Is that something that should happen at the state level, or federal level, or both?

I think it should be at both levels. And a number of states have those types of protections. But we need them in every state and federally as well.

Is it good policy to give religious objections greater deference than other kinds of objections someone might have based in moral convictions?

Well, I think we need to look at all moral objections similarly. We should not be in the business of determining which religious convictions are more sincere or more reasonable than others.

And that really points to part of the problem here … If we allow for-profit corporations and owners to have freedom to not follow generally applicable laws that everyone else follows, then we are potentially granting that ability to some folks with very, very extreme and dangerous beliefs.

Rush Limbaugh got a lot of attention for calling you a “slut.” Did his comments reveal anything broader about Republican or conservative attitudes about women or about sex?

I think that what was revealed in those comments is that there are still a lot of folks who want to silence particular communities — not only women, but also people of color and LGBTQ folks. And it’s up to the rest of us, who are members of those communities and allies, to stand up and ensure that everyone’s voices are heard in this country.

Turning then to California: Sen. Leno and Sen. Steinberg are proposing to hike the state minimum wage to $13 an hour in 2017. Would you support that bill?