Stacey Post starts her caucus day. (Photo: Courtesy of Stacey Post)

My caucus day began at 3:30 a.m. Sounds excessive, I know. I can almost hear you: “Slow down Stace, the caucus doesn’t start until 7 p.m.” But I had to be at the TODAY Show by 4:30 to start filming at 6 a.m.

I soon found out Sarah Palin was there. I was trying to keep calm about former governor of Alaska and started looking around the room at the way they decorated the coffee shop and store.

They even had Sarah Pratt sculpt a small butter cow. So cute. As the show started, I realized that whenever Al Roker was on camera, so was I.

My favorite was the moment I realized how many famous people I was seeing at one time.

At 8:20 a.m., after a wonderful couple of hours, I had to get to class. In my 9:10 a.m. class, I gave a shameless caucus plug.

I drove back to Des Moines around 11:30 a.m. to work the phones at the Republican Party of Iowa until 4 p.m. Time went really fast because I didn’t put the phone down the whole time. So many people called, asking about their caucus locations and whether or not they needed to re-register or if they could bring their children. I loved answering them, as nerdy and lame as it sounds.

At 4 p.m., I drove back to Indianola (Simpson College) to drop off voter registration forms that we had students fill out, but were not in early enough to make the Secretary of State’s list. I grabbed a quick dinner and drove back to Des Moines, finally to my own caucus location.

I had been worried for weeks that I would report my two assigned precincts wrong and mess up the entire caucus. I had nightmares about being late and not being able to participate.

As we got settled and voted, I slowly went through the process of reporting my precinct and the other precinct in my area that was in the same building. I didn’t mess up.

It’s been an exhausting, amazing day. My first caucus was a success, and I am happy to be fortunate enough to participate. These last few months have really solidified why I love Iowa so much, as well as falling in love even more deeply with politics. I’ve loved the entire experience.

Stacey Post is a sophomore at Simpson College, studying political science and applied philosophy. She is originally from Des Moines and attended Dowling Catholic High School. Post is a fellow at Simpson's John C. Culver Public Policy Center, chair of the Simpson College Republicans and a co-president of Simpson Votes. She has had internship experiences in Governor Branstad's office and LS2group, and she will intern at the Republican Party of Iowa during the spring semester of 2016. She also does consulting work for NewGov, a foundation working to increase political engagement in millennials. Outside of politics, Post enjoys time with friends and family and exploring all that Des Moines has to offer.

To read more from the 12 Iowans who wrote about their experiences for Our Caucus, visit medium.com/our-caucus.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1X1FcED