In this Oct. 27, 2011 file photo, Tracey Richter listens to testimony during her first-degree murder trial in Fort Dodge, Iowa. An Iowa judge sentenced Richter to life in prison Monday, Dec. 5, 2011, for killing a neighbor in the small northwest Iowa town of Early as part of a plot to frame her ex-husband. (Photo: Associated Press )

It would be difficult to convince me that it is not arrogance of power for a county attorney to take every last penny of a prisoner’s meager resources for the rest of her life as a way to satisfy his personal sense of vengeance.

But that is what Ben Smith of Sac County appears to be doing by garnishing every source of money for Tracey Richter. All of it for the rest of her life will not clear her state-imposed debt. Maybe the garnishment laws at this point allow him to do this, but common sense and what is humane says “No.”

It doesn’t matter the crime. Richter has already been sentenced. Smith’s job is done once he gets the conviction and she is off to prison for life. Smith says he is doing it to get money for the victim’s family. Does he do it for every crime victim in his jurisdiction? I doubt it.

Our Constitution does not allow for “cruel and unusual punishment.” This might qualify. There must surely be something in law that would not allow for every cent of a prisoner’s money to be taken from them even though it might be sent in for their telephone account or commissary account or for the three bucks it costs for an inmate to see a doctor.

The little bit a prisoner makes in wages or receives from relatives only keeps them at the very lowest level of human worth. We are supposed to be supporting their efforts to become better human beings even if sentenced to life without parole.

We don’t have the death penalty in Iowa, not in the literal sense. What we do have is a very slowly applied death penalty implemented by denying freedom for the rest of one’s life for crimes such as was committed by Richter. Apparently, County Attorney Ben Smith has come upon a way of making Richter’s life even more lastingly miserable than our Iowa society itself has thus far intended. He should not be able to do that.

— Rev. Carlos Jayne, co-founder, Justice Reform Consortium, West Des Moines

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1mtzM4Y