Petra Hermstein, CPA (Photo: Courtesy)

Some of this year's tax questions revolve around a new line on the tax returns, the one that Obamacare put there.

It's a question about whether you had full-year health-care insurance coverage or not. And if not, how much you have to kick in as an addition to the taxes you ordinarily owe.

Most people aren't hit with much difficulty, though some are, said James Passikoff, with Passikoff & Scott in Poughkeepsie. Most people have employer-provided health insurance or else Medicare or Medicaid, "So they're home free," he said.

"It's the people that don't have employer-provided insurance that have the problem," Passikoff said. And most of them have obtained coverage through the state-sponsored exchange, New York State of Health.

When you have questions about this, who can you call? Well, there's the Internal Revenue Service, but tonight, there's the free annual Dial-A-CPA night at the Poughkeepsie Journal, with a team of local CPAs to answer questions from 5 p.m. to 7 p.m.

Call 845-451-4541 during that time. You can also post questions on www.facebook.com/poughkeepsiejournal.

What's new this year for taxes is that the Affordable Care Act is hitting the tax-filing season. It's the first time Americans will be asked to report health-care coverage.

For some, it's just checking a box. (It's Line 61 on Form 1040; Line 11 on Form 1040EZ.) For others, it will be filing an additional form, including those who can claim a tax credit. Anyone who bought through the state exchange marketplace should have received and kept a form 1095-A. And those who didn't do what they were supposed to will have to pay a penalty, called an "individual shared responsibility payment."

That payment is the greater of either 1 percent of your household income that is above the tax return filing threshold for your filing status or your family's flat dollar amount, which is $95 per adult and $47.50 per child, limited to a family maximum of $285. However, your payment is capped at the cost of the national average premium for a bronze-level health plan available through the health insurance Marketplace in 2014.

More people with employer-provided health insurance find that they are in high-deductible plans and have Health Savings Accounts, and if so, must file an HSA form with their return.

The IRS is also warning that there are lots of scams and mischief, including phishing, phony websites and phony phone calls.

Help at hand

This year, five local advisers from the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants are on hand to help.

They are:

James Passikoff: Partner, Passikoff & Scott, Poughkeepsie

Passikoff became a partner in the firm in 1981. He has worked in public accounting in the mid-Hudson since 1969. A graduate of Rider University, he has completed graduate coursework at New York University, and is a member and past president of the mid-Hudson chapters of both the New York State Society of CPAs and the Institute of Management Accountants. His community involvement includes past presidency of the Highland Rotary Club. He was on the board and was treasurer of the Eleanor Roosevelt Center at Vallkill and is currently on the board at Dutchess Outreach; at Saint Cabrini Home of West Park; and at the Foundation of Accounting Education where he is board president.

Brian E. DiFilippo: Partner, D'Arcangelo & Co., Poughkeepsie

DiFilippo graduated from Marist College in 2003. Prior to joining D'Arcangelo & Co., LLP in 2005, he worked for a large national firm as a staff accountant. He became a Certified Public Accountant licensed to practice in New York state in 2005.

He specializes in tax planning and preparation of closely held businesses and their owners. He also works on audits, reviews and compilation of the financial statements of these businesses. DiFilippo is accredited in business valuation and runs that department in the mid-Hudson offices of the firm. He is a member of the Executive Board of the Mid-Hudson Chapter of the New York State Society of Certified Public Accountants and serves on the board of directors of the Poughkeepsie-Arlington Rotary Club and of Bridgeway Federal Credit Union.

Glenn Noakes: Sedore & Co., CPAs, oughkeepsie

Noakes is a CPA and is an enrolled agent licensed to practice with the Internal Revenue Service. He has 30 years of tax and accounting experience. He is a graduate of Fairleigh Dickinson University. He is experienced in tax compliance matters including representation for various entity types including corporations, partnerships and high-net worth individuals and provides business consulting for buy-sell transactions. He is on the Parish Council and the Church of Regina Coeli in Hyde Park.

Petra Hermstein: Senior accountant, GKG CPAs, Newburgh

Hermstein received a Bachelor of Science degree in accounting from the School of Business at the State University of Albany, New York in 2000 and has 15 years of experience in public accounting. Her experience includes accounting and tax return preparation, including individual, corporate, partnership, estate, fiduciary, nonprofit, payroll, sales tax and highway use tax returns.

Don Sagliano: Vice President and CFO, Arnoff Moving & Storage, Town of Poughkeepsie

Sagliano has more than 30 years in public accounting and finance, the last 20 of them at Arnoff. Previously, he was a senior accountant at D'Arcangelo & Co. CPAs. He has extensive experience preparing individual tax returns. He is also a member of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. He is also a Dutchess County legislator for Pleasant Valley and the Town of Poughkeepsie.

Dial-a-CPA

What: Free advice on your federal and state income tax returns.

When: From 5 p.m. to 7 p.m. today, Wednesday.

How: Call 845-451-4541 during that time. Or, post on Facebook on the Journal's page, www.facebook.com/poughkeepsiejournal, when the chat goes up live at 5. Or, email to biznews@poughkeepsiejournal.com, put "Dial-A-CPA" in the subject line and include your phone.

Who: Five local certified public accountants will be on hand to help.

One of the CPAs will get back to you that night.

More Help

Our tax night is a one-time event. But you can use these resources any time:

Internal Revenue Service: www.irs.gov, or call 1-800-829-1040.

New York State Department of Taxation and Finance: www.tax.ny.gov. The telephone line for income tax assistance is 518-457-5181.

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1brhNdr