U.S. Sen. Cory Gardner has asked the secretary of Health and Human Services to investigate whether a Colorado health care cooperative is financially solvent.

Gardner, a Colorado Republican, sent a letter Monday to Sylvia Burwellquestioning the ability of Colorado HealthOP to repay its federal loans.

The Affordable Care Act created cooperatives as an alternative to private insurance coverage. It also provided federal loans, including $72 million to Colorado HealthOP.

He wrote that health cooperatives in Louisiana, Nevada, Iowa and Nebraska had failed, costing taxpayers $277 million. Last week, New York authorities ordered its cooperative to stop writing new policies and wind down business after existing policies expire, citing financial concerns.

“Has Colorado HealthOP been meeting its application projections, or has it been placed on boosted oversight by your agency?” he asked.

And, using agency measurements, “what is the estimated ability of Colorado HealthOP to repay its loans?”

Julia Hutchins, the cooperative’s chief executive, responded that it has successfully created a fast-growing, low-cost alternative to private health insurance.

“Things are going really great. We’re in a really good position to be able to pay taxpayers back,” she said. Most of the loans can be repayed over a 15-year period, she said.

In one year, the cooperative has grown from insuring 14,000 individuals and small businesses to 80,000, “bringing down the cost of health care to Colorado,” she said.

Colorado HealthOP cut its prices for 2015 plans but is seeking a rate increase averaging 25 percent for next year.

“We’re certainly not happy with that,” Hutchins said, but the cooperative would still offer a low-cost plan if the state approves its request.

Hutchins said the cooperative serves many people in rural communities who had done without insurance.

Alex Siciliano, a Gardner spokesman, said his request was based partly on an HHS inspector general’s report this year that the majority of cooperatives did not meet initial enrollment and profitability projections.

The report found that all but one of the 23 cooperatives lost money in 2014. Colorado HealthOP’s $23 million loss was among the largest. The cooperative had projected a $5.6 million loss for 2014. It has projected a $2.8 million loss this year and net income of $1.8 million in 2016.

Vincent Plymell, a Colorado Division of Insurance spokesman, said that during the past year, “the HealthOP has met the minimum capital and surplus requirements of the division and state law.”

David Olinger: 303-954-1498, dolinger@denverpost.com or @dolingerdp