'We will not go back. America has turned the page,' Biden says. | John Shinkle/POLITICO Biden defends Obamacare

Vice President Joe Biden delivered a message Thursday to Republicans still bent on undoing Obamacare: America is ready to move on.

“After Republicans in the Congress have voted to repeal the law 40 times, they still haven’t given up on their message. After a disastrous effort of shutting down the federal government, they didn’t get the message,” he said during a keynote speech at the annual conference of Families USA, a pro-Obamacare ally of the White House. “We will not go back. America has turned the page.”

Story Continued Below

In a 45-minute speech, Biden also took aim at Republican governors who have declined to embrace the health law’s Medicaid expansion.

“If Republican governors and state legislatures in the states of Texas, Florida, North Carolina and others would act responsibly, we could cover more than 5 million people,” he said.

Biden added that it shouldn’t be surprising that a recent study showed Medicaid recipients still rely on the emergency room — a finding critics of Obamacare have used to argue against expanding the program to more poor people.

“The truth is, many of these people never knew a doctor other than the emergency room,” he said. “They don’t even know how to manage the system that covers them.”

Biden noted his own battle with serious medical issues as the foundation of his belief that health care should be a right — not only for the physical benefits but for the relief of having insurance as a financial backstop.

“I was hospitalized for seven months with two cranial aneurysms … the one solace I had even though the bills I had exceeded half a million dollars, I had insurance,” he said during his address to Families USA’s Health Action Conference.

His speech followed remarks by Kathy Stokes, a communications consultant and breast cancer survivor who said her final treatment this month wouldn’t have been covered by insurance if it weren’t for Obamacare. Her previous coverage, a COBRA plan offered through her ex-husband’s employer, expired at the end of 2013.

“My cancer odyssey is nearly over, but without Obamacare, 2014 would’ve been a disaster. No insurance company would’ve taken me on,” Stokes said.

Authors: