Topics: From the Wires, News

CHICAGO (AP) — Jamil Boldian headed to college four years ago, arriving in small-town Ohio with a one-way Megabus ticket and $17.91 to his name.

He’d been scared to leave Chicago, the only place he’d ever really known. He’d had a rough start in life, bouncing around in seven or eight elementary schools. He wasn’t always sure he was college material. Now here he was on a rural campus, where he knew no one.

But that had been part of the grand plan ever since Boldian had enrolled in Urban Prep, a new charter high school for young black men. Most were poor, way behind in school and living with their mothers in gang-ravaged neighborhoods. But founder Tim King had made a pledge: If they stayed disciplined and dreamed big, they’d get into college. And sure enough, every member in the Class of 2010, the school’s first, was accepted into four-year colleges and universities.

Once they’d climbed that hill, though, the mountain was next. Each student approached college with his own baggage:

There was Krishaun Branch, the former hell-raiser who’d flirted with gang life, left Urban Prep, then returned after a tragedy. Robert Henderson, the survivor of a lifetime’s worth of hard knocks. Marlon Marshall, the soft-spoken runner who’d said he’d never had a real childhood. Rayvaughn Hines, the student council vice president and athlete, who grew up hearing the odds were stacked against young black men. Cameron Barnes, the lanky, shy teen still mourning his mother’s death, wondering whether he had what it takes to finish college.

Once in school, these students would wrestle with stress and loneliness. Depression and self-doubt.

They’d come to know the stomach-churning anxiety of getting a D on a big test. The strain of balancing classes with two, even three jobs and still ending up in debt. The uneasiness of living in a nearly all-white community for the first time in their lives. The sting of hearing your professor predict you will fail in school.

They’d have to overcome all that, and more, to make it to graduation.

___

On a sunny May day, Tim King sat in a Nashville church, savoring success.

He’d just watched Branch accept his diploma from Fisk University, the first Urban Prep alumnus to earn a bachelor’s degree.

“There are times in life when you think you’re right,” a beaming King declared. “And there are other times when you KNOW you are.”

When he opened Urban Prep in 2006, the school had two core principles:

One was discipline. Longer school days. Double doses of English classes. No bling, no baggy pants. Black blazers with the school crest and striped ties (a much-dreaded uniform often shed after school to avoid being targeted on the streets).

The other was the reach-for-the-stars message, celebrated every morning by students gathering in a noisy (think rap songs belching from speakers) gym to recite the school’s oath:

“We BELIEVE. … We are exceptional not because we say it, but because we work hard at it … We BELIEVE in ourselves.”

But nobody knew for certain whether that message would successfully carry over to college. Nobody knew whether the young men would survive and thrive, absent the tough love and constant guidance they experienced at Urban Prep.

Krishaun Branch comes from Englewood, the often dangerous South Side neighborhood that’s home to the first Urban Prep. As a kid, he hung out with gangbangers. He quit Urban Prep rather than risk expulsion after getting into a fight. When a friend was beaten to death, he begged to be readmitted. He got serious, becoming president of the Student Government Association.

Four years later, Branch still has the swagger that made him a school leader, the quick smile and “S” tattoo he says represents both “Shaun,” his nickname, and Superman, his favorite comic book hero. He notes both have something in common: Invincibility.

But on graduation day, it was a fiercely proud and deeply grateful Krishaun Curtis Branch who received his degree in psychology from the historically black university. He wanted to wear sunglasses to hide his tears; his mom said no.

“I just feel like God’s got my back,” he declared, rubbing his eyes, his voice wavering.

Getting through college was no sure thing, especially at first. He had money troubles. He was slow to trust others. He had a short fuse. He was homesick, but he knew he couldn’t leave. “I had to calm down,” he says. “I knew this was an opportunity I could lose. … College is a place where you have to want it. If you don’t, you’ll be spit out quickly.”

His Urban Prep family, he says, often came to his rescue. They provided money when he needed it, boosted his confidence when it was sagging, even temporarily moved him out of his neighborhood during one break when trouble was brewing. “I had people who wanted to see me succeed as much as I did,” Branch says. “That helped me tremendously.”

The school’s midwife approach is all-encompassing. An alumni affairs team keeps in touch with the students by phone, text and email.

There’s also limited money for tuition, books or everyday expenses. Transportation to college. Arrangements for travel home during holidays. Care packages, winter coats, clothes for internship interviews. Lawyers for legal troubles. Advice on fatherhood. In-person advocacy at school. Visits by staff to take a homesick kid to lunch or dinner.

“You just can’t say to a student, ‘OK, now here’s your chance to go to college. … See you later,'” King says. “You’ve got to keep being there to provide support.”

Branch hopes to pay back the favor, working as a fellow, mentoring freshmen at Urban Prep, which now has three campuses. He knows where he might have been if not for King and others who believed in him. The day before graduation, a longtime pal had phoned to offer his congratulations. He’d called from Cook County Jail.

Just thinking about it brings tears to Branch’s eyes.

“I’m supposed to have been dead — honestly,” he says.

___

Just 40 miles separate Robert Henderson’s South Side home and Lake Forest College, but the two places are worlds apart.

Henderson left one of the poorest pockets of America, riddled with gangs and drugs, for one of the wealthiest, a peaceful enclave of Social Register families, old money and corporate power.

He hadn’t heard of Lake Forest growing up, but when he saw it, he says, it was like a vacation retreat. “This is my Ha-wa-ii,” he says, with a huge grin.

School, though, was anything but relaxing. Chemistry was intimidating, but he wasn’t too proud to seek help. His scholarship money fell short, so he sometimes juggled three jobs simultaneously: Security dispatcher. Assistant librarian. Campus mail clerk. Cashier at a local pharmacy. All-around helper at a community church.

Henderson’s bills still mounted and when pressured to pay up — which he couldn’t do — he made it clear he was staying.

“I refused to give up and leave this college,” he recalls. “(I said), ‘You’re all going to have to call the police to get me off this campus. I’m not going down without a fight. I WANT my education.'”

Henderson, 23, earned a degree in history and American studies. But his diploma came at a steep price: A $56,000 debt.

Unlike many classmates, Henderson couldn’t rely on parents for financial support. Along with six brothers and sisters, he was raised by his plain-spoken-but-wise grandmother, Ona, now 85. His mother was run over by a car when he was 17 months old. At times — especially at school’s end when parents packed up their kids — Henderson says he found himself yearning for a mother and father to tell him they loved him.

But he’s not one for regrets.

“Why should I dwell on the past and play the violin and say, ‘Somebody feel sorry for me.’ Life doesn’t work out that way,” he says. “Nobody is going to try to help you unless you help yourself.”

Henderson tried to squeeze everything he could into college life: He joined Alpha Phi Omega, a national service fraternity, along with black, Latino and Asian clubs. He used his wrestler’s strength — he participated in off-campus charity matches — to become a force on the school’s rugby club.

Henderson will soon move to South Carolina to join City Year, a national service group that is part of the AmeriCorps program.

“For the people who invested time, money and love to get me here, it did not go to waste,” he says. “It’s not where you start. It’s how you finish. That’s what I like to call resilient.”

___

It’s not clear how many Urban Prep alumni will cross that finish line.

Urban Prep won’t say how many members of the Class of 2010 graduated from college in four years until the end of 2014 but King says it will exceed the national 15.6 percent rate for young black men. His benchmark for success is a six-year-graduation rate, a common standard. So far, about 70 percent of the Class of 2010 remains in school, he says.

Some have quit because they couldn’t afford it, others because college wasn’t for them.