Maury Regional Medical Center was named the most affordable hospital in Tennessee based on Medicare patient discharge data collected by a consumer information website.

Napala Pratini, a health analyst for the website NerdWallet, said her website analyzed the 100 most common medical procedures performed at the 50 largest Tennessee hospitals by using Medicare discharge data that was released in May. The most 100 common procedures came from data provided by Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Of the 50 hospitals, NerdWallet calculated which one had the lowest procedure price and ranked how many times the hospital showed the cheapest rate, Pratini said.

MRMC had 30 of the most affordable treatments out of 100, giving them the top spot, Pratini said.

“Maury Regional has the most, least expensive treatments, if you will,” she said.

NerdWallet used the Medicare discharge data because it is the largest publicly available source of information on what hospitals charge patients for particular procedures, Pratini said. The data should paint an accurate portrayal of what hospitals charge all patients because procedures are billed the same, regardless of Medicare enrollment, Pratini said.

Many hospitals choose to not publicly release billing data for all of their patients, and the Medicare discharge data is the closest to overall prices that can be found, she added.

Medicare is a health insurance program for people age 65 or older, or people under age 65 with certain disabilities, according to the CMS website. About 14 percent of Maury County’s population is age 65 or older, according to 2012 U.S. Census data.

The top five most treated ailments at MRMC are sepsis, pneumonia, congestive heart failure, emphysema and fluid in lungs, according to the Medicare discharge data.

MRMC Chief Financial Officer Nick Swift said he believes the NerdWallet data accurately represents the hospital’s low-cost pricing, but the information should be taken with “a grain of salt.”

“The data itself is good data. It just doesn’t represent all our patients. It only represents the Medicare population,” Swift said. “We charge everybody the same. So, what we charge Medicare patients is the same as any other patient, and that’s true for every hospital in the country.”

MRMC Chief Executive Officer Alan Watson said the hospital monitors patient cost data internally and said it was not too surprising to hear about the designation.

“It’s not hard to be a low-cost provider — sometimes — but you might lose quality and service to get there,” Watson said. “So, we are always balancing those three things.”

Watson noted that the NerdWallet study showed MRMC has a 74 percent patient satisfaction rate based on numbers collected from Hospital Consumer Assessment of Healthcare Providers and Systems. HCAHPS gathers data about patients’ perspectives of hospital care.

The national patient satisfaction average is 71 percent, Pratini said.

The second most affordable hospital is the Cookeville Regional Medical Center about 120 miles east of Columbia, according to the NerdWallet study. The least affordable health care facility is the Saint Francis Hospital in Memphis.