Buy Photo Governor Steve Bullock was in Great Falls Thursday for a quick tour of Benefis and a roundtable discussion of Medicaid expansion with several legislators from the Great Falls delegation. (Photo: Amanda Determan / TRIBUNE PHOTO/AMANDA DETERMAN)Buy Photo

For his Medicaid expansion plan to be successful, membership will decrease, Sen. Ed Buttrey said Thursday at a roundtable on his HELP Act at Benefis Health System.

The Great Falls Republican's bill, whose full name is Montana Health and Economic Livelihood Partnership, would accept federal funds to expand Medicaid coverage to people whose income is below 138 percent of poverty level.

The bill also has a job-training component, with people who enroll asked to participate in a Department of Labor and Industry workforce assessment survey for the creation of a job placement plan.

According to Buttrey, if the HELP Act is passed and is successful, people who participate eventually will be able to acquire a job that pays enough to pull them out of the Medicaid income area or get a job that provides health insurance.

Sen. Ed Buttrey, R-Great Falls (Photo: Courtesy state of Montana)

Buttrey worked on the plan between sessions, looking at ways to marry access to health care with economic development.

"I realized if we provide access and stop there, we're going to have to continue to provide it into perpetuity," Buttrey said.

Buttrey was in Great Falls with Gov. Steve Bullock and several other Great Falls legislators to tour Benefis and participate in a roundtable discussion with health care professionals about Medicaid expansion.

"I've seen two people this week who are going to have recurring strokes and probably die" without additional care, cardiologist Dr. James Whittle said of uninsured patients. "People will die or be so debilitated they can't work."

Legislators and Bullock toured Benefis Walk-In Care and the OB unit. In Walk-In Care, the number of people served doubled year-over-year, with nearly 3,000 people seen last month. The cost of a typical Walk-In Care visit is about one-fifth the cost of an emergency room visit, where many uninsured people go as a last resort.

Buy Photo Governor Steve Bullock speaks with Terry Olinger (far left), president of Benefis' Acute Care Group, on the impact Medicaid expansion could have on the walk-in clinic's patient load. (Photo: Amanda Determan / TRIBUNE PHOTO/AMANDA DETERMAN)

Bullock said he hopes Medicaid expansion will cut bank on cost shifting that occurs in hospitals, in which insured patients are charged more to cover the uncompensated care for patients who are uninsured and cannot pay their bills.

"We're committed to use extra funds to not cost shift," said John Goodnow, Benefis CEO.

According to Dr. Gregory Tierney, president of Benefis Medical Group, Medicaid dollars are needed to "put more money into the system" in order to continue to provide the same level of services now available.

Legislators who attended the roundtable spoke out in favor of Buttrey's bill. Republican Sen. Brian Hoven called it an "outstanding bill." Sen. Mary Sheehy Moe, a Democrat, praised the bill for fixing the problems of cost shifting and making the emergency room the first point of medical contact for people who cannot afford to go to the doctor.

Buttrey admits Montana does not currently have the jobs to employ the Medicaid population and pay them all a wage that is above 138 of the federal poverty level. While it's estimated 16,000 jobs will be created by expanding Medicaid, Montana already has a low unemployment rate, just over 4 percent.

Buy Photo Governor Steve Bullock and a few members of the Great Falls legislative delegation (Wendy McKamey, left, and Ed Buttrey, center behind Gov. Bullock) toured Benefis Thursday before holding a roundtable discussion on Medicaid expansion. (Photo: Amanda Determan / TRIBUNE PHOTO/AMANDA DETERMAN)

But Buttrey believes "if you have a healthy, skilled workforce, business will come to you."

Buttrey's Senate Bill 405 has passed through the Senate and is scheduled for a Tuesday morning hearing before the House Human Service Committee, chaired by Rep. Art Wittich, R-Bozeman, an outspoken critic of Medicaid expansion.

Wittich has taken to Twitter to criticize both Buttrey and the bill, calling it not a "compromise" bill but a "capitulation/surrender" bill on Buttrey's part. Wittich is an opponent of the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare, of which Medicaid expansion is a component. Instead of Medicaid expansion, he has proposed studying hospitals' administrative pay and finding a way to reduce medical malpractice lawsuits.

Buttrey expressed hope that the bill would make it through its committee hearing and get a vote on the House floor.

"This is not something we should be playing games with," he said.

Read or Share this story: http://gftrib.com/1IWFaa5