Walt Weiss said — over and over, through the tumult of a summer gone south — that he liked his Rockies team. The third-year Rockies’ manager continues to see promise in their potential. Injuries, he believes, scuttled the team’s chances last year.

All his praise, though, was lip service until the winter months.

There was no indication more clear that the Rockies believe in their roster than a look at their offseason moves. Or, rather, the lack of them. The Rockies return a roster largely unchanged from the team that went 67-95.

“With position players, we feel like we’re as talented as anybody,” Weiss said. “I feel like we’re talented enough to compete in this division.”

The Rockies have one of the best lineups in baseball, led by Troy Tulowitzki, Carlos Gonzalez and Justin Morneau. They have two Gold Glove infielders, third baseman Nolan Arenado and second baseman DJ LeMahieu. They have a potential all-star outfielder in slugger Corey Dickerson.

If only they can put together a pitching staff. Their starting rotation was one of the worst in baseball last season, made worse by a ragged bullpen and a slew of injuries. The Rockies started 15 pitchers in 2014.

“And we have some young pitchers starting to establish themselves and some young pitchers on the cusp of being here and being impactful,’ ” Weiss said. “Those guys have to grow up quick.”

Much of the offseason work done by new general manager Jeff Bridich, with input from Weiss, was aimed at bolstering the Rockies’ depth in case injuries batter the team once again.

Rockies new GM Jeff Bridich joined Woody Paige and Les Shapiro, on The Sports Show.

WATCH: Rockies GM Jeff Bridich on team’s offseason decision-making process

WATCH: What’s the difference between Jeff Bridich and Dan O’Dowd?

WATCH: Jeff Bridich on what he believes the Colorado Rockies need to change

WATCH: What is Jeff Bridich’s goal for the Colorado Rockies?

WATCH: Will there be a 100-pitch count for the Colorado Rockies this year?

Here is a position-by-position look at the Rockies’ roster heading into spring training

First base

When Justin Morneau held on to win the National League batting title, outlasting Pittsburgh’s Josh Harrison over the final weekend, a predictable storm of criticism followed. Morneau’s a Coors Field product, they said.

But Morneau has an easy retort. His league-leading .319 batting average was accomplished as much away from Denver as it was at Coors. His home-road splits, .327/.309, were by far the best on the Rockies.

.363 vs. .364: Morneau actually had a higher on-base percentage on the road than at home. He walked 21 times on the road, just 13 at home.

Second base

DJ LeMahieu doesn’t look like a second baseman. His 6-foot-4 frame is more suited for a first baseman, or a small forward. But his size — and a corresponding range — boosted him toward a Gold Glove last year.

LeMahieu, ranked by defensive wins above replacement, was the seventh-best defensive player in the NL, regardless of position. It’s one reason why he earned his first Gold Glove award. The Rockies can live with his .267 batting average, which tied for last among regular Rockies starters, due to his outstanding glove work.

.991: LeMahieu’s fielding percentage actually dipped two points from 2013. But he saw significantly more action. He turned 676 chances (up from 442) into nearly double the number of double-plays (99, up from 57).

Shortstop

Troy Tulowitzki was the second-best player in baseball last season, until he was hurt. He was playing at a Mike Trout-level for the first third of the season. And, not coincidentally, the Rockies were tied for first place a month into the season.

But Tulowitzki finished the season with just 91 games played after a hip injury led to surgery. Still, his 5.1 WAR last season, even over just half a season, ranked as the 22nd best in baseball. He was playing that well.

If he reaches that level again, the Rockies have a chance to contend. But if he’s playing that well, and the Rockies start sliding, get ready for another avalanche of New York-based trade rumors.

1.035: Tulowitzki’s on-base plus slugging percentage. It was the Rockies’ first four-digit OPS mark since Matt Holliday was at 1.012 in 2007.

Third base

Nolan Arenado, depending on your perspective, was the Rockies’ second-best player in 2014. His 4.1 WAR trailed only Tulowitzki. He won a second Gold Glove award in his second big-league season.

The next step for Arenado is joining the NL elite. For Arenado to sidle up next to Washington’s Anthony Rendon, Milwaukee’s Aramis Ramirez, Pittsburgh’s Josh Harrison and Cincinnati’s Todd Frazier, he needs to get on base more. Arenado’s .500 slugging percentage (behind 18 homers) ranked third among Rockies starters. But his .328 on-base percentage was sixth. He must become more patient at the plate.

.828: Arenado’s OPS last season, off a .287 average, .328 OBP, .500 slugging percentage, was up more than 100 points from his rookie season. And he made significant increases across the board, against left-handers and right-handers, at home and on the road.

Catcher

In early January the Rockies signed veteran catcher Nick Hundley to a two-year, $6 million deal.

That means the Rockies have three catchers competing for two spots, with Wilin Rosario and Michael McKenry the backups. Or, perhaps the Rockies have two catchers and a utility infielder in Rosario who can sub in for spot duty behind the dish. Or maybe McKenry or Rosario won’t make it out of spring and will be traded.

Whatever the outcome, the position is unsettled. Rosario will continue working as a back-up first baseman during spring, while also keeping his catcher’s gear at the ready.

3.34: The Orioles’ team ERA in the 50 games Hundley caught for them last season was 10 points lower than their season ERA. He also helped guide Baltimore pitchers to a 2.64 strikeout-to-walk ratio, compared to a 2.49 mark overall.

Outfield

The Rockies’ crowded outfield last season — they had six at the position, when all were healthy — loosened when Michael Cuddyer signed with the Mets during the off-season.

The Rockies will start spring with a penciled-in outfield of Corey Dickerson in left field, Charlie Blackmon in center and Carlos Gonzalez in right. It’s a formidable trio — Gonzalez and Blackmon have all-star years on their resumes and Dickerson would have been among the NL batting title contenders with a few more plate appearances last year.

Speedy Drew Stubbs will be the backup in center field and Brandon Barnes can spell all three spots. The Rockies, playing in the biggest land mass in the major leagues, have a competent and settled crew tending the outfield.

24: Dickerson’s home run total last season, over just 131 games, led all Rockies. He’s a new-age Dante Bichette, a budding Blake Street Bomber. Any defensive liability he carries in left likely is overcome by an ability to hit to all fields.

Starting rotation

Jhoulys Chacin’s name should be whispered at spring training. When he injured his shoulder early in spring last season, it foreshadowed a spiral of injuries suffered by the Rockies pitching staff.

If Chacin can return to form — he went 14-10 with a 3.47 over 197-plus innings in 2013 — the Rockies will have the one-two punch they lacked last year. Jorge De La Rosa is the staff. If Chacin rebounds, it would also help take a lot of pressure off second-year lefty Tyler Matzek and Jordan Lyles, who broke his hand last year.

“He’s doing great,” Walt Weiss said of Chacin. “He’s been throwing and working out really hard. He’s had a really good offseason.”

The Rockies go into spring training with better pitching depth than they had a year ago. Newly-acquired David Hale might fight into the rotation and Eddie Butler and Jon Gray are close to becoming big-league regulars.

Rockies Mailbag: Pose a question for Patrick Saunders

But for now, a rotation of De La Rosa, Chacin, Matzek, Lyles and Kyle Kendrick looks likely. Barring injuries, of course.

5.40: Chacin’s ERA in 11 games before he was shut down in June.

Bullpen

The only question that won’t be asked of the Rockies’ bullpen in Arizona is: who’s the closer? That job, again, will fall to LaTroy Hawkins, the 42-year-old veteran. He’s in the final year of his career after announcing in December he’ll retire after the 2015 season.

The bullpen in front of Hawkins, though, is a series of questions. Can Rex Brothers rebound from a disastrous 2014 (5.59 ERA) that looked a lot like a case of the yips? Is Boone Logan healthy after suffering through elbow issues? Can Tommy Kahnle, a rookie bright spot last year, step into more responsibility? Does Adam Ottavino and his put-away slider have the makings of a future closer? Can Jairo Diaz, acquired by trade from the Angels, actually through 100 mph?

Whatever the questions, the answers need to be an improvement. The Rockies’ bullpen had an NL-worst 4.79 ERA last year. As Colorado’s starters fell to injuries, the relief corps was leaned on. They were overworked and punched around the yard. It was a vicious circle.

62: Home runs allowed by Rockies relievers last year, the most in the majors.

Bench

While the Rockies kept most of their regular roster in place, they will enter this season with a very different bench. Where Colorado was young and inexperienced a year ago, they are settled with veterans.

Daniel Descalso, signed as a free agent away from St. Louis, can sub in at any infield spot. He’s a steady insurance policy in case Tulowitzki or Arenado are injured again.

Stubbs will again see near-regular time rotating in the outfield along with Barnes. And Charlie Culberson will battle with Rafael Ynoa and Cristhian Adames, two late-season call-ups, for a backup spot.

$3.6 million: Descalso’s two-year contract is a significant investment for a utility infielder. But he can play any position on the field, including catcher and outfielder.