Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Kynect "adds no value" that the federal exchange doesn't provide, the Kentucky governor-elect said Friday at the State Capitol in Frankfort.

Governor-elect Matt Bevin (Photo: Dylan Buell)

FRANKFORT, Ky. — Matt Bevin promised Friday that soon after he becomes Kentucky’s next governor on Dec. 8 he will issue an executive order to remove the names of county clerks from marriage licenses — a step he said will protect them from being jailed for their religious beliefs.

"That is going to be done. The argument that that can not be done is baloney," Bevin said during his first news conference since his victory in the governor's election Tuesday.

Also during the news conference, the Republican governor-elect repeated his pledge to dismantle kynect, the state’s health insurance exchange that has been hailed as a national model. And Bevin said he will not be releasing his tax returns even though he said during the campaign that he would do so if elected.

While he repeated his election night comment that Republicans and Democrats must work together as "one Kentucky" to tackle the challenges ahead, he made clear that he believes voters gave him a mandate to carry out his conservative agenda.

"I think the people of Kentucky have clearly spoken, ..." he said. "We have a clear political mandate where the people clearly state, 'We want something new. We want to be heard.'"

One thing Bevin said he will do quickly is issue an order that addresses the situation of Rowan County Clerk Kim Davis, who was jailed by a federal judge in September for refusing to issue marriage licenses to same-sex couples despite a U.S. Supreme Court order legalizing such marriages.

Outgoing Gov. Steve Beshear has said only the General Assembly can make such a change, and Beshear declined to call a special legislative session for the legislature to change the marriage licensing form and procedure.

But Bevin said Friday: "We've already changed those forms three times, for crying out loud. ... I do intend to make that change. We will take the names off of those forms. We will do that by executive order. We will do it right out of the gate."

Bevin said the changes will allow a marriage license to be filed and recorded with a clerk like other legal documents such as mortgages or deeds without the clerk being the issuer.

Regarding kynect, the online service people use to shop for health coverage or determine whether they are eligible for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, Bevin said "my intent is to have it wound down by the end of next year.”

Instead, Bevin said he will transition people to the federal site, Healthcare.gov, to shop for insurance under the law, also known as “Obamacare.”

Bevin said 34 states never created a health exchange and Kentucky simply doesn’t need one.

“It adds no value,” he said. “It is a redundancy that we as taxpayers in this state are paying for twice.”

But the decommissioning process will be complicated and costly — state officials have estimated shutting down kynect could cost upwards of $20 million, money the state would have to repay the federal government, which financed the startup. Federal officials also require a 12-month notice before a state can shut down an exchange.

And health advocates warn many people are likely to go without insurance if the state shuts down kynect, which has been praised as simple, accessible and easy to use.

“There will be a lot of people who fall through the cracks,” said Bill Wagner, executive director of Family Healthy Centers in Louisville, a network of community health clinics.

In addition to offering a good website, kynect has knowledgeable staff on hand to help with problems and assist with enrollment, he said. As a result, Kentucky has had an enormous success with locating and enrolling people in health care plans, many of whom never had prior insurance, Wagner and other health advocates said.

Since Kentucky implemented the federal health law in 2013 by executive order of Beshear, about 400,000 Kentuckians have enrolled in Medicaid and another 100,000 purchased private health plans through kynect. Kentucky’s success in enrolling people resulted in the sharpest drop in the nation of residents with no health insurance, now about 9%.

But the health plan has long been the target of Republicans in the Kentucky legislature and nationwide, who criticize it as excessively broad and costly.

Bevin also said that his administration will begin work immediately to scale back the Medicaid expansion authorized by the federal law, which permits people with incomes of up to 138% of the federal poverty level to enroll. That’s an annual income of about $33,000 a year for a family of four.

Bevin said he wants to obtain permission, or a waiver, that would allow Kentucky to create its own plan that would include some cost-sharing by consumers instead of the mostly free coverage Medicaid now provides.

A handful of states have obtained federal waivers to create their own Medicaid expansion plans, with most involving cost-sharing through co-pays or premiums. Bevin said he expects to create a similar plan for Kentucky.

“It will involve people having some skin in the game ... taking personal and financial responsibility for these things,” he said, repeating a pledge he made often during his campaign.

But that doesn’t mean people will lose coverage right away, he said.

“It isn’t an attempt to cut people off,” he said. “It is an attempt to have people take responsibility.”

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1iIggTf