Thousands turn out for Mundelein parade

hello

Mundelein proved Sunday that a July 6 parade can be just as festive as one held on the fourth.

You didn't even have to live in Mundelein to enjoy Sunday's Mundelein Community Days parade.

Naperville resident Judy England didn't even know there was a parade. She expected to be roller skating, but the roller rink was closed and she found herself camped at the corner of Seymour Avenue and Hawley Street, where she was doused with water sprayed from a water cannon on one of the floats.

"I asked them to get her and they got us instead," she joked, referring to her 7-year-old daughter, Lydia Weber.

Lydia came for the candy and wasn't disappointed, as village trustees showered constituents and non-constituents alike with sugary packages.

The festivities opened after a brief threat of rain, but the threat proved just that, and spectators only had to contend with the heat.

Sirens from Mundelein Police cars launched the proceedings, after which the Great Lakes Navy Band treated the crowd to "Anchors Aweigh."

Following behind were Mayor Steve Lentz in a fire truck and floats carrying the candy-throwing trustees.

Mundelein resident Cristian Garcia watched the parade with his dog, Sox, a Huskie who turned 4 on July 4. He said he has been attending the parade since he was a boy, but hadn't had the chance to see it the last two years because he was at work instead.

For Brian Carman, owner of the Caboose restaurant on Hawley, it was a chance to take a day off as well. Carman stood with family and friends in front of the restaurant, which was closed for the holiday weekend, and enjoyed the proceedings. A sign on the restaurant door urged visitors to take part in the Mundelein Munch as well as the fire department's pancake breakfast.

"We shut her down," Carman said. "It's not because of the parade. We just like taking a holiday."

Carman said his children particularly enjoy the candy.

"The Easter candy has finally run out. It's now time to reload," he said.

Parade Chairman Shah Quaiyoom said there were 100 parade entries and estimated the number of parade watchers at 2,000 to 3,000.

"It seems to be getting better and better every year," said Quaiyoom, who invited everyone to stay for the evening concert in Kracklauer Park, referring to it as a "mini-Ravinia."

"It brings the community out here. The kids, you just see their eyes sparkle. They love parades."