Sioux Falls, SD

Get ready for another burst of orange cones and closed lanes Monday as four new construction projects begin across Sioux Falls.

West 12th Street will be undergoing concrete and sewer repairs from Kiwanis Avenue to Western Avenue. Lanes will be closed for the work, but one lane of traffic will be maintained at all times in either direction. Eastbound traffic will open up to two lanes in the morning, and westbound traffic will have two lanes in the evening. The work is expected to be complete by early September.

Traffic will be reduced to one lane at the downtown Sioux Falls intersection of East 11th Street and South Second Avenue. South Second Avenue will be closed from the south side of 11th Street to north side of South Third Avenue. No turns on or off 11th Street will be possible at this intersection. The project should be cleared up by mid-June.

Some major road work of all kinds will shut down South Solberg Avenue from West 49th Street to West 57th Street Monday. The first phase of the project will close down Solberg Avenue from 49th Street to Chippewa Circle. Travelers can access Solberg Avenue from 57th Street to Chippewa Circle. Solberg Avenue traffic will be diverted to Louise Avenue during the project, which is expected to be finished by early November.

Finally, the intersection of 22nd Street and South Minnesota Avenue will be under construction starting Monday. Minnesota Avenue will be whittled down to one lane each direction at 22nd Street, and 22nd Street will be closed at Minnesota Avenue. Traffic will be detoured to 26th Street from Phillips Avenue and Grange Avenue. This project is expected to be wrapped up by early July.

Drivers are encouraged to leave a little early for their commute during construction, and may even want to consider alternate routes.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.