By David Benda of the Redding Record Searchlight

The North State has been slower to recover from the Great Recession than many other areas of California and the United States.

Shasta County's unemployment rate is well above the state's average — 8 percent in March compared to 5.6 percent for California.

The area has struggled to recover from the housing crash and the thousands of construction jobs lost when the industry sunk into a depression about eight years ago.

As Redding's Stillwater Business Park remains largely vacant, initiatives such as the Shasta Venture HUB, a center to incubate business ideas and help startups grow, have caught the fancy of community and business leaders.

"There is a cyclical nature to the economy because we are on an island up here," Shasta Builders Exchange Executive Director Joe Chimenti said. "We are a lot more susceptible (to a downturn) and it takes longer to get out of it."

Jake Mangas, president of the Greater Redding Chamber of Commerce, agreed that Redding's location is a challenge.

"Redding faces a challenge because of its geographic distance from more urban centers," Mangas said. "Redding seems to be the last to feel the recovery."

Chimenti said we should be focusing on building a more sustainable economy.

"Everybody understands that California has unique rules and regulations and nobody can circumvent that," he said. "We need leaders who understand how to navigate" the state's rules and regulations.

Here are some of the views on what can be done to improve the economy from the candidates who are running for the 1st Congressional District seat.

Doug LaMalfa

The incumbent Republican said he would continue to put his efforts toward developing job opportunities from the district's natural resources: water, timber, farming and minerals.

Doug LaMalfa supports construction of the Sites Reservoir near Maxwell. LaMalfa and fellow congressman John Garamendi introduced HR 1060 to help fund the estimated $3 billion to $4 billion reservoir that both say would create much-needed water storage and jobs.

LaMalfa said plans to remove dams on the Klamath River would kill jobs.

Onerous regulations, including federal rules that delay timber harvests, especially salvage harvests in fire-ravaged areas, serve as job roadblocks, LaMalfa said.

"We don't need to study every timber harvest plan to death," LaMalfa said.

LaMalfa has concerns that the Clean Water Act at times hampers ranching activity in his district, which means fewer jobs.

"Bottom line, the government doesn't create jobs," LaMalfa said. "It's not supposed to be creating jobs. It's supposed to allow those creating jobs the freedom and openness to do it."

LaMalfa supports broadband and recently got behind HR 2666 that would prohibit the Federal Communications Commission from regulating the retail rates charged by Internet service providers for broadband access.

"We believe in an open market," LaMalfa said. "I supported that bill and other efforts to get broadband pushed a little broader, deeper into our area."

Broadband can have a tremendous impact for health care in rural areas, LaMalfa said.

"For telemedicine and the ability of information to freely flow in those more outlying areas," LaMalfa said.

LaMalfa also believes we need to continue investing in roads and other infrastructure projects because they keep people in the district working, and the money they make is spent on food, clothes and other retail products.

Jim Reed

This isn't Democratic challenger Jim Reed's first run for Congress. Reed, an attorney from Red Bluff with ties to Fall River Mills, ran in two previous elections.

Reed believes it's time to start investing in infrastructure such as roads and bridges, which he says would bring much-needed jobs to the 1st Congressional District.

The Army Corps of Engineers estimates it will cost $4 trillion to update the nation's infrastructure, Reed said, and he would fight to make sure the district gets its fair share. Reed doesn't think that has been happening.

Money to fund road projects could come from the defense budget. That doesn't mean we stop investing in the military because a strong armed forces and strong highways, roads and bridges go hand in hand, Reed said.

Reed says the government should do everything in its power to help the private sector grow the economy.

"I think the government has the responsibility to make sure the private sector is in a position so it can compete," Reed said.

Reed would support efforts to bring broadband to the region because he believes it would entice high-tech companies to expand or relocate to the North State.

Gregory Cheadle

Republican challenger Gregory Cheadle, of Happy Valley, said Washington, D.C., is so mired in its ways that a single congressman can't do much. It will take the entire body of Congress.

"We have four factors destroying not only the North State's economy, but the entire country's economy: globalization, industrialization, mass incarceration and technology."

The days of graduating from high school and getting a job at a neighborhood factory are long gone and technology has forced people out of the workforce, making many good-paying manufacturing jobs obsolete, Cheadle said.

Cheadle, a real estate broker, would fight for stronger anti-monopoly laws. He also would endorse right-to-work legislation because he believes states doing well economically are right-to-work states.

Cheadle would not spearhead efforts to bring broadband to the North State because that would mean the government getting involved.

"Whenever government gets involved in something, it becomes grossly expensive and out of date," he said.

Cheadle, however, would support private-sector efforts to bring broadband here.

Ultimately, it will take residents banding together to grow the economy.

"The power is in the people," Cheadle said. "People have the power to make changes with their pocketbooks. They need to start spending locally."

Joe Montes

Joe Montes said he has experience negotiating with companies, including a Fortune 250 tech firm that he helped find space for in Chico.

He said that knowledge will be important.

"It takes a lot of work to understand their needs from a labor perspective, commercial building perspective, infrastructure perspective," said Montes, a Chico businessman and a Republican. "I think a congressman needs to be active in reaching out to companies and employers beyond the territories of their district ... and I don't think that's happening with Doug LaMalfa."

The North State's proximity to Silicon Valley, its affordable housing, moderate climate, and uncongested freeways and roads make it attractive to out-of-area employers looking to expand or relocate, Montes said.

Montes would fight for lower taxes and improving the country's trade laws, which he believes would mean more jobs. "Repressive" trade policies endorsed by state and federal agencies are interfering with business.

"We need to get rid of needless federal agencies that cost us money," Montes said, adding he would target nine: Department of Transportation; Housing and Urban Development; Department of Education; Department of Labor; most of the Department of Interior; Department of Commerce; Department of Energy; Environmental Protection Agency; and most of the IRS. "Control needs to be local. We don't need to pay for two agencies that do the same thing."

Broadband is essential if the North State has any hope to attract more tech companies, he said. But companies that provide broadband will want to see economic growth before they make the investment, Montes said.

Gary Oxley

Gary Oxley, an emergency room nurse who lives in Redding, said the local economy is tied to the national economy and right now the national debt is a major obstacle to economic growth.

The United States can't keep funding the global economy through organizations such as the United Nations and Congress needs to be straight with the American people about where taxpayer money is spent, he said.

Oxley said foreign trade policies need to be looked at.

"What happens internationally trickles down to what we do in District 1," said Oxley, a Republican. "As a congressman my duty is to find out more specifics about these treaties and what is it we need to do to change them."

The question that needs to be asked about broadband is the cost to bring it to the North State.

"Somebody has to pay for it and if we are $19 trillion in debt, who is going to pay for that," Oxley said. "Yes, I believe that people need to be connected through the Internet and we need services, but who is going to pay for it?"

Jeff Gerlach

Improving the North State's economy means making sure District 1 gets its fair share of federal dollars, Jeff Gerlach believes. What happens now is those moneys don't necessarily come to the rural areas that could use them, rather they are redirected to the urban areas, Gerlach said.

"I want to make sure the funds end up where they are needed and not where the states decide to reallocate them based on voter representation," said Gerlach, a technology consultant who lives in Lincoln. Gerlach has no party affiliation.

Gerlach also believes spending less on national security will free up money to other areas that could use it, including the North State.

Federal and state rules have made it harder to manage forests, which has taken away logging jobs, Gerlach said. He suggests selective logging to make the forests healthier.

Gerlach likes the idea of bringing broadband to the North State, but he wants to be sure it is done in a secure manner that benefits residents, and not advertisers.

Broadband can be a "double-edged sword" and used to track Internet activity so advertisers can leverage the information for their benefit, Gerlach said.

"What do they do with that data and are they going to use that data against you. It's something that needs to be defined and limited," he said.

David Peterson, a Democrat who lives in Placerville, did not return a phone message request for an interview.