Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

If you need to take a trip to the emergency room, likely, you will choose one that takes your health insurance. That doesn't mean much, however, because your doctor may bill you separately for his or her service. As 8 On Your Side consumer advocate Michelle Mortensen found out, those surprise bills are legal and usually outrageous.

In an emergency, time is of the essence. You act fast. The doctors and nurses act faster. The bills also rack up quickly. During an emergency, most patients don’t think about the cost.

In November 2014, Cindy Mason's husband Ron suffered a heart attack – a bad one.

“He started to say, ‘I can't breathe. I can't breathe,’ and it was just mayhem,” she said.

The situation was dire. She says the doctor told them Ron narrowly escaped death.

The doctors and nurses had to act quickly. Ron had two emergency surgeries and an angiogram in the course of four days. A month later, he walked out of the hospital. He was bruised, but not broken.

Then, the real shock came. Cindy says they received an ER bill for $466,000. The doctors who treated him didn't take his insurance, even though the hospital did.

This billing practice is quite common.

In the 1980's, most ER doctors were hospital employees who didn't bill separately for their services. Today, 65 percent of hospitals contract their emergency room doctors, so they aren't hospital employees.

That means those doctors can choose which plans they work with. Many are not taking insurance at all, especially since the Affordable Care Act went into effect, and there's nothing patients can do about it.

That didn't sit well with Cindy and Ron.

“I'm not paying it, and that's it,” she said. “They're out of luck, and that's saying it nicely.”

Cindy and Ron refuse to pay the bill. They've been fighting it for a year and say they are winning.

“I got a letter saying nothing is due,” she said.

The Masons’ problem isn’t unique. In most cases, things haven't work out as well as they have for Cindy and Ron.

If you need to take a trip to the ER, ask questions. Ask the doctors if they take your insurance and if the procedure is covered.

Understandably, this may not be practical during an emergency. That is why you should also contact your legislators to add protections into state law.

California and New York recently enacted surprise bill laws that require doctors to inform patients if an item or service isn't covered by insurance.

The Nevada Legislature won't meet again until 2017. So far, no such legislation is being considered.