The heat was suffocating in the West Henderson gymnasium Tuesday night, but the battle taking place on the floor was much more humid.

The Lady Falcon volleyball team hosted Polk County, which marked the return of former volleyball player Molly Corhn to her old stomping grounds. Corhn and her Lady Wolverines brought the heat in her first-ever match as a head coach but couldn't pull off the upset of her alma mater.

They pushed West to the limit, however, as the Lady Falcons won the match 3-2 (25-27, 26-24, 26-24, 16-25, 15-9).

"We definitely had our first-game jitters," West coach Tiffany Lowrance said. "We played not to lose. We need to play to win."

Polk jumped out to a 6-0 lead in the first set, but the score was reset after a rotation issue at 1-1. After that, the battle raged. The two teams tied the set up eight times before West took a 23-21 lead after two Mary Catherine Ball kills.

Polk broke serve there but gave a point right back to the Lady Falcons. One point away from victory, the Lady Falcons couldn't hold. Polk broke West's serve and then tied the game up at 24 and then took three out of the final four points to win the first set 27-25.

The next two sets were much of the same. The second set had nine lead changes, and Polk led 24-23 before West scored the final three points to win the second set 26-24.

Polk started the third set with a 7-1 run. A West timeout settled the Lady Falcons down. West went on a 7-1 run after the timeout to tie things up. Polk, however, took the lead back and at one point was up 20-16 after Reagan Waddell served up two aces in four consecutive points.

West called another timeout. This time the Lady Falcons went on a 9-3 run after the timeout. With the scored tied at 24, West scored three consecutive points, and the game ended on a Ball kill to give the Lady Falcons a 2-1 game lead.

Polk dominated the fourth game 25-16. West then handled business in the fifth and final set in a 15-9 win to secure the match.

Ball and Gracie Carrick had two kills each in the final set. Carrick finished with 16 kills and Ball with 21 kills and nine digs. Kasey Kilpatrick had 24 assists and Rachel Kordonowy had 41 digs.

Carrick came up big over and over again at the net on Tuesday night as most of her kills came from the center of the net.

"The passing was good," the junior said. "If we get a perfect pass then we need to put it down. It's just really exciting to be able to do that."

For Corhn, the trip back to West was a good one, despite not getting the win. She saw growth and energy from her team.

"We held our own and I couldn't be more proud," she said. "They really showed heart. They wanted it. They really wanted it."

___

Reach Millwood at Joey.Millwood@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7883.

___

Follow Joey Millwood on Twitter at https://twitter.com/BRNJoey