In Washington, the media writ large is asking, nay, suggesting, that his popularity is proof that Republicans are (insert editorializing declarative statement here). Trump has been critical of the Iran nuclear agreement, which was made public this month. “They’re bringing crime. They’re rapists and some, I assume, are good people”.

“He’s not a war hero”, Trump said recently of McCain. “I was their fair-haired boy”. “Yes please.” Wendy Ansley writes “GO TRUMP!!!” Most politicians aren’t so candid. According to the Republicans’ provocateur-in-chief, Graham wanted a “good reference” to “Fox & Friends”, a show on the network that conservatives revere, and then whether “he could come and see me for some campaign contribution”. “Why don’t you bring up the positive polls”, Trump demanded.

Now, Derbyshire is more of a restrictionist in terms of immigration.

For some, the remarks sparked fear of a growing anti-immigrant movement. “We wouldn’t be talking about Obamacare right now if we didn’t have Roberts”. “I would deal very differently”. Not one to keep quiet, Trump reacted in the completely adult fashion by calling her a hypocrite. “They have failed, and Texas has stepped in, and done the best they could do to help secure that border”.

“I thought it was bad”, Trump told Cooper on CNN of the arrest and later death in police custody of Sandra Bland, an African American woman from Texas.

Of course, the relevant question this morning in regard to Trump might be who he’s going to attack, as opposed to what sort of immigration actions he’ll espouse.

Cuellar said he encourages candidates to visit Laredo and the border, adding that Hillary Clinton, whom he is a “strong support of” visited twice during her 2008 run. A lot of illegal immigrants are visa overstayers. And I don’t think Americans are when they really take take a – this is a guy who’s for single-payer healthcare.

Yes, some illegal immigrants are rapists, some are murderers, and some are drug pushers. While the 2016 race is heating up with candidates including Hillary Clinton, Jeb Bush, Bernie Sanders and more, one candidate in particular stands out for reasons all his own: Donald Trump. “We’re going to push back, and we’re push back hard.'”. It’s one thing to argue: “Hey, don’t let that unskilled applicant with a long rap sheet get a green card” and quite another to paint with a broad brush, as Trump has.

But over in the current events department, we get to the even more troublesome part, at least politically when it comes to reform.

“It’s scary, not just what he says, but in terms of people supporting that”, said Guevara, who works for a nonprofit organization and who will be voting in her first presidential election next year. Immigration is often a curious exception. It is unclear if the federal government is providing any cooperation or coordination for the trip. “As far as the debate is concerned, these politicians debate every night”.

Second, the poll contains the seeds of Trump’s demise. They shouldn’t.

Most experts agreed that his candidacy hurt President Bush, taking away the votes of independent and moderate Republicans attracted by Perot’s fiscal conservatism.

Saenz spokeswoman Xochitl Mora Garcia said the mayor’s office is trying to coordinate a tour of the port with Trump as he will now have more time to spare in Laredo, to give Trump “a different perspective of life on the border”.

Trump may have Chris Christie-esque qualities out on the campaign trail. He ran for president twice and lost both times. A Cleveland native, his dad is from Piqua and mom from Sidney.