James Comer, left, and Hal Heiner

A new political action committee with ties to the billionaire Koch brothers has formed in Kentucky with plans to get involved in Kentucky's Republican gubernatorial primary on behalf of Hal Heiner.

And another political action committee supporting James Comer began running ads in four radio markets that reach into Kentucky on Friday, a sign that Kentucky's 2015 gubernatorial race is heating up.

The Bluegrass Action Fund filed its organizational papers with the Kentucky Registry of Election Finance on March 18 and, according to sources close to the fund, will back Heiner, a former member of the Louisville Metro Council.

The group lists as its chairman Alan Philp a conservative activist and the chief operating officer of Aegis Strategic, which the Huffington Post reported is funded by David and Charles Koch, the billionaire businessmen who have funneled tens of millions of dollars into political races in recent years.

Philp, of Denver, Colo., declined to comment.

According to its mission statement, Aegis Strategic seeks to identify and support electable conservatives to political offices.

"At Aegis, we know that electability requires far more than just commitment to a set of principles. It requires political savvy, message discipline, and tenacious fundraising," the organization's mission statement says.

The filing papers also list Timothy Koch as the organization's treasurer. He pronounces his name differently than the Koch brothers and isn't related to them. He didn't return a call or email seeking comment.

Philp is a former staffer at the Republican National Committee and is the former president of Citizens for Sound Government, which the Washington Post reported spent more than $1 million in gubernatorial races in Connecticut and Nebraska in recent years.

In 2014, the group got involved in a GOP congressional primary, spending $45,000 and running one ad against a state senator looking to move up, alleging that he was "not conservative," the Post wrote.

The Bluegrass Action Fund is organized as an unauthorized campaign committee and, according to its filing papers, plans to advocate for a candidate or candidates in an election but doesn't identify any. The filing says the organization will have ongoing activity in the state.

The group plans to raise money primarily in Kentucky but won't disclose donors.

Sources said the group expects to spend "well into six figures" but hasn't decided on its budget. It has hired McCarthy, Henning, Whalen Inc., U.S. Sen. Mitch McConnell's media consultant, to make television ads.

The group is yet to report how much money it has raised but such an organization could be a boon to Heiner.

Heiner already has put more than $4.2 million of his own money into the race and has carved out a lead in recent independent polls over state Agriculture Commissioner James Comer, Louisville businessman Matt Bevin and former Supreme Court Justice Will T. Scott.

It would be especially helpful if the group attacks Heiner's opponents as Philp's has done in other states, allowing Heiner to spend his millions burnishing his own image rather than tearing down others. The group, however, will wait to see the race develop before deciding the content of its ads.

The group is likely to begin advertising early next month, sources say.

Meanwhile, the pro-Comer PAC is up and running.

Kentuckians for Growth, Opportunity and Prosperity has begun airing the ad on radio. The group has bought about $22,000 in airtime in Bowling Green, Owensboro, Evansville, and Somerset over the next three weeks.

Kathryn Breiwa, who is running the organization, said the group plans to help Comer throughout the election but would give few details.

"Kentuckians for Growth, Opportunity and Prosperity believes James Comer is the best candidate for governor," she said in an interview. "We feel we have a responsibility to let Kentuckians know of his experience and qualifications before the state votes on May 19."

The group's chairman is listed as Richard Knock, a Union businessman who founded AmeriGOP, another political action committee that focuses on conservative issues.

Breiwa refused to say how much the organization plans to raise or where.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1bCR263