Amateur Baseball: Miesville bashes Red Wing in Independence Day battle

Red Wing starting pitcher Brady Schroeder sets to throw during the second inning of Saturday's Independence Day game against Miesville at the Red Wing Athletic Field. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Miesville shortstop Deryk Marks makes a throw to first base for an out during Saturday's Independence Day game at the Red Wing Athletic Field. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Red Wing first baseman Josh Thygesen lays down a sacrifice bunt during the second inning of Saturday's Independence Day game against Miesville at the Red Wing Athletic Field. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Miesville starting pitcher Steve Maher fires off a throw during the third inning of Saturday's Independence Day game against Red Wing at the Red Wing Athletic Field. Maher threw 7 1/3 innings in the Mudhens' 14-5 victory. (Republican Eagle photo by Joe Brown)

Miesville has made a habit of hitting the cover off the ball the last two weeks.

Fresh off a 14-5 victory against Classic Cannon Valley League rival Red Wing in the annual Fourth of July game, the Mudhens have outscored opponents 58-16 while rattling off five straight victories.

“Even today, missing four of our starters, we’ve been having really good at-bats,” said Miesville manager/third baseman Chris Olean. “This is a really good lineup when we have everyone; we shouldn’t need an old guy like me at third base. We have more veteran-type hitters who can grind out at-bats.”

Looking for payback after a 5-3 loss to the Aces on Memorial Day, the Mudhens wasted little time in jumping out to a 5-0 lead. Pounding Red Wing starting pitcher Brady Schroeder for four hits in the opening frame, Deryk Marks and Charles Bruchu did the most damage with both collecting two-run doubles.

The Aces showed some resilience after that initial shellshock with a two-run bottom of the first. Leadoff batter Adam Thygesen scored on a wild pitch while Mitch Matter crossed home on a Kyle Blahnik groundout.

That offensive spurt was short-lived as Steve Maher’s slider gave Red Wing fits as he had seven strikeouts in 7 1/3 innings.

“(Maher) was having trouble locating his fastball early, so we were going to his slider early in the court,” said Miesville catcher Nate Hammes.

Red Wing assistant manager/center fielder Steve Boldt added, “We were able to weather some of the storm early, but that first inning got away from us.”

While the Aces’ offense was busy trying to find answers, the Mudhens continued to bash the ball around the Red Wing Athletic Field with Hammes (4-for-5, four runs) and Bruchu (3-for-5, five RBI) doing the bulk of the damage from the No. 5 and 6 spots.

“I really like having Chuck bat behind me,” Hammes said. “Between at-bats, he’ll tell me, ‘I’ll going to do this when I’m up,’ and we can play off of each other. It’s nice to have someone bat behind you that has such easy power.”

The Miesville twosome of Hammes and Bruchu were hardly the only batters hitting the seams off the ball. Matt Van Der Bosch (2-for-4, three runs), Marks (3-for-5, two runs, four RBI) and Olean (2-for-4) also had multi-hit games as the Mudhens belted out 18 hits as a team. Jordy Horsch added two runs from the leadoff spot and Alex LaShomb drove in two more runs for Miesville.

“They definitely came out swinging,” Boldt said. “They’re a good team and with an offense like that, they’re a challenge for any team.”

Boldt and Adam Thygesen both finished with two hits and a run, and Ty Buck came up with a double and a run scored in the seventh inning. Josh Thygesen plated a run for the Aces after Boldt was hit by a pitch with the bases loaded.

Both teams were back in action on Sunday with Miesville (13-5) taking on Randolph and Red Wing (9-7) hosting Lake City.