One potential downside to “loading up” a first line on a team with unproven depth, as the Avalanche has done with Nathan MacKinnon centering Matt Duchene and Gabe Landeskog, is …

OK, but where do you go from there?

Case in point: Heading into the Avalanche’s Saturday night home game against the Winnipeg Jets, future Hall of Famer Jarome Iginla, 38, is four short of becoming the 19th player in NHL history to score 600 career goals. He is trying to do it while playing with young linemates who have combined for a grand total of five career goals — center Mikhail Grigorenko (4) and winger Andreas Martinsen (1).

The Avalanche’s depth has been additionally diluted by injuries to veteran forwards John Mitchell (oblique) and Alex Tanguay (knee), who both are skating in orange no-contact jerseys at practice. Colorado coach Patrick Roy has shown no signs of wavering in his determination to leave Duchene, a natural center, at right wing on the line with MacKinnon and Landeskog. Duchene has 10 goals in November, tying Claude Lemieux’s franchise record for the month.

The three young standouts on the line, plus defenseman Tyson Barrie, are the only Colorado draft choices currently on the roster who have been with the Avalanche their entire NHL careers. Tanguay also was an Avalanche draftee (in 1998), but this is his second tour of duty with Colorado.

Especially during Iginla’s long run with the Calgary Flames, it was a given that any mention of loading up a top line included Iginla. But now he’s 38, still effective, but winding down. As recently as earlier this month, he was on a “Respect Your Elders” line with MacKinnon, 20, also centering Tanguay, 36.

“They’re definitely playing very well,” Iginla, 38, said of the top line after Friday’s practice. “They’re carrying a lot of the play. The other lines, you have to try to chip in one here. Your focus is to get to be a plus at the end of the night. If you can get a goal for, keep it down against, it helps. You need offense from other guys and other lines.”

It’s safe to say that in his long career, Iginla — who has seven goals and eight assists this season — never before has played on a line with a Norwegian (Martinesen) and a Russian (Grigorenko).

“We haven’t been together that long,” Iginla said. “Marty’s a big guy and he works hard and can be physical and be a presence at the net and in the corners. I think with ‘Grigo,’ you can see his confidence growing and growing. But we have to score. It’s not just about scoring, but about being plus.”

He noted of the top line: “As good as they are, on some nights, they might get one, they might get two, and that’s great, you want to chip in and help them out. … Everyone wants to score every night, but it doesn’t always work out that way. We have to make sure we’re strong.”

MacKinnon seems to have settled in at center after playing most of his first two seasons at wing.

“I feel like I’ve played the puck pretty well,” MacKinnon said. “We’re not really in our own zone a lot, and we’re controlling it offensively. … I’ve watched a ton of video this year and every day I feel more comfortable, watching how positionally I could be better. It’s a learning process for sure. There are some really good centers you have to play against every night, and against their top D pairing.”

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or TFrei@denverpost.com

Winnipeg at Colorado

When: 8 p.m. Saturday

TV/Radio: ALT, 104.3 FM

Spotlight on Andrew Agozzino:

The Avalanche recalled the 24-year-old left wing Saturday from San Antonio after winger Dennis Everberg cleared waivers and was demoted to the Rampage. Agozzino was leading the Rampage in scoring, with seven goals and 16 points. He played one game with the Avalanche last season, getting an assist in his NHL debut.

Notebook

Jets:

For the second home game in a row, Colorado will be facing an opponent that played the day before. The Jets beat the Wild 3-1 at St. Paul on Friday afternoon. Goalie Connor Hellebuyck made his NHL debut and stopped 14-of-15 shots. The Jets snapped a road winless streak at seven games.

Avalanche:

Semyon Varlamov, yanked during the second period against Ottawa on Wednesday and criticized by coach Patrick Roy after the game, will be back in the net against the Jets. Said Roy: “It was clear in my mind, (Varlamov) was playing. He will play (against) the Islanders next game, if healthy. He’s our number one goalie. Like I said, I was very upfront with you guys after the game and said the first goal was a bad goal. You even said that in your article and I agree with that. From there, he’s our number one goalie and I’m behind him.” Roy said Everberg, who doesn’t have a point in 15 games this season, hadn’t been playing physical enough or as well defensively as he had as a rookie last season.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post