Nivea Earl Thornton, owner of Twistykinks in Jacksonville, Ark., cleanses the scalp of Stephun James’ at her salon on Sunday afternoon. Karen E. Segrave

There’s a growing backlash against state licensing laws, which entrepreneurs and small-business owners cite as their biggest obstacle to growth, ahead of taxes.

As the WSJ reports today, the Supreme Court will take up a case this fall that could curtail the spread of professional licenses.

But here’s another twist: Hair braiders in Arkansas were recently granted a reprieve from a requirement that they must undergo more than one thousand hours of cosmetology training before taking in paying customers. In a “Declaratory Order” issued late last month, the Arkansas State Board of Health said it has proposed legislation to create a “Natural Hair Stylist” certification for hair braiders, exempting them from a decades-old Cosmetology Act.

To obtain a license under the state’s current law, hair braiders must take cosmetology training at a recognized school, with sessions on hygiene and sanitation, physiotherapy, “cosmetricity”– electricity used in cosmetology –haircutting, dying, scalp massage and iron curling, among other topics.

Hair braiders in the state say those requirements are costly, time-consuming and unnecessary. They point out that hair braiding isn’t even included in any of the mandated training sessions.

The July 24 order, by Miranda Childs Bebee, president of the state board, said it would not enforce licensing requirements on hair braiders until the proposed exemption is “considered, voted upon by the legislature and enacted as law” in the 2015 legislative session, which begins in January. A spokeswoman for the board declined comment.

Earlier this summer, Nivea Earl, a 33-year-old customer-service agent at a Jacksonville, Ark., condo complex, sued the state over its licensing requirements, arguing that the excessive and irrelevant training requirements prevented her from operating her own hair braiding salon.

She already has secured a name for the business: TwistyKinks.

Similar lawsuits are being pursued by hair braiders in Texas, Missouri and Washington.

Hair braiders are on a growing list of professions that now require a license in some states. They include mortgage brokers, emergency medical technicians and childcare workers – but also teeth whiteners, taxidermists, shampooers, florists, tattoo artists and hundreds more.

That’s causing headaches for entrepreneurs, who say they’re being unfairly shut out of markets by overzealous licensing laws.

In fact, roughly half of U.S. businesses with less than $20 million in annual revenue said they need a license from federal, state or local authorities to operate, according to The Wall Street Journal/Vistage Small Business CEO Survey of 798 ventures, fielded online from Aug. 11 to 20.

Four of those interviewed by The Journal complained about what they described as the burdens of licensing-related paperwork, as well as fees.

Despite the July order, Ms. Earl, who dropped out of cosmetology school in 2004 to have children, plans to pursue the lawsuit, saying she doesn’t want to commit to building her salon full-time until state lawmakers change the state’s laws.

“I’m good at what I do and ready to get to work,” she says, adding that she braids hair only on weekends, recently charging a neighbor $65 for a scalp cleanse, re-twist and lock-style braiding.

The state health board has sought to dismiss her lawsuit, pointing out that Ms. Earl has never faced any fines or penalties as an unlicensed hair braider.