Center for American Progress pushes 'inclusive prosperity'

The Center for American Progress, the prominent liberal think tank headed by a longtime Hillary Clinton adviser, is recommending wage increases and middle-class tax relief as part of a string of proposals to create “inclusive prosperity.”

The recommendations come in a new report that was compiled after meetings of a task force of people including CAP President Neera Tanden, a former policy director for Clinton; former Treasury Secretary Larry Summers; and former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm.

Story Continued Below

The report was issued just days before President Barack Obama’s State of the Union address. Its release also coincides with increased activity on the part of potential candidates for the presidential race in 2016, including Clinton, the presumed frontrunner for the Democratic nod.

( Also on POLITICO: Obama to Senate Dems: 'I'm going to play offense')

Several of the likely candidates have indicated that alleviating poverty and helping the middle class will be key issues in their campaigns; progressives in particular have seized on income inequality as a rallying cry.

The report, which calls for “bold action at a time when institutions on all levels are deeply mistrusted by the public,” discusses the global economy, but many of its policy prescriptions are geared at the United States.

“Rather than fully embracing isolationism or laissez-faire policies, we must show — as progressives have traditionally done — that a dynamic market economy and a fair society can go hand in hand,” the report says. “Creating a more-inclusive prosperity with good jobs, decent salaries, and a sustainable future is possible but requires a concerted effort and a major shift in policy across a number of areas.”

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare's little secret)

Under Obama, the unemployment rate has fallen and other metrics indicate an improving economy, but polling has shown that a wide number of people don’t feel their lives are getting better.

After Democrats were trounced in the midterm elections last year, the party was criticized for lacking an effective strategy for appealing to middle-class voters.

The think tank behind the report was founded by John Podesta, a White House adviser who is leaving that post next month and is expected to have a top role in a Clinton 2016 campaign.