“Years of state financial support and bailouts in the absence of real systemic reform has left Brooklyn residents with an unstable and unaffordable hospital system that falls short of delivering the real primary care that the community actually needs,” Bill Schwarz, a spokesman for the State Health Department, said. “The administration is seeking to end this unsustainable cycle.”

Over all, New York City has 3 hospital beds for every 1,000 residents, more than the national average of 2.6 beds, according to the American Hospital Association’s 2010 survey. (New York’s rate is still lower than that of some other cities, including Phoenix, with 4.7 beds per 1,000 residents, and Dallas with 4.4 beds.)

Brooklyn hospitals have a vacancy rate of almost 30 percent and, with more efficiency, could cut more than 1,200 beds — the equivalent of three or four community hospitals, according to a recent state report. A large portion of Brooklyn’s more affluent population goes to the more prestigious academic medical centers in Manhattan for care, further weakening the system. About 25 percent of health care spending for Brooklyn residents is on Manhattan doctors and hospitals, according to the state.

Generally, the Brooklyn hospitals that are in financial straits disproportionately serve patients with Medicaid, which pays less than private insurers, and the uninsured.

Kenneth E. Raske, president of the Greater New York Hospital Association, called Brooklyn hospitals “the poster child for the problems affecting safety net hospitals throughout the entire country,” and said the federal government should step in.

State health officials acknowledged that hospitals have become one-stop shopping centers for health care in poor neighborhoods, a pattern that is hard to break.

Photo

“If those hospitals simply disappear, you’ll have health care deserts,” Jason A. Helgerson, the governor’s Medicaid chief, said. “Individuals will have to travel extremely long distances for even the most basic forms of health care services.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

However, Mr. Helgerson added, the state does not favor the way those hospitals are operated today, each with a heavy emphasis on inpatient care that requires a costly staff and upkeep. In an effort to turn more money over to primary care — in part because the Affordable Care Act is expected to create a demand for it, as an estimated one million state residents gain coverage — health officials talk about turning some hospitals into what they call medical villages. Some of those villages, which might include some combination of emergency care, primary care and other services, but not the full array they now provide, would have to send patients to another hospital when they needed to be admitted.

So the state has pursued a policy of trying to persuade Brooklyn’s unlinked collection of charity institutions to coordinate their services and become more efficient, even if that means that some of them might have to scale down significantly, or even close. (Brooklyn also has three city hospitals.)

In the crisis of the moment, Long Island College Hospital, also known as LICH, in Cobble Hill and Interfaith Medical Center in Bedford-Stuyvesant are losing money and on the verge of closing. The state has propped up those and other Brooklyn hospitals for decades through loans and grants, but in the current fiscal climate shows little inclination to continue doing so.

Some of the hospitals have resisted consolidation, in part because their governing boards and doctors have a vested interest in keeping them as they are.

Often it is the hospital medical staff, protecting its long-established patient relationships, its billing and perks like teaching, that fights the hardest to keep the facilities independent.

Two cases in point are Wyckoff Heights Medical Center in Bushwick, Brooklyn, which has refused a state commission’s recommendation to merge with two other hospitals, and LICH, where the doctors are making a bid to take over the hospital after an ill-fated merger with SUNY Downstate Medical Center.

The doctors and other hospital employees, with hundreds of jobs at stake, have taken a lead in going to court to stop LICH from closing. Mr. de Blasio, the candidate for mayor who has been the most vocal about protecting the hospitals, has been endorsed by both 1199 S.E.I.U. United Healthcare Workers East, the hospital workers’ union, and another union, the New York State Nurses Association.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

George Gresham, president of 1199, said that whether the state continued to invest in hospitals would reflect its social and political priorities. “This is an indication of the health care disparity that unfortunately exists on the national level and in New York, particularly with communities of color,” he said.

Mr. de Blasio and other mayoral candidates have called on the federal government to approve the state’s application for a $10 billion “Medicaid waiver” to redirect some money toward new ways of delivering health care. But while the candidates have suggested that the waiver could save the struggling hospitals, the Cuomo administration intends to use some of the money, $3.7 billion, to restructure hospital care in the state, particularly Brooklyn, through mergers, consolidations, expanding primary care and other changes.

Mr. Helgerson, the state Medicaid chief, noted a 2009 Commonwealth Fund study that ranked New York the second-worst state in the country, after Louisiana, in avoidable hospitalizations. “What we are asking for from the federal government is these dollars to be able to make those targeted investments, not money just to keep the same system afloat,” Mr. Helgerson said.

The Cuomo administration has also proposed inviting private capital to invest in the state’s nonprofit hospital system, a plan that has been rebuffed by legislators worried that it would lead to large for-profit corporations taking ownership of hospitals, which all states except New York allow.

Finally, it has proposed creating a public benefit corporation, with members appointed by the administration, that would become the parent organization for struggling Brooklyn hospitals, with sweeping authority to change their governance and how they deliver care. But the Legislature did not approve the proposal in the last session. Mr. de Blasio, Ms. Quinn and Mr. Thompson have called for some sort of regional planning entity.

Mr. de Blasio and Ms. Quinn have also suggested that city taxpayers might ultimately have to spend money on the hospitals.

“You know, I think one of the most important things we in the public sector do is protect the public’s health,” Mr. de Blasio said at the recent debate, “and whether it takes some city funds, whether it takes state funds or whether it takes the Medicaid waiver that the state has called for which would bring in federal dollars explicitly for hospital restructuring, it’s time for the local governments to take responsibility.”