Westchester County, a court-appointed monitor and HUD need to join efforts to find a path forward

This election mailer is an example of the politicking that's swirled around Westchester's standoff with HUD over the 2009 housing settlement. (Photo: CONTRIBUTED)

Politicking remains hot around the still-lingering 2009 Westchester fair housing settlement: cries of federal overreach; political ads each election season — some ugly — that warn high-rises could be planted amid single-family homes; accusations that the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Renewal is using Westchester County as a guinea pig for future "social engineering."

Amid such dire declarations about the federal settlement — reached to avoid a ruling, under the False Claims Act, that could have cost the county tens of millions of dollars in fines — there's actually plenty of forward momentum:

Westchester is on track to exceed a requirement to help fund 600 affordable units by the end of the year. The county appears to be in position to meet a final goal of building or obtaining 750 units by 2017.

Most of the 31 predominantly white communities originally described as having exclusionary zoning have, on their own, quietly rejiggered zoning regulations to meet criteria set forth in the settlement. In fact, fewer than a half-dozen municipalities still are considered as having zoning codes that lead to either excluding minorities or segregating certain groups.

Buy Photo Federal housing monitor James Johnson, right, speaks during a 2010 press conference with Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino in White Plains. (Photo: JOURNAL NEWS FILE PHOTO)

Oddly enough, a key sticking point is the absence of an approved document — a report called an "Analysis of Impediments" — that is supposed to outline how municipal rules create hurdles for minorities to move into certain neighborhoods. Westchester County Executive Rob Astorino has filed several versions of the report. But he's repeatedly concluded, despite the data his own administration has collected, that there are no hurdles. That's unacceptable to HUD.

No surprise on either end of this standoff: Astorino inherited the settlement and has made his opposition to it a cornerstone of his administration; and HUD insists that Westchester acknowledge the consequences of its prized municipal zoning codes.

Show leadership

The ongoing conflict between Westchester and HUD — which may be more about rhetoric at this point than bricks and mortar — feeds confusion, and fear. Residents don't understand what the dispute is over or why it can't be solved. Many people acknowledge the need for affordable housing, while remaining understandably leery of federal involvement in local communities that have taken shape over many decades.

Political campaigns have gotten enough juice out of bashing the settlement, often in nasty ways aimed at provoking fear. Just before the recent elections, a robocall to Republican voters in Westchester's 3rd Legislative District, where the settlement was an issue, linked the Democratic candidate to President Obama and former county board Chairman Ken Jenkins, both black. A couple of years ago, a flyer in Bedford warned "Don't Let the Federal Government INVADE Bedford," with a graphic of an apartment building between two suburban homes. The settlement has been used elsewhere in similar ways.

At the same time, HUD and the court-appointed housing monitor, James Johnson, often have done a poor job of explaining their goals, leaving others to fill in the gaps. In a Nov. 10 meeting with the Editorial Board, HUD Regional Administrator Holly Leicht acknowledged that. "We're not quite as quick at the draw at public relations as the County Executive is," she said.

Video: 'We have not been as nimble'

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Holly Leicht, regional administrator for the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Renewal, discusses how HUD hasn't always gotten its message out. She spoke with the Editorial Board on Nov. 10, 2015. Peter Carr/The Journal News

It's time for all parties involved to show some leadership and settle their differences. The 2017 deadline looms, and the federal court could fine the county for failing to fulfill the rules of the settlement. Westchester has already lost millions in federal grants.

It's doable

First, Astorino has to give HUD a report acknowledging that zoning codes have impeded the development of affordable housing. We all know it's true, no matter the motivations. Codes were written to create and protect a suburban way of life. Some will assume that steps were taken to create racial segregation, while others will deny this. The history varies from town to town. Either way, codes that restrict housing density have made affordable housing difficult to develop.

The county insists, in New York's "home rule" environment, that it can't force municipalities to comply. But, most municipalities have been doing their parts, without waiting on the county. Places like Pound Ridge have worked directly with Johnson, the court monitor, to meet the requirements of the settlement. It's to the town's benefit, too, as it struggles to find a way to boost economic development that's hampered by an overtaxed septic system in a watershed.

Video: 'The towns want to have this conversation'

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Holly Leicht, regional administrator for HUD, discusses the 2009 Westchester housing settlement with the Editorial Board on Nov. 10. Video by Peter Carr/The Journal News

Leicht, during the Editorial Board interview, made it sound like HUD is ready to accept a good-faith effort by the county. "The last thing we want to do is have a stand-off," she said. "The one thing we're asking the county to do is look at the zoning impediments."

Westchester Board of Legislators Chairman Mike Kaplowitz, D-Somers, told the Editorial Board that Westchester could probably create a solid report for HUD with data the county already has and two studies of zoning codes done by Johnson. "Let's get the job done and get the settlement behind us," he said.

Some have suggested that Johnson, the monitor, could take the onus off the county and file his own analysis of impediments. He's shown no inclination to do so — since it is, after all, Westchester's job. But he could work with the county to produce something.

There's also the awkward possibility that all the municipalities, on their own, will have fixed their zoning rules to erase impediments before the county produces an acceptable "Analysis of Impediments" document.

Opportunity missed

Remember that the settlement did not appear out of thin air. After a housing nonprofit sued the county, claiming Westchester has failed to fulfill requirements for receiving hundreds of millions of federal dollars on behalf of its municipalities, a federal judge ruled the county has "utterly failed" to live up to its obligations. Westchester could have been worse off.

Among the disappointments of this standoff is the lost opportunity to truly modernize suburban zoning to meet future needs. In an aging region, there's a need to attract younger residents. Zoning regulations that support transit-oriented development and multi-use properties would not only fulfill the mandate to make room for affordable housing, but also help attract millennials. "The towns want to have these conversations," Leicht said, recounting work by the monitor and HUD in various communities.

Video: 'People are realizing this is a good, healthy thing for their town'

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Holly Leicht, regional administrator for HUD, talks about the takeaway Westchester residents could find after the 2009 housing settlement is finished. She talked with the Editorial Board on Nov. 10, 2015. Peter Carr/The Journal News

When all is said and done, it's not likely that anyone will be thrilled with what the settlement produced (except, perhaps, the families who get the 750 units). HUD has hoped that developers would be inspired to produce more affordable housing, and municipalities will welcome those efforts, but it's not clear that this will happen.

As Leicht said, "Litigation is a difficult way to change hearts and minds."

Read or Share this story: http://lohud.us/1NSdTuo