ABC News President James Goldston this morning announced Mary Bruce as Congressional correspondent and Devin Dwyer as contributing correspondent.

Here is Goldston’s memo:

Team,

I am very pleased to announce that Mary Bruce will be our new Congressional correspondent and Devin Dwyer will be a contributing correspondent and the coordinating producer in charge of our Pennsylvania Avenue team that covers the White House, Congress, and presidential politics.

They are both outstanding reporters who have played a key role in making our Washington Bureau a hub of storytelling, newsgathering, and innovation.

Mary, a D.C.-native, began her career as a desk assistant in Washington soon after graduating from Washington University in St. Louis. Since then, she has reported on every major Washington story of the last decade, developing sources in every corner of the nation’s capital. Mary covered President Obama’s re-election campaign and second term, traveling with him to report on the Secret Service scandal in Colombia and the President’s trips to Myanmar and Panama. Just this summer she reported from Croatia and Serbia on the refugee crisis in Europe, from the White House on Pope Francis’ historic visit and covered the tragic shooting in Roanoke, Virginia and the Iran nuclear deal for all of our programs and platforms.

Devin has covered the White House and Capitol Hill for ABC News since 2009, reporting on the President, Vice President and Secretary of State from 28 states and more than a dozen countries. He reported on major election campaigns, Supreme Court nominations, the 2013 government shutdown and led our coverage of the Affordable Care Act and its implementation. Devin most recently served as a digital correspondent with the White House unit and filed for the weekend editions of “Good Morning America” and “World News Tonight.”

Mary and Devin join an outstanding roster of Washington reporters and producers on our Pennsylvania Avenue team, led by our Chief White House Correspondent Jonathan Karl. This group has already had a fantastic year, helping us land first and exclusive interviews with several presidential candidates and providing sharp and immersive storytelling on Pope Francis’ visit to Washington, the Planned Parenthood controversy, the ongoing immigration battle, the Iran nuclear deal, the Clinton email controversy, and the conclusion of the Supreme Court’s monumental term in June.

Please join me in congratulating these two formidable journalists and our entire Pennsylvania Avenue team.

James