The firing of a front-desk receptionist by the Hampton Inn Bordentown has united an odd coalition of nursing mothers, feminists and workers' rights advocates.

Twenty-one-year-old Ariana Gossard of Pemberton Township says she lost her job at the hotel last month after she asked for break time to pump breast milk for her infant daughter Anaira.

"The fact that I got fired for trying to do one of the best things I could do for my daughter is pretty messed up," the single mom says.

Gossard was getting ready to head back to her job after taking maternity leave. At the end of July, she met with her bosses to talk about returning to work in late August, telling them that over the course of her eight-hour shift, she would need to take two or three short breaks to express milk.

RELATED: Mothers protest at Hampton Inn in Bordentown

By her own account, she was flexible about the arrangements, offering to work in the mornings when a manager was available to step in, or to reduce her hours to part-time, or to move to housekeeping if necessary make scheduling easier for the hotel.

Management opted for none of the above.

Instead, Gossard says, they told her there were no positions available to her – this even though she assured the brass that she didn't expect to be paid for the 15- to 20-minute breaks.

In the best of all possible worlds, such a request by a nursing mother would not fall on deaf ears. This is not that world.

Although a provision of the 2010 Affordable Care Act requires employers to provide reasonable break time for an employee to express milk for her nursing child for a year after the child's birth, the law doesn't apply to workplaces with fewer than 50 employees if they can show that such an accommodation would impose an undue hardship.

Gossard, who worked at the Bordentown hotel for two years, says it has about 25 employees. So she's out of luck, out of a job – but not out of supporters.

Some 20 women gathered outside the Hampton Inn to protest after the story broke, many of them cuddling babies and carrying signs.

Nicole Bucci, who was breastfeeding her 18-month-old old son, displayed a poster reading, "Let her pump! Justice 4 Ariana."

The hotel may not technically be required to provide Gossard with the break time she requested, but a humane, compassionate management could surely find a way to accommodate her reasonable needs.

She's not asking for the moon, just for the right to provide her infant daughter with the best possible start in life.