Sarah Palin has once again put her foot in her mouth. While defending Ted Cruz’s efforts to defund Obamacare, Palin called Republicans that are opposing Cruz gutless. This includes her own employer, Fox News.

On Breitbart, Palin wrote, “Those of us who hang in there supporting a major political party with our energy, time, and contributions would like to believe that that party would praise principled conservatives like Ted Cruz and Mike Lee for following through on campaign promises. We’d like to believe that the GOP establishment would applaud the way these bold leaders have rallied the grassroots to their cause. But, no, such praise would require a commensurate level of guts and leadership, and the permanent political class in D.C. is nothing if not gutless and rudderless.”

The problem is that among the “gutless” is the television network that employs Palin. Fox News Sunday spent the majority of their program today discrediting Ted Cruz. The take down job included Chris Wallace grilling Cruz by using the Senate rules to explain to him why his plan will fail, getting to admit that he has lacks the Republican votes in the Senate for his plan, and forcing Cruz to dance around the question of how he plans to win this fight. Fox News followed the on air massacre of Cruz with a panel discussion that featured a Karl Rove among others attacking and discrediting Cruz’s plan.

The piece written for Breitbart is so intellectually lacking that it is almost possible to believe that Palin really wrote it. For instance, Palin claims that the only thing that happened during the Gingrich government shutdown of the 1990s was that Bill hooked up with Monica. When the government shutdown for three weeks in 1995, the US economy lost a full point off of its GDP. The idea that government shutdowns are harmless is a bit or revisionist history that is often pushed by the conflict seeking right. Their tall tale about shutdowns being harmless defies common sense. If a government shutdown is harmless, why are both parties so terrified of them?

Sarah Palin has formed an axis of stupid with Ted Cruz and Jim DeMint, and they have now placed themselves squarely in the cross hairs of the Fox News propaganda machine. If Palin really believed in standing up to the Republican establishment, the first thing that she should do is what she does best, quit another job.

If she keeps doing what she is doing, Palin won’t have to quit on Fox News. She will almost certainly be fired (again).