Photo

You know things are going badly when Rick Perry, the former governor of Texas and failed presidential candidate, sounds more sensible than anyone else in the Republican Party.

Mr. Perry responded today through his spokesman, Jeff Miller, to an article in The Times on Sunday that said Mr. Perry had been mentioned as a possible third-party candidate at a recent meeting of so-called conservatives in Washington.

Mr. Miller said on Twitter that Mr. Perry “has no interest in running as a 3rd party candidate.” That’s a good thing, because Mr. Perry also has no interest in being a serious person. He is the one, you will remember, who said in 2011 that he was going to close three cabinet agencies but could not name the third one.

The other Republican mentioned in the Times article as a potential third-party choice by disgruntled Republican right -wingers was former Senator Tom Coburn of Oklahoma, an anti-abortion climate change denier who might actually be a worse choice than Mr. Perry, if such a thing is possible.

The Times said Mr. Coburn has “told associates” he might be open to running as a third-party alternative to Donald Trump. He has said Mr. Trump “needs to be stopped” and that he would back an independent alternative.

“I’m going to support that person, and I don’t expect that person to be me,” said Mr. Coburn.

Of course, Mr. Perry did not have much competition for most sensible thing said by a Republican so far this week, and he won’t as long as Senator Mitch McConnell, the Republican majority leader, is still at large.

On Sunday, Mr. McConnell — whose only original idea was announcing after President Obama’s inauguration in 2009 that the Republicans’ sole agenda would be opposing Mr. Obama — said that the National Rifle Association should have veto power over the next Supreme Court appointment.

Speaking on Fox News, Mr. McConnell said he “can’t imagine that a Republican majority in the United States Senate would want to confirm, in a lame duck session, a nominee opposed by the National Rifle Association” or the National Federation of Independent Businesses, known primarily for trying to repeal Obamacare.

Come to think of it, I can’t imagine that either.