Bill Smith’s seventh-grade class at Southern Regional Middle School engages in a chat about Ebola with Senior Airman Susan Lowry while Lowry was quarantined. (Photo: Courtesy of Southern Regional Middle School.)

Senior Airman Sarah Lowry was in quarantine for possible exposure to Ebola when she was scheduled to talk to students at Southern Regional Middle School in the Manahawkin section of Stafford.

Lowry had planned to talk to her niece’s seventh-grade Social Studies class in October about her work with a joint military task force building hospitals in Liberia. Instead, she remained in isolation at an Air Force base in Virginia.

Despite the physical limitation, new technology in classrooms enabled Lowry to reach her niece and the students in Manahawkin through a live chat using computers and webcams. The technology enabled the seventh-graders to ask the airman questions and get answers in real time, despite Lowry’s quarantine.

Ebola “is all kids wanted to talk about,” said their teacher Bill Smith. “They were kind of freaking out about it, because they see it on CNN, and they hear about doctors dying and the nurses getting it.”

Read more stories about Ebola

Lowry did not have approval from her commanding officers to talk about the experience with an Asbury Park Press reporter, but her 12-year-old niece Karagan Bulger said getting to see her aunt through the live chat technology and ask her questions about the Ebola crisis in Africa calmed her classmates’ fears.

“It was a miracle,” Karagan said. “I always thought she was a super hero, because she was kind of like saving everybody.”

Days before the chat session, Smith had tried dampening the students’ fears about Ebola, pointing out that none of them knew anyone in Liberia.

“Actually, I do,” Karagan recalled telling him.

That conversation set in motion Lowry’s plan to speak with the class about her ordeal.

For Karagan, it was an emotional, as well as educational, experience. It was the Stafford girl’s first time seeing her aunt since Lowry returned from Liberia, and her first experience using live chat software.

“I think it was really great for them to have this opportunity,” said Kelly Bulger, who is Lowry’s sister and Karagan’s mother.

Bulger said the technology enabled Karagan and her classmates to better see the broader world around them.

Karagan said after the chat session, her classmates were less scared that they would catch Ebola.

“They were more scared for my aunt,” she said. “Everyday they would come to me and say “Is your aunt OK?’”

Karagan said she was reunited with her aunt the day after Lowry was released from the quarantine.

Smith said technology in the classroom is offering his students more information about current events, geography and giving them a better global perspective.

“We try not to be insular,” he said. “I think that’s the best part about Social Studies. These kids are part of their global community, and I want them to realize that.”

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1zRWIyO