Photo

I love casinos. The sounds, the lights, the corny decadence. … I love it all, except for one thing: I hate losing money. So in the handful of times I’ve visited one, I’d give myself a high-low limit. If I lost $100 or won $200, I’d have to leave. I guess I’m not much of a gambler.

Had I been a gambler, I might have been more familiar with the sinking feeling of not only failing at our first I.V.F., but in watching thousands of dollars go down the drain with it.

See, when you start I.V.F., everyone tells you to have a plan: How much time and money are you willing to spend on the process? The answer to the first question was a no-brainer for us; we had only a year, maybe two at the most, to have a baby with my eggs. We wouldn’t be able to continue on indefinitely the way some younger women with fertility problems can if they choose to.

Money … now that was a different question. How much would we be willing to spend?

The answer, it would seem, should be “everything,” right? You’d give everything you have just to have a baby, just as people sacrifice all they can once they have their children. But how much is it worth to us? How much would we borrow, how much can we spend? Is having a baby worth spending $10,000? $20,000? $100,000? $1,000,000?



I am not sure how most people figure out the answer to this question. Some people surely can’t afford it at all. How do the rest pay for I.V.F.? Some people crowdfund their treatment. Others take out mortgages, ask their parents or put it on their credit cards.

I hate that we have to even consider this question. It’s so crass. And so not fair.

I know, life isn’t fair, not in the least. A good friend has cancer, another was found to have H.I.V. Now those are conditions that must be treated, or my friends will die. We – all of us with fertility problems, with 150,000 I.V.F. cycles in a year (25 percent under age 35) according to the Society for Assisted Reproductive Technology – will not die if we don’t have a child.

Only eight states have mandatory I.V.F. insurance coverage. (New York isn’t one of them – insurance there varies but generally covers fertility medicines and certain procedures, though not I.V.F.) The Affordable Care Act will not be “very hopeful” for the one in eight couples of childbearing age with fertility problems, according to Resolve, the National Infertility Association. The new act outlines 10 “essential health benefits,” including maternal and newborn care, mental health and pediatric services, but not infertility. States without fertility coverage before are unlikely to cover it again.

Solomon and I will still have to pay out of pocket.

Now, financially, we are what you might call N.Y.C. middle class. (With three advanced degrees between us, we are rich in education.) His full-time job and my part-time gigs — writing, editing, teaching, all in the moribund field of journalism — allow us to get by in New York City, but not abundantly. We have about as much money for I.V.F. as we do time: It’s limited.

Of course we were so sad at our first I.V.F. failing. But we were also dismayed at how quickly $5,000 of our savings – which we thought would be for our future child – was gone. (Although we were relieved that we hadn’t done regular I.V.F., which costs $10,000 to $30,000.)

After, we had to ask ourselves the hard question: How much are we willing to spend?

After reviewing our finances, asking our generous families for help, revising our sparse budget (go Groupons!), we decided to invest in three or four cycles, what Dr. C. says will give us a reasonable idea of our chances for success.

But it’s not really an investment. It’s a gamble. I don’t know if we’ll be able to stick to our limit. I hope that decision never has to be made.