Exec Tech

Turning big data into better health outcomes

Population health management is a multifaceted, many-layered endeavor that nevertheless has a common theme: the need for data and the ability to mine it for actionable information.

A broad spectrum of health care players -- individual providers, hospital systems, payers, local public health departments and federal agencies -- are all in some way addressing population health management. The approach involves identifying populations, assessing their disease status and developing appropriate responses, such as management programs for chronic diseases. Those activities require access to data -- and plenty of it.

"You can't do population health management without data," said Fred Goldstein, interim executive director of the Population Health Alliance.

Dr. Jon White, director of the health IT portfolio at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality, said data -- or the lack thereof -- influenced his decision to leave his medical practice and join the government. AHRQ's work in population health includes evaluating hospital safety via data analysis.

"It became painfully obvious that having the right information at the right time is really important for delivering great care," White said. "I didn't have the information where I needed it when I was in practice."

The good news for organizations pursuing population health is that they have more data than ever. The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services have provided financial incentives for the adoption of certified electronic health record (EHR) systems by physicians and hospitals through its meaningful-use initiative. Information formerly confined to paper charts is now in electronic form, and a new generation of wearable health-oriented devices promises to generate another stream of data.

However, privacy and security considerations complicate the collection of data, and technology also contributes to the problem. Although EHRs free data from paper records, they can inhibit the aggregation of data across medical providers using different systems. Other issues are quality and the "normalization" of data so analysts can make meaningful comparisons. And then there's the need to build an infrastructure capable of crunching all those numbers.

Why it matters

Population health management is a key element of the Obama administration's efforts to reform health care. The Medicare shared-savings component of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), for example, focuses on Medicare beneficiaries as a population. Under the law, accountable care organizations -- groups of providers who coordinate the care of Medicare patients -- receive a portion of the savings that result from better quality and lower costs. According to the law, the program "promotes accountability for a patient population."

Next steps for improving population health Boosting data quality. On the horizon is a drive toward better population health data, said Dr. Jon White, director of the health IT portfolio at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. When combating outbreaks as varied as severe acute respiratory syndrome and salmonella poisoning, data must be pulled from a number of locations in a timely fashion. Maintaining data on the nature of health care data is also important, White added. Researchers need to know where the data originated and when and why it was generated.

On the horizon is a drive toward better population health data, said Dr. Jon White, director of the health IT portfolio at the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality. When combating outbreaks as varied as severe acute respiratory syndrome and salmonella poisoning, data must be pulled from a number of locations in a timely fashion. Maintaining data on the nature of health care data is also important, White added. Researchers need to know where the data originated and when and why it was generated. Developing communication standards. Fred Goldstein, interim executive director of the Population Health Alliance, said he looks forward to the development of standards for the communication and exchange of health data. Such standards will become more important as health care organizations attempt to pull data from multiple electronic health record systems, personal health records and other datasets.

Fred Goldstein, interim executive director of the Population Health Alliance, said he looks forward to the development of standards for the communication and exchange of health data. Such standards will become more important as health care organizations attempt to pull data from multiple electronic health record systems, personal health records and other datasets. Providing simpler access. Neil Jordan, general manager of worldwide health at Microsoft, said he believes one of the biggest breakthroughs in population health management will happen when people can query data using natural language. That approach will make data even more accessible. -- John Moore

In general, population health management dovetails with the ongoing shift from reimbursing providers for the number of procedures they perform to paying them based on the value they deliver.

"Part of that value is measuring your ability to manage the health of the population that has been assigned to you," said Cynthia Burghard, research director for accountable care IT strategies at IDC Health Insights.

In a report released in April, IDC Health Insights said the increasing interest in population health and data analytics is also being influenced by the objectives of the "Triple Aim," which the Institute for Healthcare Improvement defines as improving the patient experience of care, enhancing the health of populations and reducing the per-capita cost of care.

More than 75 percent of health care costs can be attributed to chronic conditions such as diabetes and heart disease, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. White called chronic diseases the foundational problem in health care and said chronic disease management and population health programs share a common IT remedy.

"The tools we need to more effectively attack it are the same ones we need for population health," he added.

The Department of Veterans Affairs is among the federal agencies building IT systems for population health management. Last year, VA's Business Intelligence Service Line consolidated regional data warehouses into a central Corporate Data Warehouse. VA uses the data to identify high-risk populations that need extra care and examine readmission rates, among other activities, said a spokeswoman for Microsoft, which is working with the VA on the project. The Corporate Data Warehouse uses Microsoft's SQL Server, business intelligence tools, Windows Server and System Center management tools.