Operating for a century and a half, the Mayo Clinic is probably the strongest health care provider brand in the country.

Last year, about 4,500 Texans, including 1,000 patients from the Dallas area, went to Mayo for treatment, said Stephen Mansfield, CEO of Dallas-based Methodist Health System.

“We think we can keep most of those folks at home now,” Mansfield said Tuesday.

He referred to Methodist becoming the newest member of the Mayo Clinic Care Network, calling it a “wonderful opportunity” for health care in the Dallas area.

“This is not an acquisition or a merger,” Mansfield said at a news conference formally announcing the alliance. “It’s a clinical collaboration.”

Mansfield and David Hayes, medical director of Mayo’s Care Network, said the alliance allows Methodist physicians to consult with Mayo specialists and share treatment protocols and other best practices as they collaborate on patient care.

In his remarks, Hayes particularly mentioned the potential for electronic consultation about patients with complex cancerous tumors. Their cases can be presented to tumor boards made up of Mayo specialists and others from Mayo’s care alliance, which is rapidly expanding across the country.

Mansfield said Methodist has about 1,500 affiliated physicians and Mayo has about 4,000 physicians and scientists.

The Mayo Clinic Care Network began in 2011 and now has 31 members in 18 states, Puerto Rico and Mexico. Methodist is the first member from Texas, and, with more than $1.1 billion in annual revenue, one of the largest, Hayes said.

“We know Methodist Health System is an organization of excellence,” Hayes said, citing months of due diligence before the agreement was signed. “It’s a perfect match for Mayo Clinic Care Network.”

Last month, The Dallas Morning News first reported plans for the partnership. At the same time, The News reported that Baylor Scott & White Health was near an agreement that would make three of its Dallas-area hospitals part of the Cleveland Clinic’s national cardiology network.

With full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, some health care executives have said they’ve never seen more rapid change in the industry. Outright mergers and acquisitions continue. And other types of alliances, such as Mayo-Methodist, are emerging.

Mansfield and Hayes said the deal announced Tuesday makes Methodist the exclusive Mayo affiliate in Methodist’s market area of North Texas. Network members pay Mayo a fee, which was not disclosed. Mansfield called it “reasonable.”

The two executives said talks between the organizations began more than a year ago. Mansfield said Methodist was looking for ways to accelerate its pursuit of quality care.

“We felt the best option for Methodist was the Mayo Clinic,” he said.

The Mayo Clinic is based in Rochester, Minn., where it has embarked on a major expansion. It has more than $9 billion in annual revenue. The clinic also has large satellite facilities in Arizona and Florida, and dozens of small community clinics and other facilities in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa and Georgia.

Hayes said Mayo has no plans to build more major satellite locations.

“At this point in time, our strategy is affiliations, not bricks and mortar,” he said.

Mayo has had its eye on the fast-growing North Texas market, and vice versa.

In 2011, Mayo ran a marketing campaign here using TV and print ads supplemented by a Web page aimed specifically at Dallas residents. “Why should I choose Mayo Clinic rather than seeking care in Dallas?” the Web page asked.

In the late 1980s, The News reported that Ross Perot and Ross Perot Jr. courted Mayo officials, trying to get them to open a satellite facility at their development north of Fort Worth.