Here’s your afternoon Sam Adams Thirteenth Hour bottle of politics, from Joshua Miller of the Boston Globe at the Massachusetts State House.

WHO IS CONTRIBUTING TO THE HONORABLE BRIAN A. JOYCE? via Andrea Estes on BostonGlobe.com: “It looked like state Senator Brian Joyce was raking in the campaign donations despite his legal woes and his decision not to seek re-election. Campaign regulators said his extra campaign finance report, filed in April as part of a settlement of charges he misused campaign funds, showed he has raised money in 2016. But they wouldn’t release the report, saying they weren’t sure it was public.

Advertisement

A day later, when they decided the document was public, the report showed that Joyce, a Democrat from Milton, had received more than $50,000 in January and February. But the money didn’t come from constituents, voters or anyone else. Nearly all of the $53,000 came from Joyce himself, who loaned his campaign $25,000 twice. ...” http://bit.ly/1Sj0HwS

TRANSGENDER TALKER TODAY, via Moriah Balingit on WashingtonPost.com: “A federal appeals court in Richmond has sided with a transgender high school student, saying that he can proceed with his lawsuit arguing that his school board’s decision to ban him from the boys’ bathroom is discriminatory. ...” http://wapo.st/26dBIoo

THAT OTHER MASS. EDUCATION BALLOT EFFORT, via Jeremy C. Fox on BostonGlobe.com: “Common Core education standards have become a political football across the country, with Republican presidential candidates scrambling to distance themselves from the guidelines that set goals for what students should know by the end of each grade. In Massachusetts, the issue has garnered limited public debate, even amid efforts to use a November ballot measure to scrap requirements adopted by the state in 2010. ...” http://bit.ly/1VBYFhb

CAN’T MAKE THIS UP — CHURCH MOVED FOR MASS. CASINO, via the Associated Press in Springfield: “A historic Massachusetts church started slowly rolling along the street Tuesday to make way for a nearly $1 billion casino. After weeks of preparation, crews began moving Springfield’s 129-year-old First Spiritualist Church about two football-field lengths, where it will eventually stand next to a skating rink within the MGM Springfield casino’s 14-acre footprint. ...” Link via Washington Times, with photo: http://bit.ly/1WDJ1BC

LAWMAKERS WARN ON BROCKTON CASINO, via Sean P. Murphy on BostonGlobe.com: “A group of seven Massachusetts legislators is warning the state Gaming Commission against approving a proposed casino in Brockton, saying it would clear the way for a tax-exempt tribal casino in Taunton and reduce the state’s casino tax collections. ...” http://bit.ly/1QkTeLE

Advertisement

NEW ENGLAND POT PUSH STALLED BY OPIOID CRISIS, via Jess Bidgood of the New York Times: “First came Colorado and Washington. Then Alaska, Oregon and Washington, D.C. Now, advocates for legal marijuana are looking to New England, hoping this part of the country will open a new front in their efforts to expand legalization nationwide. But this largely liberal region is struggling with the devastating impact of opiate abuse, which is disrupting families, taxing law enforcement agencies and taking lives. And many lawmakers and public officials are balking at the idea of legalizing a banned substance, citing potential social costs. ...” With powerhouse quote from Massachusetts Attorney General Maura Healey: http://nyti.ms/1XHlTjU

HOW DO YOU TELL IF A DRIVER IS TOO STONED TO BE AT THE WHEEL? via Jack Sullivan of CommonWealth magazine: “When Prohibition ended in 1933, law enforcement officials found themselves in an awkward position. They knew driving drunk was a problem, but they didn’t know how to police it. How do you measure drunkenness? ... [A]s marijuana fans push for full legalization, the same problem is surfacing again. Law enforcement officials say there is no way to accurately determine whether someone who is driving is high and there is no standard for determining how high is too high. ...” http://bit.ly/1U5xGcH

NEW ENGLAND MARIJUANA WATCH — ADVOCATES PUSH TO LET PATIENTS USE POT TO TREAT OPIATE ADDICTION, via Gillian Graham of the Portland Press Herald: “Medical marijuana caregivers and patients will ask state regulators Tuesday to consider adding opiate addiction as a qualifying condition for medical marijuana. Maine will be the first state to formally consider allowing medical marijuana to be used as treatment for addiction to opiates and other drugs derived from chemical synthesis, said Dawson Julia, a caregiver from Unity who submitted a petition to the Maine Department of Health and Human Services to request the public hearing. ...” http://bit.ly/1Vegmn2

DOES A ‘CLASS ACT’ POLICE FORCE NEED BODY CAMERAS? via Brian Dowling on BostonHerald.com: “Police commissioner William Evans said he hopes Boston will change course on police body cameras, citing declines in shootings and killings in the Hub as evidence the department is a ‘class act’ that doesn’t need the cameras.

‘I know the momentum is for everyone having them, although I don’t really think we need them,’ Evans told Herald Radio. ‘I think we’ve shown what kind of a class act department we are, but we are going to give them a try and see if the results are positive.’ ...” http://bit.ly/1Vhmnj0

CONGRATULATIONS TO JESSICA RINALDI AND FARAH STOCKMAN FOR THEIR PULITZER PRIZES FOR WORK AT THE GLOBE. Don’t miss the chance to look at their work.

Jess’s heart-rending photographs: http://www.pulitzer.org/winners/jessica-rinaldi

Farah’s powerful columns: http://www.pulitzer.org/winners/farah-stockman

ZIKA COMES NORTH, via the AP in Providence: “The Rhode Island Department of Health says it has confirmed the first case of the Zika virus in the state. The agency announced Tuesday that a man in his 60s had tested positive for the viral infection. The man had recently traveled to Haiti, where there is active mosquito-borne transmission of Zika. ...” Link via The Eagle: http://bit.ly/1peUbzd

PLANE STRUGGLES TO MAKE IT SOUTH, via Randy Billings of the Portland Press Herald: “What should have been a convenient, three-hour flight from the temperamental Maine spring to the reliably warm Florida sands turned into a 20-hour odyssey for roughly 70 airline passengers eager for a vacation over the weekend. ...” http://bit.ly/1Sj2pP5

PRESIDENTIAL — WHAT HAPPENS AFTER TONIGHT? via Eli Stokols and Annie Karni of Politico: “Donald Trump owns New York. So does Hillary Clinton. And strong showings in Tuesday’s Empire State primary by the Republican and Democratic front-runners could go a long way in helping them close the sale on the nominations of their respective parties. But simply winning won’t be enough for either of them. ...” http://politi.co/23IC3k1

HEH HEH. A meta cartoon on Trump that made me chuckle. From the New Yorker: http://bit.ly/1SUKP3x

NATIONAL — BIG OBAMACARE UH-OH, via the Tom Murphy of the Associated Press: “UnitedHealth, the nation’s biggest health insurer, will cut its participation in public health insurance exchanges to only a handful of states next year after expanding to nearly three dozen for this year. CEO Stephen Hemsley said Tuesday that the company expects losses from its exchange business to total more than $1 billion for this year and last. He added that the company cannot continue to broadly serve the market created by the Affordable Care Act’s coverage expansion due partly to the higher risk that comes with its customers. The state-based exchanges are a key element behind the Affordable Care Act’s push to expand insurance coverage. But insurers have struggled with higher than expected claims from that business. ...” http://apne.ws/1ThyUiQ

FUN PHOTO, via Gayle Fee of the Boston Herald a few days ago: “Gov. Charlie Baker needed a little cheering up after getting booed off the stage at an LGBT event the other day and he got it courtesy of car czar Ernie Boch Jr. who unearthed a photo from 1976 of the then-19-year-old Baker letting loose at an Aerosmith concert. ...” http://bit.ly/1qXe1QO

CUTE ANIMAL ALERT, via Erin La Rosa of BuzzFeed: “There are three baby goats in tiny sweaters, and they need you to prepare yourselves for this much cuteness. ...” This was wicked distracting: http://bzfd.it/1S8Y2Jv

YOUR MBTA-DELAY LONG READ, “Studio 360 | The pioneers who are making the first virtual-reality narratives,” about the fascinating beginning of a new form of storytelling. By Andrew Marantz in the this week’s issue of the New Yorker.: “... ‘V.R.’ stands for virtual reality — a loosely defined phrase that is now being applied to several related forms of visual media. You put your smartphone into a portable device like a Google Cardboard or a Samsung Gear — or you use a more powerful computer-based setup, such as the Oculus Rift or the HTC Vive — and the device engulfs your field of vision and tracks your head movement. The filmic world is no longer flat. Wherever you look, there’s something to see. ...

Cinematic grammar no longer applies. There is no frame in which to compose a shot. An actor who directly addresses the camera isn’t breaking the fourth wall, because the viewer is already in the middle of the action. The viewer can look anywhere, so the director often adds subtle visual or auditory cues to indicate where to look, or to signal that the viewer’s gaze can wander without missing anything important. ...” http://bit.ly/1NioZuf

Some day this newsletter will be an immersive political environment, and come with an actual drink. For now, my dear readers, you’ll have to settle for words on your screen. Sign up here.

Speaking of words, I’m off to write some that will be delivered through a breakthrough new technology: Ink on paper. I have a feeling there’s a bright future there.

See you tomorrow.