Parrish Medical Center Recognized For Healthcare Quality By SafeCare Group

By Space Coast Daily // December 10, 2015

highest ranking performer among Florida hospitals

BREVARD COUNTY • TITUSVILLE, FLORIDA – Parrish Medical Center has once again been recognized for healthcare quality, achieving Top 100 SafeCare Hospitals in the 100 – 400 bed category for the best processes of care, best outcomes of care, and best efficacy of care by the SafeCare Group.

The SafeCare Group analyzed hospital data for 40 Affordable Care Act measures for the 2014-2015 hospital ratings.

The analysis identified hospitals with comparatively lowest riskstandardized 30-Day Mortality rates, lowest 30-Day Readmissions, lowest Complications Rates in Medical and Surgical Care, lowest in-hospital Medical and Surgical Infections, highest Medical and Surgical Processes of Care measures for AMI, HF, PN, and SCIP and highest Patient Satisfaction scores.

Only the 100 hospitals between 100-400 beds with the highest scores made the 100 SafeCare Hospitals list.

If all U.S. hospitals attained the 100 SafeCare Hospitals® level, there would be improvement in the more than 400,000 preventable patient deaths and millions of preventable complications that occur each year.

“Much too often, hospital reputation and performance on quality measures are divergent,” said Dr. Yisrael Safeek, MD, MBA, Founder and Chairman of The SafeCare Group.

“We believe that a listing of outstanding hospitals in the areas of the Affordable Care Act would promote strong incentives to improve care, treatments, and services.”

According to the data, Parrish Medical Center was the highest ranking performer among Florida hospitals for CMS Hospital Value-Based Purchasing (HVBP) Program, Hospital-Acquired Condition Reduction Program (HACRP), Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP) and Hospital-Acquired Conditions Reduction Program (HACRP).

It was also the only Florida hospital to attain the coveted three standard deviations above the average cumulative score with 40 metrics of the Affordable Care Act.

Click here to contribute your news or announcements Free