Topics: Cambodia, Copenhagen, Denmark, GlobalPost, Pirate Bay, Technology News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

COPENHAGEN, Denmark — From the moment he surprised the defense with new material on the first day of the trial, it was clear that the Danish lawyer prosecuting Pirate Bay co-founder Gottfrid Svartholm Warg wasn’t messing around.

Some might even say he was playing dirty.

Anders Riisager opened the prosecution in the biggest hacking trial in Danish history with an as-yet-unseen video taken during Svartholm Warg’s 2012 arrest at his apartment in Phnom Penh.

The video showed the apartment in a chaotic state, piled with empty cans, and Svartholm Warg himself, looking thin and disheveled, puffing mechanically on a cigarette. It wasn’t a good look.

On the second day, he presented a story from a Cambodian expat news site, which alleged that by the time of his arrest in 2012, the 29-year-old “hacktivist” was “messed up on drugs,” and “a total recluse” whose only contacts were “his dealers and landlord.”

At this point, Svartholm Warg objected that Riisager was trying to “smear” him. His lawyer protested that it was unfair to offer that article as evidence, as the author, the news site’s British owner, had had a serious falling out with her client over a deal to provide web services to the site, and had as a result wanted to discredit him.

Later, when Svartholm Warg attempted to explain the technical reasons why the data intrusion could easily have been carried out by others to whom he had given remote access to his computer, Riisager interrupted so often that he was formally rebuked by the judge three times.

“It was aggressive, but I didn’t expect anything else,” Svartholm’s lawyer Luise Hoj told GlobalPost on the morning of the second day. “This case is about what kind of evidence we have, but it’s also about character.”

When Svartholm Warg was seized in 2012 in Cambodia, internet activists initially assumed that he was being brought back to serve the one-year sentence he received in 2009 for setting up The Pirate Bay, a site that allows users to illegally share films and music.

Instead he was charged with hacking into a series of Swedish government databases held by the IT firm Logica, and later accused of hacking into Nordea, a Scandinavian bank.

The accusations continued to pile up. Svartholm Warg and his 21-year-old Danish co-defendant are now also accused of hacking into Danish computer mainframes operated by US IT giant CSC, stealing social security numbers from Denmark’s national driver’s license database, illegally accessing information in a Schengen region database, and hacking into police email accounts.

During an earlier appeal last year, the judge ruled that the prosecution could not disprove Svartholm Warg’s claim that the two computers seized in his apartment had been used remotely by others to carry out the intrusion. The current trial is based largely on the same evidence drawn from computers as that earlier appeal.

Svartholm Warg claims that the two computers, a Macbook with six broken keys mainly used for running Windows, and a desktop computer, were “lab computers” that were generally open to being remotely controlled by Svartholm Warg’s collaborators all over the world, who used them for testing software ideas.