Executive Briefing | by Monica E. Oss | April 28, 2015

Last week, I took a look at the next parity proposal that seeks to balance mental health coverage with physical health coverage by applying the provisions of the Mental Health Parity and Addiction Equity Act of 2008 (MHPAEA) to Medicaid managed care organizations (MCO), Medicaid alternative benefit plans, and Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP) plans (see Another Round Of Parity). This proposal from the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) is being met with both commendations, as well as some conflict. The MHPAEA requires that health plans provide behavioral health benefits at parity with medical/surgical benefits of the same class – and that is where the conflict comes in. While the proposal would ensure beneficiaries have access to mental health and substance abuse benefits, there is disagreement about whether it goes far enough.

The National Council reacted favorably to the proposal, and Linda Rosenberg, President and CEO of the National Council praised this step by CMS:

This proposed rule represents a key piece of the parity puzzle. Now, states and Medicaid managed care plans will have the details they need to ensure that beneficiaries have access to the full protections promised them under the parity law. We applaud CMS for so thoroughly focusing on prohibiting discrimination and addressing many of the treatment limitations that have prevented enrollees from accessing the mental and addictions care they need (see Proposed Rule Lays Out Medicaid Parity Requirements).

The American Psychiatric Association (APA) President Paul Summergrad, M.D. also reacted favorably to the progress toward accessibility offered by the proposed rule, noting:

The proposed rule, by expanding mental health parity, has the potential to greatly improve access to care for mental health and substance use disorders and the equity which our patients need. We’ve made much progress in recent years under the Mental Health Parity Act and the expansion of its applicability under the Affordable Care Act, and this rule will continue that progress by providing greater opportunity for Medicaid beneficiaries to receive the psychiatric and substance use services they need and deserve. This will help hold states and the payors they use accountable and will allow monitoring of the progress and implementation of parity (see Proposed Rule For Applying Mental Health Parity To Medicaid & Children’s Health Insurance Program).

But, many industry stakeholders feel that because of the way the proposal is written, access-to-care issues still would remain. Emily Feinstein, the director of health law and policy at substance abuse and addiction center CASAColumbia, recently spoke with Kaiser Health News, and said that this proposed rule “will not be enough to overcome all of the barriers that patients face in accessing care, including an insufficient number of in-network providers” (see Rule Proposed On Providing Mental Health ‘Parity’ In Medicaid Program). And, speaking recently with Modern Healthcare, executive director of the National Association of County Behavioral Health and Developmental Disability Directors, Ron Manderscheid, summed up, “If you’re a private practitioner, I don’t think this will lead to much of a change for you,” (see Mental Health Parity In Medicaid Plans Would Help—Not Solve—Limited Access).

Additionally, there are concerns about how this policy would affect Medicaid spending – the National Association of Medicaid Directors released a statement predicting that the parity policy would create a dramatic increase in Medicaid spending, which will, in the short-term, result in increases in coverage; but would not address long-term coverage challenges:

…[I]n the short term, this rule will result in additional costs for Medicaid programs. Because of decades of insufficient investments from other payers, approximately 30 percent of all Medicaid dollars are spent on individuals with behavioral health needs. These regulations will lead to increased coverage of (and therefore spending on) behavioral health services for Medicaid beneficiaries in managed care or other capitated care models. While it is hard to know what the bottom line impact of this will ultimately be, the regulations do assume that this will cost state governments $150 million in the near term. It is also important to note that there are a number of other long-standing barriers to improved access to behavioral health services in Medicaid. These include the statutory prohibition on coverage for adults in an institute for mental disease (IMD), as well as regulatory barriers to the effective sharing of substance use treatment information… (see NAMD Response To New Mental Health Parity Regulations).

While the parity legislation seeks to create new behavioral health services, the legislation and market forces will continue to bring challenges to the access issue – we’ll keep you updated. In the meantime, public comments are due on this proposed rule by June 9, 2015 – and you can submit your comments at The Federal Register.