Although Interlaken police chief Leon Anderson moved to rescind his resignation from the Covert town board last week, saying he had been misinformed on how holding political office would affect his ability to apply for grants, the decider turned out to be the Town Clerk, Colleen Freese, who did not accept Anderson’s change of heart.

A packed town hall watched the town council mull over a resolution to accept (or deny) Anderson’s resignation. However, town attorney Pat Morell said, “Letters of resignation are sent to the town clerk. The board can act as a formality, but it has no legal effect.” Accepting the resignation, and a subsequent reversal of that resignation, “is at the sole discretion of the town clerk,” said Morell.

Clerk Colleen Freese has been out on medical leave for a month and a half, but she appeared briefly at the meeting to read a statement. She had accepted Anderson’s letter of resignation on January 26, but “As Town Clerk, I decline to grant the letter to withdraw, because there are still possibilities of conflict of interest.”

Morell explained further, that aside from Anderson’s concerns about accepting grants, a conflict of interest exists where Anderson or his employees appear before the Covert town justice, Eileen Schmidt. Schmidt has recused herself from hearing such cases because, as a judge, she is required to avoid the appearance of impropriety or bias. Since Anderson, seated on the town council, would have a vote on the justice’s budget, she would have a conflict of interest, in violation of the Hatch Act.

“As long as this court has jurisdiction over the police chief’s jurisdiction, I don’t see the conflict of interest going away,” said Morell. “Either Leon directly, or someone who works for Leon, brings tickets to this court. The judge will have to listen to their case and consider their credibility; meanwhile, the board member controls her budget.”

Citizen Barry Ford asked, “How often does that come up?”

“All the time,” said Morell. “We only have one judge, so it would have to get reassigned. In that circumstance, it would come up a lot… the other legal issue is Leon’s parting shot. He said, ‘I will pursue an Article 78,’ which is the vehicle for challenging an action of a board or an office.”

Anderson was elected to the Covert town board in November, but held office only a few weeks in January before concerns about conflict of interest inspired him to resign. Filling his place was the next topic of interest for the board, although grumblings from the audience indicated that some people thought the board was rushing forward. The town of Covert will be placing a notice in the newspaper soliciting candidates for a one-year appointment to the town council. Applications will be accepted until March 11.

Former town councilman Chuck Bosman, who garnered the least votes in the three-way race for two seats last November, announced his intention to apply.