Mike Huckabee has defended the internationally condemned decision not to allow a Paraguayan 11-year-old child to have an abortion after she was raped by her stepfather.

The child, who was raped at the age of 10, was denied access to a termination by authorities in Paraguay, a country with some of the most restrictive abortion laws in the world.

Paraguay only allows an abortion in cases where the mother’s life is in danger and medical authorities ruled the child did not meet this condition despite the physical risk associated with carrying a child at such a young age.

Amnesty International, which led the global outcry over the decision, described the situation as “almost too heart-wrenching to comprehend”.

Huckabee, who is hoping to secure the Republican 2016 Presidential nomination, is firmly opposed to abortion in all circumstances, including rape and incest. He recently admitted to being "open" to the idea of using federal troops to stop women from having abortions at clinics in the US, because "all Americans should be protected".

Presidential prowess? Republican candidates in televised debate







10 show all Presidential prowess? Republican candidates in televised debate

















1/10 DONALD TRUMP - MOGUL AND PRESENTER Most likely to say: “You other guys are just a bunch of stiffs. I LOVE Mexico. I will make America great again!” Least likely to say: “I invited Hillary Clinton to my wedding. Which wedding? I forget. Pass me a comb.” Reuters

Least likely to say: “I invited Hillary Clinton to my wedding. Which wedding? I forget. Pass me a comb.” 2/10 JEB BUSH - FORMER FLORIDA GOVERNOR Most likely to say: “I am the only one with a proven record as a conservative governor.” He will always add at least one sentence in Spanish. Least likely to say: “I know how to campaign. The last time I ran for office? 2003.” Reuters

Least likely to say: “I know how to campaign. The last time I ran for office? 2003.” 3/10 SCOTT WALKER - GOVERNOR OF WISCONSIN Most likely to say: “I took on the unions and beat them. I won two elections in a Democrat state and a recall election too.” Least likely to say: “Put a guy without a college degree in the White House. I won’t tell you why I dropped out.” AP

Least likely to say: “Put a guy without a college degree in the White House. I won’t tell you why I dropped out.” 4/10 MIKE HUCKABEE - FORMER GOVERNOR OF ARKANSAS Most likely to say: “I will fight to end gay marriage and reverse the Supreme Court on Obamacare.” Least likely to say: “You over there, Fox News guy. Keep my seat warm in the studio, because I’ll be back soon!” AP Photo/John Locher, File

Least likely to say: “You over there, Fox News guy. Keep my seat warm in the studio, because I’ll be back soon!” 5/10 BEN CARSON - FORMER SURGEON Most likely to say: “Barack Obama has been a disaster for America and I am the only to have called him out consistently.” Least likely to say: “I have never ever held elected office or even run for one. But I have a great life story!” Getty Images

Least likely to say: “I have never ever held elected office or even run for one. But I have a great life story!” 6/10 TED CRUZ - SENATOR FROM TEXAS Most likely to say: “I will end big government and slash Washington to ribbons. Bye-bye gay marriage and Obamacare.” Least likely to say: “Hey, Mr Trump, if you want to play the ‘birther’ game again, I was born in Calgary, Canada!” EPA/SHAWN THEW

Least likely to say: “Hey, Mr Trump, if you want to play the ‘birther’ game again, I was born in Calgary, Canada!” 7/10 MARCO RUBIO - SENATOR FROM FLORIDA Most likely to say: “President Obama is wrong on Iran and wrong on Cuba. I won’t chum about with tyrants.” Least likely to say: “I look like a puppy, but bring it on Putin. Yes, Jeb Bush was my mentor. Who cares?” AP

Least likely to say: “I look like a puppy, but bring it on Putin. Yes, Jeb Bush was my mentor. Who cares?” 8/10 RAND PAUL - SENATOR FROM KENTUCKY Most likely to say: “Everyone else on this stage is war crazy. I will not send your children to fight pointless wars abroad.” Least likely to say: “Time Magazine called me ‘the most interesting man in politics’ last year. Why y’all yawning?” Reuters

Least likely to say: “Time Magazine called me ‘the most interesting man in politics’ last year. Why y’all yawning?” 9/10 CHRIS CHRISTIE - GOVERNOR OF NEW JERSEY Most likely to say: “I am a two-term governor in a Democrat state with a record of reaching across the aisle.” Least likely to say: “Any bridges in Cleveland I can foul up? Don’t ask me about New Jersey’s economy.” Getty Images

“Any bridges in Cleveland I can foul up? Don’t ask me about New Jersey’s economy.” 10/10 JOHN KASICH - GOVERNOR OF OHIO Most likely to say: “Welcome to my state, where jobs are growing and spending is down. You want to win Ohio, don’t you?” Least likely to say: “Don’t send me any foreign policy questions, because I’m more or less clueless. I might ramble. Again.” AP

The controversial politician defended Paraguay’s ruling when he appeared on CNN’s State if the Union, insisting that allowing the child to terminate the pregnancy would be the state taking an innocent life.

“A ten tear-old girl being raped is horrible,” he said. “But does it solve a problem by taking the life of an innocent child? That’s really the issue. […] Let’s not compound the tragedy by taking yet another life.

“I just come down on the side that every life is precious. I don’t think we discount the intrinsic worth of any human being, and I don’t know where else to go with it."

He claimed there are always two victims in an abortion - the foetus and the mother. [“The mother] will go through extraordinary guilt years later when she begins to think through what happened, with the baby, with her.

“If life matters, and if that’s a person, then every life matters,”