Clayton Kershaw is one of the good guys. Really, truly.

Not because he just won his second National League Cy Young Award in the last three years. Not because his 1.83 ERA this past season was the lowest in baseball since 2000. Not because he’s always been a gentleman with me and the rest of the media when he’s wearing Dodger blue.

Kershaw is one of the good guys because of this: Last year, he won Major League Baseball’s Roberto Clemente Award. The award is MLB’s most prestigious humanitarian award, presented annually to a player who demonstrates the values the great Clemente displayed in his commitment to community and understanding the value of helping others.

Saturday night, Kershaw was in Denver to receive another prestigious award: The Branch Rickey Award — for service above self — presented by the Rotary Club of Denver. Kershaw became the 22nd major leaguer to enter the Baseball Humanitarians Hall of Fame.

“No matter what was going to happen with his career, both Clayton and I knew that we wanted to give back,”

his wife, Ellen, said. “It’s always been part of the fabric of who Clayton is. He doesn’t do this sort of thing to get honored. Actually, it’s kind of funny, because he’s so humble, but being in baseball puts him in the spotlight. He’s learned to handle it and put the focus on kids he’s helping and our charities.”

Before Saturday night’s banquet, Kershaw, dressed casually in jeans and a floppy T-shirt, met with a group of kids from the Denver Public Schools. Kershaw was soft-spoken and genuinely interested in interacting with the kids.

“We said it last year with the Roberto Clemente Award. It really is a special thing for us, not only for myself but for my wife, because this is kind of her full-time job,” Kershaw said. “It really is special and more than anything it’s just great recognition for the different charities we’re helping out on. It’s really bringing a bigger platform for us and for them, to help more kids. It’s kind of what it’s all about.”

So what have the Kershaws done in their early 20s? They started Kershaw’s Challenge, a foundation

that seeks to transform the lives of at-risk children and communities.

Their cornerstone charity, “Arise Africa,” has built and sustained an orphanage in Lusaka, Zambia called “Arise Home.” They are leaving for Zambia on Wednesday.

The orphanage is now home to nine children who came from desperate situations. This year, their goal is to rebuild a community school in the heart of Lusaka, adding five additional classrooms and paying salaries for higher educated faculty. They are also drilling a new water well to bring fresh water to the town. Each year, the Kershaws travel to Africa to visit with the children and bring awareness to the issues of diseases and infections related to HIV and AIDS.

“We feel like we are all called to different places,” Ellen Kershaw said. “Some of us are called to Africa, some of us are called to our own backyards.”

In 2012, the couple co-authored “Arise: Live Out Your Faith and Dreams on Whatever Field You Find Yourself. The book chronicles their life together and their trips to Africa.

Kershaw’s Challenge is also involved with Sharefest in Los Angeles and Mercy Street in his hometown of Dallas. Both charities seek to improve the lives of at-risk youth through after-school programs and sports.

Kershaw laughed when he was asked if he pushed baseball on the kids at Sharefest or Mercy Street.

“Honestly, baseball is not that important,” he said. “I don’t really care what sports kids are playing. I just want them to have the opportunity to do it, if they want to do it, I hope that we can provide that for them. There’s definitely opportunities for sports programs at Share Fest and Mercy Street and things like that, but we’re definitely not pushing baseball on them. If they want to play soccer or baseball or basketball or whatever, go for it.”

Since 2011, Kershaw has taken the mound knowing he’s pitching for “Striking Out to Serve,” his program that donates $500 to Kershaw’s Challenge for each batter he strikes out. He led the National League in 2013 with 232 strikeouts, meaning he raised $160,00.