TOP STORIES

Could a merger be in the near future for Independence Blue Cross parent, Independent Health Group? It would fit in with the general trend of M&A deals among payers seeking greater profitability as Affordable Care Act compliance drives their costs up. But the nonprofit status of some of the 36 separate Blue Cross and Blue Shield insurers could pose challenges to merging some of the insurers. — The Wall Street Journal

LIFE SCIENCES

ScandiDos got FDA clearance for a medical device to independently verify the radiation dose delivered to a patient during radiation treatment. — BusinessWire

Medtech investor Lightstone Ventures has closed a $50 million fund focused on Singapore. Its fund partners include Singapore investment company Limited Partners Temasek and EDBI, the corporate investment arm of the Singapore Economic Development Board. — Fierce Medical Devices

Padlock Therapeutics, a biotech startup developing treatments for autoimmune disease, said its co-founder Kerri Mowen has passed away. — Padlock Therapeutics

The global 3D printing healthcare market is expected to have sales of $2.3 billion by 2020. The market will be bolstered by augmented R&D investments, a rapidly expanding customer base, widening scope of biomedical applications, and extensive research and development activities. — PR Newswire

PAYERS-PROVIDERS

UPMC’s insurance business attracted 20 percent more subscribers at the end of 2015 compared with 2014, pushing operating revenue to nearly $6.3 billion for the last six months of 2015. — Pittsburgh Business Times

A look at Oscar, the new health insurance company on the block, and its efforts to build up membership in California. — Politico

A contemporary twist on George Bernard Shaw’s play The Doctor’s Dilemma exploring economics, doctors and ethics: ” Do I ask [a patient] what’s really bothering her and risk a time-consuming interaction? Or do I accept what she’s saying at face value and risk missing a chance to truly help her? — New England Journal of Medicine

TECHNOLOGY

Cambia Health Solutions has promoted Rob Coppedge to president for direct health solutions. He previously led Cambia’s strategic investment efforts as senior vice president of strategic investment and corporate development. The new role gives Coppedge oversight of Cambia’s health solutions businesses, including the portfolio of wholly owned companies and direct investments. — Bio Medicine

Opternative raised $6 million for online eye exams in a Series A round led by Jump Capital, Tribeca Venture Partners, and Pritzker Group Venture Capital. — PE Hub

Stealth startup Vicarious Surgical has raised $2.4 million. Its business involves developing virtual reality software for surgery. — Mass Device

A study using AliveCor Heart Monitor to screen for atrial fibrillation after heart surgery identified 10 patients with silent arrhythmia. — iMedicalApps

POLITICS

The U.S. Department of Justice is set to collect another $23 million from 51 hospitals in 20 states for incorrectly billing Medicare for implantable cardioverter defibrillator devices. To date, the Justice Department has settled with 457 hospitals for more than $250 million. — Fierce Medical Devices

How will the South’s status as having a high rate of adult diabetes and the most chronically ill people relative to the rest of the country plat out in the presidential primaries? — The Wall Street Journal

LITTLE BIT EXTRA

A deep dive of Apple’s encryption battle with the FBI to get data from the iPhone 5 the San Bernadino Department of Public Health gave to terrorist suspect Syed Rizwan Farook to use for work. — Wired

Photo: Big Stock