We never thought we would see Anne Hathaway’s name in the same sentence as the Kardashians, but the day has finally arrived. Nothing was off limits during Hathaway’s interview with Refinery29, which was set up to promote her film The Intern.

Now that she’s been out of the spotlight for a bit, it sounds like Anne has had time to actually take in some pop culture, which has inevitably landed her on the Kardashian pulse. That said, Hathaway has some evolving ideas about the Kardashians and their empire. Hathaway admits that at first she thought the Kardashians were simply famous for being reality stars, but then her thoughts changed.

“I used to be like everyone else and think the Kardashians are just famous for being famous. But I’ve been really impressed with how supportive Kim Kardashian has been of Caitlyn Jenner.”

Who else is Anne Hathaway aware of? Well, none other than everyone’s favorite “It” girl right now, Amy Schumer. Schumer, who had a breakout hit with the film Trainwreck, actually made fun of Anne Hathaway in the film. Her character and Bill Hader’s get into a fight at a ceremony honoring Hader’s character, Amy makes a comment that he’s holding around his award like Anne Hathaway at an Oscar party.

As the Inquisitr reported, the actress seemed to take it in stride and laughed at the joke. Going from her interview, it seems like Hathaway really has a girl crush on Amy Schumer and is encouraged by the voice she’s giving women in Hollywood and outside of that spectrum as well.

“I am crushing so hard on Amy Schumer. Women like her who have chosen to stand up for themselves and face the bullies are being so embraced. I think that’s the new message: Figure out who you are, be happy with yourself, and don’t take anything from anyone. Don’t let anyone make you feel bad about you. That’s something that I’ve been growing into.”

As for what people really think of her, Anne talks about this total win or utter fail mentality that this generation seems to be growing up in.

“It does very much at times feel like we’re living in the days of the Coliseum, where people get the thumbs up and you live, or the thumbs down and you die, but the thing is, you won’t die. Sometimes it feels like you will, but you won’t die from humiliation on the internet. You have to get really strong and dig down deep and get really tough. For the first time in my life, I’m feeling comfortable. Not settled, not complacent, but just like I can take whatever is going to come.”

Anne Hathaway’s new film The Intern hits theaters on September 25.

[Photo by Stuart C. Wilson / Getty Images]