Back in March 2010, the conservative and controversial radio host Rush Limbaugh mentioned his intention of coming to Costa Rica if and when the Affordable Care Act, often referred to as “Obamacare,” would be enacted. Mr. Limbaugh actually set a date for this move, which would ostensibly take place a few days from today. To wit, we have this recent conversation on Twitter:

Got champagne? Rush Limbaugh said on 3/9/10 he’d move to Costa Rica on 3/9/15 if Obamacare was still the law. That’s one week from today. — Bill Harnsberger (@BillinPortland) March 2, 2015



As it happens, The Costa Rica Star reported on this issue in a 2012 article entitled “As the US moves towards socialized health care, Costa Rica and the UK move away”:

If conservative radio host Rush Limbaugh is a man of his word, he may be visiting Costa Rica as a medical tourist in the future. In 2010, Mr. Limbaugh stated that if the Affordable Care Act legislation passed in the United States, he would come to Costa Rica. A major ruling by the U.S. Supreme Court on Thursday gave the green light to the legislation some people refer to as “Obamacare”, the most comprehensive health care reform in the U.S. in many decades. When Mr. Limbaugh made the reference to Costa Rica a couple of years ago, some people thought he would actually pack his bags and move here as the ultimate expression of his opposition to President Obama’s health care initiative. He debunked this conjecture directly on the air: “I was asked yesterday where will I go for health care if Obama’s health care passes, and I said if doctors here are not permitted to form private practice little clinics with individuals paying a fee, a retainer, and for services, then I’ll go to Costa Rica to get major medical health care.”

Based on the above, it can be assumed that Mr. Limbaugh is not moving from the United States to Costa Rica, notwithstanding the fact that the Affordable Care Act has been enacted and implemented. He could still visit as a medical tourist if he so dislikes Obamacare and the medical service rendered under the program.

Should Mr. Limbaugh keep his original work, he would certainly find plenty of opportunities to ply his trade in Costa Rica, a country where analog radio is not only alive and well but also vibrant. Finding a receptive audience in our country, however, could prove trickier unless he syndicates his show overseas.