Topics: 2013, Best of 2013, Hoaxes, Jimmy Kimmel, manti te'o hoax, NASA, the daily dot, Top Ten, Video, Social News, Media News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot

It’s that time of year again. Your Facebook newsfeeds and Twitter timelines are about to fill up with end-of-year lists in every possible classification. There are infinite ways to categorize news—from the general, like the most influential people of the year, to the specific, like the most retweeted tweets by athletes in 2013. But what made 2013 notable was that some of the most important stories never actually happened. They were complete lies. Hoaxes.

This list is a tribute to the pranksters, the people who made countless people and media companies—including this one—look gullible and unprofessional. These are folks who drew in readers with thought-provoking YouTube videos and gut-busting tweets, only to punish us for ever believing any of it.

10) Fappy the Dolphin (May)

Michael Moore has directed some of the most provocative films of the past 24 years. So when a press release began circulating from a suspicious-looking site about his next film, Fappy, about an anti-masturbation dolphin, people began to wonder.

The supposed plot: Fappy travels to different towns and schools teaching children about the dangers of self-love and warning that masturbation is the gateway to rape.

The film was due out this month. To give it an air of legitimacy, the people behind the prank created the following fake tweet from Moore’s account.

The press release quoted Lonnie Childs, president and founder of Stop Masturbation Now, as telling CNN: “[Masturbation] leads to sexual dysfunction, erodes family values, and is a top 10 cause of disease. What our organization does is designed to help make children and parents aware of the dangers of masturbation in and outside of the home. God willing, one day masturbation will be illegal.”

No such interview can be found. And to this date, the source of the hoax is unknown.

9) Penning the perfect fake letter (November)

NASA wrote back to me. pic.twitter.com/pu5LjGpKVO — Jamie Jones (@JamieDMJ) November 23, 2013

NASA was tired of being the butt of the Internet’s jokes (see No. 6).

For the second time in the past two months, the space agency has been placed at the center of an online hoax. The latest attempt comes from the United Kingdom’s Jamie Jones, who posted the following NASA correspondence on his blog today regarding a “new” form of rocket propulsion.

Unwilling to be taken advantage of again, NASA set the record straight on Twitter.

This letter (https://t.co/eapIRX8Y5S) isn’t from us, but we do reply to your snail mail. Write us: http://t.co/dSoGqUE71r #PenPal — NASA (@NASA) November 23, 2013

Jones has a long history of viral forgeries. He previously produced fake letters from Guinness World Records, Cadbury, and webuyanycar.com.

8) Diane in 7A (November)

I sent the lady a glass of wine and a note pic.twitter.com/GttnmQI25P — elan gale (@theyearofelan) November 28, 2013

While waiting for a flight home for the holidays, Elan Gale, a producer on The Bachelor, tweeted about a note and drink he had sent to a female passenger on his plane after a flight delay caused her to complain.

The story was the perfect mix of holiday travel angst and a rude target: “Diane.”

BuzzFeed was one of the first organizations to break the story, claiming Elan “won” Thanksgiving. Other news organizations were less complimentary. Gale responded to online criticism of the situation by telling people they could eat a part of his anatomy, just like he told Diane in one of his notes. Elan also wrote a blog post explaining why he was right to antagonize Diane, before concluding that we should all be kind to each other. He just wanted to teach her a lesson.

He also taught the world one too. Don’t believe everything you read, especially when the writer is in the business of making things up for TV.

“Anyone who would scroll back [through my tweets] would see what I am all about as a tweeter,” Elan told ABC News. “My thought was I can’t believe anyone is taking this seriously. I thought, ‘Why isn’t anyone doing any fact checking?’ Then I saw it was on the evening news in Sacramento and it became this totally absurd thing.”

7) Cancer story raises $150,000 (April)

Brittany Ozarowski was a 20-year-old living with a laundry list of ailments only seen in Lifetime movies.

“I shattered my right femoral head, fractured my right femur, fractured my pelvis, dislocated and fractured my S.I. joint in my back, collapsed my right lung, had 20 staples in my head, fractured my L1, L3, and L5 in my spine and shattered my L2,” Ozarowski wrote in on Facebook in 2011. “I had nerve damage and severe muscle abnormalities throughout my body.”

And if that wasn’t enough, Ozarowski also had stage two ovarian cancer as well as stomach cancer

Over the next two years, Ozarowski’s raised more than $150,000 for her treatment. That included $100,000 from her grandmother who sold her house, $25,000 from her father who cleaned out his IRA portfolio, and a nearby man named Walter Warren, who lost his son to cancer in 2007 and vowed to help Ozarowski with whatever it took.

Ozarowski’s story sounded too good to be true. As it turns out, it was.

Instead of cancer treatment, Ozarowski used the $150,000 to feed her heroin addiction.

A breast cancer survivor in Medford, New York, got suspicious of Ozarowski’s activity and eventually called the police on Ozarowski. She was arrested on April 8.

“This defendant perpetrated an absolutely despicable scam,” Suffolk County District Attorney Thomas Spota said in a statement. “There was no cancer, no chemotherapy, no radiation, and no medical bills. There was just heroin.”

6) NASA gets fooled (October)

The story began on Oct. 1, the day the U.S. government shut down, placing about 800,000 federal employees temporarily out of work in a partisan dispute over the Affordable Care Act. The furloughed employees included 17,400 NASA staffers, leaving a skeleton crew to monitor crucial operations like the International Space Station.

At about 4:16pm that day, the clandestine marketing group and YouTube botting troupe called SocialVevo registeredrememberthe13th.com. It was a few hours after NASA tweeted that because of the shutdown, all public activities and events would be canceled or postponed.

By that evening, Remember the 13th was fully operational. The site featured a cute rocketship, social media buttons, and a promise to release the “biggest discovery that will shake the Earth” on Nov. 13. And in the top left-hand side of the page was the official NASA logo.

This got netizens wondering, if NASA was shut down, how could it orchestrate such a groundbreaking scientific reveal? It couldn’t. But because NASA’s un-furloughed employees are tied up with crucial work, debunking an Internet hoax wasn’t on their agenda.