FOREVER BEAUTIFUL: How to shine like the stars

Glitz and glamour: Scarlett Johansson

Every Monday, Elsa answers a reader's big beauty query and presents the best buys to perk up your week...



I have a charity ball to go to and need make-up tips for looking good on the night. I’ve loved watching the Oscars and BAFTAs and now want to recreate some of the stars’ sparkle at home, without spending a fortune. I have short, silver hair and am wearing a full-length emerald green dress.



Agnes, 72, Lanarkshire.

PRIME YOUR SKIN

Make-up looks better if your skin is in good condition, which is why Los Angeles’ top facialists get booked months in advance before the Oscars. But you can do some of their best tips at home for free.



Top facialist Nichola Joss, beauty therapist for Scarlett Johansson and Hilary Swank, advises drinking plenty of water and using a youth boosting treatment oil. Try the Sanctuary Therapist’s Facial Oil (£17.50, Boots) or Weleda’s iconic Skin Food (£8.95, weleda.co.uk), a miracle moisturiser.



When I interviewed the 69-year-old actress Jacqueline Bisset, she told me almond oil is one of her secret wonder products.



‘It nourishes my skin and keeps it supple,’ she said. Other advice included: ‘Get your blood moving by exercising! It keeps your skin looking fresh.’ And her best tip? ‘Sleeping for eight hours in a nice, cool room.’



A face mask can give skin a boost before a big event, but use it at least two days before in case it brings out irritations.



Actress Natalie Portman uses Glamglow Mud Mask, (£25, Marks & Spencer), but an inexpensive alternative is the Superberry Mud Mask, (£2.59 from Superdrug).

THE PERFECT CANVAS

Camera-ready foundation is a red carpet must-have. The new Giorgio Armani Maestro Fusion Compact Make-up (£31, armanibeauty.co.uk) is a cream foundation with a blend of oils and waxes that melt into the skin.



For a less expensive version, try George Flawless Crème Foundation (£4, Asda).



STATEMENT EYES

Make-up artist Lina Cameron, who has worked with Scarlett Johansson and Sienna Miller, says: ‘Eyes need to look dramatic. Bourjois Intuitive Black Liner, (£6.99, Superdrug) is easy to use. To make eyes stand out, curl your lashes before applying mascara. I like Maybelline Great Lash Very Waterproof (£4.99, Boots).’



STATEMENT LIPS

Red lips look classically Hollywood — try No 7 Precision Lips pencil in Fire, (£6.75, Boots) and fill with Seventeen Stay Pout Lipstick in Date Night, (£4.49, Boots) — but orange can be striking, too.



Illamasqua’s Satin Finish Glamore Lipstick in Soaked, (£16.50, illamasqua.com) is a vibrant tangerine.



HAIR RAISING

It’s not just Hollywood stars who can get away with something fun — so can you! Channel Helen Mirren, who appeared on the red carpet with pink hair at last year’s BAFTAs, with Body Shop’s brightly coloured Hair Chalks (£5, bodyshop.co.uk).



Would you like advice for a special event? Write to me at elsa@dailymail.co.uk



UNSUNG HERO



People have been asking me where Rimmel London’s Nail Rescue has gone.



The excellent conditioning treatment for fragile, brittle nails is now called Nail Nurse (£4.49, Superdrug).



It’s every bit as good as the original product.



Apply every day for a fortnight and it will strengthen damaged nails.



You can also wear it as a basecoat and it will prevent nails from going yellow.



ELSA'S PICK

This March, Elemis is celebrating the tenth birthday of its Cellular Recovery Skin Bliss Capsules with a limited super-sized set for £79.50 (a saving of £44.50 on the usual price). The capsules contain moringa oil and rose absolute to help revitalise the skin and maximise cellular repair overnight.

FACE TIME

Sought-after facialist Su-Man, who developed the ‘non-invasive alternative to Botox’, has launched a range of products.Exfoliating Facial Polish, £40, leaves skin firmer, brighter and glowing.



su-man.com

TREATS TO MAKE YOUR MONDAY MARVELLOUS

Bubble T Bath & Body is a range of tea-infused shower gels, lotions, hand washes and hand creams blended with fruit extracts inspired by the Taiwanese drink of the same name.

Goji berries, known for their antioxidant effects, are featured throughout. Choose from refreshing Moroccan Mint Tea, uplifting Lemon- grass and Green Tea, and calming Sweet Hibiscus and Acai berry.

bubbletcosmetics.com Nude shades for nails are still very much in fashion.

I love L’Oreal Paris Color Riche Nail Les Blancs in Peach Negligee, (£4.99, Boots), Maybelline Color Show Stripped Nudes In Your Flesh (£2.99, Superdrug) (pictured), and Bourjois So Laque So Glossy, in BC Beige, (£7.99, Boots) — elegant, grown-up colours.