The Broncos reached the halfway point 7-1, but compromised. Injuries remain a 100 percent certainty in the NFL. Who and when often determines a team’s success. Denver enters Sunday’s game with history working in their favor, yet concern exists.

Why?

Peyton Manning is 39 in case you haven’t noticed. He grinded through this week with a sore right foot and, as of Saturday, a rib injury. He will start. The challenge will be to finish. Emmanuel Sanders warmed up multiple times on Sunday, testing his sprained left ankle with short pass patterns, trying to impress the coaches enough to be active. It worked. He will play, but it bears watching how effective he can be. The Broncos might need receiver Bennie Fowler and the crew of tight ends to come through.

The Broncos already are without edge rusher DeMarcus Ware, who told me on Friday he’s suffering from a structural issue in his back. He is likely to miss next Sunday’s game at Chicago as well, though he hasn’t ruled out playing. Pro Bowl cornerback Aqib Talib is out, suspended for one game for an eye gouge in the closing moments of the season’s first loss at Indianapolis.

And on to the keys to the game:

Trust the defense

The Broncos defense played poorly last Sunday. They hit quarterback Andrew Luck 11 times, but produced only one sack. The Chiefs line is porous. The Chiefs are among the league’s worst in sacks per pass attempt. Translation: the Broncos need Von Miller to get hot and for Shaquil Barrett and Shane Ray, even in limited snaps, to step up. Covering tight end Travis Kelce is the key. The Broncos have allowed only one touchdown to a receiver this season.

Help Manning make history

Manning needs three passing yards and a win to pass Brett Favre on both all-time lists. He will be appropriately honored when he breaks the former mark, with the game stopped for a minute as a video tribute airs. Manning owns the Chiefs. He’s won nine straight against the Chiefs, the most by an opposing quarterback against them. Since joining Denver, Manning is 7-0 with 19 touchdown passes and four interceptions. For the trend to continue, he must rely on a Demaryius Thomas, his multiple tight ends and a better running game.

Start fast

The Broncos have scored 19 first quarter points, third worst in the NFL. They have scored one first quarter touchdown. If they can find momentum, it bodes well. The Broncos have yet to lose a home game under Manning when leading at halftime.