The high cost of care is spurring more change in the Dallas health field than at any time in its modern history.

Hospitals are in a top-down revolution that focuses on keeping people well rather than treating the sick.

Meanwhile, Dallas, Fort Worth and 29 other cities in North Texas are rebelling against high hospital prices. They want the hospitals to bid against each other, publicly, for the care delivered to 80,000 municipal employees and their families.

Many companies are changing the health insurance deal with their workers by charging lower premiums for those who quit smoking or pass screenings for high blood pressure, diabetes and artery-clogging cholesterol.

A community-wide campaign is underway in Fort Worth to change the lifestyle choices that cause most chronic illnesses, while Dallas and other cities are also working on weight loss and exercise programs.

The sweep of change is evident in many other parts of the country. The debate over federal budget deficits is largely about rising health care costs. Both Republicans and Democrats have sought ways to stem the tide by taming inflation in Medicare prices.

California’s biggest pension fund has set price ceilings for some surgeries — and hospitals have quickly fallen in line.

In Wisconsin, “exasperated private payers, led by large and medium employers, are staging a revolt” against the medical establishment, said John Torinus, chairman of Milwaukee manufacturer Serigraph and author of The Grassroots Health Care Revolution. “No other vendor would get away with double-digit increases for decades.”

Nearly 17 million people now have health insurance under the 2010 Affordable Care Act — insurance they could not afford or, in some cases, didn’t want before the law passed.

Pace of change

“I will tell you that the pace of change is incredible,” said Brian Dickerson, Fort Worth’s human resources director and a former health insurance executive. “It’s moving so far and so fast, we have more solutions than there are questions.”

Dickerson’s comments suggest not all of this change may succeed. Baylor Scott & White turned aside the cities’ request for bids indexed to Medicare pricing. The Affordable Care Act remains unpopular with millions of Americans, and Republicans continue to seek its repeal.

Behind all this churn, however, is a shared belief that health care costs too much and too often fails to deliver.

Roughly a third of the nation’s $3.1 trillion health care bill is wasted on unnecessary or incorrect services, according to studies by the McKinsey Global Institute, the Dartmouth Institute for Health Policy and Clinical Practice and a 2012 examination led by Don Berwick, a physician and former director of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services.

“Berwick’s right,” said Gary Brock, president of the North Texas operations of Baylor Scott & White. “We’ve created a collaborative structure that’s focused on strategies eliminating the waste that Berwick talked about.”

Care coordination among hospitals, physicians, nurses, therapists and home health care agencies is key to Baylor’s strategy. Dickerson noted, however, that not all of Baylor’s caregivers are equal in ability. Choosing a doctor can be harder when care in a coordinated chain requires patients to see whomever the health group assigns.

“You’ve poured all your doctors into this, but where’s the quality?” Dickerson said he told Baylor executives. “You know you have some doctors that are good, some that are great, and some that are not either one.”

There is a lot of misdiagnosis in that wasted spending, Dickerson said. Patients and employers should still be able to choose their physicians, or, expect Baylor and other providers to weed out the worst performers.

Municipal rebellion

The municipal rebellion against hospital prices was ignited by recent increases averaging 9 percent to 9.5 percent a year, according to an analysis by Dallas consultants Holmes Murphy.

Last March, Den Bishop, president of the consulting firm, began encouraging the cities to unite to confront these prices. Instead of relying on insurance companies to bargain with hospitals, he said, they should do it themselves and insist that the hospitals use a single index as their starting point.

Bishop argues that the only way to get control of medical spending is to peg it to Medicare’s fixed prices. “The system will not stabilize until we get to that place,” he said.

Medicare, the federal health insurance program for seniors and the disabled, sets prices annually for hospital and physician services. Caregivers have long complained that these prices are too low and don’t even reflect their costs.

But both Baylor and Texas Health Resources, another large hospital chain in North Texas, are striving to reach a break-even point between costs and prices in treating Medicare patients.

Coaxing the cities into what’s called the North Texas Coalition required convincing their benefit managers that a Medicare index would work. Until now, they have not had the ability to compare prices among hospitals.

Every hospital uses a different formula of retail prices for procedures; the only thing they have in common is that the prices are far higher than what the hospitals collect.

Barclay Berdan, CEO of Texas Health Resources, said he hopes a more rational price list — “something where the charges are more reflective of revenue we actually expect to get” — will be developed by the end of 2016.

“With most hospitals nowadays … what you actually get paid or collect of the gross charges is about 25 to 45 cents on the dollar,” he said. “Forty-five cents would be very good, 25 cents would be on the low side. I would guess our average … right now is about 32 to 33 percent.”

Instead of bargaining for discounts off these inflated retail price lists, Bishop urged the cities to demand that hospitals start with Medicare prices. These are roughly uniform across the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Bishop put it this way: “At what percent of Medicare are you willing to sell your services?”

United front

By early December, the cities were prepared to fight on a united front.

Molly Carroll, Dallas’ director of human resources, said something has to give in negotiations with the hospitals. “The city is only going to be able to do so much,” she said. “At some point, we’re going to be cannibalizing our services for health care.”

Baylor’s Brock turned aside the municipal coalition’s bid request and said the cities should talk with his hospital group about Baylor’s new care model. Under that approach, employers would pay Baylor an annual fee for each worker. If Baylor kept most of them well and out of the hospital, it would make money. More illness would require Baylor to take a loss.

The starting line for this approach, however, is an expensive one. Hospital prices in Dallas — the real prices that are paid by insurers — are among the highest in the country. Last year, they were 14 percent above the national average, according to a September analysis by the Health Care Cost Institute, a Washington think tank.

“The story for Dallas really seems to be the price level,” said Eric Burette, the lead author of the study. “It’s not what patients and employers want to see in an area.”

Bishop blames employers for not standing up to the health care industry.

“I tell them, ‘Shame on you for being willing to pay this,’” Bishop said. “You haven’t cared that you’ve had high inflation. You just absorbed some of it and passed the rest to your employees.”

Business community

Surprisingly, Brock agrees. Asked about the Health Care Cost Institute’s findings, he, too, said the Dallas business community has preferred to include all hospitals in their insurance plans rather than seek lower prices.

“Employers haven’t really been focusing on a more narrow band of providers and being able to use their relationships with those providers to drive their cost of care down,” he said. “But it’s starting to happen.”

Torinus, the Milwaukee manufacturer and author, sees employers standing up all across the country.

“First, they are becoming self-insured,” he said. “They bear the insurance risk, not the insurance company. Second, they’re pushing their employees into consumer-driven health plans with high deductibles, but also, for most of them, with health savings accounts.

“That gets you to the 30-yard line,” he said. “Next is when the companies open onsite clinics, staffed by their own physicians, to make it easy for their employees to get the preventive care they need.”

Nearly 30 percent of the nation’s companies employing 5,000 or more workers now have such clinics, he said.

“Companies in the vanguard of containing health costs do it by managing health. In the process, they are enjoying improved productivity, higher morale, less absenteeism, and lower workers’ compensation charges,” Torinus said.

Dallas residents who get their health insurance at work have seen a lot of their companies’ health costs shifted to them in the last few years. The average Texas worker spent 12.3 percent of income on health insurance in 2013, a larger share for coverage than almost anyone else in the nation, according to a report by the Commonwealth Fund, a health policy think tank in New York.

High deductibles mean consumers pay thousands of dollars for their own care before their insurance kicks in. Often, the result is delayed care. It’s hard for consumers to know where to get the best value for their money, because health care is that rare purchase where the cost can’t be discovered beforehand.

Costs of procedures

This, too, is beginning to change. The Health Care Cost Institute, using claims records from several large health insurance firms, runs a website called Guroo.com that provides average costs by metropolitan area for hundreds of medical procedures.

The national average for a colonoscopy screening is $2,288, while the average in Dallas is $2,947, Guroo.com reports. Consumers are urged to take that average to their physicians to see if they can match or beat it.

Many times, however, physicians have no idea what their services cost. That depends on the deal negotiated by the consumer’s health insurance company, which, in turn, is based on discounts off the inflated retail price. The discounts are typically confidential, so competitors won’t be able to see them.

Most insurers now offer consumers some type of price estimates and can steer them to lower-cost providers.

Quality, however, is even more difficult to determine than price.

An array of consulting firms has stepped in to help employers and their workers find answers for both price and quality. They use the company claims data to build a record for physicians and hospitals showing which ones have the most success, and lowest costs.

Health care summits

David Toomey of Compass Professional Health Services is one of those consultants. He’s also precipitated much of the change in the Dallas health care field.

Over the last six years, Toomey has masterminded two Dallas health care summits. With Bishop, Toomey went to the benefit managers of the largest employers in Dallas with the same Medicare-plus bargaining proposal that’s now been adopted by the municipalities. (The Dallas companies declined.)

This fall, Toomey invited Torinus to Dallas to speak with some of those same employers about the need to rebel against the high cost of care.

“This is ultimately one of top three expense lines of your company,” Toomey said in echoing Torinus’ remarks. “It’s really going to take the employers to drive the change. He [Torinus] took hold of it. He told his workers, ‘I need you to be responsible for your health. I need you to see a doctor and get primary care.’

“All this stuff we’ve been talking about for years can get your emergency room visits cut in half, get your employees to get a physical, get their cancer screenings — it cuts that health care inflation way down.”

Energy Future Holdings, one of Toomey’s Dallas clients, has managed to cut health care cost growth to 1.5 percent a year. It’s a telling comparison to the municipalities still struggling with growth near 10 percent a year.

“It still needs to go down, but they’ve [Energy Future Holdings] made major strides,” Toomey said.

The common ground in these reform drives is getting consumers to take responsibility for their health — by buying insurance, by paying more out of their own pockets when they need care, by seeing a doctor and getting the screenings and preventive care that can avoid a medical catastrophe.

If employers can get their workers started down that road, Toomey, Torinus and Bishop say their next hurdle is to manage health care costs the way they manage the rest of their business: confront their suppliers, and shop for better prices.

Fort Worth’s Dickerson is all in. “We’re going to start with hospitals,” he said. “But that doesn’t mean we aren’t going to go to imaging and other services like radiology. I know at least one outpatient surgery clinic that’s going to submit bids for our business.”