Superphones: Samsung's Galaxy S5, left, and the HTC One M8.

Blessed with an abundance of screen real estate and brimming with features, Samsung and HTC's Android heavyweights stand toe-to-toe.

At 5.1-inches, the Samsung's screen is a smidgen larger than its 5-inch HTC rival. The difference is barely noticeable, as is the fact that the HTC handset is a fraction taller and thicker. The key difference is the HTC's unibody aluminium chassis, which helps the handset look more elegant and feel sturdier than the Samsung while only weighing 15 grams more.

Under the bonnet both smartphones pack quad-core processors accompanied by a generous 2 gigabytes of RAM. The Samsung comes out ahead in the benchmarks but neither handset will disappoint power users looking for extra grunt.

Impressive built-in BoomSound speakers are the HTC's killer feature – offering rich, full sound for both movies and music which could certainly replace a portable speaker. The Samsung's speakers sound tinny in comparison.

Advertisement

The Samsung's strengths include a water and dust-resistant design, which will suit those who like to get out and about. Its 16-megapixel camera outshines many point-and-shoot compact digitals. The Samsung takes much sharper pictures than the HTC's 4-megapixel camera, although the HTC relies on larger sensor designed to produce better low-light photos. It can also refocus shots thanks to the built-in depth sensor.

When it comes to software, HTC's Sense 6 is more muted and elegant that Samsung's chirpy TouchWiz interface. Both handsets have access to the Google Play store, but the Samsung comes out ahead thanks to its own store with extra content and exclusive apps. Samsung's Galaxy S5 can also act as a mobile tap and pay credit card for Westpac and Commonwealth Bank customers, plus the fingerprint scanner supports PayPal payments.

The verdict

The Samsung Galaxy S5 is an impressive all-rounder with a great camera, but HTC's One M8 has the upper hand in terms of style and might win multimedia fans over with those impressive speakers.

Samsung Galaxy S5

$929

samsung.com/au

HTC One M8

$899

htc.com/au