Back in 2010, then-mayor Michael Bloomberg threw down a challenge: New York City would put up $400 million worth of land and infrastructure upgrades to seed a technology hub that would give Silicon Valley a run for its money. Universities would compete for the central role by proposing plans for an applied sciences research facility. The payoff over 30 years, Bloomberg predicted, would be some 400 new companies, billions of dollars in economic activity and nearly 30,000 new jobs.

Today, Bloomberg is back in the business world, running his namesake media company. Meanwhile, Applied Sciences NYC is taking shape with not one but four new grad-school options for those interested in applying technological know-how to contemporary problems. All four get a piece of the city’s largesse. Three of the programs created by the competition already have students on campus; another could open this year. Here’s the lowdown:

1. Cornell Tech, an arm of the Ivy League university and the big official winner, aims to fill “the talent gap of the digital age,” says Dean Daniel Huttenlocher. Engineering is integral to almost all aspects of daily life, he says, but the demand for workers with the skills to keep the machinery humming is not being met. The school is temporarily holding classes in Google’s downtown Manhattan building and will move to sleek new digs on Roosevelt Island in the East River in 2017. The tech company atmosphere will persist there, with ample studio space to encourage innovation and collaboration and an open floor plan with meeting rooms rather than individual offices for professors.

In the 2014-15 academic year, Cornell Tech has 100 students enrolled in three programs: a one-year master’s in computer science and a second in tech-oriented business administration, plus a two-year master’s in connective media (focused on the technology behind digital media) through the Jacobs Technion–Cornell Institute, a partnership between Cornell and Israel’s Technion-Israel Institute of Technology, which will result in a degree from each university. Future programs include master’s degrees for people interested in developing individual technology to drive healthier living (such as mobile devices) and in making buildings and infrastructure more efficient. Cornell Tech expects to have 500 students by 2017.

[READ: Seek MBA-Style Skills With Master of Engineering Management]

The computer science and MBA students spend about a third of the curriculum together, in class and working on projects, to ensure that business students hone their tech prowess and the techies learn management and communication skills. In the fall, students collaborate to solve problems at local companies or organizations, and in the spring they work on startup projects.

The entrepreneurial orientation was part of what drew Geoffrey Peterson to the computer science master’s. Peterson, 29, graduated from Harvard with a computer science degree but then worked in other fields, most recently in infrastructure policy for the state of Rhode Island. “I was looking for programs that would let me do a career pivot and get back into the tech world,” he says. He and several classmates are hoping their startup project, a secure messaging protocol, will lead to jobs – ideally, as their own bosses.

[ALSO: New York's Startup State of Mind]

2. New York University’s Center for Urban Science and Progress was conceived to address the increasing percentage of the population living in cities and to exploit the massive growth in the ability to collect and analyze data. Created by NYU and a consortium including other academic institutions and companies, CUSP is an effort to use “urban informatics” to improve how cities function, says Constantine Kontokosta, deputy director of academics. Think of city issues like noise, transportation and emergency response, and you’ll get a sense of where CUSP is targeting its data analysis power.

There are now 64 students enrolled in a one-year master’s and advanced certificate programs in two buildings in downtown Brooklyn. (The program will move to nearby permanent headquarters in 2017.) CUSP expects enrollment to hit 500 in about a decade, as more master’s students come on board and executive education and Ph.D. programs are added. Master’s students work on two-semester deep-dive projects tackling problems faced by a city agency or company – modeling transportation movements and patterns, say, or improving waste management.

The typical student has a quantitative background, but the group represents a wide diversity of academic paths, says JeanCarlo Bonilla, director of enrollment management and student services. The common denominator, he says, is a desire to apply technology to more than making money. “I wanted to use my abilities in a career I thought had more tangible benefits for communities and cities,” says Eduardo Franco, 29, a former trader in New York’s financial industry with an undergrad degree in industrial engineering from the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign.

[READ: 3-D Printing Makes a Mark on Engineering Education]

3. Columbia University’s Data Science Institute focuses on six fields: cybersecurity, data science foundations, financial and business analytics, health analytics, new media and smart cities. The availability of data has exploded in these areas in particular, says director Kathleen McKeown, and there’s a need for people to smartly analyze it to make predictions. The institute offers a master’s in data science as well as a certification for working professionals. The plan is to add a data sciences Ph.D. in the fall of 2018 and, by 2017, to be preparing about 75 full-time and 30 part-time students for careers in media, advertising and finance as well as tech.

“This is definitely going to be opening a new door for me,” predicts Barbara Welsh, a 31-year-old IT consultant with a math undergrad degree from NYU who was looking to add data analysis to her list of quantitative skills. She is hoping eventually to apply her new knowledge to fields such as energy and health care.

[READ: Engineering Programs Work to Get Research From Lab to Customers (//www.usnews.com/education/best-graduate-schools/top-engineering-schools/articles/2015/03/19/engineering-programs-work-to-get-research-from-lab-to-customers)]

4. Pending curriculum approval by New York state, Carnegie Mellon’s Integrative Media Program will welcome its first class of about 40 students to Steiner Studios in the Brooklyn Navy Yard this August. The goal is to train students to work in “new creative industries” that bridge technology and the arts, and to include film, social media, games and interactive media. That will happen through four full- and part-time master’s programs in emerging media, computational data science, integrated innovation and urban design.

Thanassis Rikakis, CMU’s vice provost for design, arts and technology, says creative industries are looking “feverishly” for people who can cross disciplines and tackle challenges like building a brand across media outlets, or designing smart buildings. And artists with the proper technical training can fill those gaps, he says. A theater lighting expert, say, could spend one year working to design a smart home, then develop an app and next turn to a project with Cirque du Soleil.