iStock

After protracted negotiations, Australian regulators have approved a new code of conduct for the pharmaceutical industry that requires drug makers to disclose payments made to physicians for speaking and consulting, as well as travel.

The move was largely welcomed by both the pharmaceutical industry and consumer groups, which have jousted for more than two years over specifics. Last year, for instance, the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission caused an outcry by proposing to allow doctors to opt out, which meant specific payment data for individual physicians would not have appeared. This idea has since been scrapped.

“This new transparency regime is a significant and important change to the code and focuses upon some of the most significant transfers of value,” says Jill Walker, who heads the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission, in a statement. The upgraded code must still be accepted by the pharmaceutical industry, although drug makers have until October 2016 to start reporting payments to physicians.

The upgraded code is the latest attempt to address perceived conflicts of interest amid concerns that financial ties between drug makers and physicians may unduly influence medical research and practice. In the U.S., notably, the federal government now runs a website that displays a database containing payments to physicians. It was created as part of the Affordable Care Act and debuted last fall.

In a statement, Tim James of Medicines Australia, the industry trade group, praised the revisions as a “significant step in increasing the transparency of relationships between the pharmaceutical industry and healthcare professionals… Greater transparency also increases confidence by patients that the working relationship between the industry and healthcare professionals is appropriate.”

Some were not as sanguine. The Consumers Health Forum of Australia called more detailed reporting of payments an “important step forward.” But Leanne Wells, who heads the group, also expressed concern to The Sydney Morning Herald that drug makers will not be required to report food or beverages given to physicians. She also says that a cap on the value of meals that can be paid for at $120 is problematic.

In her view, this is a “free lunch flaw,” she told the paper. “That would seem to make it possible for companies to entertain doctors to a decent meal frequently, without the matter coming to the notice of patients or the public.”

The ACC, however, believes “ongoing reporting would impose a significant administrative burden on member companies.” The regulator also says that if the lack of reporting leads to “significant and unreasonable increases in food and beverage expenditures, it may reconsider the need” for drug makers to report this type of spending.

Meanwhile, Brian Morton of the Australian Medical Association told the paper it was “insulting and naive” to suggest free meals may influence doctors. “Here we have doctors who people entrust their lives to… and we’ve got a Consumers Health Forum who says for $120 you’re going to prescribe inappropriately,” he tells the paper. “Pharmaceutical companies actually are a good source of information.”

Another consumer advocate, however, says the revised code may not be perfect, but does hold out the promise of achieving greater transparency.

“The code is good because transparency of monies paid to doctors – in cash or in kind – is likely to make some key opinion leaders think twice about being used as paid drug company spokespeople and it will also make their listeners (hopefully) more critical of their message,” says Ken Harvey, an adjunct associate professor at the Monash University School of Public Health and Preventive Medicine, who was also a consumer rep on the Medicines Australia transparency working group.

“The media is also likely to highlight the highest paid doctors which should also have a deterrent effect on such relationships,” he tells us. “And consumers will now be able to see if their specialist has financial relationships with drug companies which may have influenced the drugs they are prescribed. Unfortunately, the compromises made to get the above accepted may have produced new loopholes for drug companies to influence doctors. However, in my opinion, getting disclosure of the biggest transfers of values should outweigh any downsides.”