By Jonathan Weaver

Armstrong School District board directors will vote on at least two items at tonight’s regular business meeting: whether to hire an outside company for substitute teachers and if to approve a construction change order to the Tech Ed wing.

The six-month contract would be with Source4Teachers – which was founded in New Jersey 14 years ago – a company that would provide any necessary substitute teachers.

ASD Business Affairs Director Sam Kirk said the effort, coordinated with Assistant Superintendent Lyn Logelin, would help minimize projected district expenses toward healthcare and retirement funding for substitute teachers.

Armstrong may eventually have to be offer healthcare for anyone that works more than 30 hours per week as soon as July 1, 2015 through the Affordable Care Act.

“We have to start tracking those hours,” Kirk said. “We have over 110 substitute teachers on staff. The other (issue) is with PSERS – this year, we’re paying 21.4 percent of every dollar that goes out for retirement, and that includes substitutes. If we hired a company that outsources, they would keep track of all the hours (and) PSERS would no longer be an issue.”

Source4Teachers Business Development Director Paula Vercammen said that the company currently serves nearly 50 school districts in Pennsylvania since July 2013, including several in Westmoreland County.

The group also hopes to partner with the ARIN Intermediate Unit.

“Being a private firm, we aren’t held to the same standards of measurement a school district is. Employees that work for us are measured over a full 12-month period, whereas in a school district, where you have substitutes that don’t work during the summer months or holiday breaks, you have to credit them with for those hours worked as an average over that time,” Vercammen said.

Source4Teachers would recruit at colleges and career fairs, conduct background checks, train and manage, as well as offer positions to current Armstrong substitute teachers or other employees.

Substitutes currently make $90 per day, and Source4Teachers would charge nearly 30 percent commission.

Vercammen said there are other benefits to hiring Source4Teachers – including reducing hard and soft costs when administrators don’t have to worry about calling for substitute teachers during the morning -, with Kirk explained evens out expenses.

“It’s a relatively-break even from my analysis. We know (what the PSERS rate will be) in the future,” Kirk said. “The administrative time that would be freed up is immeasurable variable I can’t put a dollar figure on.”

Board Director Larry Robb said the past few years, regional school districts have had scrambled for substitute teachers due to multiple factors.

The change order to the technical education-wing of the new Armstrong Junior-Senior High School in Manor Township includes some-60 electrical-related items.

L.R. Kimball Project Manager Brian Hayes said the electrical contractor is all set to go with approval.

“There were ongoing changes – even to the point of things going in while decisions were being made,” Hayes said. “It’s a continuous update our engineers have tried to keep up with.”

Project Manager Roshelle Fennell also spoke on the change order.

“It was a major change to the whole suite,” Fennell said. “The teachers are very happy. It was no fault of anybody – just major changes and new equipment.”

Reynolds Construction On-Site Manager Stephen Reckhart added that teachers were not complete with their design specifications at the initial construction – which caused some of the surprise cost.

“Even though it’s not been approved, some of the things he put in were based on the change order,” Reckhart said. “He is being proactive that it will be set up. It’s been 6-8 months we’ve been trying to see what the tech education department really wants.”

School Superintendent Stan Chapp said the change order also allows for program modification and to offer the most flexibility in STEM classes in the future.

With the approval, there would be about $20,000-worth of change orders to date on the construction project, Hayes said.

In terms of the rest of the construction project, Fennell said most windows have been installed, and temporary heating will be available before a public open house of the site Saturday, November 1.

Exterior bricking will hopefully be completed by mid-November

The last section of roof – over the library – will also hopefully be completed this week. Underground storage has also begun.

“We had a really great month of September due to the great weather up there,” Fennell said.

The regular meeting begins at 7:30PM within West Hills Intermediate in East Franklin Township.