One of the truisms of politics is not only do you get the government you vote for, but you also get the government you don't vote for. This has been proven time and time again.

We need look no further for an example than the election last fall for Allentown city controller. The Lehigh County Republican Committee spent considerable time and effort to alert Allentown voters that the incumbent candidate for controller was either asleep at the switch or complicit in the "pay to play" scheme being investigated by the FBI.

That message fell on deaf ears last fall, as less than 15 percent of those registered to vote in Allentown bothered to even show up at the polls. And those who did voted overwhelmingly to re-elect someone who resigned before taking office and then pleaded guilty to felony fraud. They obviously got the government they voted for while the 85 percent of registered voters who failed to cast a ballot also got the government they didn't vote for and the controller they deserved.

It appears some Republicans are on course to repeat the same kind of mistake in this year's presidential election. Morning Call readers witnessed this in a recent Your View by former Lehigh County Republican Chairman Wayne Woodman. He stated he would not support nor vote for Donald Trump if he is the Republican nominee. Similarly, there are others in the party who say they wouldn't support Ted Cruz if he's the nominee.

As current and former chairs of the Lehigh County Republican Committee, we strongly disagree with those who say they will sit out the election and refuse to support the party's nominee. We believe that approach would guarantee that Hillary Clinton or Bernie Sanders would become president. This, in our opinion, would be a calamity for the nation that would extend far beyond just the next four or eight years.

Our country has suffered dearly these past seven years under President Obama and his feckless leadership. The economy's recovery has been at best sluggish, wages remain stagnant, and workforce participation is the lowest it's been since the '70s. This economic malaise is the direct result of the policies pursued by Obama and the Democratic Party. The Obama stimulus succeeded in only ballooning the deficit and enriching Democrat donors and public sector unions.

The Affordable Care Act, passed without a single Republican vote, makes a mockery of the word "affordable" and has complicated health care while driving up costs. More significant, it has created a drag on the economy and prevented wage growth.

Nationwide our businesses, especially the small businesses that have been the nation's engines of growth, have been increasingly burdened by mountains of stifling new regulations. Meanwhile, under the president's direction, our borders have been opened for any and all to cross. And anyone who asks if this is in our nation's interest has been labeled a bigot.

Internationally, America has adopted a policy of leading from behind. This has allowed China and Russia to fill the resultant void, thereby increasing the likelihood of conflict. The Middle East continues to spiral out of control with the rise of ISIS and the spread of terrorism throughout Europe and into the United States.

Compounding this, the president and congressional Democrats approved ill-advised deals with those who declare themselves our mortal enemies. Thanks to this shortsightedness, Iran will likely have nuclear weapons in 10 short years. Is there any doubt they will use them — either against Israel or us?

We're convinced America will continue to stagnate under a President Hillary Clinton, since she promised to deliver a "third Obama term" or decline precipitously under a President Bernie Sanders, who promotes policies that would transform America into Cuba.

For some Republicans, the choice this fall may seem to be between bad and worse. But using that as an excuse not to vote certainly guarantees the worst. This November, Americans would be wise to unite on the common goal of defeating a promised third Obama term. Dissatisfied Republicans do not have the luxury of "taking their marbles and going home." That is not a rational option, because, if they do, the nation will get the government all Republicans agree would be disastrous.

Bill Heydt is chair of the Lehigh County Republican Committee; Bob Lovett and Dean Browning are former committee chairs.