Louisville lawyer Gene F. Price, right, has been promoted to rear admiral during a recent ceremony in Washington, D.C. (Photo: Photo courtesy U.S. Navy )

Louisville lawyer Gene F. Price has been promoted to rear admiral, one of the highest ranks in the U.S. Navy Reserve.

Price, a partner in the Louisville law firm of Frost Brown Todd, was promoted recently in a ceremony at the National Museum of the U.S. Navy in Washington, D.C. The Army equivalent of a rear admiral is a major general, a two-star designation.

Price, who has served in the Navy for 27 years, is currently deputy senior inspector for the Information Dominance Corps Reserve Command in Fort Worth. He is scheduled to become deputy commander (reserve) of Fleet Cyber Command/U.S. 10th Fleet at Fort Meade, Md. early in 2015.

Price, a Louisville native, is a 1975 graduate of Doss High School, a 1980 graduate of the University of Louisville and 1988 graduate of the U of L Brandeis School of Law.

He has been a Navy Reserve intelligence officer since 1986. According to a Navy release, Price “has seen the Navy’s intelligence community grow from a relatively small community with a narrower focus into an important part of today’s Information Dominance Corps, a wide-ranging organization incorporating several related fields.”

Dominance in obtaining many types of information “has never been more important to the security of our nation,” Price said.

The Information Dominance Corps Reserve Command was created in 2010 by merging several Navy professions into a single command, including intelligence, information warfare, information professionals, cryptology, oceanography and the Space Cadre.

Price has served with Navy Reserve units around the world, including in Kosovo, Iraq and Afghanistan.

At Frost Brown Todd, he specializes in employee retirement income matters and in maritime law.

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1wV27Ff