Women in Alabama who buy health insurance on the federal exchange may face limits on prenatal care and breastfeeding education that violate the Affordable Care Act.

The National Women's Law Center studied plans in 15 states – including Alabama – and found violations in coverage for preventive care, contraception coverage, prenatal care and lactation counseling. The report found that a majority of insurance issuers studied violate provisions for women's coverage required by the Affordable Care Act.

Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama offers a plan that limits prenatal visits to six per year, despite requirements that plans not impose limits on the number of prenatal visits, according to the study. Koko Mackin, a spokesman for Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama, said prenatal visits are not limited and three routine prenatal visits are covered each year.

The insurer also covers lactation counseling up to two visits per pregnancy and three in the year after birth. The Affordable Care Act requires insurers to provide lactation counseling for the duration of breastfeeding, according to the study.

"Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Alabama's health plans, offered on and off the federal exchange, provide coverage for all preventive services required by the Affordable Care Act," Mackin wrote in an e-mail. "Blue Cross' health plans meet the ACA coverage requirements for preventive care, contraception, prenatal care and lactation."

Researchers for the National Women's Law Center only reviewed the Blue Cross Blue Shield of Alabama plan for 2015, which is one of three offered in the state. Plans offered by United HealthCare and Humana were not available.

Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, insurers could charge women higher premiums just for being women, and often excluded or charged higher rates for maternity coverage and prescription contraception, according to the center. More than six million women have signed up for insurance on marketplaces run by states and the federal government.

Updated at 10 a.m. on Thursday, April 30 to include information from Blue Cross Blue Shield and remove incorrect information about counseling for sexually transmitted infections.