Army promotes first Black surgeon general to the rank of lieutenant general; Maj. Gen. Nadja West now highest-ranking woman of any race from West Point Military Academy

FALLS CHURCH, Va. (Army News Service) – Many probably did not know that Maj. Gen. Nadja West was sworn in last Dec. 14, 2015, as the Army’s first African-American surgeon general. That’s the kind of news that generally escapes widespread media attention.

But it happened.

Then, West stepped one rung higher. Feb. 10, 2016 she made another mark in history, becoming the U.S. Army’s first Black woman to hold the rank of lieutenant general when she pinned on her third star becoming the highest-ranking woman of any race to graduate from the United States Military Academy at West Point.

When the Senate confirmed West for the position and Acting Army Secretary Eric Fanning administered the oath of office, West assumed her position in American history as the Army’s 44th surgeon general and commanding general of U.S. Army Medical Command, or MEDCOM.

West most recently served as the Joint Staff surgeon at the Pentagon.

The Army surgeon general provides advice and assistance to the Army secretary and chief of staff on all health care matters pertaining to the U.S. Army and its military health care system.

“I was once an orphan with an uncertain future” West told theGrio. “And I am incredibly honored and humbled to lead such a distinguished team of dedicated professionals who are entrusted with the care of our nation’s sons and daughters, veterans, and family members.”

West is now responsible for development, policy direction, organization and overall management of an integrated Army-wide health service system and is the medical materiel developer for the Army. These duties include formulating policy regulations on health service support, health hazard assessment and the establishment of health standards.

Dual-hatted as the MEDCOM commanding general, West oversees more than 48 medical treatment facilities providing care to nearly four million active-duty members of all services, retirees and their Family members. MEDCOM is composed of three regional health commands, the Medical Research and Materiel Command, and Army Medical Department Center and School.

West earned a bachelor of science in engineering from the U.S. Military Academy at West Point and a doctorate of medicine from George Washington University School of Medicine. She has held previous assignments as commanding general of Europe Regional Medical Command; commander of Womack Army Medical Center, Fort Bragg, N.C.; and division surgeon, 1st Armored Division, Army Europe and Seventh Army, Germany.

West hails from Washington, D.C., and finished high school at the Academy of the Holy Names in Silver Spring, Maryland.