The White House said it welcomed Monday's Supreme Court decision to let the lower courts sort out the latest challenge to Obamacare's contraception coverage requirement.

"We'll obviously continue to engage in the process; but we obviously are pleased the announcement today by the Supreme Court protects the ability of millions of women nationwide to continue to get access to their health care," White House spokesman Josh Earnest said.

Some religiously affiliated nonprofits objected to the Obama administration's tweak to Obamacare, which shields them from covering contraception and associated fines as long as these groups, such as hospitals and schools, tell their insurer or the government that they want an exemption. Those opponents say even filling out a form is still too intrusive into their religious freedom.

The Supreme Court instructed the sides to submit additional briefs to the lower courts to see if further compromise is possible.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

"The administration has put forward an accommodation that ensures that women nationwide have access to health care, including contraception coverage…while also protecting religious liberty," Earnest said. "We were committed to both principles."

Earnest said the ruling, likely forged to avoid a deadlock, shows why the Senate needs to consider Merrick Garland's nomination to the Supreme Court.

"Our concerns about the continued vacancy on the Supreme Court persist," Earnest said. "It's not obvious an additional justice would have yielded a different result ... but I haven't heard anybody make the argument that leaving the Supreme Court of the United States short staffed is somehow good for the country."