Buna brewery caught in federal bottleneck





Photo: TAMMY MCKINLEY Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 John McKissack is the man behind Texas Big Beer in Buna, Tuesday, March 13, 2012. Tammy McKinley/The Enterprise John McKissack is the man behind Texas Big Beer in Buna, Tuesday, March 13, 2012. Tammy McKinley/The Enterprise Photo: TAMMY MCKINLEY Image 2 of 2 Fans gather for a tasting party at the opening of the Texas Big Beer Brewery in Buna, Saturday, July 7, 2012.Tammy McKinley/The Enterprise Fans gather for a tasting party at the opening of the Texas Big Beer Brewery in Buna, Saturday, July 7, 2012.Tammy McKinley/The Enterprise Photo: TAMMY MCKINLEY Buna brewery caught in federal bottleneck 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

With four months still to go until Valentine's Day, local craft beer brewer John McKissack is already heartbroken.

McKissack, owner of Buna craft brewery Texas Big Beer, has been forced by the government shutdown to delay the release of two seasonal beers, including a white chocolate porter slated for Valentine's Day.

"It'll be heartbreaking because it's our highest-rated beer in brewery taste tests," McKissack said.

The government shutdown went into effect Oct. 1 after House Republican lawmakers blocked a spending budget in an effort to derail President Obama's Affordable Care Act.

Blowback from the shutdown has furloughed thousands of workers and reached as far as Antarctica, where the U.S. Antarctic research program has been halted indefinitely. Now, the effects of the shutdown have made it into American pint glasses.

Although McKissack's flagship brews will still show up on shelves and behind local bars, two of his seasonal releases may be delayed a year. Seasonal releases make up a substantial portion of the craft beer market. Fall, with its emphasis on darker beers and pumpkin-flavored brews, is often considered one of the most fertile quarters for seasonal releases.

McKissack has been waiting for label approval for a pumpkin-flavored fall seasonal that he now says will have to wait until 2014 for release. Unless the shutdown ends soon, McKissack's Valentine brew may not be available until 2015.

"It may really harm us," McKissack said. "We put a lot of money into developing this beer, and now we may have to wait a whole year to make any money off of them."