How could you create jobs in your district? Blakeman believes across-the-board tax cuts would help expand the private sector. He wants to change both the rates and brackets of the federal income tax. Rice argues that the best way to stimulate the economy is to help the middle class, especially by raising the minimum wage and supporting small businesses.

What should be done about immigration reform? Both agreed that it's "a national disgrace" that Congress has not passed comprehensive reform. Rice advocates creation of a path to citizenship for immigrants here illegally who have otherwise followed the law. Blakeman argues that legislation should secure the borders and should not grant amnesty to people here illegally.

How should the U.S. respond to Iran’s nuclear program? Rice believes that talking about war with Iran is irresponsible before all diplomatic options have been explored. Blakeman argues that Iran is "a mortal enemy" of the United States. He believes the United States should launch airstrikes against Iran if sanctions do not halt its nuclear program within 90 days.

ADVERTISEMENT ADVERTISE HERE

What do you think about the Affordable Care Act? Blakeman thinks the Affordable Care Act was "misguided" and believes that it should be repealed and replaced. In place of Obamacare, Blakeman believes we should create an assigned risk pool to allow patients with pre-existing conditions access to insurance -- similar to the way insurers provide coverage to high-risk drivers. Rice says we have a "moral imperative" to provide health care and that even though the rollout of Obamacare could have been better and that there are some improvements to be made, that the law should not be repealed.

Should the federal government intervene to mitigate climate change? Blakeman believes that conservation is wise whether or not climate change is happening. He supports policies like raising fuel efficiency standards, but opposes direct efforts to mitigate carbon emissions like a carbon tax or cap-and-trade system. Rice says that government should always push businesses like automakers "to be better and do better." She supports a carbon tax.