Before he campaigned for president of the United States, he refused to wear the pin of the American flag on his suit lapel.

After he was elected, he toured the Arab world apologizing for the “sins” of America against the Muslim nations. To be “fair and balanced” (a phrase detested by the Democrat left), he also apologized to the rest of the world for the sins of America, a la Jimmy Carter. (What is it with Democrats anyway?)

When delivering a speech at the Brandenburg Gate in Berlin after being elected, he, unlike his predecessors, John Kennedy and Ronald Reagan, faced east toward the Muslim world instead of west toward Europe and the United States. When on a state visit to Saudi Arabia, he bowed to the king of Saudi Arabia, as though giving homage to the king, a strange posture for the head of a sovereign western nation.

He refuses to use the term “Islamic State” when referencing the barbarians who behead, burn, rape, kidnap and kill anyone who doesn’t profess to be a Muslim, including children. Yet, he doesn’t hesitate to use the term Islamic State when talking about the people who commit the most atrocious crimes against humanity since the Middle Ages. It makes one wonder what the “I” stands for in the president’s acronym. And, by the way, what he does mostly is talk, the hallmark of his presidency, as when he, at the National Prayer Breakfast, condemned Christians for the Crusades, suggesting a moral equivalency with Islamic State for its inhuman atrocities.

Perhaps he needs to take a refresher course in world history.

Is Obama a Muslim? I don’t know. He represents himself as a Christian, and I will assume that he is. Besides, what if he is a Muslim? The First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution gives citizens of the United States the right to practice their religion, whatever it may be, although, obviously, if he were a professed Muslim, he would not have been elected.

The old adage, “Actions speak louder than words” may apply to his peculiar activity, but I believe other factors are at play here.

The president seems to abhor the history of the United States, a country who has freed more people than any other country in world history, notwithstanding our own dark history of slavery, admittedly our own terrible atrocity. He sees America as a colonial power, the influence of “Dreams from My Father.”

It is an America which needs to atone for its sins, thus his attempt to bring his definition of “social justice” to America by “fundamentally transforming” the country into a socialist state.

Look south, Mr. President, to see the results of the Mexican Revolution under Pancho Villa; and look at our southern border, at the people flooding in daily, to see the results of socialist transformation masquerading under the guise of democracy.

And look at our own country, Mr. President, under the influence of your administration. The transformation which you have wrought, despite your pronouncements to the contrary, has brought chaos to our economy, our world leadership, and our military.

Yes, I know, surviving the greatest recession since the Great Depression is your mantra and that of your surrogates in the Democratic Party, including our own local liberals who can find no fault with your policies. This mantra is your rationale for the dismal state of the state.

However, just as Lyndon Johnson’s Great Society brought little change to impoverished citizens, your policies have prolonged the slow growth to recovery and done nothing for the middle class, again in spite of your pronouncements to the contrary. The middle class, without your interference by ramrodding the disaster of the Affordable Care Act down the throats of the American people and throttling small businesses with excessive regulations (to say nothing of supporting environmental activists who believe insects and plants are more important than people) would have been able to recover on its own.

As Ronald Reagan said, “The most frightening words in the English language are ‘I’m from the government, and I’m here to help.’”

A recent letter to the editor in the Amarillo Globe-News asked whether we can survive another two years of Obama’s presidency.

Yes we can, because the Constitution of the United States is more powerful than Obama, even though he has done all he can to destroy it. After all, socialism cannot survive without a dictator, a role that he has assumed. If he had retained control of both houses of Congress during his second term, he would likely have pursued removing the two-term limit of the presidency.

We can thank the God of all, including Muslim and Christian, that the people of these United States elected a Republican Congress in 2014. And we can thank God for the Constitution of the United States despite those who ignore the influence of a deity. God is great.

Carl Fowler is a retired professor of English at Amarillo College and lives in Amarillo.