Average wait times;

Staff turnover, which could be an indication of poor management or a doctor who's difficult to work with; and

Cancellation and rescheduling policies.

Doctor shortages. Changing health plans. Physician retirements. Hospital network and insurance consolidations. All are making it necessary for many Americans to find a new primary-care physician or specialist.With open enrollment for health insurance plans just weeks away, millions of Americans will find themselves looking for a new doctor this fall, experts say.Stephanie Haridopolos, M.D., a board-certified family practitioner in Melbourne, Fla., notes that it’s not a decision to be taken lightly. In fact, it may be single most important step you can make to boost your health. A physician who knows you and your medical history well can best guide you good health decisions.“A good patient-doctor relationship can help improve the quality of care by … giving the physician a better understanding of the ‘big picture’ and how to help [you] improve: mind, body, and spirit,” Dr. Haridopolos tells Newsmax Health.“It is increasingly difficult for patients to find doctors … and it is likely to get worse, not better, as millions more gain health insurance under the [Patient Protection and] Affordable Care Act,” she adds. “The medical field has long been fretting about an upcoming doctor shortage.”So if you have to make a switch, what’s the best way to find a good doctor? Four key strategies can help you find a great doctor, according to Dr. Haridopolos and other experts.The best way to find a good doctor is ask family and friends whom they use and trust. “People who find their physicians through someone they trust — a friend, a family member, or another doctor — [have] the most favorable experiences,” Dr. Haridopolos advises.Medical research bears her out. Nearly three-fourths of patients use the opinions of friends and family members when choosing a doctor, according to the recent Altarum Institute Survey of Consumer Health Care Opinions, an annual survey on consumer beliefs and health care practices.Once you have several recommended practitioners, check their names against the list providers in your insurance network.Online doctor-rating sites — like vitals.com or zocdoc.com — can also be a resource, but be aware that these are not always reliable. Still, they may be worth a look to see what other patients have said about any prospective doctors you are considering.Check with your health insurer for doctors and hospitals that are part of your network. “If you have health insurance, you may need to choose a doctor in their plan,” Dr. Haridopolos notes. “See if your insurance company has a Website you can use to search for a local doctor who accepts your plan and is affiliated with a hospital that your insurance covers.”Seeing a doctor outside of your insurance network can cost three times as much or more as the standard $30 copay with an in-network doctor.Once you’ve settled on a doctor, be sure to check out his or her background, training, and licensing. Visit to your state health department’s Website, which provides patient and consumer resources to help.“Look for a doctor who is board-certified and affiliated with a reputable hospital,” Dr. Haridopolos advises.If your research checks out, all the doctor’s manager or the front desk, and ask about office policies and the physician’s general philosophy. Does the doctor require office visits for every consultation, or are phone and e-mail communications sometimes OK? Does he or she prefer patient involvement, or not?Also, make sure you ask about:When you’ve identified a doctor you think you’ll like, schedule a pre-exam interview to learn more about his or her style of medicine, approach, bedside, manner, and how well you get along. Treat the meeting like a job interview.“You can find out some key details about a prospective doctor just by calling him/her,” Dr. Haridopolos notes. “When you are choosing a doctor, look for someone who treats you with respect; listens to your opinions and concerns; encourages you to ask questions; [and] explains things in ways you can understand.”She also recommends asking a series of key questions during a first meeting with a doctor:• How long will it take to get an appointment?• How long do appointments usually last?• Is the doctor part of a group practice (and who are the other doctors)?• Who will see you if the doctor isn’t available?• Which hospital does the doctor use?• Can you get lab work and X-rays done in the office?• What is the office’s cancellation policy?• If you have a medical condition, does the doctor have experience treating it?• If you are more comfortable speaking to a doctor in a language besides English, is there a doctor or nurse who speaks that language?• Does the doctor offer evening or weekend appointments?• How long will you have to wait for an appointment?• Does the doctor keep paper or electronic medical records?• Does the doctor take questions by e-mail?