The University of Arizona College of Medicine in downtown Phoenix could lose its accreditation if it does not fix some of its governing policies. (Photo: Tom Tingle/The Republic) Story Highlights An accrediting agency says UA College of Medicine-Phoenix needs governance changes.

The Phoenix school must update accreditors by Dec. 1 in order to retain accreditation.

University of Arizona representatives say that fixes are in the works.

An accrediting body has warned the University of Arizona College of Medicine-Phoenix that without fixes to governing policies it could face more severe restrictions or lose its status as an independent medical school.

The Liaison Committee on Medical Education sent an 11-page letter to University of Arizona President Ann Weaver Hart this summer warning of potential adverse actions such as probation or a loss of accreditation for the university’s downtown Phoenix medical school, which anchors the Phoenix Biomedical Campus.

The UA medical school in Phoenix secured the organization’s “preliminary” accreditation in July 2012, which allowed 80 students to begin their first-year classes at the newly accredited campus. The medical school opened in 2007 as a branch campus of the UA College of Medicine, which has had a Tucson medical school for a half-century.

The Phoenix campus was seeking “provisional” accreditation, a mid-tier status before the Liaison Committee grants full accreditation. But the committee in June did not advance the Phoenix school’s standing, instead putting the program on “warning” status.

The Liaison Committee cited four standards that the Phoenix medical school failed to meet — or at least make enough progress on — and three standards that the organization will monitor to ensure compliance. The accrediting body also noted the Phoenix medical school’s strengths, such as a simulation laboratory, learning spaces and support programs for students.

The medical school’s dean must submit a progress report by Dec. 1 detailing fixes. The Phoenix medical school also must demonstrate progress toward compliance by June 2016 or the accrediting body “may impose probation or may take an adverse action, defined by the LCME as withdrawal of accreditation,” the organization said in the letter.

The U.S. Department of Education recognizes the Liaison Committee as the accrediting body for medical education programs that offer an M.D. degree.

Community leaders familiar with the issues urged the University of Arizona to address the accrediting organization’s concerns.

“It would seem to me this should be treated as an issue of the highest importance,” said James H. Lundy, CEO of Alliance Bank of Arizona and past chairman of the Greater Phoenix Economic Council. “It’s a situation that needs to be remedied and certainly should be remedied in the time frame set in the letter.”

Officials at UA said they are working to address the accrediting organization’s findings and have hired a consultant, PricewaterhouseCoopers, to make required improvements.

“This is akin to an ‘incomplete’ on a grade in school,” said Judy Bernas, UA’s associate vice president of university relations. “We have some work to do, but we can get it done and progress to the next level.”

Two of the four areas of non-compliance highlighted by the Liaison Committee involve issues that followed Banner Health’s $1 billion-plus merger with the University of Arizona Health Network:

•The accrediting body’s standards define a medical school dean’s authority and responsibility. But the 30-year affiliation agreement between Banner Health and the university has the “potential to limit the traditional authority of the dean to ensure the availability of resources” needed by the medical school, the Liaison Committee letter said.

•The Liaison Committee also questioned how the Banner-UA deal could impact the medical school’s authority in forging training opportunities for students. The medical school’s existing relationships with hospitals and other health providers can be terminated as of February 2019 under the Banner-UA agreement. Any new academic agreement with hospitals or other health-care providers would require the approval of a six-member academic-management council that consists of three appointees from both Banner and the university, but no appointees from the Phoenix medical school.

A Banner Health spokesman said the Phoenix-based health-care system will work with the medical school as it moves toward full accreditation.

Earlier this year, Phoenix-based Banner Health struck a deal to acquire the UA Health Network’s two hospitals in Tucson and to partner with the UA College of Medicine. As part of that deal, Banner Health agreed to contribute $261 million to an academic-enhancement fund that would distribute $20 million each year to recruit faculty and develop programs at the UA’s medical school campuses in Tucson and Phoenix.

The Liaison Committee also said that the medical school has had several vacant leadership positions since 2010. That absence of these department chairs, particularly in branches of medicine that are competitive for students seeking medical-training opportunities, may “disadvantage students seeking careers in these disciplines,” the letter said.

The accrediting body also said that the Phoenix medical school’s bylaws allow an admissions committee without a majority of faculty members to vet applications from prospective medical students. The Liaison Committee requires faculty members to make up the majority of voting members at such meetings.

The Phoenix medical school complies with three other areas that will be subject to ongoing monitoring. Those areas involve diversity among students, faculty and staff; financial aid and debt-management programs for students; and long-term and financial resources to support medical education.

UA officials said that the university is working to address all aspects spelled out in the accrediting body’s review of the medical school. For example, the university will soon launch a search to fill vacant leadership positions or appoint interim leaders. Of the 22 academic chair positions, 10 have vacancies, Bernas said.

The medical school drafted updates to its bylaws to meet the Liaison Committee standards. Faculty must approve those bylaw updates in a vote scheduled next month.

“There is no mystery,” Stuart Flynn, dean of the Phoenix medical school, said. “We know exactly what they expect.”

Dan Hunt, co-secretary of the Liaison Committee, said he could not discuss his organization’s report on the UA College of Medicine-Phoenix. But he said the most difficult step typically is obtaining preliminary accreditation, because that allows a school to accept students.

Hunt said his organization has denied several medical schools seeking approval for preliminary accreditation. However, all schools that have received preliminary accreditation have progressed to full accreditation.

“That doesn’t mean there couldn’t be an exception to that in the future,” Hunt said. “All schools have progressed, some a little faster, some a little slower.”

The Arizona Board of Regents also anticipates that UA officials will provide an update on the Phoenix medical school’s efforts next month, Regent Rick Myers said.

“The regents and the university are absolutely committed to its success,” Myers said of the Phoenix medical school. “If there is something we need to do, we will do what it takes to make sure it is successful.”

ON THE BEAT

Ken Alltucker covers health care as a member of The Arizona Republic’s watchdog team. He has written about the Affordable Care Act, consumer health, insurance, prescription drugs and hospitals.

How to reach him

ken.alltucker@arizonarepublic.com

Phone: 602-444-8285

Twitter: @kalltucker

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1Ej4Tfb