Elizabeth Warren Cheers on Bernie Sanders

Elizabeth Warren is Rooting for Bernie

By CHRIS JOHNCOX

With only three Republicans and two Democrats in the race to the party’s nomination for President of the United States, the fighting is getting even more ugly and even more polarized. Each of the prominent party members are picking sides, throwing their weight behind what many believe is the lesser of two evils. However, there’s occasionally whole-hearted support from one figure to another, rare as it is. One such outcropping of support came from Elizabeth Warren– to candidate Bernie Sanders.

This isn’t to say Warren endorses Sanders, per se. She has been hesitant to endorse anyone, though that could soon change. It’s possible Warren does not outright endorse Sanders because she does not want to anger the Clinton supporting establishment Democrats, an unwise move if she chose to run in the future. Warren has, however, praised Sanders exclusively at several points, recently and in the past.

I’m glad @BernieSanders is out there fighting to hold big banks accountable, make our economy safer, & stop the GOP from rigging the system. — Elizabeth Warren (@elizabethforma) January 6, 2016

Shortly after, Warren made this tweet, making sure to include every Democratic candidate this time:

I’m glad that ALL the Dem candidates for president – @HillaryClinton, @BernieSanders & @MartinOMalley – are fighting for Wall St reform. — Elizabeth Warren (@elizabethforma) January 6, 2016

More recently, when asked if Sanders should drop out of the race, Warren wasn’t dismissive of the Senator from Vermont. Instead, she was enthused that Sanders is still running against Clinton. From The Boston Globe:

‘‘He’s out there. He fights from the heart. This is who Bernie is… He has put the right issues on the table both for the Democratic Party and for the country in general so I’m still cheering Bernie on.’’

Warren did say both Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders would make better presidents than any Republican candidates.

Follow Chris on Twitter