Older Americans are assets that, since the end of the Clinton administration, poor economic policy has failed to maximize, says former Reagan economic adviser Arthur Laffer. Points chatted with the famed supply-side economist, who was in North Texas last week to speak to senior professionals on these and other issues. This is a longer version of the Q&A that appear in the print Points section.

What are the implications of older workers in society?

I look at the economy slightly differently than other economists. They look at it in terms of demand, at what are the consumption patterns, what will be the demand and what will be the different products produced. I look at the world from the standpoint of supply-side. From the supply side, when you have older workers in this society, you ask what more could they produce than if they were not to be working? I think this increases the production potential of the United States enormously, especially when you get high-skill workers living a lot longer.

I’m in my 70s and full-time working today, just the way I’ve always done. I don’t notice any diminution whatsoever. My dad, on the other hand, who was a very top skilled worker and head of one of the top companies in the country, retired at age 65, and he really needed to retire.

What it has done is allow our capital stock to stay in use far longer and even be more efficacious.

Is there an appreciation of that? There are mandatory corporate retirement ages and the sense is that as we live longer, we become a greater strain on societal resources.

I think that stuff is nonsense. The existence of older Americans is a huge resource for additional production to alleviate need want hardship and poverty. I think the existence of older workers is one of the biggest pluses you can imagine. Let me take the extreme position and assume that everyone dies at age 18. What kind of society and production would you have then? You are talking about really highly skilled people who will stay on the job and be happy doing it for many more years.

Aren't Gen Xers, Gen Yers and aging boomers competing for jobs?

What you have is a government of the U.S. over the last 13 years — I include W. and Obama together (because) to me they aren’t that different — that have done all the policies incorrectly. What they have done is cause a really slow growth economy where you have a shortage of jobs and people disincentivized to produce. Therefore, you have very large numbers of unemployed, underemployed or not in the labor force. It seems to them that other people are taking their jobs, but it is just not true. The jobs just don’t exist, and it is because of very bad economic policies taking away the incentive to work.

But there is a debt side of the equation, such as the challenges of Social Security and Medicare and the high cost of the final 10 years of our lives?

That’s all true, but the reason there is a high cost to the last 10 years of life is that you’re not paying your own money. If you are on your death bed and could spend all of your inheritance to your grandchildren to extend your life another six months, would you do it? No, you would make sure your grandkids had that to go forward. When it is someone else’s money — well yeah, let’s go for it. We’ve removed the incentive, the skin in the game, from all of our systems, which is outrageous. It’s the incentives that matter on whether you dissipate your wealth trying to extend your life for another six months.

The idea of having retirement accounts and medical accounts make perfect sense. But there has to be some safety net in there for Americans. I would require catastrophic insurance for every American. For a really big event that would bankrupt the family — something where we have a pooling of interests and the events are not predictable. Then there needs to be transparency, truth in labeling.

I love the role the government plays in respect to cigarettes. I think people should be apprised of the health damages — as well as other products, too. I think the government has a right and a responsibility to make sure that people are informed as to what is going on. And finally, you can’t have Typhoid Mary teach the kindergarten class. That is a perfect role for the state to play — inoculations and that kind of stuff. And lastly, if someone is really poor, of course, you will have a free health clinic, and a homeless shelter and a soup kitchen for the guy. But other than those three things, get the government the hell out of health.

So Obamacare has worsened the challenge of the longevity economy?

Obamacare is a catastrophe. Whenever you give away valuable resources, you are going to run out of money and you’re going to go bankrupt. They are giving away healthcare benefits so they are going to have to allocate or ration them some other way. Remember the gas lines in the 1970? The government was selling gas below the market clearing price and we had long lines You’ve seen what has happened with the Veterans Affairs. They’ve given away all this health care and they have way too many patients. It is disgusting, but that is to be expected whenever you give away valuable resources.

But I am struggling with this notion that has been drummed into our heads that once we reach a certain age, we become a drain.

But that’s just not true. Once you reach a certain level of incapacity, you become a drain. But it is not years based. Sixty-five is not age everyone becomes incapacitated. In fact, as time goes on, the later and later the years go on before incapacitation occurs. Without increasing the number of people, we’ve increased the labor force enormously.

What needs to change in policy?

We need to get a low flat tax. We can’t discriminate against people who work and earn income. I mean low-rate, flat and broad based so you provide people with the least incentive to evade, avoid or otherwise not report taxable income. And you need to provide them with the least places to put their income to avoid taxation. Then you need spending restraint. You know the tooth fairy no longer works at the U.S. Treasury. Every dollar the government spends it takes from someone else in the form of debt or taxes. It is a double-entry accounting system. Government spending is taxation — period. Nothing can bring the economy to its knees faster than high inflation and high interest rates. And then you need free trade. We would be foolish in the extreme if we didn’t sell them things we do better than they do in exchange for those things they make better than we do.

Now you know you’ll get push back from a lot of people, specifically on free trade and Ross Perot’s “great sucking sound” of jobs going offshore?

I know, I know, but what a stupid argument that is. You know without China here is no Wal-mart and without Wal-mart there is no middle class or lower class prosperity. China is our biggest ally not our biggest enemy. And foreigners are not our problem.

So what about immigration reform?

Immigrants are an enormously positive influence to the U.S. because they are high quality workers at a very low cost. Putting them into the legal immigrant roles will well take a lot of advantages away from them as far as contributing to society. I don’t believe illegal immigrants are any different than we are except that they aren’t eligible for a lot of the welfare programs that we have and they don’t avail themselves really of a lot of the taxes we pay, and that makes all the difference in the world to their productivity. There is a movie — A Day Without a Mexican — it shows you really how important they are to our society that there is really an unfettered, un-government controlled segment of our economy that really performs well.

How does the United States stack up with the rest of the world in terms of the longevity economy?

We’ve done very poor job, say since 2000, of creating an economy that can exploit the advantages of older, well-educated, highly-skilled workers because we have run the economy badly and so have a number of other countries. But let me tell you a country that has done really well — China. The change in China from 1980 to the present is the biggest reduction of poverty the world has ever seen from the beginning of mankind to the present. It is absolutely astounding what China has done in regard to supply side economics. They have reduced the number of products that go though state-run enterprises from 97 percent down to 22 percent or something. Free trade, sound money and tax cuts — look what it has done for them.

They are still very much a hybrid society — one part capitalism and two parts communism, right?

It used to be 9.5 parts communism and half-part capitalism. Now it is eight parts capitalism and two parts communism. Now they don’t have democracy so I’m not going to argue with you on that one. I’m not sure democracy is a great economic instrument. It is great in a lot of other ways but not in economics.

There are 50-plus folks who have been laid off and unable to find jobs.

That is all Obama and W. It really is. During our term in office with Reagan, that wasn’t the case. During Clinton, that wasn’t the case. People were scrambling to find good workers. Now there are good workers all over the place trying to find the one job that comes available. It is tragic what has happened with their macroeconomic policies. That has nothing to do with entrepreneurial sprint. It has to do with bad economics in Washington. And we have seen that happen time and time again. You remember the group Johnson, Nixon, Ford and Carter? I used to refer to them as the Four Stooges — the largest assemblage of bipartisan ignorance ever put on planet Earth. I thought that was the biggest until I found W and Obama coming together.

Are you hopeful nation will move toward supply-side economics, a flat tax and an incentive-based society?

The highest marginal income tax rate in 1944-1945 was what — 92.5 percent. Then Harry Truman cut it to 91. Jack Kennedy cut it from 91 to 70. Ronald Reagan cut it from 70 to 28. We’ve had a blip back up with George H.W. Bush on through Obama. We are just about ready to start on a real growth path in cutting tax and broadening the base again. I am ecstatic about what is going to happen in the next 10 years.

If Ronald Reagan had been elected in 1976, you would have seen a very different Ronald Reagan than the one who was elected in 1980. In all honesty, it took a Jimmy Carter to create Ronald Reagan. You cannot imagine the great president who will follow Barack Obama. I think the elections in 2016 will be very pro-growth agenda. and we will come out of the 16 years of doldrums with W. and Obama and get a period once again of incredible economic growth.

If I were to say to you there needs to be a federal senior policy, what would you say to me?

Leave us alone. (laughing)

This Q&A was conducted and condensed by editorial writer Jim Mitchell. His email address is jmitchell@dallasnews.com. Arthur Laffer can be reached at arthur.laffer@fortegroupinc.com.