3-minute interview: Gerry Wevodau, president, Wevodau Insurance & Benefit Strategies Inc., Camp Hill.









Q: Describe the culture at your company,

A: We partner with our clients for shared success and provide unique services to enhance our experience with each client. We provide honest straightforward information even when the news is not what a client wants to hear.

Q: As a business that helps small businesses find employee benefits particularly health insurance, how has the Affordable Care Act affected what you do?

A: It’s been challenging educating and informing business owners and HR professionals about the Affordable Care Act changes and simplifying a complex set of regulation on how it affects them and their employees. However, we have stepped up communication and have a resource center to help small businesses navigate what affects their business and employees with regard to the Affordable Care Act.

Q: What advice would you give to a new entrepreneur when it comes to setting up insurance and other benefits for their new business?



A: They should seek out the advice and service of a qualified and experienced professional now more than ever to navigate the system. Gone are the days when an insurance agent could dabble in the health insurance industry. They need to seek out a company who focuses on employee benefits and specializes in healthcare reform.

Q: What advice would you give someone who aspires to open their own business?



A: Make a plan, work your plan and let no one discourage you. Take advice from others who have been there and stay humble enough to always be learning.

Q: What is the most fun part of your job?



A: The people, both clients and co-workers. If you find something you love doing and partner with quality people, you will never work another day in your life.



If you would like to be considered for a 3-minute interview and answer a few questions about your experiences and insights as a business or non-profit leader, please send us an e-mail to durie@pennlive.com and in the subject area please include "3-minute interview."

You can find Trade Talk, Central Pennsylvania Business Awards, 3-minute interviews and Midstate Real Estate Transactions and Business Openings at www.pennlive.com/business.