The nursing shortage may not be as bad as once thought, but it is still manifesting itself in alarming ways.

In Florida, the population is growing fast enough that it recently surpassed New York to become the third most populous state. The resulting increase in demand is contributing to a growing shortage of RNs, currently about 12,500 nurses, according to a report from the Florida Center for Nursing.

A related Tampa Bay Times article, describes how experts “are particularly troubled” by the statistic showing that the number of vacancies has increased more than 30 percent since 2013. And another 9,947 nursing positions are expected to be created in 2016.

"We're entering turbulent waters," Dianne Morrison-Beedy, dean of the University of South Florida College of Nursing, told the newspaper. "It's no longer like a tide coming in. It's a nursing shortage tsunami."

Of course, hospitals aren’t sitting on their hands; some are adding residency programs for nurse specialties in a bid to attract and retain their valued nurses.

Show me the evidence

Despite a perceived growing need for evidence-based practices, many hospitals could be doing more to promote their use, according to a survey of 276 chief nurse executives.

The survey, published online by Worldviews on Evidence-based Nursing, found that more than half of the CNEs reported that “evidence-based care is practiced in their organization ‘not at all’ or only ‘somewhat,’ ” according to a news release from The Ohio State University, which led the research. In addition, when asked to list their organization’s top three priorities, quality and safety ranked first and second, while evidence-based practice was ranked among the lowest, according to OSU.

A Very Decent Proposal

The sincerity and enthusiasm of a five-year-old leukemia patient at Rady Children’s Hospital in San Diego was felt with full force by a nurse at Rady who is helping with the patient’s care.

Gideon Robinson was so taken with the care of one of his nurses, that he proposed marriage to the caregiver, identified in the TV station KTLA's online article as Sarah. Gideon calls her "Tall Sarah.”.

His mom, in an accompanying video, says she helped with the ring and the concept of proposing, but it was all on Gideon to decide to do so on bended knee. The proposal drew tears from the staff on hand for the proposal.

Follow Gideon’s story on his Facebook page, “Adventures of Iron Gideon.”