An Oklahoma City man is in jail this evening, accused of repeatedly exposing himself to his neighbors and performing lewd acts right in front of them.

In his arrest warrant, Oklahoma City police say his actions were cause for great concern, especially based on his past.

Jeffrey Lorne Jenkins, 51, has been arrested more than a dozen times for stalking, peeping in windows and threatening an act of violence.

Now, he's being held on $200,000 bond accused of indecent exposure.

Jenkins has lived in the northwest Oklahoma City neighborhood of Military Park near N.W. 33rd and Pennsylvania Avenue for years.

"The neighborhood is a much safer place now that he's gone," Waneka Callahan said.

She and her 4-year-old son live right across the street, and she says Jenkins tried to lure her son over to his home on more than one occasion.

"He wanted my son to see his dogs, and I was like no, no, absolutely no," Callahan said.

5/23/14 Related Story: OKC Man Charged With Three Counts Of Indecent Exposure



Jenkins stands accused of exposing himself to neighbors outside his bathroom window - with his blinds wide open - and shining a light in front of his body.

Last year, he was convicted of peeping into a neighbor's window but received a suspended sentence.

He also received a suspended sentence when he pleaded guilty to stalking another neighbor almost four years ago.

Neighbor Dwight Sulc has known Jenkins for 15 years.

"He's always been an even handed man with me, when he's on his medication," said Dwight Sulc. "I just know from his mother that he suffers from mental illness."

Jenkins' arrest warrant states back in 2009 he was banned from Barnes and Noble bookstore near N.W. 63rd and May Avenue, as well as another bookstore a couple of miles away for approaching and watching kids in the store.

Callahan says that doesn't surprise her at all.

"I've seen him watching other children in the neighborhood."

Callahan says now she can sleep a little easier now knowing he is back behind bars and hopefully not getting out any time soon.

The arrest warrant states police fear Jenkins is exhibiting escalating predatory behavior, and the judge felt it necessary to put him behind bars and request a high bond.