Officials: The merger that's creating Banner-University Medicine has the potential to transform care nationwide.

Then-University of Arizona medical student Sarah (Whitley) Coles examines Don Van Camp in 2011. She has since completed her residency and works at Banner Good Samaritan Medical Center in Phoenix. (Photo: David Wallace/The Republic) Story Highlights University of Arizona Health Network and Banner Health are merging on Feb. 27

The new network will be anchored by academic medical centers in Tucson and Phoenix

We aim to produce lots of quality doctors and provide better care at lower costs

In a few days, the merger of the University of Arizona Health Network into Banner Health will be complete.

On Feb. 27, UA Health Network will become part of Banner, and the long-term partnership with the University of Arizona Colleges of Medicine in Phoenix and Tucson will be reflected in a new name for this statewide academic enterprise: Banner–University Medicine.

RELATED: Regents approve merger

The creation of a private-public partnership of this magnitude and scale is a tremendously complex endeavor. Few private-public partnerships such as ours exist, so there was no "blueprint" we could follow.

But the primary focus that helped drive and join our organizations through long hours of sometimes challenging negotiations was the vision that this merger and partnership could bring long-term and important benefits to the people of Arizona.

It has the potential to transform academic medicine in the U.S.

Over the next 30 years the population of Arizona will increase significantly. At the same time, the gradual aging of the population will continue. As a result, the need for doctors will increase.

During this same time period, through the thick and thin of lean state budgets and ample ones, this agreement will bring $40 million a year to support the UA Colleges of Medicine in Phoenix and Tucson. This funding source, combined with continued support of the state, will ensure a steady supply of quality physicians to care for Arizona's citizens.

OUR VIEW: Doctor education gets a booster shot

Banner–University Medicine will be anchored by academic medical centers in Tucson and Phoenix. These centers will serve as catalysts for a significant gathering of physicians, researchers and professionals who support them.

We anticipate that this will result in corridors of health care-related commerce, attracting highly skilled workers into high-paying jobs. Clearly, these centers hold strong potential to serve as powerful economic drivers for local communities and the state.

Peter S. Fine (Photo: handout)

There is growing evidence that the real transformation of our health-care system — a system that provides better care and improved service at lower costs — will be found in two areas that haven't been the focus of the Affordable Care Act.

One is the over-usage of costly medical services. The other is the linkage of medical provider organizations with private and government insurers in models of care that successfully utilize population health management.

Through highly coordinated care, population health management seeks to improve care, reduce unnecessary and duplicated medical services, and better manage the care of complex, chronic patients — all at a lower cost. This is transformation.

We are convinced that our private/public partnership will help play a lead role in the transformation of health care in our state and beyond. The academic rigor of Arizona's premier medical education program will be combined with the clinical delivery excellence and population health know-how of the state's leading health system.

Ann Weaver Hart (Photo: handout)

This is a formula that can elevate both the quality and management of care for our state's citizens, along with the reputation of Arizona as a national leader in health care.

As we prepare for our launch into this exciting future that will reshape the health-care landscape of our state, we want to express our gratitude to three groups of visionary leaders that were instrumental in helping to move this merger forward:

We are grateful to the Arizona Board of Regents for their approval on behalf of the University of Arizona and to the Banner Health Board of Directors for their insightful focus on the transformation of health care. Finally, we are grateful for the leadership and courage of UA Health Network's Board of Directors, who guided the transition of their organization into Banner Health.

Peter S. Fine is president and CEO of Banner Health. Ann Weaver Hart is president of the University of Arizona.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1AaIpbG