A new health insurer has sprouted up in a market segment where others have stumbled of late in the form of Denver-based Canopy Health Insurance (unveiled earlier this month as Melody Health Insurance (HPW 3/21/16, p. 7)). The new player wants to be known as the go-to insurer for traditionally hard-to-reach young consumers on- and off-Affordable Care Act (ACA) exchanges in two metropolitan areas: Las Vegas and Cheyenne, Wyo.

While major insurers like UnitedHealth Group, and smaller startups from the world of Consumer Operated and Oriented Plans (CO-OPs), have either suffered hundreds of millions of dollars in losses from ACA markets (HPW 1/25/16, p. 1) or failed outright (HPW 3/21/16, p. 7), the Canopy model is to zero in on a specific age group (young adults) and share risk with reinsurers.

Starting this fall for the 2017 open-enrollment period, Sal Gentile, the CEO of Canopy, tells HPW his new carrier has a target of wooing 30,000 individual-market enrollees to its exclusive provider organization (EPO) products. Though classified as high-deductible health plans (HDHPs), the EPOs will seek to entice consumers with affordable prices and unusual first-dollar benefit designs, like free first-time doctor visits and prescription drugs. Premium rates and deductible levels will not be released by the company for at least a few months.

Gentile and Canopy co-founder and Chief Operating Officer David Pinkert have worked mainly at TriZetto Corp. over the last decade and-a-half, giving them a foundation in the health information technology side of the business. The itch to move on from TriZetto (which Gentile first did for a two-month stint as CEO of Web portal platform Healthx at the end of 2014 into 2015) is a result of the opportunity the ACA presents, and with it the added challenge of reaching a tough sell for insurers: younger adults, Gentile says.

“This is an opportunity to bring affordable health insurance to people who largely get ignored in the system, which are the younger, healthier population,” he explains. “Health care tends to be for the sick, so the young healthy ones are subsidizing sick people, or they are individuals who sit it out altogether because they don’t see value in the system. We aim to correct that by bringing in an affordable product now that young healthys can opt out of their group insurance and buy products on an open exchange with a competitive price. Or if sitting it out, our goal is to bring them value.”

Canopy, which will be available through its own website and broker channels, has a lot of work to do in building a brand quickly not only in its two selected original markets, but also across the country as the company expands.

“There are plenty of competitors. Every Blue Cross and Blue Shield plan, United, Aetna….These are all big brand names,” he says. There are also upstarts like Oscar Health, but Gentile stresses that the difference between his insurer and all the others is focus. “They don’t offer products exclusively to this market space. They offer a broader product, mostly group product because that is where a majority of the members are and Medicare and Medicaid. We aim to purposely build products and networks and tools to manage the system that are directly aimed at this core group of people,” he adds.

Reaching the Young Is Not a Simple Task

But how does a new insurer attract the young and healthy? “Therein lies the challenge,” Gentile says. “We definitely believe that first and foremost this is a cost-driven market, so we intend to be very price-conscious about the product we put in front of them. But at the end of the day it has to have value at any price. And this will start with a purpose-built network that may look like a narrow network at a statewide level, but where they live and work it would actually have a fairly robust network and have features and designs for them at the stage of life they are in.”

As an example, Canopy may appear to a young, healthy person as a stop-loss product in a self-insured company. “They will have a high deductible, but they will get some basic services provided for. And if something really goes wrong, they won’t go bankrupt, they have health insurance,” he continues. “We will give them tools to navigate beyond what is in the marketplace today. Things like cost calculators and geo-locators for physicians in network to help navigate and manage the costs and tools pointing to the best pharmacy in terms of price for a particular drug script they get,” Gentile says.

Unlike other startups in the health care industry, Canopy has what Gentile calls a unique funding and risk structure. Yes, he says, outside capital is being raised. And with the assistance of Nashville-based investment bankers Silvermark Partners LLC, the then-Melody Health said in December it raised $3.8 million in seed money from investors led by Eduardo Cruz, the CEO of ARS Humano, a health insurer based in the Dominican Republic.

“But the other thing we have done that is a little bit unique in the health insurance business is we are partnering with reinsurance companies, and they actually take some of the risk, in our case at least 50% and up to 80% of the actual medical risk,” he says. “And in doing so the risk-based capital requirements for the health insurance company get offset by that exact percentage. It would normally take a lot of capital to start a health insurance company, but we have done it this way instead of raising as much money from venture capital, which is very dilutive. The money sits there on a balance sheet, while we are utilizing the reinsurance contracts.”

Other parts of the Canopy story also stand out, like the choice of Las Vegas and Cheyenne for its first two markets. Gentile says these two launch sites offered concentrated numbers of the 26- to 39-year-olds most attractive to the insurer, along with centralized, competitive provider networks in close distance to population centers. Added to these demographics were the states each city is in and the regulatory framework of the marketplaces. “One reason we went to Nevada, for instance, is they have only had three brands in its exchange. In the face of all the bad news about ACA exchanges, Nevada regulators were welcoming to someone with a rational idea,” he says.

Another feature to the early Canopy story that has raised eyebrows is the fact two of its most recent and senior executive hires come from the world of failed CO-OPs. Canopy’s president of Western markets is the former CEO of the Nevada Health CO-OP and Arizona’s Meritus Health Plans, Tom Zumtobel, and Chief Marketing Officer Tracy Faigin served as CMO for Colorado HealthOP.

Gentile says judging the importance of the CO-OP backgrounds “is in the eye of the beholder,” but considering the success each of these executives had in doing their jobs in enrolling members, it appears good for Canopy’s future success. “We are looking for people who have been exclusively focused on consumers. For instance, Tracy Faigin, our CMO, was wildly successful in driving 85,000 members to the Colorado CO-OP in just two years. The downside for them was financial. They had a bad partner in the federal government, who pulled the rug out from under them,” he says. “We will mimic much of that [success,] and we will have better financial partners.”

© 2016 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

The AIS E-Savings Club offers regular opportunities to buy AIS products and services at substantial savings. Click here to see the current specials — including $250 off a subscription to Health Plan Week.