AUSTIN — Much of Rick Perry’s legacy stems from the fact that it’s hard to remember when he wasn’t governor.

In 2000, he was a lieutenant governor who won a promotion when his predecessor left for the White House. And then he beat all political comers, becoming the first governor to win three four-year terms.

He crushed the century-old truism of a constitutionally weak governor because no one envisioned one executive owning every appointment in every agency for more than a decade. And while Perry didn’t place the oil under the Texas soil, he relentlessly sold the economy that it helped foster. He slashed regulations and hawked the state as a place that smells like freedom and tastes like apple pie, pushing to keep it at the top in job creation and population growth.

“We’re a dynamic, growing state,” Perry said in an interview with The Dallas Morning News. “Did we get it all done? No. But I think we made extraordinary progress.”

Texas’ 47th governor will be remembered as the longest-serving chief executive who led a time of economic boom, even as the rest of the nation sank under a recession, observers said. But they add that his legacy also likely will reflect a shortsightedness.

While growth was the ballyhooed golden child, the state’s infrastructure and public education systems were its stepchildren, left to shoulder the brunt with hardly a nod to the increasing burden of a booming, changing population.

Perry obviously now has his sights set on another presidential race, using his economic credentials as a starting block. He is impatient with the notion of an epilogue when there is more he wants to write.

“Legacy’s going to be what the legacy’s going to be,” he said, adding: “If there was anything of great concern or note that I felt I hadn’t accomplished, I would have run for re-election.”

Four more years? With Perry’s political skills, it would have been entirely possible.

“If you look back at him, you’d say it was a time of great prosperity and he was an unbeatable politician,” said Republican consultant Bill Miller.

Longevity was key to making him the most powerful governor the state has known, but it was his skill as a political architect, capable of changing with the times, that got him there. Perry went from rural Democrat to pro-business Republican to tea party evangelical.

“People will say this guy was a hell of a politician,” Miller said. “Lots of people tried to take him, and lots of people lost.”

Over his 14 years, Perry amassed control by placing loyalists into key jobs — making 8,000 appointments in all. His supporters are running institutions throughout Texas — its universities, regulatory agencies, courts, public schools and energy production, to name a few.

They shared his philosophy of business first, which he preached as the economic tide that raised all boats. Since Perry took office, the state has added almost 2 million new jobs and about 6 million people.

“Some have the bully pulpit,” said outgoing Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson, who held office as a Republican throughout Perry’s tenure. “He had the marketing pulpit.”

Rice University political scientist Mark Jones said Perry took a fiscally conservative, pro-business philosophy that has dominated Texas politics for decades and elevated it to new heights.

Under Perry, the Texas model was portrayed as a gospel contrasted to the high-deficit, pork-barrel, partisan noise in Washington.

“He certainly has left Texas a pro-growth, pro-business state,” Jones said. “Others would criticize that he has not done enough for the poorest and those who have the least in our society.”

Texas leads the nation in adults and children without health insurance, while Perry has fought implementation of the Affordable Care Act as an intrusion by the federal government.

While virtually every former governor had made boosting education the mainstay of his or her administration, Perry’s loyalty was to a balanced budget without new taxes. He oversaw a $5.4 billion cut to public education in 2011 and also vetoed legislation that would have created full-day kindergarten and further limited the size of those classes.

In a state that leads the nation in greenhouse gas emissions, Perry worked to fast-track coal burning plants, streamline industrial regulation and limit citizen concerns in the permitting process.

“Overall, it’s going to be a partisan legacy, highly tempered by one’s political position,” Jones said. “Many Republicans are going to remember him fondly, and almost all Democrats view his legacy in a much more negative light.”

Democratic consultant Jason Stanford said Perry is a free-market ideologue. He suggests the governor has turned over much of the machinery that used to be state government to private contractors, including school curriculum, charter schools, toll roads, technology, Medicaid delivery and foster care.

“Private companies are doing government functions. That is a huge sea change in Texas,” said Stanford, who ran Democrat Chris Bell’s losing campaign against Perry in 2006.

Much of it has failed or spawned lawsuits or scandal, Stanford said. The Medicaid and food stamp services contract was canceled, as was one with IBM to take over state technology needs. The Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas and Texas Enterprise Fund have raised charges of cronyism, leading to at least one indictment on a charge of favorable treatment with state funds.

And Democrats have been powerless to stop much of the abuse, shortchanging and inside-dealing, Stanford said.

“He has been ascendant at a time of comparative ineptness by the Democratic Party. We’re flabby and weak. And only now is the next generation coming along to repair it,” he said.

Perry largely dismisses the naysayers. He points to an uptick in high school graduation rates, the largest reduction in pollution-causing emissions in the nation, and low taxes and limited government that have fueled tremendous growth.

As he likes to say, people vote with their feet.

“I’m about results,” he said.

Economist Ray Perryman said Perry helped lead major changes to reduce regulations and limit lawsuits, greatly enhancing the state’s business climate. His Texas Enterprise Fund and Emerging Technology Fund have spent about $800 million, enticing companies to relocate or expand in Texas.

The state is No. 1 for exports and is now the home of 52 of the Fortune 500 companies. Texas has led the nation in job growth.

“For all of these reasons, he justifiably ranks among the very best governors of Texas — or anywhere else, for that matter — in terms of proactive economic development programs,” Perryman said.

But the applause has died down in recent years.

“His agenda has become increasingly partisan over the years and included several items that are not in the best interest of long-term economic growth,” Perryman said, citing the education cuts and the paltry investment in water development and roads.

In addition, the state has produced no “Texas solution” to address the health care needs of more than 2 million indigent people. It means Texas has forsaken billions of federal dollars available through the Affordable Care Act, he said.

That political intransigence “will cost the economy hundreds of thousands of jobs, create a net loss in dynamic state revenues, impose additional local taxes to fund emergency care, create hundreds of millions of dollars in penalty taxes on small businesses and forgo an opportunity to significantly address the critical issue of uninsured Texans,” Perryman said.

Overall, Perry should get exceptional marks for economic development, but his record on “fundamental issues that will drive long-term growth is less than stellar,” Perryman said.

Perry said that while Gov.-elect Greg Abbott will have much he wants to do, the problems he faces are likely the envy of 49 other states.

He pointed out that a $2 billion revolving fund is in place to help cities and counties keep water flowing. And newly dedicated oil and gas money will help fund new roadways.

The problems he leaves, Perry argued, are the outcroppings of tremendous growth.

States losing population “because they put bad policies into place aren’t having to worry about transportation funding because they don’t need any new roads. Needing more roads is a good challenge to have,” Perry said.

Besides, Perry said, he didn’t get everything he hoped for from the Legislature.

“Wanting and getting are two different things in this building,” he said in his Capitol office. “We’ve made some pretty good progress.”

Follow Christy Hoppe on Twitter

at @christyhoppe.

RICK PERRY’S TEXAS: THEN AND NOW

Transportation

Perry’s attempt to tackle one of the state’s biggest problems — traffic congestion — was one of his boldest moves as governor. He abandoned the pay-as-you-go highway funding model and in 2001 unveiled the plan for a Trans-Texas Corridor. The $175 billion project called for cutting a swath through Texas to lay 4,000 new miles of toll roads, high-speed rail, pipelines and utilities.

Pushback from landowners and lawmakers soon derailed the ambitious plan. Since then, Perry has pushed for roadway construction through toll roads and bond debt. Now residents are complaining about toll roads popping up like dandelions, and transportation experts warn that the state is falling far behind its burgeoning needs.

Perry likes to point to 6,600 new lane-miles added during his tenure — the most in the nation. But a recent state comptroller’s report looking at the past 25 years shows the state’s population increasing 57 percent and road use growing by 95 percent, while road capacity inched up just 8 percent.

Economy

Perry led the state through the harshest recession in decades, and Texas has come out on top, especially in job creation. He credits low taxes, predictable regulation, small government and limiting lawsuits, a banner he carries as a national model — and a potential presidential platform.

With the deal-closing Texas Enterprise Fund — created in 2003 and followed two years later by the Emerging Technology Fund — Perry has doled out about $800 million in corporate incentives. It has given him a high profile and made him a target of cronyism charges.

Perry counters that his answer is all in the results. Since 2000, the state’s population has increased by 12.7 percent, nearly twice the pace of growth nationally.

Schools

In Texas, 1 out of every 3 dollars the state spends goes to education. When Perry had a choice of cutting big budget items or spending down the state’s rainy day fund in 2011, he did not spare schools.

The Legislature cut $5.4 billion, providing no new money for enrollment growth for the first time in seven decades. School districts cut 11,000 teaching jobs. And the state requirement of a 22:1 ratio of elementary students to teachers took a huge hit. Almost 1,300 elementary schools — nearly 30 percent of campuses — exceeded the limit.

School districts have won the first round of a lawsuit challenging the state over inadequate funding. While many of the cuts have been restored, Texas is still lagging most other states in educating its children.

Higher education

With the stroke of his pen in 2003, Perry ushered one of the most sweeping policy changes in Texas higher education: He deregulated tuition. The Legislature had always set a ceiling to keep college affordable. But in another move to shift costs away from state government, Perry traded cuts to state higher education funding for allowing universities to set higher tuition rates. The change was immediate and dramatic, with ballooning tuition costs. More recently, his regents aggressively have confronted University of Texas administrators for, among other ills, enrolling less-qualified offspring of the well-connected. The publicity has shaken UT’s national reputation and led to censure of one of Perry’s appointees for over-meddling.

Christy Hoppe

Perry’s biggest successes

Jobs: While other states withered, Texas bloomed. In the past five years, Texas has been the overwhelming national leader in adding jobs.

Hurricanes Ike and Katrina: In the face of nature’s fury, Perry welcomed evacuees and led a swift emergency response.

Abortion limits: He has signed into law some of the most sweeping abortion restrictions in the nation. And thus far, they have all withstood legal challenges.

Perry’s biggest misses

Oops: Perry’s failure in a presidential debate to remember the third federal agency he proposed to abolish capped a miserable showing on the national stage and helped drain his political reserve in his home state.

HPV vaccine: In 2007, Perry ordered that schoolgirls receive vaccination against the human papillomavirus, the most commonly sexually transmitted disease. The Legislature quickly shredded the order, and the effort casts a shadow on his conservative credentials.

Rosemary Lehmberg: Perry saw an opening to force out the Democratic district attorney of Travis County after her conviction for drunken driving in 2013. Instead, his threats and strong-arm tactics led to his indictment for coercion of a public official and abuse of office.

A success and and a miss

CPRIT: Perry decided Texas could lead in finding cancer breakthroughs. In 2007, he was instrumental in creating the $3 billion Cancer Prevention and Research Institute of Texas. But like his business incentive programs, the fund quickly became mired in charges of cronyism, with top Perry supporters snaring major grants. An executive was indicted on charges of inside dealing. CPRIT is still working to rebuild its reputation.