Hospital Health Plans Rely on Data Integration

Choosing the right model can reduce risk, and cash reserves are important, but access to patient data is the vital third leg to launching and operating a successful health plan.

Hospitals looking for ways to gain market share and reduce costs through improved healthcare management are creating their own health plans. Despite the challenges, they're incented by financial need and encouraged by the positive experiences of health systems that have already plunged into the commercial insurance market.

A recent report from Moody's Investors Service forecasts an uptick in nonprofit hospital systems creating health plans over the next few years, but Moody's cautions that starting a new plan or acquiring an existing business both carry significant risks. Managerial skills shift, competition intensifies, and start-up costs rise, notes Moody's Vice President and Senior Analyst Mark Pascaris.

As Payers Merge, Hospitals Dream of their Own Health Plans



Mark Pascaris

"Different management expertise is needed to operate a commercial health insurance business versus an acute care hospital," Pascaris says. "Health plans require actuarial skills for pricing models and specific marketing and service acumen, for example."

And despite substantial risks to cash flow margins, the trend is expected to persist, especially among larger systems which can absorb the costs. Drivers include the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act, which encourages care coordination and population health management; continued focus on cost reductions, synergies through greater economies of scale, and creating new revenue streams, Moody's says in its report, "Hospitals Entering Insurance Business Gamble on Long-Term Payoff."

Not-for-profit hospitals with a health insurance business, often known as an integrated delivery system (IDS), tend to operate at noticeably lower operating cash flow margins than similar health systems without insurance, Pascaris says. "Entering the insurance business inevitably suppresses hospital system margins from the beginning," he notes.

How to Build a Health Plan from Scratch

In addition, Moody's points out that recent merger and acquisition activity among insurers will intensify competition. Nevertheless, some healthcare leaders will be drawn to the IDS concept by hospitals that were pioneers and are now showing good results.

Moody's notes that these health systems have been successful with their own health plans in part because they have ample cash reserves to weather insurance cycles and regulatory changes that come with the line of business.