ENGLAND 4 MONTENEGRO 1

Debut to remember: Andros Townsend celebrates scoring England's third goal against Montenegro. Photo: Reuters

Tottenham Hotspur's Andros Townsend crowned his international debut with a fine goal as England beat Montenegro 4-1 on Friday to close in on a place at next year's World Cup.

The 22-year-old winger was handed his first cap by manager Roy Hodgson and the gamble paid off as he settled the hosts' nerves with a late strike after the visitors had threatened to come back into the game.

World Cup qualification beckons: Wayne Rooney and Danny Welbeck celebrate England's first goal. Photo: Getty Images

Wayne Rooney broke the deadlock early in the second half and a calamitous own-goal from Branko Boskovic doubled the hosts' lead, before Dejan Damjanovic replied for the visitors.

Advertisement

Townsend restored England's two-goal cushion with 11 minutes to play, driving home right-footed from 25 metres before an injury-time penalty by Daniel Sturridge completed the scoring.

Victory on a damp autumn evening at Wembley Stadium means England will approach their final game at home to Poland on Tuesday needing another win to secure a berth in Brazil.

Poland's 1-0 defeat by Ukraine earlier in the evening ended their own hopes of qualifying, but England will have to do without right-back Kyle Walker on Tuesday after a caution that will incur a suspension.

Montenegro must wait to make a first major tournament appearance, as they need Ukraine to lose to minnows San Marino in their final game to stand any chance of going through.

Hodgson displayed uncharacteristic boldness with his team selection, fielding Rooney, Sturridge and Danny Welbeck in attack and handing a debut to Townsend.

The Spurs' man saw plenty of the ball in the game's early stages, but the hosts were initially reduced to long-range sighters.

Visiting goalkeeper Vukasin Poleksic was finally called into action when he foiled Welbeck at his near post after a dogged run from Leighton Baines, before plunging to his left to repel a Steven Gerrard curler.

Montenegro were missing four first-team players, including captain Mirko Vucinic.

Rusty finishing thwarted England initially in a first half of nerves and twitchiness for the home side, but they punctured the tension three minutes after the interval when Rooney struck.

Townsend's right-wing cross was only partially cleared and when Poleksic parried Welbeck's low shot, the Manchester United man followed up from close range to claim his sixth goal of the qualifying campaign.

Jovetic shook England out of their complacency with a 25-metre shot that hit the bar, before Milan Damjanovic reduced the arrears in the 72nd minute by poking a shot from substitute Fatos Beqiraj past Hart.

It was to be Townsend's night, however.

He struck seven minutes later, with Sturridge netting from the spot in stoppage time to fire English dreams of the Copacabana.

ENGLAND 4 (Rooney 49, Boskovic 62 og, Townsend 78, Sturridge 90+3 pen) bt MONTENEGRO 1 (Damjanovic 71).

AFP