HealthiestYou Works With Your Insurance to Find Low Drug Prices

Apps that affect our health are gaining in popularity, and in their advertising, HealthiestYou compares their services like that of a fictional Müver 4 Sure (Uber), only instead of looking for a ride at the cheapest rate, you are looking for doctors and medicines on a map with the best prices. Often it is difficult to locate a good doctor, specialist or express medical care facility – HealthiestYou can help. How do you know that you are getting the best drug prices when they can vary immensely from pharmacy-to-pharmacy?– HealthiestYou can help. HealthiestYou helps change the way you view healthcare by matching you up to the right doctor, find the cheapest prescription drugs, and it even shops various procedures and prices. HealthiestYou is headquartered in Scottsdale, Arizona, and is an industry leader in eHealth user engagement. They claim their app “Cures Healthcare Industry of Rising Costs, Lengthy Waits, Consult with doctors 24/7, price compare prescriptions, procedures with an easy-to-use app.”

It is no secret that healthcare costs are spiraling out of control. Even if you have employer health coverage or a plan on the Affordable Care Act, doctor’s visits and prescriptions can still force you to pay huge deductibles before your coverage kicks in to cover costs. HealthiestYou is here to help cut costs for consumers, employers, and insurance companies by directing users to the most efficient, affordable and convenient route of care. If you are feeling ill, there is no need to end up at the emergency room or suffer until a primary care physician can get you in to see them. The HealthiestYou app is making healthcare “smart” by allowing you to consult with a doctor 24/7. A user survey they conducted shows “the most common reasons for doctor’s visits include: bronchitis, earache, sore throat, pink eye and strep throat.” Over the phone or through video chat, the doctor can accurately diagnose these and other common conditions, call the prescription into the pharmacy of your choice, and you are on your way to a healthier day.

Many people use the pharmacy that is closest to where they live, but according to a Consumer Reports survey, “there was a $749 difference between the highest and lowest priced stores for a month’s supply of the five top-selling prescription drugs.” Using the HealthiestYou app, you can locate the lowest price for a prescription with a simple search using your smartphone. Just type in the prescription name and a list of pharmacies and prices in your area will appear. You can also search for primary care providers and specialists based on your health plan by using the app. Paying for a procedure is like paying for an auto repair – depending where you go, the prices can vary greatly and HealthiestYou will find the best prices for common medical procedures and allow you to read consumer reviews on practitioners.

HealthiestYou provides you with 24×7 access to the nation’s largest network of doctors, as well as locating a healthcare provider. You can compare over 5,000 prescription drugs at more than 100,000 pharmacies. HealthiestYou gives you real-time connectivity to more than 450 insurance carriers with up-to-date information on deductibles and benefits. You can also see the cost difference of a procedure if you pay cash or have insurance. The app also has ‘Intelligent Alerts’ to help better utilize your insurance and HealthiestYou services. You can download the app at the Google Play Store to give it a try.