Since 2009, Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp. has tripled the number of outpatient centers it operates around the country to 200 and plans to open more.

“I see this as a long-term opportunity,” CEO Trevor Fetter said in an interview Tuesday. His company also operates 80 hospitals nationwide.

Fetter spoke after a morning conference call with analysts that, in part, detailed his company’s strategy in the growing area of urgent care centers, ambulatory surgery centers, imaging centers and freestanding emergency departments.

In 2010, Tenet earmarked $400 million to buy or develop outpatient centers and expected to generate $70 million in incremental adjusted earnings — before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization.

So far, Tenet said that it has invested $306 million, generating $87 million in extra earnings. That’s 25 percent more earnings with 25 percent less capital, the company said.

Others in the industry also see potential.

Last week, Nashville-based hospital giant HCA said it planned to acquire privately held CareNow, which operates two dozen urgent care centers in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

Most of Coppell-based CareNow’s locations are within 5 miles of an existing HCA facility. An HCA executive said the company hopes to replicate that in other markets.

“It’s a model that works for everybody,” Fetter said, emphasizing the convenience. “Consumers drive up, park right in front and are seen right away.”

Urgent-care facilities also are open evenings and weekends, and prices are generally lower.

In May, Tenet rebranded its urgent care centers into a national network called MedPost Urgent Care. The company has four hospitals and five MedPost locations in the Dallas-Fort Worth area.

As part of its conference call presentation, Tenet reviewed the typical economics of outpatient centers:

Urgent-care centers cost about $800,000 in capital to establish, eventually generate $2 million to $3 million in annual revenue, and have profit margins of 10 percent to 20 percent.

Ambulatory surgical centers cost $5 million to $8 million, generate $5 million to $8 million in revenue, with margins of 30 percent to 35 percent.

Free-standing emergency departments cost $6 million to $10 million, generate $7 million in revenue, with 25 percent to 30 percent margins.

Imaging centers cost $3 million to $5 million, generate $3 million to $4 million in revenue, with margins of 10 percent to 25 percent.

“The reason margins are so high is that you don’t have all the overhead and cost of a 24-7 hospital,” Fetter said.

Tenet reported its third-quarter earnings after the markets closed Monday. Despite what Fetter called the company’s best quarterly performance fundamentals ever — strong growth in admissions, revenue and adjusted earnings — investors were cautious Tuesday.

Tenet stock closed at $53.06 a share, down $3.66, or 6.45 percent. About 6.5 million shares traded, four times the recent average, according to Google Finance.

Other health care stocks were also weak, while the Dow Jones Industrial Average posted a slight gain.

On the conference call, some analysts attributed the market reaction to Election Day and uncertainty over the Affordable Care Act. The U.S. Supreme Court will decide soon whether to hear another challenge.

Fetter said he can’t predict what the Supreme Court will do. But the Affordable Care Act is so well established, and so many people depend upon it, he said, that it’s hard to imagine it going away.

“I think this train has left the station big time,” Fetter said.