By Patrick B. McGuigan | Oklahoma Watchdog

OKLAHOMA CITY — Seemingly inexhaustable at the age of 89, national conservative leader Phyllis Schlafly believes advocates of limited government will roll back both the Affordable Care Act — Barack Obama‘s signal achievement as president — and the bipartisan push for creation of national Common Core State Standards for curriculum and instruction in public schools.

In an interview during a recent visit to the Sooner State, Schlafly, a famed constitutional lawyer from St. Louis, told Oklahoma Watchdog that conservatives “lucked out” in being blamed for the shutdown.

“Now the Obamacare issue is the number one story on television and on the Internet. Everything that is coming out is just proving that President Obama lied. He’s taking tremendous heat, and of course he deserves it.”

“It’s a train wreck. His whole program is a train wreck,” she said. It simply cannot work. The whole Obamacare scheme is predicated on young people signing up, but they’re not signing up. If they don’t sign up, it will collapse.”

The effect could be felt in the midterm elections.

“The consequence for the president is that his approval rating is plummeting,” she said. “I am hoping this translates into defeating a lot of Democrats next year.

Schlafly, a veteran of every Republican National Convention since 1952, said she’s excited to see the enthusiasm of grass roots opposition to Common Core.

“I must say I’m amazed to see the hundreds of people showing up for meetings on how to organize to beat the Common Core,” she said. “I am seeing scores of meetings and hundreds of people attending, and I didn’t even invite them to come! It’s exciting.”

She thinks the push for the common core as a basis for testing and instructional curriculum — and in “strings” for receipt of federal funding — is backfiring on advocates. Schafly believes the issue is finally getting people excited about public schools.

“The American people want to control what their children learn, but the educational establishment also wants to control what our children learn,” she said.

Schafly noted that Common Core is only the latest in a number of educational proposals she’s battled in recent years, from Race to the Top to No Child Left Behind.

“In all of these, federal busybodies have tried to tell us what to do do, how to teach our children, and what they should think. It’s time to put a stop to it.”

Contact Pat at pmcguigan@watchdog.org.