It’s Tuesday, the 153rd day of 2015 and the 129th year to the day since President Grover Cleveland, 49, married Frances Folsom, 21, in the Blue Room of the White House. Cleveland was the nation’s last bachelor president, but Sen. Lindsey Graham, a South Carolina Republican who announced Monday he’s running for president, would break that streak if he makes it to the White House. Here is your Three Minute Briefing, all the News You Can Use in 180 seconds or less:

Let’s Make a Deal: It’s a case straight out of TV’s “House of Cards”: Former House Speaker Dennis Hastert will be arraigned June 9 for allegedly dodging federal banking rules to secretly pay $1.7 million in hush money to cover up a purported sexual abuse case, stemming from his time as a teacher and wrestling coach in small-town Illinois. The case has raised disturbing questions about Hastert, including: how could a low-profile but influential congressman afford to write six- and seven-figure checks? Turns out Hastert was very active in the real estate market – including some deals that raised a few eyebrows – then made a bundle as a lobbyist after leaving Congress.

Check, Please: After investing some serious political and diplomatic capital in an arena with moving goal posts, the U.S. may be throwing in the towel on its attempts to ease tensions in the Mideast between Israel and its Arab neighbors, including peace negotiations between Israel and Palestine. The strategy shift, experts say, is due mostly to political will, or lack thereof, for peace among the parties involved: the Obama administration’s best frenemy, Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu, is back in power and has no interest in making real peace, and Palestinian leader Mahmoud Abbas is a weak leader who’s looking to Hamas and not America as its top ally.

Patriot Games 2.0: A day after Sen. Rand Paul’s high-profile presidential fundraiser principled stand against renewal of the domestic surveillance provisions of the Patriot Act, the Senate will try again to get the job done, Paul notwithstanding. Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell, known as a shrewd tactician, will probably win the legislative war, but by battling him to a draw, Paul outmaneuvered the most powerful Republican in the Senate, elevated his own White House profile – and tacitly gave a playbook to the three other GOP senators running for the White House in 2016.

Justice Roberts, Call Your Law Clerk: Though the 2012 election between President Barack Obama and Republican challenger Mitt Romney was the most expensive in history, the upcoming 2016 presidential contest is likely to top that, with Hillary Clinton’s campaign preparing to raise $2 billion, about as much as Romney and Obama spent combined. But a new CBS News/New York Times poll says citizens are united against runaway political spending: 46 percent think the campaign finance system needs a complete reboot, 77 percent say there should be limits on individual political donations and a whopping 78 percent want brakes on unlimited super PAC spending. The negative take holds on both sides of the political aisle, with 73 percent of Republicans and 85 percent of Democrats saying they’d like to see super PACs reigned in.

“Cut the Crap”: Hillary Clinton has tacked hard left into Elizabeth Warren territory, decrying a rigged economic system where wealthy Wall Street types pay more in taxes than the truckers she saw on her famous van trip. But one hedge fund billionaire has booed Clinton’s fanfare for the common man. Leon Cooperman says he’s tired of her dumping all over his profession: He says he pays his fair share in taxes, kicks into museums and foundations and regularly sees the world’s most powerful nana summering on exclusive Martha’s Vineyard with some of his wealthy pals – or on Wall Street with her hand out, asking for campaign donations from the same people she’s slamming.

Today in Obama: The president awards two posthumous Medals of Honor to two World War I veterans, African American Sgt. Henry Johnson and Jewish Pvt. William Shemin, both of whom fought heroically in The Great War.

Stat of the Day: Number of African American journalists in the U.S. in 2003: 2,938, or 5.4 percent. Number in 2013: 1,754, or 4.8 percent (courtesy American Society of Newspaper Editors, via Pew Research Center).

Duly Noted: On this date in 1863, during the Civil War, Union Maj. Gen. William T. Sherman wrote a letter to his wife, Ellen, in which he commented, "Vox populi, vox humbug" (The voice of the people is the voice of humbug). In 1897, Mark Twain, 61, was quoted by the New York Journal as saying from London that "the report of my death was an exaggeration." In 1924, Congress passed a measure that was then signed by President Calvin Coolidge guaranteeing full American citizenship for all Native Americans born within U.S. territorial limits. In 1941, baseball's "Iron Horse," Lou Gehrig, died in New York of a degenerative disease, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis; he was 37. In 1975, Vice President Nelson Rockefeller said his commission had found no widespread pattern of illegal activities at the Central Intelligence Agency.