ADVERTISEMENT

Ted Cruz may have renounced his Canadian citizenship.

But that hasn't stopped his rivals from reminding people about his roots as he pursues the Republican nomination for U.S. president.

One of the latest attacks comes via a link, TedCruzForAmerica.com, that redirects users to a Canadian government page instructing people on how to immigrate to the Great White North.

But that's not the only site to which the URL has directed people.

It previously sent users to the Human Rights Campaign, which advocates for LGBT people, CBC News reported. Cruz has come under attack for his stances on gay marriage and trans children.

The URL also once took people to HealthCare.gov, a site that provides information on the Affordable Care Act, which he has pledged to repeal.



Republican presidential candidates Donald Trump (R) and Ted Cruz (L) argue during the CBS News Republican Presidential Debate in Greenville, S.C. on Feb. 13, 2016. (Photo: Jim Watson/AFP via Getty Images)

The matter of Cruz's birthplace has been a source of controversy in the Republican campaign, as fellow candidates have questioned whether he's even eligible to be president.

Earlier this week, Donald Trump threatened to challenge his eligibility in court — a threat that Cruz welcomed, ABC News reported.

At issue is whether Cruz can be president because he wasn't born in the United States.

Though the candidate's mother is American, the U.S. Constitution requires that the president be a "natural born citizen," though it doesn't define the term, according to NBC News.

"The framers of the Constitution required the president of the United States to be born in the United States."

Cruz has said the matter is settled — he renounced his Canadian citizenship in 2014. But experts disagree that it's been resolved.

A commentary in the Harvard Law Review last year argued as follows: "Despite the happenstance of a birth across the border, there is no question that Senator Cruz has been a citizen from birth and is thus a 'natural born citizen' within the meaning of the Constitution."

But constitutional law professor Mary Brigid McManamon disagreed in an op-ed for The Washington Post.

"The law is clear," she wrote. "The framers of the Constitution required the president of the United States to be born in the United States."

Like Us On Facebook



Also on HuffPost: