Almost 50 million bird flocks in more than 20 states, not to mention the biosecurity of the nation, seem to be under the weather with the current Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza outbreak.

Randy Olson, executive director of the Iowa Poultry Association, called it the “worst animal disease outbreak in the history of Iowa and potentially the history of the U.S.” He said the last 2 ½ months have “been in some state of a new normal … trying to manage through this disease outbreak.”

The Avian Flu has been felt by farmers, employees and communities in Iowa and throughout the nation. In Iowa, 33.7 million chickens and turkeys have died of the disease or been euthanized to prevent its spread, and more than 1,500 workers are expected to lose their jobs. Iowa Gov. Terry Branstad has requested that four counties be declared federal disaster areas.

Iowa—the nation’s largest egg producing state—has lost 25 million of the nation’s leading flock of 60 million egg laying hens.

And for consumers? There has been an uptick in the price of eggs. Julie Bolhuis, owner of Heavenly’s A Creative Bakery in Iowa Falls, Iowa, told The Daily Signal, “We have to buy eggs no matter what. We’re a bakery. Everything has eggs in it.”

Bolhuis says Heavenly’s goes through at least 3-4 cases of eggs per week. The bakery gets as many eggs as possible from a local farmer—who has not significantly raised egg prices—but Bolhuis must go through a food vendor to get the rest.

“We have to suck it up and pay triple the price,” Bolhuis said.

The family-owned bakery now pays $45 per case of 15 dozen eggs compared to the previous $15 per case. A report released last week by the U.S. Department of Agriculture says Iowa egg production dropped 21 percent in May alone.

Bolhuis says the bakery sticks to its formulas for its famous sugar cookies and other recipes but makes fewer of each item to allay the costs.

And it’s not just eggs. Bolhuis said Heavenly’s, which also serves breakfast and lunch, was unable to order the turkey it normally uses for its sandwiches because of the problem and had to substitute another kind.

According to the Iowa Department of Agriculture, at least 30 countries have put restrictions on accepting U.S. poultry exports, including a ban on all U.S poultry products by China, South Korea, South Africa and Thailand.

Bolhuis said she wants to hold off on price increases in hopes the situation will return to normal soon. But it’s not easy.

“All food businesses get hit in one way or another at some point,” Bolhuis said. “It’s whether you can weather the storm and make adjustments. It’s part of playing the game in the food business. You’re not in control.”

Farm owners are learning the same lesson as Bolhuis and her bakery.

The infected barns need to go through an extensive cleaning and disinfecting process before repopulating bird flocks can begin. When asked about the projected length of the rebuilding process for farm owners, Olson said, “It’s too early to tell. In some cases we anticipate farms to be repopulated yet this year. Some estimates have been in order to be fully repopulated it might take up to 12, 18 or even 24 months.”

Lastly, Olson emphasized, “I want to remind everybody that the food is safe to eat and that there is no human health consequence to this disease. It’s very serious for the birds that are infected, but it is only an avian disease not a human disease.”