Loveland saddle maker discusses the flood and human kindness

Rusty May discusses the damage the 2013 flood did to his property and shop, Rusty May Saddle Maker, west of Loveland on U.S. 34, on Sunday. He hopes to begin making saddles again in a few months. ( Amanda Sutherland )

Sept. 12, 2013: For one Loveland cowboy, it was the day he watched as his life floated down the river. But with the flood he also saw his community and his nation shine with love and generosity.

Rusty May, owner and operator of Rusty May Saddle Shop west of Loveland on U.S. 34, stood confidently in his garage on Sunday, surrounded by the remnants of his saddle-making tools, covered in mud -- beaten but not broken.

May's thick white mustache, curled on the ends, his bandanna and leather suspenders all contribute to his buckaroo demeanor. And when he looks you in the eye, you can tell he's been through a lot, but the flood couldn't put out his fire.

"I'm the kind of guy, you knock me down, I'm gonna get back up. Then I'll give you a lickin,' " he said. "I don't care who you are, there's someone out there worse off than you."

May has been making saddles for around 35 years. His particular skills are sought out by folks across the country and even overseas, making custom saddles going for as much as $10,000. He said 80 percent of saddles are shipped out of state, with 5 percent going international.

But with his tools washed away and around $350,000 in damage done to his property, his business and income is at a complete halt. He's currently cleaning the tools that were recovered, taking them apart and cleaning away the mud before he moves them into the nearly repaired shop.

Advertisement

"I can't make a $10,000 saddle under these conditions. Or even a five- or six-thousand-dollar saddle," May said. "The hard part about being self-employed now is that it means I'm unemployed."

Along with his current work being swept away by flood torrents in September, his rich history of the accomplishments he has done over his career was also lost in the madness. A photo album filled with the saddles he has proudly created: just gone.

"And all my patterns. I had patterns going back 40 to 50 years. They're gone."

The flood was hard on a lot of people, but May's stance on it is to keep a positive outlook and to never feel sorry for yourself.

"Button up your lip, put your britches back on and get to work," he said. "I don't know any other way to go. That's just me. Me and my bride are the same way."

Rusty and Jo May will have been married for 57 years in July. He attributed much of his positivity to her.

"I got a neat lady. She's my life," he said, saying she'd taken the hit from the flood pretty hard herself. "We're just leaning on each other's shoulder."

On that fateful day, the Mays woke up with no idea, no warning that a flood was crashing through the canyon and would soon drive them out of their home. From 10 to 11 a.m., their last hour on their property before evacuating, the river rose 3 feet.

"I had 4 feet of water in the shop, about 11/2 in the house," Rusty said.

The water crashed into the side of his buildings so hard it created 20-foot waves. Silt packed underneath their house to the point where mud pushed up the floor and burst through.

They evacuated their animals and themselves, using a four-horse trailer, with a cramped living quarter. They lived in that tight space, which seemingly shrunk every day, for 30 harrowing days. His youngest son took the horses to his place in Missouri.

"I sure do miss my horses. God did something right when he made the horse," Rusty said. He hopes to retrieve them in April.

Luckily for the Mays, they purchased flood insurance when they moved to Loveland from New Mexico about 25 years ago. The insurance coverage and FEMA contributions will pay for about $100,000 in repairs.

"Everybody up here that survived the '76 flood ... they rebuilt for the mother of all floods, but then, 40 years later, along come the grandmother. Seriously," Rusty said somberly. "You never have enough to cover everything you lost."

But progress is being made and Rusty will pull his saddle business out of the mud.

"It'll be another few months before we get the shop done."

The most powerful part of this long, hard process has been the support they have seen from the local and national community.

"The support has been overwhelming, coast to coast," Rusty said. "Someone brought over a casserole dish last night even."

He was touched deeply by the generosity of strangers, telling a story of a tourist who came through and visited. Upon leaving, he shook Rusty's hand and passed over a $100 bill -- for no reason other than being a kind soul.

"I broke down twice over the generosity of people," he said, the facade of a fearless cowboy melting, revealing a grateful member of the human race. "I never realized I was worth all that. It was stunning."

He also thanked the local distribution center and food bank for their support in a time when their income dropped to zero with massive repair bills constantly pouring in.

"My wife and I will be 74 years old in a few months. Don't have the stamina I once had, but I still got my lady. That's all that counts," he said.

If you know of someone in the community with an interesting story, contact James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/JamesGarciaRH.