The Board of Supervisors Tuesday formally appointed Dr. Mitchell Katz as the director of the county’s new unified health agency.

The board’s vote was unanimous in favor of Katz, who already heads the Department of Health Services and the county’s hospital system.

In his new position, Katz will oversee the three health-related departments, each of which will continue to maintain separate budgets and executive management teams.

“Integrating mental health, public health and physical health services will enable us to provide better care and better community programming to the residents of Los Angeles County,” Katz said last week, when the board’s choice was announced. “Having everyone rowing in the same direction can make a huge difference when dealing with complex social problem.”

Katz requested that his current salary of $419,655 remain the same in his new position, according to county officials. That salary was approved today and Katz’ appointment was made effective retroactive to Nov. 24, according to board documents.

During his nearly five years running DHS, Katz has transformed the county’s health care system, county Chief Executive Officer Sachi Hamai told the board.

Katz has overseen a $4 billion annual budget and a system of 19 health centers, four hospitals and a network of community partner clinics that see roughly 670,000 patients each year.

While implementing health care reform under the Affordable Care Act, Katz has led more than 350,000 patients to a primary care home, implemented a new electronic records system, eliminated the agency’s financial deficit and moved more than 1,000 patients from expensive hospital and emergency departments to independent housing, according to David Sommers of the Office of Countywide Communications.

Katz was the director and health officer of the San Francisco Department of Health before coming to Los Angeles. He is a graduate of Yale College and Harvard Medical School.

—City News Service

>> Want to read more stories like this? Get our Free Daily Newsletters Here!