When Rep. Mark Cohen leaves office on Nov. 30 after a 42-year legislative career, he could qualify for a pension that approaches $35,000 more a year than he currently earns from his legislative salary.

Cohen, D-Philadelphia, could receive as much as $119,884 a year as a retired legislator, according to pension calculations done by RocktheCapital's Eric Epstein based on information from the State Employees' Retirement System, which it confirmed to be accurate.

Cohen's current salary is $85,356.

Cohen, 66, was defeated in Tuesday's primary by Democratic challenger Jared Solomon in a contest for that party's nomination in the 202nd state House district.

That effectively ends a legislative career that spans seven gubernatorial administrations and will allow him to lay claim as the longest serving member of the state Legislature at the end of his term.

Cohen said in a phone interview on Friday his preference would be to continue serving in the state House but he accepts the voters' decision.

He said he would welcome an opportunity to serve state government in some other way, such as on a state commission. If appointed to a paid position, he said he would forgo a pension if it was part of the compensation.

"I'm interested in public service and am not interested in maximizing my income," Cohen said.

But Epstein claims that Cohen's past actions indicate otherwise. He describes Cohen as king of per diems for having been at or near the top of lawmakers who claimed the most of these taxpayer-funded payment to cover food, lodging and incidentals while lawmakers are away from home on legislative business.

Epstein also credits Cohen for being in the "hall of fame for abusing legislative perks," pointing to Cohen's reported use of his taxpayer-funded expense account to buy books and pay for three trips to the Pennsylvania Society in New York City.

Cohen, an admitted voracious reader, defended his book purchases as making him a better legislator and claims the trips to Society weekend was a legitimate legislative business expense because he met with movers and shakers he deals with in his work.

To see Cohen walk away after that with a pension higher than his salary indicates to Epstein the pension system is out of whack although he isn't the first one to do so.

"We need to align legislative pensions with market-based formulas. This is not a pension. This is a golden parachute for a man who has made a career out of looting taxpayers," Epstein said.

Epstein's pension calculations assume Cohen doesn't take a lump-sum payout of the contributions he paid into pension system or buys credits for any eligible prior service or faces IRS or retirement code benefit limitations.

Cohen, meanwhile, said he is proud of the record he built during his legislative career.

Among the examples, he cited were being on the forefront of the effort to legalize medical marijuana by introducing legislation to accomplish that back in 2009. He also fought hard to keep the state's Obamacare options open after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled it wasn't mandatory for states to expand Medicare.

And he said he has been a longtime advocate for online voter registration and endorsed Gov. Tom Wolf's decision that he had the inherent power as governor to implement it this year.

"I was deeply involved in the legislative process this session and throughout my legislative career," Cohen said. "I thought, in my judgment, that I had something to offer and I had the responsibility to at least offer to my constituents the opportunity to re-elect me. They didn't. They chose someone else."

That's why, he said, he would "welcome an opportunity to serve on a commission or some other capacity. I enjoy public service. I'm good at it."