Sioux Falls, SD

This month's shooting in Lennox has left many people feeling shaken. But there is a way to help employees feel a little more secure in the workplace.

What would you do if a shooter came into your place of work? Do you know where there are emergency exits or shelter during a storm?

These are the questions that could mean life or death in any emergency situation.

"The more things that we prepare for. The more responses that we train our employees for. The better they are to handle those unexpected things. And it becomes second nature," said Kathy Jacobs, Director of Environmental Safety and Emergency Preparedness for Avera McKennan.



Kathy Jacobs with Avera McKennan says they train their staff to be prepared at all times, for any circumstance. The best way to do that is with repetitive reminders.

"We start with our children at a very young age. When they're in school we teach them how to respond. They have fire drills in school. They have other kinds of disaster drills that they do in school. So as adults, why aren't we doing the same thing," said Jacobs.

Even though the shooting at Pro-Tech is fresh on people's minds, there are other emergencies everyone should be ready for.

One way to get that training now, is by contacting the Sioux Falls Police Department.

"We can come out and talk about safety for their building. We can come out and talk to their employees and address their concerns. Or even if they want to use our expertise and reviewing their policies. We'll be helpful in that also," said Sioux Falls Police Officer, Jim Larson.

Even if your company never has to utilize these life saving skills, the fact that they are armed with this knowledge could make the workplace a better environment for everyone.

"We're not going to come in and be able to give you an exact example of what may happen. But by doing these exercises, by doing this training, it gives those employees the ability to if they're out in their normal life and something were to happen at a mall or movie theatre, those things. It gives them options. It gets their brains thinking and they're able to react quicker," said Larson.

In the case of an emergency, Officer Larson says having a floor plan of your building ready for emergency responders helps them to do their job more efficiently.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.