The first three quarters were tough for East Henderson on Tuesday afternoon.

The Eagles trailed Madison for much of their first-round matchup in the Knights Christmas Tournament.

In the fourth quarter, however, East found its legs and pulled away for a 59-52 victory.

Madison (0-9) took an 8-6 lead into the second quarter and then pushed the Eagles for much of that quarter. They took an 18-12 lead before baskets by Josh Glynn and Austin Messer pulled the Eagles back to within two points.

Madison answered with a basket by Kelby Aikens and a 3-pointer by Matthew Lloyd.

East (5-5), however, outscored the Patriots 8-2 down the stretch, including a buzzer beating halfcourt shot by Malik Alston to tie the game at 26 heading into the half.

“We played lackadaisical in the first three quarters,” East coach Bruce Gilliam said whose team has been off for a week. “Shots weren't falling early.”

The message through all of that never changed though.

“We just kept telling them to keep shooting and play defense,” the coach said.

They did that and pulled way in the fourth quarter.

The Eagles grabbed that momentum early. Josh Glynn hit a 3-pointer. East followed that up with tough defense as Alston blocked a shot, gained control of it, sent it to Nykeem Brooks who dished an assist to Daniel Parker.

Alston had two blocks and four points in the fourth quarter. Brooks had seven points in the fourth quarter. Alston finished with 14 points. Brooks had 10 points and six steals. Glynn had 13 points and Parker chipped in 10. John Nabers had 10 rebounds to lead the Eagles in the paint.

Girls

Madison 53, East Henderson 31

Madison opened up the Knights Christmas tournament with a victory over East Henderson on Tuesday afternoon.

It was all the Lady Patriots (5-4) from the start en route to a 53-31 victory.

The first quarter was the difference as Madison jumped out to a 16-2 lead. Brooke Vilcinskas scored six points in that first quarter. She finished with a game-high 19 points.

East (3-8) settled down in the second quarter. Drew McMillan, Kayla Johnson and Tristan McCrary all had baskets in the second quarter, but the Lady Patriots took a 28-11 lead into the half.

The third quarter was close to even as McMillan scored four points and Johnson scored three for East. The hole was still there as Madison held a 42-23 lead.

In the end, that early deficit was too much to overcome as the Lady Patriots held on for the victory.

McMillan led the way for the Lady Eagles with 14 points.