Boulder boutique firm launches online interactive home tours

Boulder County is a hotbed for innovation and technology. And it's cropping up in an unlikely market: Real estate.

Spaces Real Estate, 2701 Iris Ave. in Boulder, has launched Spaces360, an interactive on-line tour of its for-sale residential properties.

Likened to Google Street View, the process entails using a 3D camera (and occasionally drones) to capture a 360-degree view of the homes — inside and out. Users can do a virtual walk through of the property, including a "doll-house" view that presents a 3D model of the floor plan.

Founded in May 2012, the boutique real estate firm employs 11 people, including seven agents who are founding members.

We sat down with Grant Muller, owner and Realtor at Spaces, to ask him a few questions about the technology and where it's taking his business.

Drones. 3D cameras. What's with all the technology?

Technology exists to support a better client experience, to create a better shopping experience for the consumer.

We are the first in Colorado, that I know of, to get that camera. It was a risky investment — $5,500 for the 3D camera — but we wanted to get out there and grab the bull by the horns and show this to our clients.

How does Spaces360 better that client experience?

Flat photos only tell part of the story. The better we can tell the whole story of that space, the quicker someone can find a place that's right for them.

Advertisement

This is really about understanding the space, because better informed clients make better decisions.

We're named Spaces. It's not about bedrooms and bathrooms. It's about the space you're going to be spending time in. To us, technology is the means to the end. We are only going to seek out technology to the end that it helps the client experience.

Alright, so it's not really about the technology. What DOES set you apart from other real estate firms?

I want a brand that stands for something. This is our life's work. I founded this company on exceptional client experience.

For one thing, our Realtors are all certified negotiation experts. There is no negotiation training required to become a real estate agent, but it helps the client get more value out of the process.

How does that change how you operate?

Sometimes it means telling the truth. "Oh, you're being a bit greedy" or "This isn't the house for you."

It also means that we take on only experienced agents who have proven themselves. We don't take on new agents, and (everyone at the firm) is very successful. They understand that real estate is not just a transaction. It is a very human process.

We are a brand that stands for consumer experience. We're small right now, so we are quietly standing for it.

So what can we expect in the future? Robot Realtors? Virtual reality tours?

Probably not.

We are focused on getting better with what we've got and making sure we are growing with the right people.

But if the technology comes along in the future and it's right for us, we'll use it.

Shay Castle: 303-473-162

6, castles@dailycamera.com, @shayshinecastle