Police say there's evidence a woman accused in a deadly road rage shooting in Tempe was "planning to engage in violence." The shooting left a 19-year-old Arizona State University student dead, and caused a crash that injured five other people.

Holly Davis, 32, has been booked on four felony charges, including first-degree premeditated murder, according to court documents.

The victim was identified as 19-year-old Yue Jiang, an international student from China. Police said Jiang's family was en route to Arizona as of Sunday afternoon.

Police say shortly before 3 p.m. Saturday, Jiang and a 21-year-old friend were stopped at a red light in a Mercedes at the intersection of Broadway and McClintock when Davis rear-ended them.

The friend got out to inspect the damage, but quickly returned to the vehicle after realizing Davis had a gun, Officer Naomi Galbraith said. Davis got out of her Volkswagen Passat, walked to the driver's side door of the Mercedes and opened fire, Galbraith continued.

Badly wounded, Jiang tried to flee by making a U-turn and heading east on Broadway, but crossed into oncoming traffic and collided with another car, Galbraith said.

"I'm not sure why that woman shot her because she didn't do anything wrong, just stopped her car at a red light, so I don't know why," said one of Jiang's classmates, Jin Suan.

Five people from a Chevy sedan were taken to the hospital, including a pregnant woman and three children, Sgt. Raj Johnson said. Their injuries are believed to be minor.

Jiang was transported to the hospital for treatment. She later died.

"I just want to pray for her," said Eli Li. "This is very unfortunate and I feel so sad."

Davis fled the scene southbound on McClintock Drive in the silver Passat. She was later apprehended at a Mesa apartment she shares with her boyfriend. She had only been living there for four days, according to court paperwork.

Police said Davis, who is estranged from her husband, hid the gun under her car and then hid the car itself in an effort to avoid arrest. Officers said she also put her clothes in the washing machine and took a shower.

Court paperwork shows that Davis was sentenced to three years in prison after being convicted of resisting a lawful stop and fleeing in Missouri.

That paperwork also shows that the officers who arrested Davis suspect she might be an alcoholic or addict. She also suffers from depression.

"Defendant has expressed a desire to be shot by law enforcement," court paperwork reads.

While searching the apartment where Davis was arrested, officers found a note "consistent with defendant planning to engage in violence."

When officers interviewed Davis' boyfriend, he told them he and Davis had been drunk earlier in the day. Officers also noted in their arrest forms that Davis admitted that she used Oxycodone. At this point, it is not clear if Davis was impaired at the time of the incident.

Davis was booked on charges of first-degree murder, aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, possession of a weapon by a prohibited person, and disorderly conduct with a firearm.

Broadway & McClintock intersection is shut down in all directions for a drive by shooting. Update to come! — Tempe Police (@TempePolice) January 16, 2016

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.