Earlier this year, the Association of American Medical Colleges (AAMC) sounded the alarm of an increasing doctor shortage in America. With an aging baby boomer population there will a greater demand for specialists for seniors and related ailments, such as surgeons specializing in cancer or doctors that deal with Alzheimer’s. There is also a greater need for generalists who can work as primary care physicians and focus on preventative medicine.

The physician shortage has been an issue for nearly a decade, but has gained more attention with the full implementation of the Affordable Care Act. However, even with 90 percent of Americans now covered, the influx of new patients is just a small part of the complex problem. From education, training, patient care and even salaries, there are many steps along the way that contribute to fewer doctors.

In April, President Obama signed the biggest overhaul of Medicare in nearly two decades. The new Medicare reimbursement formula included in the bill and a push towards patient-centered treatment will allow doctors to see more patients and spend quality time with them. Still, doctors seeing more patients won’t be enough to help with the shortage. According to the AAMC study, the United States will face a shortage of between 46,000-90,000 physicians within ten years. These shortages will occur in both primary and specialty care, with the latter being hardest hit.

The federal government provides $15 billion annually for physician training and residency programs. Medicare and Medicaid provide 90 percent of this funding. The bulk of the funding goes to teaching hospitals in large urban areas. The Medicare overhaul maintained the funding for this, but there are caps on the number of residents.

The National Academies of Sciences, Medicine, and Engineering (NASME) warned last year that training hospitals’ control over where their funding goes led to a disproportionate number of specialty residences being funded, leaving little for generalists. They further noted that, “Training opportunities are highly concentrated in specific geographic regions and urban areas, and the training system is not increasing the number of physicians willing to locate to rural areas or treat other under served populations.”

The nation’s changing demographics means that doctors need to be representative of diverse populations and communities. There are definitely more women who are doctors than ever before, the number of doctors of color regardless of gender are small, especially in minority communities. Racial and gender bias can lead to delays in diagnoses, referrals and treatment. Studies have shown that culturally sensitive health care leads to better health outcomes.

Black and Latino physicians represent 4 and 5 percent of U.S. physicians respectively. In 2014, there were a little over 6,000 black and Latino applicants to medicals schools, compared to nearly 24,000 white applicants. The difference in acceptance rates was even starker, with just a third of black and Latino applicants being accepted, and 42 percent of white applicants accepted. There is not much data as to why there are so few minority applicants, but differing educational opportunities, self-selection (the belief they don’t have a chance), and lack of awareness that medicine is even a possible profession are some anecdotal reasons given for the disparity.

By the time a medical student is finished with their residency, they are carrying an average of $150,000 in debt, with many carrying as much as $500,000 or more. The amount of debt often influences their choice of specialty, leading many to choose ones that pay higher. While the salaries of family doctors or generalists still keep them at the higher end of the pay scale, it can be as much as half of specialists. The salary makes the repayment of loans, as well as the associated costs of practicing (i.e. insurance and continuing training) difficult to do. The high student debt also makes it less likely for these doctors to work in rural or low-income areas where pay would be much less.

To help reduce the post tuition burden, schools have tried different programs to help encourage students to enter – and stay – in medical school. In 2008 The Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western University was the first university to offer free tuition as a way to encourage more students to enter academic medicine. That same year, the University of Central Florida offered full scholarships for the inaugural class of their new medical school. Last year, the University of California Riverside Medical School announced five full-ride scholarships to students who agreed to practice in the area for a minimum of five years. In all of these cases, the tuition was covered by endowments and private grants.

Training for doctors can take five to 10 years. The AAMC estimates that an additional 3,000 new doctors need to be trained every year on top of the estimated 20,000 that train annually. A few scholarships here and there will do little to meet the demand. This is why the AAMC and other professional organizations are calling on Congress to increase the amount of funding for training, as well as spread that funding beyond the concentrated teaching hospitals currently benefiting.

Thinkstock