Democratic East Baton Rouge Parish Mayor-President Kip Holden and former Plaquemines Parish President Billy Nungesser survived a four-candidate primary Saturday (Oct. 24) to advance to a runoff to decide who will replace Lt. Gov. Jay Dardenne.

Nungesser squeezed past Jefferson Parish President John Young. State Sen. Elbert Guillory was a distant fourth.

The real fireworks in the race were between Young and Nungesser, who raised millions of dollars for their campaign and waged a battle on the airwaves that turned nasty in the final weeks of the race.

This was Nungesser's second attempt at winning the lieutenant governor's office; he was defeated in the 2011 campaign by Dardenne in a race that also turned ugly. Nungesser was a business owner before he got into politics.

Young, a former prosecutor, is in his first full term as president of Jefferson Parish. He and Nungesser both touted tourism-heavy campaign platforms; Young spoke often of trying to lure retirees to the state.

Holden has served as Baton Rouge's mayor-president since 2005, and has by all accounts presided over a period of economic resurgence -- particularly in downtown Baton Rouge. Holden, who is term-limited, touted his successes in Baton Rouge during debates, but he struggled to raise enough money that allowed him to match challengers in the general election.

Guillory, a term-limited state senator from Opelousas who is one of the state's few black Republicans, struggled to maintain enough cash to fund his campaign. Ten days before the primary, he had just $58 on hand.

Dardenne, who was first elected lieutenant governor in 2010, is widely seen as a standard-setter in the office for his decision not to hire a secretary of the Department of Culture, Recreation and Tourism. All of the candidates for the office this year have pledged to follow Dardenne's lead, so the next lieutenant governor will also effectively become the head of an agency that oversees one of the biggest revenue-generating industries in the state.

One of the biggest issues for the next lieutenant governor will be finding the funding for special events that are big tourist draws -- think the Super Bowl or large festivals -- rather than pay for those events out of the state's marketing budget. While the job is vested with very little power in state government, tourism industry players say it's important to have a lieutenant governor who can effectively market the state and make it attractive to conventions and visitors.