Timothy Jost

April 16, 2015

On April 15, 2015, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service issued its funding opportunity announcement for 2016 navigator grants. (search CFDA 93.332 here ). The 2016 grant announcement looks much like last year’s, with one major change: grant awards will be for 36 months rather than 12 months (actually for 12 months renewable for two additional 12 month periods). This should give navigator programs greater assurance of stability than they have had in the past and reduce start-up costs.

The total amount of awards for 2016 will be $67 million. This is the same as the amount awarded for 2014, but more than the $60 million awarded for 2015. If funding is available, a total of $201 million will be awarded over the 3-year period. The amount awarded for each state depends on the number of uninsured adults and the number of individuals covered through the individual marketplace in the state, with each state assured a minimum of $600,000. The largest awards will go to Texas and Florida, each of which will receive almost $10 million.

Each state will have at least two types of navigator grants, one of which must go to a community and consumer-focused nonprofit. Current and past awardees are not explicitly given preference in the application process; however, since a number of the award criteria look to acquired previous expertise and ties to the community, awardees that have done well in the past should be well-positioned for continued program participation.

Letters of intent to apply for a grant are due on June 3, 2015, and final applications on June 15. CMS expects to announce awards on September 2, 2015.

Federal Appellate Court Dismisses Challenge To Congressional Participation In DC SHOP Exchange

On April 14, 2015, the federal Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals dismissed yet another lawsuit challenging the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Wisconsin Senator Ron Johnson and one of his staff members had sued the Office of Personnel Management (OPM), alleging that the OPM rule that allows members of Congress to purchase health insurance through the District of Columbia SHOP exchange with contributions from the Federal Employees Health Benefit Program (FEHBP) violated statutory requirements and the Equal Protection Clause of the Constitution. The Seventh Circuit affirmed a district court decision holding that Senator Johnson had not been injured by the rule and thus had no standing to challenge it.

Members of Congress are federal employees and have traditionally received health coverage through the FEHBP, which is administered by OPM. The ACA, however, provides that the federal government may only pay for health insurance coverage for members of Congress and their personal staff if they obtain coverage through an ACA exchange. This provision was added in response to a suggestion by Senator Charles Grassley that if members of Congress supported the legislation, they should receive coverage in the same way that their constituents did. OPM rules provide that members and their staff must obtain this coverage through the D.C. SHOP exchange. The OPM rules also provide that the FEHBP can pay the normal contribution it would make for federal employee health coverage for insurance obtained through the exchange.

Senator Johnson sued challenging this rule claiming that 1) the OPM lacked authority to grant pre-tax employer contributions for plans offered through an exchange; 2) the rule violated the ACA by allowing Congress members to purchase coverage through a small business SHOP exchange, since Congress is manifestly not a small business; and 3) the regulation denied Senator Johnson equal treatment with his constituents.

The district court had dismissed the case; it held that Senator Johnson had not suffered a concrete and particularized “injury in fact” traceable to the defendants’ action and likely to be redressed by a favorable judicial decision, and thus did not have standing to challenge the regulation. Senator Johnson argued that he in fact had been injured because of the administrative burden the regulation imposed upon him to determine which staff members were subject to the rule, the alleged deprivation of equal treatment, and the “reputational and electoral injury” he would suffer if he received illegal special treatment not available to his constituents.

The court rejected the administrative burden argument. It held that the burden Johnson alleged was unrelated to the provisions of the regulation he challenged and would still be present even if the court granted him relief. The court found no basis in the ACA for an equal treatment claim, and held that simple unequal treatment without some kind of injury does not support standing to raise a constitutional equal protection claim. Finally, the court rejected Johnson’s argument that the rule harmed his reputation and chances of being reelected, observing that he could simply decline the FEHBP contribution if he believed it to be illegal.

This case is yet another attempt to ask the courts to involve themselves in essentially political arguments involving the ACA. It is another example of the courts relying on standing doctrine to refuse this invitation. The decision was written by Judge Joel Flaum, a Reagan appointee, joined by Judge William Bauer, a Ford Appointee, and Judge Ann Williams, a Clinton appointee.

In Other ACA Implementation News

On April 14, 2015, CMS made four additional ACA-related announcements.

Reinsurance Program Collections Fall Short Of Target

First, CMS announced that the transitional reinsurance program has so far collected a total of $8.7 billion for 2014, with an additional approximately $1 billion more scheduled for collection by November 15. The reinsurance program collects funds from insurers and third-party administrators of self-insured plans to reinsure high-cost cases in the individual market during the three-year period from 2014 to 2016. Congress anticipated that the reformed individual market might experience a disproportionately high-risk enrollment over this period.

The target for collections for 2014 was $12.02 billion, with $10 billion for the reinsurance fund, $2 billion for the Treasury, and $20 million for administrative costs. Under current rules for allocation of collections, the entire amount collected up to $10 billion will go to pay reinsurance claims, so virtually all claims should be covered, although no money may be available for the Treasury or to cover administrative expenses.

The guidance does not explain whether the shortfall occurred because 1) the $63 per covered life amount that HHS collected from insurers and third-party administrators, based on its estimate of what needed to cover the $12.02 billion, was too small an amount; 2) HHS overestimated the number of covered lives covered by contributing entities; 3) some contributing entities failed to pay the amount they owed; or 4) some other factor caused the underpayment.

Refunds Based On Erroneous Enrollment Counts

CMS also released a guidance with instructions as to how contributing entities can file for refunds if they overpaid because of misapplying allowable counting methods to calculate their annual enrollment count. Refund requests must be filed by April 30, 2015, or 90 days after the entity submitted its annual enrollment and contributions submission form, whichever is later.

Rate-Filing Justifications

In addition, CMS released an Insurance Standards Bulletins on April 14 as to the Timing of Submission and Posting of Rate Filing Justifications for the 2015 Filing Year for Single Risk Pool Compliant Coverage Effective on or after January 1, 2016. Health insurers offering non-grandfathered, non-transitional plan coverage (qualified health plan or non-qualified health plan) must submit proposed rate filing justifications to CMS and to applicable states for rates subject to review by May 15, 2015, or by an earlier date specified by a state.

No later than June 1, 2015, states with an effective rate review program must 1) post on their website with respect to all single risk pool rate filings subject to review the information contained in Parts I, II, and III of an insurer’s rate filing justification, or 2) provide CMS’ web address for access to this information. States must also post this information on final rates no later than the first day of the annual individual market open enrollment period. States that intend to release information on proposed or final rate increases earlier than these dates must notify CMS in writing at least 30 days before making the information public.

Key Dates For Qualified Health Plans

Finally, CMS has posted a comprehensive list of key dates for qualified health plan certification in the federally facilitated marketplace, rate review, and the risk adjustment, reinsurance, and risk corridor programs.