Rachel Bundy, 22, has recently joined the Longmont Police Department, where her father, Jim Bundy, has been serving for 29 years. ( Lewis Geyer / Longmont Times-Call )

Longmont Police Officer Rachel Bundy's father Jim made sergeant the day she was born.

"The chief of police at the time brought my badge out to the hospital," Jim said. "I couldn't attend my promotion ceremony."

Jim Bundy recently saw Rachel sworn in as an officer.

Rachel is still getting acclimated to the job, but her involvement with the department goes back several years as she started off in the Explorer program, eventually rising to the rank of commander. She also worked as a student intern.

The two don't work the same shift together as part of department policy.

Jim and Rachel are not even the first father-daughter police officer combo in the family. Jim's wife and father-in-law were both police officers. He also boasts a twin brother and nephew in law enforcement.

"It goes back a couple of generations," Jim Bundy said. "We've got currently, I think, at least two husband and wife teams at the department. This is the first father-daughter that I can recall."

The family connection in the first responder business also extends to firefighters and emergency medical personnel.

Father and son Dave and Nick Puccetti both work for the Frederick-Firestone Fire Protection District.

When firefighter paramedic Nick was 15-years-old, a night ride to a fire sparked his interest in joining the emergency services.

"We were going to a fire one night — I was doing a ride along with him," Nick said. "We passed the house, and there were flames blowing out the back. I got the adrenaline dump, and I realized that I could actually do this."

Advertisement

Dave, now the division chief/fire marshal, admits that it was actually a captain at the scene who put Nick to work that night cleaning firefighter's gear, handing out water, rolling hoses and picking up supplies.

"He gave him a shovel and had him clean stuff up, blow smoke out of the house, stuff like that," Dave said. "I can't take credit for that."

Both say having family members in the same field allows for a sympathetic ear, particularly on the more troubling calls, for example, ones that involve children.

"You have somebody who has a frame of reference," Nick said. "They kind of know what it feels like."

They admit, however, that having two first responders in the family can wreak havoc with holidays, because being a firefighter is less of a career than a lifestyle choice.

"As far as family life, it's never normal," Dave said. "Holidays are always planned around shift work. We tease that the wives and husbands of firefighters are really single parents 10 months out of the year."

Nick said that in addition to the regular family, a firefighter also has his station family.

"You get to know your coworkers and your coworkers' spouses, kids and their trials and tribulations," he said. "You really do have two families."

Dave said the fire district has been supportive of the two working together, adding that there are certain restrictions. For example, Dave has nothing to do with Nick's compensation or advancement through the district

"We don't talk about work a whole lot as far as the nuts and bolts," he said. "We do talk about calls and responses."

FFFPD Community Outreach Specialist Summer Stair said she doesn't have any biological family members in the fire service but feels like she has a family in the district nonetheless.

Stair said that when she bought a house, she was considering hiring movers but several firefighters quickly volunteered for the job, saying "We're your family."

"The fire service is like a big family," she said. "Even if you don't have family members, it's like you have a family. I know I could go to anyone and ask for help and they would help me."

Contact Times-Call staff writer John Bear at 303-684-5212 or bearj@times-call.com