When someone commits suicide, the first response is visceral emotion: shock, grief, horror. Then the mind kicks in, trying to make sense of what the heart can’t abide, we ask, “Why? Why? Why? What made this person murder themselves?”

Just days after Robin Williams’ suicide, when many are still reeling from his tragic death, Urban Samurai has opened Marsha Norman’s Pulitzer Prize-winning play, ” ‘Night, Mother,” at the New Century Theatre in downtown Minneapolis. The timing couldn’t be better.

The two-person show grapples with suicide — and the depression that sparks it — with moving performances by Tina Sigel as Thelma and Marcia Svaleson as Jessie, her daughter.

Jessie asks for her Mom’s help in finding her late father’s pistol, ostensibly for protection against robbers, but soon admits to her mother that “the gun is for me.”

She preps her Mom for her loss, trying to download all of the daily details the older woman will need to handle in order to survive and move forward, since Jessie has been taking care of things in their shared home.

Gradually, the play reveals the lives of the two that have brought them to this point.

There are ironies. The mother kept things from Jessie that she learns only now as she’s planning to leave her life — while Jessie also has kept her mother in the dark about the depth of her pain. They are more honest with each other than ever, because this might be their last chance to speak.

While the older woman admits that she fears death and will have to be dragged kicking and screaming into the darkness, Jessie wants to embrace the peace she thinks she’ll find by moving beyond her sad life and epileptic body.

Thelma isn’t always kind as she rages against the dying of her daughter’s light, trying to stop her by any means possible. And Jessie’s intended “kindness” in preparing her mother for her death seems to make her exit even harder for her mother than if she had simply left a note.

There is a stirring, melancholy humanity in Matt Greseth’s direction, which juxtaposes the mundane, everyday with a larger catastrophic arc. It makes suicide become concrete and real, in spite of our urge to reject it as an act and deny it as a possibility — and it opens the door a crack into the dark room of depression.

But at the end, we are left wondering, still. Is there ever an answer to the “why” of suicide that will satisfy? What: ” ‘Night, Mother”

Where: Urban Samurai at New Century Theatre, 615 Hennepin Avenue, Minneapolis

When: Through Aug. 31

Tickets: $25-$20

More information: 612-455-9501; urbansamurai.org

Capsule: A melancholy and moving exploration of suicide — and the love that may not stop it.