Topics: Editor's Picks, Love and Sex, Masturbation, Sex, Life News

You probably hadn’t realized that May is a commemorative month — but you might have been celebrating without even knowing. It isn’t a holiday observed by post offices or banks, at least not in any official capacity. You won’t be getting a day off (although you might be getting off). And, no, it has nothing to do with Mother’s Day (ideally).

Give up? It’s International Masturbation Month, according to, you know, some people who decided it is. It’s also National Pet Month, National Bike Month, National ADHD Awareness Month and, like 14 other things. Of all the causes vying for the public’s attention this month, Masturbation Month certainly has the most pleasurable fundraising approach: masturbate-a-thons, in which people literally cum together for a cause. Yes, this is a thing that exists in the world, and it’s been around for nearly 20 years now.

I talked to Good Vibrations Staff Sexologist Carol Queen, one of the minds behind this commemorative month, to talk onanistic advocacy, vanishing taboos and masturbation slang.

How did Masturbation Month get started?

In 1994, Dr. Joycelyn Elders, then the U.S. surgeon general, was fired for saying one brief and sensible thing about masturbation: that “it’s something that perhaps should be taught” about in sex-ed curricula. Good Vibrations staff struggled to make sense of this senseless situation, and decided to create National Masturbation Month, now known as International Masturbation Month, to celebrate and provoke discourse about this so prevalent but often disrespected sexual practice.

What’s it take to make an international month, anyway? Is there an official process or do you just declare it “such and such” month and hope people listen?

I don’t know how all those other quirky holidays got on the calendar, but in this case, we just did it and waited for the people to celebrate.

Why do we need to have an International Masturbation Month? Is masturbation really something in need of awareness-raising?

Well, if the Kinsey Reports were right that almost everyone masturbates, at least at some point in their life, you could argue that this is a behavior that needs no boosters. But it’s also a serious source of shame and opprobrium. That’s, in fact, a terrible mix — it’s not rare, yet when someone notable says something neutrally, carefully respectful about it, they get the axe. Ordinary people who do it think there’s something wrong with them, and it’s painted as a pathetic third choice if you can’t get someone to have sex with you. In fact, if you can shake off this bad rap, masturbation is amazing. It can provide extraordinary pleasure, or just help you get to sleep, teach you about your body and sexual responses, and help keep the blood flowing in the nethers, as they might say on Firefly. It’s good for you, unless you do it so much that you forget to eat or run afoul of the laws of physics — here I’m really talking about friction.

Just how far have we come since Jocelyn Elders’ Masturbationgate? Have much have people’s views on masturbation evolved?

It’s a glass-half-empty thing. We’ve had almost 20 years of more open discourse about it — at least during May every year — so of course things have improved. But generations of students still have terrible sex education, so it’s like the consciousness-raising has to start all over again every few years.

Has Masturbation Month ever courted controversy?

One could say that the whole notion courts controversy, though there’s been surprisingly little ruckus. The Masturbate-a-Thon, I suppose, has been the most controversial thing, even before the live-action version was developed. But partly that’s because it’s so cheeky. We didn’t want to depart very far from this position of a serious message delivered with a light touch, because bringing real controversy down would also include broadcasting the message that there was something wrong with masturbation. This, of course, is the message we don’t want to encourage. But drawing out the snarling anti-masturbation dogs, then pointing and laughing, is really quite tempting.

Actually, when an entity — a media outlet or pundit, say — finds us too controversial, one of their strategies is often just silence. Coverage of International Masturbation Month in the U.S. has been way scantier than in many other countries, and often less substantive. When we did a Masturbate-a-Thon in London in 2006, we got tons more press than we get for the events in the U.S. It’s one way, I think, that this country continues to live its prudish, Puritan history.

Tell me about this Masturbate-a-Thon.

So there are two sorts of Masturbate-a-Thon: One is the kind Good Vibrations’ brainstormers came up with in 1999, in which a participant got pledges for their involvement, masturbated — presumably privately, or maybe with a partner — and then remitted those pledges to Good Vibes so they could be passed on to nonprofits who dealt with sexual health. Good Vibes was always trying to cook up new Masturbation Month angles, and this one got lots and lots of attention; it went on for many years.