AP file photo Hillary Clinton

Choosing a U.S. president hinges on a basic question: Which candidate is most likely to help America become a better, more prosperous, more stable, more secure country that benefits all citizens?

The clear answer in 2016 is Hillary Clinton.

She has a distinguished record of governing. As first lady in the 1990s, she pioneered efforts for universal health insurance — which didn’t succeed, but were followed by the Affordable Care Act. As a U.S. senator from New York state, she championed progressive causes to help average American families. As secretary of state, she dealt commendably with complex world conditions and the rise of dangerous terrorism.

More than all other aspirants in this year’s colorful field, we think Clinton has wisdom, judgment and presidential stature to lead the world’s greatest superpower. Therefore, we endorse her for the Democratic nomination in West Virginia’s May 10 primary election.

Clinton is the only candidate who speaks specifically to the economic hardship felt by West Virginia families and communities as the coal industry shrinks. She would invest federal money in a way similar to what President Obama has proposed to help people and towns get through the transition and on to more prosperous times.

More than 50 U.S. newspapers have endorsed Clinton — most of them saying that Democratic socialist challenger Bernie Sanders is an appealing idealist, but with little chance of achieving tangible improvements in the cesspool of Washington politics.

For example, the Hartford Courant said Clinton is a practical leader who is able to “solve problems, whether negotiating a cease-fire between Israel and Hamas or getting Republican support for the Children’s Health Insurance Program.” It added:

“Mrs. Clinton has turned dreams into laws. She has fought for the underclass, championing the causes of women and children around the world. Her grasp of foreign policy is deep. ... Given her resume, few people today are more qualified for the Oval Office than she is.”

The tabloid New York Daily News blared:

“Vote Hillary Clinton: Her plans to give working- and middle-class Americans a fighting chance at rising incomes are far superior to Bernie Sanders’.” It said:

“Clinton would enable every student to graduate debt-free from public higher education. … She would use substantial tax hikes on the wealthy and breaks for the middle class both to tilt the scales away from the rich and to jump-start the economy by giving many others more money to spend. ... Big businesses would face heavy penalties for moving money abroad to avoid corporate taxes … . Clinton’s proposals are shaped for the world in which we live, not the world in which we might wish to live.”

We welcome the prospect of America’s first female president. We urge West Virginia Democrats to choose her on May 10.