Sioux Falls, SD

With it being the unofficial start to the summer season, you might be in search of that summertime glow. But skin cancer is on the rise.

For years people have soaked up the sun in search of a gorgeous glow.

"It makes me give a nice, little glow," sunless tanner Darci Guerra said.

Now more people are heading indoors for a UV-free tan.

"I sunless about once a week," Darci Guerra said.

Darci Guerra is one of a growing number of women using sunless tanning booths.

"It gives me that flawless look. It smoothes my face, and covers some freckles. I am a mommy, so it covers some of those imperfections I have on the side," Guerra said.

Your sunless tan can last a day, or a week, depending on what you do before, during and after your application.

Stacey Burkhart, the district manager at Sun Tan City, says you should moisturize and exfoliate before hitting the sunless booth.

"There's different types of exfoliants. You want to get that dead skin off because dead skin can't tan in the bed or the sunless unit as well," Burkhart said.

Whether you head to a booth or put lotion on at home by yourself, make sure you choose the right shade and apply evenly.

"Not everyone is going to have the same color. We're going to find out what best fits you," Burkhart said.

Right after your sunless tan, it's also not a bad idea to try a tan extender, and drink plenty of water.

"That's how your skin keeps hydrated--water and products that keep your skin moisturized," Burkhart said.

You also want to wait four to six hours after a tan to work out, shower or swim.

"A lot of people want to get fast, instant results. That's a great way to do it," Burkhart said.

For Guerra, it's a great way to get a summer tan without the fear of skin cancer.

"As a mom, I want to be healthy as long as I can for my young ones. It is a healthier way to maintain a great color," Guerra said.

Pregnant women should consult a doctor before hitting a sunless tanning booth.

HealthBeat

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.