It was early Monday morning when Chalkin said he first learned that his dear friend, neighbor and colleague may have been on a plane that crashed in Owasso.

People who knew Dr. Perry Inhofe had nothing but great things to say about the doctor. His colleagues tell us the medical community will not be the same without him.

"He was a great friend. You can always count on him if you ever needed anything," said Dr. Brian Chalkin.

Sources close to Oklahoma Senator Jim Inhofe confirmed Monday it was his son, Dr. Perry Inhofe, who was killed in a plane crash in Owasso.

Perry Inhofe was a Tulsa orthopedic surgeon. He was well-known throughout the community.

People who knew Dr. Inhofe had nothing but great things to say about the doctor. His colleagues tell us the medical community will not be the same without him.

They say Dr. Inhofe was also a loving father, husband, son and friend.

"He was a great friend. You can always count on him if you ever needed anything," said Dr. Brian Chalkin.

Chalkin has known Inhofe for nearly a decade. The two specialize in hand surgery.

It was early Monday morning when Chalkin said he first learned that his dear friend, neighbor and colleague may have been on a plane that crashed in Owasso.

"I really didn't think it was possible, because Dr. Inhofe was very meticulous, was very precise, very detail oriented person," Chalkin said.

11/11/2013 Related Story: Dr. Perry Inhofe, Son Of Sen. Jim Inhofe, Killed In Owasso Plane Crash

But as Chalkin said, accidents can happen.

Chalkin said Inhofe got his passion for flying from his father and he passed it down to his children.

"He engaged in a risky hobby, something that he loved. He was extremely passionate about it," Chalkin said. "If he was lost doing something he loved, you have to respect him for that."

We had dozens of viewers comment on NewsOn6.com about their experience with Inhofe.

One viewer wrote, "he helped my son after he broke a bone. He was so kind and compassionate and answered each question thoroughly while making the patient and family feel important to him."

Another wrote, "He was a wonderful doctor that truly cared for his patients."

"Dr. Inhofe was an excellent surgeon. He was honest. He was accurate and he did great service to the community," Chalkin said. "It's been very upsetting to all of us and I only hope his family can get through it as painlessly as possible."

Inhofe leaves behind his wife, children, and parents.

We have not learned of any funeral arrangements.