There are huge economic benefits to paid leave for new mothers and fathers. So why doesn't the U.S. mandate any?

Family leave, including some form of paid leave for new parents, is an emerging political issue. (Photo: File/Gannett News Service)

This time four years ago, I had gotten to watch a fair number of World Cup matches on TV, or at least part of the matches. I think I watched Sweden play North Korea, to give you a sense of how far I was willing to go.

This year I have hardly gotten to watch any. Don't get me wrong: I will make it a priority to find a television on Sunday so that I can cheer on the U.S. women in the finals against Japan, the same team that beat us in 2011. It's my patriotic duty, and one feels especially sensitive to patriotic duties on July 4 weekend.

There are several reasons that my World Cup viewing has flagged this time around, but the main one is that, exactly four years ago, I was on the tail end of eight weeks of unpaid paternity leave and was at home, trying to learn what to do with this new baby son who was living in our house all of a sudden.

Two months is not a long time, really, and it goes by in a sleep-deprived, half-panicked haze. (I may be nostalgic for the soccer matches now, but at the time they were far from a priority.) Still, those eight weeks were some of the most important of my life, and I think they have helped set the course for the years that have followed, for my son Forrest, for my wife and me.

Family leave is important for both men and women, and there have been lots of economic studies showing long-term benefits to children and families. "In Britain," the Economist magazine wrote, "dads who took time off at birth were almost a third more likely to read books with their toddlers than those who hadn't." Paternity leave also correlates to improved performance in school, better sharing of parenting duties — and, actually, better employee retention for companies.

Paid leave is something of an emerging political issue, and it is stunning to recognize how rare the U.S. policy of zero weeks of mandatory paid leave truly is. The United Kingdom mandates 40 weeks of paid maternity leave — which, I admit, sounds like a lot. But Canada mandates 15 weeks, China 14, Mexico 12. Out of 185 countries, only the U.S., Oman and Papua New Guinea are new mothers not guaranteed a single day's worth of leave. Most countries also have some sort of less-generous mandate for paternity leave.

(By the way, leave in other countries isn't paid directly by the employer or by the taxpayer, but through a kind of mandatory insurance fund that employees pay into, sort of like Social Security tax in the U.S.)

On July 1, a new law in California made 6.5 million Californians eligible for paid sick leave for the first time. There are a couple of paid family leave bills kicking around in Washington, and both President Obama and likely Democratic presidential nominee Hillary Clinton have mentioned it as an issue.

In Wisconsin, meanwhile, some GOP legislative leaders have signaled a willingness to repeal some of the state's existing protections on leave, a move that triggered some strong pushback among Democrats.

I'd say that is a worthwhile fight to have. It is possible to design family leave policies in a way that are not overly burdensome to employers, and the weight of economic and neurological research on the subject show that the upsides to families and young children are immense.

As I said above, my leave four years ago was unpaid. I am well aware that most households cannot afford to do what my wife and I did and use savings to cover the loss of income in that time. We had that luxury, that privilege, and I'm glad of it.

But time off to care for a new baby shouldn't be a luxury.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1IxmgJb