As I mentioned in my reading-list post earlier today, some of my friends in the small world of “reform conservatism” have been busy putting together a book of policy essays, which includes (among other ideas) proposals on tax reform and safety net reform that the authors, at least, think might help boost the fortunes of the working class and poor.

Fortunately, the ever-reliable Jonathan Chait is here to explain to them that they’re simply wasting their time, because whatever a few right-of-center wonks might like to think, American conservatism in its very essence is intent on soaking, punishing and immiserating the poor.

Taking off from a recent Ramesh Ponnuru piece in which Ponnuru argues that Republicans should defend wage subsidies like the earned-income tax credit as an alternative to minimum-wage increases, Chait makes two valid points: First, that many red states rely on regressive state and local taxes that burden the working poor, and second, that many Obama-era Republicans have decided that it’s a mistake to take poor people off the federal income tax rolls, whether via the earned-income tax credit or some other mechanism.

These points prove the case that the GOP includes a strong ideological tendency that cuts against what some of the reform-conservative essayists want to do. What they don’t prove, however, is that the current Republican Party could never be a vehicle for such a policy agenda. The Democratic Party of the late 1970s and early 1980s stood rather firmly for all kinds of ideas (price controls, middle class tax increases) that the Democratic Party of the 1990s deliberately backed away from. There is no necessary reason why the same could not be true of the G.O.P.’s Obama-era fixation on the mooching 47 percent — especially since all kinds of prominent, ambitious Republicans have been backpedaling away from that idea ever since Mitt Romney’s 2012 defeat.

And especially since, in backpedaling away, they’ve moved closer (quite close, in the case of a not-at-all-insignificant figure like Marco Rubio) to what I would describe as the consensus “reform conservative” position on welfare policy: Namely, that a reform of the safety net should concentrate on 1) increasing take-home pay for low-wage workers and 2) removing and minimizing perverse anti-work incentives created by current transfer programs.

Is it really unimaginable that the national Republican Party would get behind such a two-part vision of reform? I would say not, since that’s basically the thrust of reforms that were enacted under Republican Congresses and Republican presidents throughout the long pre-Obama period of conservative ascendance. If you look at this table, for instance, you’ll see that federal income tax liability for the poorest 10 percent declined pretty steadily from the 1986 tax reform onward — quite often thanks to policy changes that Republicans either accepted or actively endorsed. Or again, if you look at this chart, you’ll see that we cut taxes on low-wage workers three times (relying on the EITC and child tax credits) in the twenty years before the Obama era: first in the ’86 tax reform, under Reagan; then in 1997, in a Clinton-Gingrich deal, and finally in 2001, in the Bush tax cuts. Those were not policies supported by all Republicans and conservatives by any means — hence the internal party debate, which swung in more Randian direction in 2009-2012 — but they were ideas that many Republican leaders embraced, pushed for, and signed into law.

And of course they were accompanied, as in many of today’s reformist proposals, by changes and cuts to existing welfare programs, with the overall goal of changing the incentive structures facing the poor, so that work would become more rewarding and attractive and idleness less so. Reasonable people can disagree about the consequences of these reforms, but there’s a pretty plausible case that this combination of increased take-home pay and lower guaranteed benefits, rather than punishing the poor, tended to help them: At the very least, we seemed to make more progress reducing child poverty from the 1990s onward, as Scott Winship argued earlier this year in Politico, then we did in the years before the EITC/welfare reform/child tax credit combination became federal policy.

Chait’s thesis, then, hinges on the idea that the ideological changes in the national G.O.P. since 2008 have been so sweeping, so revolutionary, that there can be no going back to the way that both tax reform and safety-net reform quite often proceeded during the years of substantial Republican influence and power that preceded Obama’s election. And maybe he’s right: As I keep saying in these arguments, I’m a pessimist by nature, and I’m not interested in making a Pollyanish case that the G.O.P. will necessarily embrace “reform conservatism,” or any other flavor of reform for that matter. But I just think that both the historical record and the current drift of Republican policy thinking suggest that it’s much more possible than Chait tends to allow.