Price check in the operating room.

Patients can find out how much their surgery will cost by dialing a phone or clicking a computer now that St. Luke’s University Health Network rolled out PriceChecker.

The system quotes a bundled price for the same operation at any of St. Luke’s hospitals in Pennsylvania, including St. Luke’s Miners Campus in Coaldale.

For example, a patient needing reconstruction of a knee ligament will pay $10,270. That includes the charges for the surgeon, operating room, image scans done during the procedure, anesthesia and an office visit after the surgery.

Nationally, medical care prices have been rising faster than most other prices during the past 12 months, and hospitals have had incentive to share price information for the past two years since the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services began revealing what it pays.

Lehigh Valley Health Network, which includes Lehigh Valley Hospital-Hazleton, is studying a way to provide prices to patients.

“We are still evaluating what that will look like and what is really best for our patients,” Lehigh Valley said in a statement.

St. Luke’s when creating PriceChecker kept in mind patients who pay high deductibles through their medical insurance, rather than patients insured by Medicare and Medicaid. Low-cost insurance plans with high deductibles have become more common since the Affordable Care Act required Americans to purchase healthcare insurance or pay a penalty.

At St. Luke’s, PriceChecker is available for several types of surgeries and imaging scans.

The bundled price, however, doesn’t always cover everything.

Human bodies differ, St. Luke’s points out, and patients get a separate bill for any extra services required, such as lab tests of specimens and scans done before or after the procedure.

A colonoscopy, for example, costs $1,050, but if the procedure finds cancer, the cost for treating the cancer is extra for the patients or their insurers.

“We have a number of payment plans and options for patients in need,” Kenneth Szydlow, a spokesman for St. Luke’s, said by email.

At Geisinger Health Systems, based in Danville, patients have been offered a guaranteed price for heart surgeries since 2006. The price covers any additional work required up to 90 days after the surgery, and Geisinger expanded the plan called ProvenCare to a few other procedures.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services began posting average charges for 100 procedures at 3,300 American hospitals on its website two years ago.

Some websites collate the CMS data for consumers.

NerdWallet.com has an online tool to compare hospital prices. Typing in Hazleton, PA, for example, yields a list of charges for hip replacements at nine area hospitals.

The website OpsCost.com provides the list of average prices that Medicare paid for dozens of procedures, such as MRI scans. Again by typing in Hazleton, PA, users can find the average cost paid at 10 area hospitals.

The cost of medical care commodities, which climbed 0.7 percent in February, the biggest spike in eight years, is up 3.4 percent for the 12 months ending in August, according to the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics. Medical care services are up 2.2 percent during that span, while the bureau’s Consumer Price Index for all items is up 0.2 percent.

kjackson@standardspeaker.com