The Wichita Wingnuts had nine players in their lineup on Monday night when they hosted the Laredo Lemurs at Lawrence-Dumont Stadium, but the way Jake Kahaulelio is hitting these days his name seems to be attached to every big offensive play. The second baseman made some memories on Memorial Day by putting on a show for the 3,844 fans in attendance for Wichita’s 5-3 win over Laredo. Kahaulelio went 3-3 at the plate, with four RBI, a double, and a home run.

Anthony Capra had a tough first inning, but would eventually shut down the league’s top-ranked offense for most of his outing. Nick Van Stratten began the game with a triple and scored shortly thereafter on an RBI single by Devin Goodwin to make it 1-0 Lemurs in the early going. Capra settled in after the initial burst, working 7.0 innings of four-hit baseball and issuing just two walks compared to seven strikeouts. The quality start marked the eighth time in the first 12 games that the starting pitcher for Wichita has gone at least 6.0 innings and allowed three or less runs.

Kahaulelio tied the game at one in the bottom of the first inning when he scored Ryan Khoury on a sacrifice fly to shallow right field. Khoury reached on a walk and stole second base to reach scoring position for his teammate.

Kahaulelio was back on the attack in the fourth inning. Carlo Testa tripled to start the inning and then the California native whacked a home run to left field that gave the Wingnuts a 3-1 cushion.

In the very next inning the Wingnuts relentless bats got to Laredo starter Mike Piazza once again. David Amberson led off with a single before Ryan Khoury drew his league-leading 13th base on balls. The dynamic duo then executed a double steal to put runners in scoring position with nobody out. Testa brought home Amberson on a sacrifice fly to left before Kahaulelio drilled another extra base hit, this time an RBI double to push the lead to 5-1. Piazza allowed all five runs and seven hits over his 6.2 innings of work.

Daniel Bennett came on in relief of Capra for the eighth inning and allowed a one out single to Harrison Kain that was followed by a 2-run home run by Goodwin. Goodwin went 2-4 and drove in three runs to bring his season total to 17. Lefty Alex Hinshaw relieved Bennett with two runners in scoring position and two outs and struck out the only batter he faced to end the threat.

Matt Nevarez allowed just a single in the ninth inning on his way to picking up his sixth save in seven opportunities.

The top two teams in the South will meet again on Tuesday night at Lawrence-Dumont Stadium as RHP Tim Brown works for Wichita against RHP Josh Strawn of Laredo. First pitch is set for 7:05 p.m. There will be $3 Rolling Rocks served all night long. For information on season tickets, group outings, and party packages, call the Wingnuts' main office at (316) 264-NUTS, or visit the Wingnuts' official website at www.wichitawingnuts.com