Obamacare may be taking a turn for the bizarre, if a couple of recent developments are any indication.

First, a new ad campaign in Colorado promoting President Obama’s health-care overhaul doesn’t seem to be afraid of doing whatever it takes to enlist the all-important 20-somethings and 30-somethings needed to help spread out the liability risk.

One of its online campaign posters promoting “Brosurance” features two apparent college buddies propping up a third friend over a beer keg asking the question — a la those milk ads — “Got Insurance?” As the picture shows, the third friend is performing a drinking game known as a keg stand, or attempting to drink beer directly from the tap while in an unnatural position for consuming said suds.

If you can’t see it, the slogan reads: “Keg stands are crazy. Not having health insurance is crazier. Don’t tap into your beer money to cover those medical bills.”

Some of the other Colorado promos target active, younger consumers as well as mothers — who may well be single though it is not stated — who want to make sure they have insurance for their teen, toddler and even unborn children.

On the other side of the coin, a report from CNBC.com issued Monday says the House Committee on Energy and Commerce consulted tech legend and one-time murder suspect John McAfee on possibly helping to fix the distraught web site HealthCare.gov that has become an embarrassment for Obamacare proponents.

McAfee, whose company was responsible for the antivirus software that bears his name, took a $100 million buyout from the sale of his company in 2004. He also was a one-time fugitive, suspected at one time of shooting his neighbor in Belize, Greg Faull, but was later deported back to the U.S. without being charged and he denies any involvement in the killing.

Still House Energy staffers emailed McAfee, CNBC says, asking for an “informal discussion” to go over what might be the troubled with the glitch-ridden web site.

YouTube A still from McAfee’s controversial video

“It would be an informal discussion: We would take notes but these would not be for attribution, it would mainly guide our oversight and review of the program,” the email from staff counsel Sean Hayes said, according to CNBC.

You may remember McAfee made a controversial video for YouTube earlier this year alluding to complaints with his former company’s antivirus program. Entitled “How to Uninstall McAfee Antivirus,” it features a frustrated McAfee cursing over the software he originated but points out he has not been involved with the company for years. The video features McAfee giving up and starting up a bacchanalian ritual with a bevy of women before he pulls out a handgun and shoots his computer.

Follow Russ Britt on Twitter @russbrittmktw

Follow Health Exchange on Twitter @MWHealthBlog