Action Points Note that this study was published as an abstract and presented at a conference. These data and conclusions should be considered to be preliminary until published in a peer-reviewed journal.

WASHINGTON -- A single dose of an investigational influenza drug was able to reduce the duration of fever and viral shedding, researchers said here.

In a combined analysis of two randomized placebo-controlled trials, the neuraminidase inhibitor peramivir (Rapivab), given by injection within 48 hours of symptom onset, also lowered the amount of virus in the blood, according to Rich Whitley, MD, of the University of Alabama at Birmingham.

But while the drug reduced the time to resolution of symptoms -- the primary endpoint of the trials -- the difference from placebo was not statistically significant, Whitley said during a media event at the Interscience Conference on Antimicrobial Agents and Chemotherapy here.

Nonetheless, the studies are sufficiently convincing they can be used to support a phase II trial, conducted in Japan and reported in 2010, that forms the basis of an application for FDA approval, said co-author William Sheridan, MBBS, chief medical officer of BioCryst Pharmaceuticals, of Research Triangle Park, N.C.

That 2010 study found that the drug significantly reduced the time to alleviation of symptoms, compared with placebo. The current studies reached that endpoint in an unadjusted analysis, but fell short of statistical significance after adjustment for smoking, influenza season, and type of flu, Sheridan said.

"The key is that the combined analysis supports the pivotal analysis because everything is the same direction," he told reporters.

BioCryst is developing the drug, which is already licensed in Korea and Japan and has been given to more than 1 million patients in Japan.

Peramivir can be given both by intramuscular injection or intravenous infusion, but the company is seeking an indication for intravenous use because the intramuscular (IM) shot "hurts a fair bit," Sheridan said.

The two studies Whitley is presenting used the IM route, but other research from BioCryst presented here shows that both approaches are equivalent, Sheridan said.

For that reason, he said, the company is using them to back up the Japanese trial, which used intravenous infusions to deliver the drug. The infusions take between 15 and 30 minutes.

The other neuraminidase inhibitor in the public eye is oseltamivir (Tamiflu), which is given orally. Zanamivir (Relenza) is in delivered to the lungs using a nebulizer.

While an oral drug is easy, some people might not be able to use it, Sheridan said, especially if one of their symptoms is nausea and vomiting, and there are also some people unable to take zanamivir.

But in general practice in the U.S., "IV medications are going to be met with reluctance," commented Michael Schmidt, PhD, of the Medical University of South Carolina in Charleston, who moderated the ICAAC session.

On the other hand, public health authorities might "embrace it" in emergencies, he told MedPage Today, and some institutions -- such as nursing homes -- might also find it useful as influenza prophylaxis.

Large metropolitan hospitals might also adopt the drug to protect staff, he said, "if they have a hotspot outbreak where all of a sudden the [emergency department] is overwhelmed."

"The true utility of the drug, I think, is the single dose," he said, and it might be an important tool in the event of an outbreak of highly virulent pandemic flu.

Whitley disclosed a relevant relationship with Gilead Sciences. Several co-authors disclosed relevant relationships with BioCryst.