Local and State News

To S.C. Nonprofits’ Dismay, Attorney General Weighs in on Obamacare

Oct. 1 Enrollment Launch Is This Week



Wednesday, September 25, 2013 By Porter Barron Jr. Wednesday, September 25, 2013

Last week, S.C. Attorney General Alan Wilson joined 12 of his fellow Republican state attorneys general on Capitol Hill to warn Congress about what they say are insufficient privacy and security safeguards in the enrollment process of the Affordable Care Act, popularly known as Obamacare.Meanwhile, in Columbia, several nonprofit community groups with grant support from the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services have been racing to prepare to assist the public in that enrollment process, which is scheduled to begin nationwide on Oct. 1.With less time and resources than any of the grant recipients would have preferred, they are harried and anxious, as they, like most Americans, do not know exactly what to expect on Oct. 1.One of the most crucial services these groups will provide is helping consumers learn whether they qualify for health care subsidies, based on their income levels.So it was with dismay that they heard of Wilson’s Sept. 18 testimony on Capitol Hill and subsequent Twitter posts, in which he derided Obamacare and, in particular, the volunteers and staff who are preparing to assist consumers with enrollment. Under the new health care law, they are known as navigators, assisters or certified application counselors — three classifications with minor differences among them.“While groups like the Girl Scouts require employees to complete background checks, there are no such requirements for Navigators,” Wilson told Congress.Then he took to Twitter: “#Navigators will handle your personal data without a background check, screening, or proper training.”Shortly thereafter, he followed with, “It is more difficult to help the Girl Scouts sell boxes of cookies than it is to be a HHS #Navigator.”Then: “It only takes 20 hours of training to be a #Navigator. Most states require over 40 hours of training for a driver’s license.”Wanda Pearson of Columbia’s Cooperative Ministries took exception to those statements: “Our navigator program will not operate that way,” she said. “The requirement is that everyone we hire as a navigator will have a satisfactory background screening. That will mean no criminal convictions in South Carolina or anywhere else that we can detect, no history of any type of moral turpitude; and they don’t handle personal information.”However, Wilson has a point: It’s not clear whether the new law mandates background checks for navigators. The Department of Health and Human Services has not responded to Free Times’ questions about such a provision.Still, local navigators say they will protect consumers.Pearson says that navigators will provide consumers with personal computing devices with which to enter their own information, and that navigators who attempt to access that information should be reported. Federal law mandates that anyone found guilty of abusing personal information used in the enrollment process will face fines up $25,000.As for training, Pearson says, “The navigator training is really up to the individual. The projection was that it would take the average person 20 hours to complete it. It could take you less; it could take you longer. As far as the comparison to the driver’s license, I don’t know how valid that is. It’s a whole different skill set.”York Glover of Eau Claire Cooperative Health Center, which received a federal grant to train certified application counselors, sees Wilson’s comments as part of a Republican effort to hamstring Obamacare at every turn for political purposes.“They’re trying to deter people from enrolling, period,” he says.“It could be an uneasy process, but if you had to do it by yourself, you’d have a lot of people who would be less inclined to do it,” Glover says. “So if I can set up a system to help someone through the process, then I assure a better success rate, but if you make those folks seem unsafe, then you have a whole lot of people who won’t get enrolled and you can then say, ‘See, this was a big waste of time.’”Indeed, Obamacare opponents have stymied navigator programs in multiple GOP-controlled states. At least four nonprofits have returned their federal grants, saying that state-level restrictions prevented them from fulfilling the grants’ requirements, according to a report by USA Today.Asked to explain the disconnect between his Capitol Hill testimony and Twitter posts and the work that nonprofits are doing in South Carolina, Wilson’s office replied: “Attorney General Wilson’s testimony did not criticize individual Navigator grant recipients. It addressed the existing law, not specific organizations and entities, by highlighting security risks associated with federal regulations that don’t require background checks and invite identify theft scams.”In related statements, Wilson described the data hub — through which consumers’ personal information will pass for verification purposes — as “a con-man’s all-you-can-eat buffet overflowing with a gold mine of sensitive information.”Asked how the attorney general had reached such a frightful conclusion, his office replied, “A rapid response mechanism to respond to data breaches is no substitute for the Administration’s refusal to impose appropriate security safeguards at the outset. Remember Benjamin Franklin’s advice: An ounce of prevention is worth more than a pound of cure.”For their part, the feds say they are implementing tested cyber-security measures that have been used successfully in administering other federal programs like Medicare, Medicaid, government grants and mortgages. They say they are focusing on front-end and back-end security and are “ready to take action against any entity that engages in fraudulent activities.”Despite dismissing Wilson’s stated concerns as propaganda, the local nonprofit workers say that they have serious concerns about what is coming on Oct. 1.“Our biggest concern is that people will not be able to distinguish the legitimate navigators from the ones who are just purporting to be navigators,” Cooperative Ministries’ Pearson says.“We want people to understand that a genuine navigator will not ask for your personal information,” she says. “They will not attempt to copy it. They will not attempt to print it or to keep possession of it in any way. If anyone asks you for that, then chances are they are a [health insurance] agent/broker or a conman.”

Printer-friendly version

Let us know what you think: Email editor@free-times.com.

More news

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus