Topics: Affordable Care Act, Editor's Picks, GOP, John Boehner, Medicaid, Obamacare, The Right, Politics News

One of the most consistent raps against Republicans over their four years of fevered anti-Obamacare advocacy is that for all the symbolic efforts they’ve undertaken to repeal the law, they haven’t been able to muster a consensus over how to replace it.

It’s the one thing about the party’s Affordable Care Act campaign that the traditional media feels comfortable criticizing Republicans for, and something like a running joke in national politics.

Well, now that millions of previously uninsured people are actually covered and getting lifesaving, non-bankrupting healthcare, the repeal-but-no-replace position has finally become unstable enough that House Speaker John Boehner is publicly predicting that Republicans will unveil an official alternative in the next few weeks.

“Republican House members will be having our retreat about a week and a half from now,” Boehner told reporters last week at his regular Capitol briefing. “It’s one of the big issues for conversation in terms of our agenda for this year. And I think you’ll see Republicans come forward with a plan to replace Obamacare. A plan that will actually reduce costs for the American people and make health care more accessible.”

The surprise here is that Republican leaders might actually put forward a healthcare reform bill of any kind at all. Individual Republicans have proposed healthcare bills designed to replace Obamacare over the years, but none has won the endorsement of skittish party leaders.

What I don’t think will come as any surprise is the (likely) content.

For years now, Republicans have filled the void left by the absence of a replace plan with focus-grouped descriptions of the healthcare ideas they like. These will be familiar to anyone who’s followed the story closely: repeal Obamacare, allow for the sale of insurance across state lines, bolster high-risk pools for people with preexisting medical conditions, equalize the tax treatment of individual and group insurance, block-grant Medicaid and cut its funding, tort reform.

Most of these are bad ideas, and the two that aren’t bad ideas per se are bad ideas in the context of the rest of the reforms. High risk pools could be a defensible alternative to Obamacare’s insurance guarantee, but only if adequately funded, and Republicans have no intention of spending hundreds of billions of dollars to do that.