Will the Harrisburg area’s two health care giants become one?

Such mergers are taking place all over the country, and some experts believe a merger of Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center and PinnacleHealth System is possible.

But Dr. Harold Paz, the CEO of Penn State Hershey, said even he doesn’t know.

No one will know, Paz said, until after an independent consultant studies how Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth System might “broaden their existing relationship.”

The consultant, which hadn’t been hired as of last week, is expected to provide a recommendation by the end of March. Paz said he hopes a final outcome will be known by the end of June.

“We are really at the beginning of a process,” he said.

Paz had been asked whether possible outcomes include full merger or one entity being sold to or otherwise absorbed by the other.

According to Paz, the consultant will focus on questions including “what could we do together to benefit the community and the region and the state,” and will “recommend the best structure for us to continue to grow our strategic alignment.”

He stressed Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth already have substantial collaborations. These include the 74-bed Pennsylvania Psychiatric Institute, which is a joint venture, and a decade-old arrangement in which Penn State Hershey medical students and residents train at PinnacleHealth.

Paz said he and PinnacleHealth officials agreed to make an early announcement of the collaboration talks and to be highly transparent about the process.

Asked whether merger is possible, PinnacleHealth spokeswoman Christina Persson wrote in an email that “we wanted to be open as best we could at this early stage. It’s always a dilemma when we don’t have the specifics, but we wanted the community and our employees to know that we are looking for new ways to work together so that they would not be surprised when further details are developed.”

Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth each have roughly 550 inpatient beds and are located only about 20 miles apart. But there are many differences between the two.

Penn State-Hershey is an academic medical center and medical school and a major research institution. Its medical offerings include a children’s hospital, the highest level of adult trauma care and a full range of organ transplants.

PinnacleHealth operates two inpatient hospitals, Harrisburg and Community General Osteopathic, and is building a third in Cumberland County. It has long been one of the state’s busiest hospitals for heart surgery. Unlike Penn State Hershey, PinnacleHealth is based in an urban area with a high concentration of uninsured people and people with low incomes.

Penn State Hershey has about $1 billion in revenues from medical care annually, compared to about $700 million for PinnacleHealth.

The late-November announcement from Penn State-Hersey and PinnacleHealth comes amid a national wave of hospital merger and affiliation.

Earlier in 2013, two of the Harrisburg region’s smaller health systems, Good Samaritan Health System and Holy Spirit Health System, each announced plans to merge or affiliate with a larger partner.

Holy Spirit is having formal talks with the vast Geisinger Health System center in Danville. Good Samaritan hopes to announce a partner next year.

Some possible arrangements allow hospitals and health systems to remain separate while still taking advantage of concepts such as joint purchasing.

Dennis Oldstead, a health care economist for the Pennsylvania Medical Society, said “it’s likely Hershey is providing some kind of resource that Pinnacle can’t offer, and Pinnacle might offer something to Hershey that they don’t have … clearly everyone is looking to fill a void.”

He also said the two could be reacting to the possibility of a large entity from outside the area entering the Harrisburg-area market.

Olmstead believes full merger is possible. But he also believes there are many possibilities for collaboration that would enable them to remain separate.

These might include expanded efforts to train doctors and conduct research, and collaborating on an “accountable care organization” or ACO. ACOs are part of the Affordable Care Act and involve paying hospitals based on their success in managing large populations of patents.

Another possibility, Olmstead said, would be for the two to create their own health insurance company. That touches on another relatively new trend in which some health systems are becoming health insurers — and health insurers are acquiring hospitals — for reasons including eliminating a middleman.

“The opportunities are endless for the organization they could become,” Olmstead said.

Similar to Olmstead, Stephen Foreman, an associated professor of health care administration at Robert Morris University, believes full merger is possible, but other possible arrangements also make sense.

Foreman believes that one of the likely goals of a collaboration is to gain more negotiating power with insurers — a move that could lead to higher health insurance premiums.

“They don’t have to merge … the tighter the affiliation, the more bargaining power they will get out of it,” he said.

Describing something of a worst-case scenario, Foreman pointed to the situation in western Pennsylvania. There, the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, which is the dominant hospital system, is mired in a dispute with health insurer Highmark Inc., and plans to eventually stop allowing network access for Highmark members.

Likewise, a Harrisburg area health system, if it was big enough, might offer a discount to a health insurer, but insist that the health insurer require its customers to use that health system exclusively. A combined Penn State Hershey-Pinnacle, or Holy Spirit-Geisinger, might be capable of wielding such power, he added.

But Paz stressed that Penn State Hershey and PinnacleHealth are both non-profits, and said the main purpose of their collaboration would be to provide better health care at a more affordable price, so more people have access.

A merger or acquisition deal would have to be approved the Pennsylvania Attorney General’s Office, which would consider factors such as whether the resulting entity would have a negative impact on competition and access.