Third-ranking House Republican backs legal status for immigrants - The Hill House Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy (R - Calif.) has said that he supports legal status for unauthorized immigrants, but stops short of a path to U.S. citizenship. In a recent television interview, he indicated that soon-to-be-released immigration reform "principles" from the House GOP could call for provisional legal status.

White House dials it down on immigration - Politico From the story: "In meetings with immigration reform advocates, White House officials have said President Barack Obama won’t threaten to take unilateral executive action — at least not yet — and that he wants to give House Republicans some breathing room to try to pass legislation this year."

2 friends reach across the aisle on immigration - New York Times On the relationship between two immigration strategists, Cuban-born Esther Olavarria, a Democrat who worked for Sen. Edward M. Kennedy as an immigration lawyer and now works for the White House, and Rebecca Tallent, a Republican who once advised Sen. John McCain and Sarah Palin, and was recently hired as a policy aide to Republican House Speaker John Boehner.

Covered California faulted for low Latino enrollment - Los Angeles Times Covered California has experienced a surge of more than 500,000 people in the last six weeks signing up for health insurance under the Affordable Care Act. This has led to problems like long phone waits for customers, and "supporters of the healthcare law say those broader service issues are hampering enrollment among Latinos, who are expected to be among the biggest beneficiaries."

'Hispanic' Or 'Latino'? Polls Say It Doesn't Matter — Usually - NPR Here we go again: Do we say "Latino," "Hispanic," or does it even matter? Much like a broader Pew Research poll did some time ago, a recent NPR poll of 1,500 respondents "found a very slight preference for Hispanic, but not a terribly significant one." But individually, some people feel strongly about how they choose to identify.