There are a number of events going on that involve people that do not impress me. Did anyone else watch “60 Minutes” on CBS Sunday night? It was an investigation into the land-based part of our nuclear missile triad. Notice the “tri” in triad, meaning three. We have a three-part nuclear defense consisting of missiles on airplanes, submarines, and the ground. Lesley Stahl of CBS went to one of our land-based missile sights. The old, 1950s-looking computers she found there, using floppy disks, were not impressive. Floppy disks (here I go again) — “Are you kidding me, floppy disks?” I’ve been using computers at home and at school since the late 1980s and I can’t remember the last time I used a floppy disk. The commanding officer assured Stahl that our computers at these nuclear missile sites are very secure from cyber terrorism. I guess this is because nobody else in the world uses these dinosaur era computers. I did not find these bases very impressive.

Maybe, Congress could get them some updated computer systems. Oh, wait a minute. They would have to stop running around yelling “Benghazi” to do that. No way will they do that. After all, who has time to improve our nuclear weapons’ safety, when Rep. Darrell Issa has them all busy with Benghazi investigations? Of course, I don’t find Congress very impressive either, especially the GOP controlled House of Representatives.

Speaking of unimpressive governments, what kind of a sad joke is going on in Harrisburg? If we don’t have the worst state government in the USA, we have got to be in the running. Now I am very supportive of state Sen. Daylin Leach, and I’ve met state Sen. Vincent Hughes. He seems like a good guy. As a loyal Democrat, I assume most of them, but not all, are straight shooters. But right now this a GOP show — after all, they’ve got the governorship and majority control in both parts of the state legislature. And they are all fighting with each other. They can’t come up with sensible pension reform, and they apparently won’t adequately fund the Philadelphia schools. If the tobacco lobby permits, they might semi-adequately fund the Philadelphia schools later this summer. Also, if you are expecting this group to come up with some sensible way to ease the real estate tax burden on senior citizens, I wouldn’t recommend holding your breath while you are waiting. To say the Pennsylvania state government is unimpressive is a vast understatement.

Next, America’s least impressive political voice (and that is saying something given the competition for this dishonor), Sarah Palin, is calling for President Obama’s impeachment. Rumor has it that Sarah is being considered for one of the panel jobs on “The View.” Well, that will kill that show off quickly.

Advertisement

In the sports world, I did not find the Sixers’ summer victories in the Orlando weeklong league very impressive. This team, which is going to go through its third season in a row with an injured big man who is not going to play, is on schedule to be a championship contender sometime around the year 2525. That is about the time I will consider renewing my 10-game season ticket plan.

I have jumped on and off the Phillies bandwagon a number of times this season. You know — lose six in a row (I’m off), and then win five in a row (I’m back on). Then you lose the last two before the All Star break and I’m back off the bandwagon again. All in all, this has been a most unimpressive team in April, May, June, and July. Well, I bet it’s interesting at the meetings between the manager and the coaches. Ryne Sandberg is so monotone that he bores you in five seconds flat, whereas Larry Bowa is probably ready to go completely berserk. I don’t think either approach is going to work. What the Phils need is a boatload of young prospects who can hit. That is not going to be easy to accomplish. I would not want to be GM Ruben Amaro Jr., right now.

On the impressive side of things, I liked the German World Cup soccer team. To get away from sports, I am impressed that the Affordable Care Act has reduced the number of uninsured adults in the USA by 8 to 11 million. It would be even more if mean-spirited GOP governors, including our one-term wonder (Tom Corbett), had expanded Medicaid.

To end with a really impressive woman from American history that I am reading about in Doris Kearns Goodwin’s book “The Bully Pulpit,” listen to this quote from 1890 by Mary Lease of the Farmer’s Alliance: “Wall Street owns the country. It is no longer a government of the people, by the people and for the people, but a government of Wall Street, by Wall Street and for Wall Street.” Wow. She figured that out in 1890. That’s impressive.

Contact Tom Lees, a longtime area resident and educator, at tlees2@aol.com.