David Price remembers living in the Golden Triangle neighborhood on the border of downtown Denver back when there wasn’t much housing, but there were plenty of parking lots and empty warehouses. And that wasn’t even too long ago.

Price moved into the neighborhood — from Lincoln Avenue to Speer Boulevard up to Colfax Avenue — in 1997 and has watched the neighborhood transform into a vibrant community that is ready to grow even more in the next few years.

“I’ve enjoyed watching the community grow,” Price, the president of the Golden Triangle Association, said. “I’ve been here from the time of surface lots to where it is today. It’s impressive.”

He quickly became a board member with the Golden Triangle Association. His first survey the next year estimated about 400 residents living in the neighborhood; his most recent found approximately 3,000 people.

The city of Denver has also taken notice and put together a master plan for the neighborhood that outlines visions, goals and framework to build upon the growth happening in the area. Denver City Council approved the plan Nov. 10.

“The current plan is really, truly a collaboration of residents, business owners and developers,” said Anne Lindsey, chair of the Golden Triangle urban design committee.

With all the neighborhood has going for it — construction of new apartment units at 10th Avenue and Bannock, 11th Avenue and Cherokee and 1000 Speer Blvd., which will add about 600 units — there are still some challenges.

Known for containing the City and County Building, Colorado Capitol and Civic Center park, Golden Triangle has well-defined boundaries. But those major streets can act as a barrier, making the neighborhood difficult to access, a problem for people coming to places such as the Denver Public Library main branch and the Denver Art Museum.

“That’s an advantage in that it defines us as a neighborhood, but it also serves to isolate us,” Price said of the boundaries.

The neighborhood plan emphasizes connectivity. While a few bike lanes are in place, future lanes could provide better access to the Cherry Creek Trail.

The FreeMetroRide that goes up and down 18th and 19th streets was originally planned to dip into Golden Triangle, but that has not yet been realized.

“If we had a bus that would break that Colfax barrier and come down into the area, it would make a huge difference for visitors, shoppers and residents,” Lindsey said.

As with all neighborhood plans the city approves, implementation is dependent on funding. Sarah Showalter, co-project manager for the plan with the city, said public-private partnerships that bring in outside funding is paramount to getting started.

“I can’t emphasize how important they are. Most successful plan implementation relies on this,” Showalter said. “It’s key.”

Other things, such as the reactivation of Civic Center, have also helped the neighborhood and brought more people in to live.

With more residents, business has followed, and the neighborhood is now home to several local restaurants and coffeehouses. Jason Calloway, who opened up the Rooster and Moon coffee house and restaurant at 955 Bannock St. five years ago, said businesses are great at supporting one another, and the neighborhood organization has provided assistance.

“What I like about this neighborhood is the independence of it,” Calloway said.

City Councilwoman Jeanne Robb, who represents the area, praised the Golden Triangle Association, especially those who have worked to help bring the area to what it is today.

Robb said: “My observation is they have a wonderful combination of a group of people who are urbanists, but also pioneers in the area.”

Joe Vaccarelli: 303-954-2396, jvaccarelli@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joe_vacc