First to fail were the laboratory procedures for determining how much soot was in the air, and then ozone air monitoring was found to be a mess — putting the Louisville area’s compliance with the federal Clean Air Act in question.

Now, the Louisville Metro Air Pollution Control District has received one more critical audit — this one for the operation of a monitor that measures continuously the tiniest soot and particulates.

State Division for Air Quality sent the district a letter Oct. 3 detailing the problems at the monitor, which is located on Cannons Lane near the former vehicle emissions testing location. (Remember the VET program?). I just received a copy of the letter, and two of the problems it identified are these:

When discussing … operating procedures with the Air Quality Unit Supervisor, Division personnel observed that key activities described by the supervisor were not fully documented in the (Standard Operating Procedures). … field forms utilized (by the district) staff for completing routine precision checks and audit procedures contained the incorrect flow rate range for the … monitor.

District officials were also inaccurately coding data, among other problems.

The good news for the district is that the division has recommended ways for the district to correct the problems — and to correct the data.

The earlier failing audits have resulted in at least two job casualties at the district — a quality assurance officer, and Lauren Anderson, the district’s director, who recently announced her unplanned retirement. Meanwhile, Mayor Greg Fischer has commissioned an outside review of the agency’s air monitoring program, in addition to other pending audits by the state and U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.

The state and federal agencies are looking pollutant category by pollutant category.

The EPA, however, has largely shut down due to the budget fight over Republican efforts to defund the Affordable Care Act. The shutdown has affected local and state air quality programs’ interactions with the EPA across the country, according to the National Association of Clean Air Agencies. On Tuesday, I asked Louisville district spokesman Tom Nord whether the shutdown has impacted its interactions with the EPA, but have not heard back yet on that question.