Last-minute rush sees one million go online to sign up to Obamacare before deadline expires



More than one million US shoppers visited healthcare.gov in past 24 hours



Original deadline for enrolling for health insurance was 11.59pm yesterday



But this has been extended to midnight tonight to deal with high demand



Many potential customers met with a stalled and malfunctioning website



More than one million Americans have gone online in the past 24 hours to sign up for health insurance, it has been revealed.



A last-minute rush of shoppers visited the the ever-breaking healthcare.gov yesterday - w hat was supposed to be the final day people could enroll for insurance under the Affordable Care Act.



However, the deadline has now been extended to tonight to give more people a chance to sign up.



Scroll down for video

High traffic: More than one million Americans have gone online to sign up for health insurance in the past 24 hours. Above, certified enrollment specialist Laquanda Jordan helps Narendra Parmar enroll in the scheme

Demand: A last-minute rush of shoppers visited the ever-breaking website healthcare.gov yesterday

Not working: The malfunctioning website has now deployed a queuing system to deal with the high traffic

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) announced on Twitter the website had 'surpassed a million site visits', according to ABC News.



A staggering 850,000 of these visits happened before 2pm (7pm GMT), according to CMS spokesman Julie Bataille.

This followed more than 1.2million site hits at the weekend.



The website - which has faced a series of problems since its launch - has deployed a queuing system to deal with the high traffic.



This means more than 60,000 potential customers have been forced to leave an email address to be invited back later when the traffic is lighter.



Extension: Yesterday was supposed to be the final day people could enroll for 'Obamacare' under the Affordable Care Act. However, the deadline has now been extended to today to allow more people to sign up

President Barack Obama (pictured left at a basketball game in Hawaii on Sunday) has insisted he is doing all he can to make sure people who miss the deadline can still get health insurance under a series of exemptions



Ms Bataille told people wanting 'Obamacare' to 'sign up today' - but added: 'if you have trouble due to high-demand, we will make sure we help you get signed up'.

Customer Liz Meitner, 56, told TV crews at a Washington library that she had been trying to sign up for health insurance - which kicks in on January 1 - since enrollment first became available , but had so far been unsuccessful.

EVEN OBAMA CAN'T USE THE SITE!

The President of the United States didn't have to test his patience with the error-prone website or spend hours on the phone with a volunteer 'navigator' in order to sign up for new health insurance. A White House official has confirmed that Obama simply dispatched his aides to the Washington, D.C. insurance exchange's office, where they filed his papers in person – while Obama himself luxuriated in his annual Hawaiian vacation with his family. 'His situation is unique,' the official insisted.

'The president couldn't have used the DC exchange's website because the databases these sites use to confirm insurance eligibility wouldn't contain those sorts of records about him.' Obama chose 'a bronze plan' – the cheapest option – according to the White House. But an official statement conceded the exercise 'is symbolic since the president’s health care will continue to be provided by the military.'



'The implementation has been unsuccessful as far as I'm concerned so far - I'm almost in shock', she said at the Martin Luther King Jr. Memorial Library .

'It's just so hard to believe they could be so inefficient with something so important.'

The deadline for people to sign up for health care coverage was supposed to be 11.59pm yesterday.



However, due to the site's record traffic, the deadline has been pushed back to midnight tonight, according to The Washington Post.



T he White House has insisted that it is doing all it can to make sure people who miss the deadline can still get coverage under a series of exemptions, and apparently this date bait-and-switch is another way of trying to help.

There is a 'hardship' exception for some that permits them not to sign up any kind of health insurance at all without facing a penalty - the hardship being problems they've encountered with Obamacare and its malfunctioning website.

There will also be a 'good faith exception' for others, according to a senior Obama administration official.

'We'll have a special enrollment period,' the official said last week, for 'all those who make a good faith effort to get enrolled by the deadline' but fail to do so.

The official did not say how the government would determine whether or not the effort was made in good faith.

Still, others may simply get a break from insurance companies, which the administration has urged to be flexible with people who miss the deadline.



Problems: Health Secretary Kathleen Sebelius speaks about the problems the troubled website has faced

Such is the uncertain state of 'Obamacare' as it approaches what was originally supposed to be a defining moment - a signup deadline that would provide the first real test of the viability of the healthcare program brought into law by the Affordable Care Act.

Adding to the confusion is the fact that the original deadline for obtaining medical coverage was December 15.

That was extended to December 23 after the federal government's website, HealthCare.gov, proved dysfunctional and sometimes non-functional.

Obama said on Friday that one million people had enrolled for new insurance plans under the law through HealthCare.gov, which serves 36 states, and 14 state-run marketplaces.

Trying everything: President and Mrs Obama met with a group of mothers last week in an effort to persuade them to have their children sign up for the healthcare insurance

Many more enrollments are a major priority for Obama's signature healthcare reform, which officials are still hoping will help millions of uninsured and under-insured Americans finally to obtain medical coverage by the end of March.

It is not known how many consumers may have no insurance coverage during periods of 2014 if they failto sign up on HealthCare.gov today.

The Obama administration says it is trying to be flexible, but some Republican critics of the law say the frequent delays and changes have muddied the waters and confused people.

'With no clarity as to when people should sign up and who they should pay and when, it's a virtual certainty that many consumers will find themselves uncovered for a period of time through no fault of their own,' Senator Orrin Hatch, a Utah Republican, said last week.

'It's just so hard to believe they could be so inefficient with something so important '

- Liz Me itner

Administration officials said on Friday there are fewer than 500,000 people who have received cancellation notices from their insurance companies and have not yet found alternatives.

Some were 'auto-enrolled' in other plans by their insurance companies, the officials said.

The pace of sign-ups has picked up since October and November when technical problems crippled the HealthCare.gov website. Anyone who tried the website in October and November and became stuck has been getting attention from the administration.

Officials sent more than two million emails to people who could not advance through the website.



They have also made more than 600,000 phone calls to consumers and mailed notices to hundreds of thousands of people, officials said.