CAÑON CITY — Kellie Wasko recalled the time shortly after Tom Clements took the reins of Colorado’s corrections system when he leaned over to her and made an unusual request.

He asked for her permission to step down from the lectern at the graduation ceremony of a new class of correctional officers and stand alongside them to recite the oath of office.

“That was who Tom was,” Wasko, deputy executive director of the Colorado Department of Corrections, said Saturday.

Wasko was speaking at a service in which Clements’ name — carved in white marble — was unveiled outside the Territorial Correctional Facility. Also, a pine tree was planted in his honor.

A new annual award, in Clements’ name, will honor a CDOC employee who helps inmates successfully transition out of prison.

Clements’ name was the 16th on a list of correctional officers killed in the line of duty in Colorado dating to 1899, including Sgt. Mary K. Ricard.

It was just over a year ago that Clements stood at the same location to offer words of condolence and praise for Ricard, who was murdered Sept. 24, 2012, in a prison kitchen.

A number of dignitaries, including Gov. John Hickenlooper, state legislators and directors of prisons from other states, attended Saturday’s outdoor memorial under dark clouds.

“Tom Clements represented the best of what we are capable of. … I will never think of Tom Clements as fallen. Tom always stood tall in that relaxed way,” Hickenlooper said in his speech.

He added that he was “profoundly saddened” by the loss of the great believer in redemption.

Clements’ wife, Lisa, thanked the many people who have rallied around her family since her husband’s murder, but particularly Roxane White, Hickenlooper’s chief of staff, who helped out at her daughter’s wedding the past year.

She also thanked El Paso County sheriff’s investigators for continuing to seek answers in her husband’s death.

Parolee Evan Ebel killed Nathan Leon on March 17, 2013, and shot Clements two days later at his Monument home. Investigators are determining whether others conspired to kill the two men.

Lisa Clements noted that her husband was a diligent student of good leadership. An admirer of fellow Missourian Harry S. Truman, he tried to live up to an admonition of the 33rd president: “I learned that a great leader is a man who has the ability to get other people to do what they don’t want to do and like it.”