Bedford's Tyler Gamble scores on Manchester Central's goalie Keenan Alnahas during the Bauer Christmas Hockey Classic held at the JFK Coliseum in Manchester on Saturday. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader) Bow's Ryan Tobeler shoots on Manchester Memorial's goalie Jarrod Broussard during the Bauer Christmas Hockey Classic held at the JFK Coliseum in Manchester on Saturday. (Thomas Roy/Union Leader)





Concord 6, Trinity 2:

Bedford 4, Manchester Central 0:

— Manchester Memorial defenseman Eric Langley skated toward the crease with less than a minute left in overtime. He made his presence felt once he got there. The sophomore netted a power-play goal with 23.1 seconds remaining to lift the Crusaders boys' hockey team to a 2-1 triumph over Bow Saturday at the JFK Coliseum in the opening round of the Bauer Hockey Christmas Classic...Langley shot around Falcons freshman goaltender Nate Carrier from the crease to score the deciding goal. Bow defenseman Brendan Ulrich was called for holding 2:42 into the five-minute, four-on-four, sudden-death overtime to put Memorial on the man advantage. Brendan Johnson and Zach Pelletier assisted on Langley's tally...“I just couldn't wait to get off the ice,” Langley said of his reaction after netting the goal. “(I was) tired. Long game but I was glad I scored it.”The Crusaders were trailing, 1-0, late in the third period before Jacob Poitras knotted the score with 3:12 left in regulation with a power-play goal...Memorial coach Mark Putney felt his team started the game flat but played with a sense of urgency in the third and overtime periods.“They kept fighting through,” Putney said of his players. “Another close game. Another overtime, so I give them credit for that.”..Each of Memorial's first three regular-season games were decided by either one or two goals. The Crusaders won all of them, including a 4-3 overtime triumph over Manchester Central this past Monday.Langley said those close encounters will help the Crusaders once the NHIAA postseason rolls around...“Down (in) maybe the quarterfinals, semifinals, (it's) going to help us a lot to have experiences like that,” said Langley.Bow junior forward Doug Champagne netted the game's first goal 3:59 into the third period. Champagne received a pass from Ulrich and proceed to skate from the slot into the right circle. He then deposited the puck into the top left corner of the Memorial net past goaltender Jarrod Broussard...The contest provided both teams a chance to test their special teams play. Bow went 0-for-4 on the power play while the Crusaders went 2-for-6 on the man advantage.“We had to kill off some penalties and we had some opportunities on the power play,” said Putney. “We still need some work in some of the defensive zone work, breaking it out and things like that. But it gives us an opportunity, this tournament, to try and work on some of those things.”..The Falcons outshot Memorial, 22-17. Broussard made 21 saves for the Crusaders. Carrier made 15 stops for Bow.Putney would like to see the Crusaders earn victories with a greater goal margin going forward but he has enjoyed the early tests they've had...“It's something, I think, that you can't teach or coach. You've got to be in that situation,” Putney said. “We've had a lot of those situations...the kids are good. They're playing through it, they're not getting too excited, not making too many mental errors under the pressure and we've come out on the winning side.”..Alex Marceau was feeling good about his team's chances in its opening-round game while taking shots with linemates Bradley Murphy and Matt Norris during warmups. His intuition proved to be correct...Marceau, a junior forward, recorded four points to help lead Concord to its victory over Trinity of Manchester. He netted a goal and two assists in the first period and tallied another assist in the second...“He's a scorer,” said Concord coach Dunc Walsh of Marceau. “He's not real fast but he's good around the net. He's got good hands. He's smart. He's a guy who can finish. He's an effective player for us.”..Trinity senior forward Drew Merrick scored the game's first goal 1:58 into the bout but Concord didn't waste much time answering the score.Matt Norris tied the game 3:12 into the first with a low shot by Pioneers goaltender Curtis Wirbal off an assist from Marceau. Norris returned the favor to Marceau just more than two minutes later. Marceau shot the puck into the low right corner of the Trinity net at 5:32 off an assist from Norris...Dan Lebell and Jake Nelson each tallied a goal later in the first to bring Concord's advantage to 4-1 heading into the second period. Marceau assisted on Lebell's goal at 6:39 and Liam O'Brien picked up the helper on Nelson's score at 10:26 of the first...Marceau and Norris assisted on Murphy's goal 5:28 into the second that built a four-goal Crimson Tide lead. Ethan Donlan won a scramble for the puck in the crease and scored with 37 seconds remaining in the second to put Concord ahead 6-1...Marceau said that one reason the Crimson Tide had such offensive success against Trinity was that the Pioneers left one part of the ice unguarded most of the contest.“They weren't really covering the middle so when we got the puck, the middle was wide open and we just kept hitting it there and scoring,” said Marceau...Pioneers junior forward Dominic D'Amico capped his team's scoring 21 seconds into the final period.The Crimson Tide outshot Trinity, 27-18. Ben Nelson and Griffin Gilbert combined for 16 saves for Concord. Wirbal made 21 stops for the Pioneers...Walsh was happy his offense capitalized on opportunities and that he was able to give each of his players a decent amount of ice time in the win.“We got the lead and the last period we just rolled four lines and got guys some ice time that don't play as much as they usually do and to get our other goalie (Gilbert) in is good,” said Walsh. “We got six goals and we had a lot of chances.”..In the tournament's opening game, Bedford scored all of its goals before the end of the second period. Senior tri-captain Tyler Gamble netted the game's first goal and junior defenseman Chase Vaillancourt scored a power-play goal in the opening period. Junior forward Jack McDonough tallied a goal 3:09 into the second and sophomore defenseman Matt Giroux capped the Bulldogs' scoring 6:58 into the period. Keenan Alnahas made 38 saves for the Little Green...Hanover netted all three of its goals in the third period to capture the victory. Junior forward Jake Acker scored the Marauders' first two goals and teammate David Lehmann capped the game's scoring with 1:58 remaining. Gabe Loud made 23 saves to earn the shutout. Colin Holt made 30 stops for the Grizzlies...ahall@unionleader.com..