POLITICO Pro Burwell soliciting ideas for 'increased transparency' at HHS

Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell is looking for ways to make her department more transparent after the House GOP discovered that officials had overstated Obamacare enrollment.

Burwell emailed senior HHS leadership Sunday night asking them to work toward a “culture of increased transparency, ownership, and accountability.” She asked them to meet with their staff and cull good ideas.

Story Continued Below

“I believe strongly that a hallmark of effective leadership and management is instilling a culture of transparency, ownership and accountability,” Burwell wrote in the email obtained by POLITICO. “As leaders, we all must have a sense of urgency in promoting these cultural values.”

Late last week, House Oversight Committee Chairman Darrell Issa revealed that HHS included about 400,000 dental plans in its public tallies this fall of health coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Including the dental plans - which HHS said was a mistake — gave the impression that marketplace enrollment had passed the 7 million target. It had not.

When Burwell was nominated in April to be HHS secretary, she pledged to bring a greater openness and management structure to the agency. She’s generally made a good impression among lawmakers in her first six months on the job, but the flap over the enrollment numbers has created a new round of criticism for HHS about accuracy and transparency. Issa’s House Oversight and Government Affairs Committee has asked Marilyn Tavenner, the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid administrator who first announced the wrong number, to testify early next month.

Burwell in her email reiterated that the inclusion of dental plans in the enrollment tally was a mistake.

“Let me be clear: this mistake was unacceptable,” Burwell wrote. “One of our most important obligations to the American people is to report information and data accurately. We are working quickly to understand what happened and to improve our processes in order to prevent similar mistakes from occurring again.”