When my wife and I first moved to Colorado, we were excited that we would have the opportunity to ski at some world class resorts across the state. We knew about Vail, Breckenridge, Keystone, Beaver Creek and Aspen but had very little knowledge of Eldora since it really didn't qualify in the "world class" category. Fast forward a few years once we had children. We enrolled our kids in the Eldorables program at Eldora and we were so thrilled that our kids would learn to ski at such a young age and on a regular basis.

Our children progressed to group lessons, the Trek program, and then transitioned to the Eldora Mountain Ski Club which focuses on racing. We've felt privileged that Eldora was in our backyard and we felt we had a special relationship with the resort since our kids have, in essence, grown up skiing there.

Over the years Eldora has had their challenges working with other organizations, dealing with expansion, staffing and so on. This year one of their challenges was with its late announcement of a partnering with the Rocky Mountain Super Pass +.

As is typically the case, I called Eldora while they were having their early season pass sale. I spoke to a representative asking if 1) they had any plans to partner with any of the other local resorts or passes this year and 2) if this indeed was the lowest price of the season for a family pass. The representative informed me that they will not be partnering with Epic or any other pass program or resort this year and this indeed is the lowest price of the season. Based on this information, I purchased a full family pass.

Advertisement

Three — yes, three — days later they announced that they will be partnering with Rocky Mountain Super Pass + that would include Eldora, Winter Park, Copper and days at Steamboat and Crested Butte. I figured all I had to do would be call Eldora and they would refund, transfer or assist me in converting my $999 Eldora family pass to the $1,500 Rocky Mountain Super Pass but alas, no. They said they weren't converting or refunding anyone and that they held to the fact that they, actually, didn't even know about this until it was announced. Really? Creating a pass program with four other resorts and rolling out a market program takes more than three days!

I have some fundamental issues with how this unfolded. First, I was lied to. Just because the representative that I was talking to didn't know this was in process doesn't mean the Eldora management didn't know this was in process. At the very least they could have put these pass sales on hold or at least kept names about people who inquired about partnering passes (Epic etc.) on a list for a callback. Second, as a local resort, they aren't bound by some huge bureaucratic structure and can easily resolve issues on a case by case basis. As someone who has been a pass holder at Eldora for over a decade and is up there during the season up to four times a week — I would imagine that they could accommodate our family with this simply request. That said, in the spirit of good customer service and honesty in business, I would expect that they would resolve this issue for any customer that they had given misinformation.

I've tried to escalate this issue with Eldora many times — I spoke with sales multiple times, left a message for the owner (via their administrative assistant), sent emails and so forth. Nothing! Eldora is not interested in building and maintaining loyal relationships, good customer service or even fair business practices.

When it comes right down to it, it's sad. This resort has so much potential to be so much more than it is — to be the local resort that everyone wants to go to and speaks highly of. Instead, they have decided to act as if they are the only game in town and we are all a captive audience. I guess, since my children are involved in the Eldora Race Team, we are to some extent. For those that aren't, consider this when making your pass purchasing decision.

Andrew Halperin lives in Niwot.