Physicians Mutual Group will have a new top executive on Jan. 1 for the first time in 40 years.

The choice: Robert A. “Rob” Reed, the son of Robert A. “Bob” Reed, who became CEO in 1974 and has led the niche insurance company through decades of growth, into a high-profile office building and to success alongside Omaha’s better-known insurance companies.

“It will be a fishbowl,” the elder Reed told his son when he came to work at the company in 1989, a figurative description of working at a company where Dad is the boss.

In the 25 years since then, Rob Reed has worked in virtually every department of the 1,000-employee Physicians Mutual, joining its board of directors in 2005 and serving as chief operating officer, the No. 2 spot, for the past nine years.

“It’s certainly a planned approach. It’s helped my perspective,” said Rob Reed, 47. He will become the fifth CEO in the company’s 112 years. His father, 75, will become chairman-elect and will remain as an adviser to the company.

Rob Reed’s plan includes a familiar mantra: “First, do no harm.”

“We’re on a wonderful pathway,” Reed said, with assets reaching an all-time high of $3.2 billion and, last year, premiums and investment revenue of $850 million and net income of $42 million.

“I haven’t been saving up all these things that I’ve wanted to do,” Reed said. “We’re not going to do anything crazy.”

Physicians Mutual’s teams will continue working on existing products and looking for new ones, he said. “We’re wanting people to go out and dream about things beyond what we normally do.”

The company’s fastest-growing product is dental insurance, launched in 2003 mostly because of demand among senior citizens because Medicare doesn’t cover most dental work.

The company added “pre-need” insurance for funeral expenses in 2012, sold through local funeral homes.

A possible new product: Vision coverage, also requested by many of Physicians Mutual’s policyholders, who are its owners under the mutual ownership model.

The company’s other main offerings are Medicare supplement and hospitalization coverage, with smaller lines of supplemental health products, including limited benefits, mini-medical, cancer and critical illness coverage, plus life insurance and annuities through its Physicians Life Insurance Co.

Financial ratings firm A.M. Best Co. lists Physicians Mutual as an “A” company, the third-highest financial strength level on a 16-level scale.

Best said the company’s revenue dropped for a time before 2011 as premiums declined in the increasingly competitive hospital insurance market. Competition for Medicare supplement insurance also has grown.

But premium revenue has grown a total of 23 percent since then, alongside higher investment income.

Reed said the focus on people near or at retirement age has led to a diverse mix of financial products, often starting with people who are thinking about retirement and realize they need to become better informed.

“We have to sell a person at the end, but we like to start with education,” he said. “It’s complicated stuff.”

Dr. William Hamsa, chairman of Physicians Mutual’s board of directors, said Reed is “an accomplished business leader with a combination of financial and operational acumen, making him uniquely positioned to lead the company.”

Hamsa said the leadership change “comes at a time of strength and growth.” He is due to step down from the chairmanship in 2016, with Bob Reed becoming chairman.

During Bob Reed’s tenure as CEO, Physicians Mutual’s assets grew from $54 million to $3.2 billion; annual premiums collected rose from $72 million to $700 million; and annual benefits paid increased from $49 million to $461 million.

Employment totaled 450 when he became CEO. Since 1993, when the company’s employment peaked at nearly 1,400, expanded use of computer programs has increased productivity, such as its automated claims system, and slimmed the workforce.

E.E. Elliott started the company in 1902 to provide health insurance for doctors and their staffs. The physician focus continues through its board of directors. Besides the Reeds and Hamsa, they are Drs. John Woodbury, Dale Brett, James Canedy and Martin Mancuso.

That tradition will continue, Rob Reed said, preserving access to the doctors’ valuable medical insights.

Reed has degrees from Georgetown University and the Kellogg Graduate School of Management at Northwestern University. He and his wife, Stacie, have five children, the oldest two in college.

In Omaha, he has worked with the Red Cross, Completely Kids, Heartland Family Service, the YMCA, the Jesuit Partnership Council of Omaha, Community Health Charities and the United Way of the Midlands, the Knights of Ak-Sar-Ben, the Omaha Symphony and the River City Rodeo & Stock Show.

While Mutual of Omaha may have more name recognition and National Indemnity Co. is part of a larger parent company — Berkshire Hathaway Inc. — Physicians Mutual’s public profile increased in Omaha in 1987, when it purchased the former headquarters of Enron Corp. at 2600 Dodge St.

Enron’s predecessor, InterNorth Inc., had spent $36 million to clear 17 acres of land and build the marble-clad structure, which opened in 1985. Soon after, Enron moved its headquarters to Houston and put the building up for sale.

Physicians Mutual paid $17 million, plus $2 million for the furnishings, and moved from its much-smaller office near the University of Nebraska Medical Center.

“The price was right,” Rob Reed said. Today the property is valued at just over $12.5 million for tax purposes.

The building is nearly full with the company’s 900 Omaha employees. An additional 100 staff members operate regional sales offices to serve the independent “career” agents who are an important sales force. The company also sells its products by mail and over the Internet.

Contact the writer: 402-444-1080, steve.jordon@owh.com, twitter.com/buffettOWH