MINNEAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Minnesota-based Health E(fx)® today announced the release of Compliance Connect™, an industry-leading Affordable Care Act (ACA) management solution. Expressly designed for third-party providers, including benefits administration, payroll, private exchange, and outsourced HR-managed services, Compliance Connect integrates with a provider’s existing service to track, audit, report, manage and deploy comprehensive ACA compliance.

“The IRS’s reporting requirements for ACA are looming and are now critical to employers,” said Andy Brown, Health E(fx) president and CEO. “Health E(fx)’s Compliance Connect is the leading solution that gives third-party service providers the robust capabilities they need to fully manage their employer group customers.”

Industry-leading Technology. Compliance Connect follows the release of Health E(fx)’s Enterprise™ and Advisor™ platforms. Enterprise is designed for employers while Advisor is tailored to insurance brokers and advisors.

“All Health E(fx) solutions are delivered through our seamless, cloud-based technology,” explained Brown. “Our clients are confident in their ongoing ACA compliance, and our industry-leading data analytics help them to better understand the impact of the ACA and refine their company’s strategic options accordingly.”

Key Features. Compliance Connect features include eligibility and affordability management, IRS reporting and employee communication, compliance auditing and alerts, analytics and forecasting, and ongoing data management. It integrates into existing HRIS environments through single sign-on capability, is easily scalable and can be quickly implemented. Additional details include:

Ongoing compliance to new and changing ACA regulations over time via cloud technologies

Automation of employer 1094-C IRS reporting and submission

Automation of 1095-C employee forms and new hire marketplace notifications

Tracking and automation of PCORI, transitional reinsurance fee, and high-cost excise taxes and submissions

Comprehensive call center and employee notification functionality

Secure integration of employee data to third-party tax reporting services

The most robust ACA compliance and benefits analytics, including self-funded, group, and defined contribution impacts

Configuration for private-label and third-party deployment

With the release of Compliance Connect and the tremendous success of its Enterprise and Advisor solutions, Health E(fx) continues to lead the market in ACA compliance. For updates on ACA legislation and news, please visit ACA: What to Know. For additional information on Health E(fx) and its services, please visit HealthE(fx).us.

About Health E(fx)

Named top HR Product of 2014 by Human Resource Executive magazine, Health E(fx) delivers the clarity, compliance and control that U.S. companies need to successfully comply with the Affordable Care Act. With knowledge and expertise in ACA legislation, government policy direction, and the regulatory framework that is affecting all employers with more than 50 full-time employees, Health E(fx) delivers SaaS-based solutions for employers, advisors, benefits administrators, private exchanges, and HR data stakeholders. For more information, please visit: HealthE(fx).us.