Headlines about the rising cost of healthcare in the United States are a dime a dozen these days. But imagine how much worse off we would be without low-cost generic drugs, which save consumers $3 billion a week. That’s exactly the overpriced nightmare we could face if the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) does not take the right approach in regulating the latest advanced pharmaceutical therapies.

In recent years, the use of brand name biologics – complex drugs created in living organisms – has grown tremendously. While these drugs are often lifesaving treatments helping the sickest of the sick, they aren’t cheap – costing on average $34,550 annually and as much as $200,000 at the higher end.

ADVERTISEMENT

Despite the high cost, these drugs are expected to account for 75 percent of all U.S. drug spending by 2020. Already $4 out of every $10 spent on prescription drugs is spent on biologics, resulting in roughly $115 billion in sales in 2014. Brand name producers of these biologics have enjoyed patent protection and raked in profits, but that’s about to change.

Four years ago, through the Affordable Care Act, Congress tasked the FDA with establishing a pathway to approve generic versions of these biologics, known as biosimilars. Biosimilars have no meaningful difference from and are biologically and clinically similar to biologics. Like other generics, biosimilars can dramatically lower costs and expand choice for both patients and healthcare providers. However, the full consumer benefit of biosimilars is in jeopardy.

Brand name biologic companies are flexing their muscles to stifle competition and preserve market share. Their latest ruse is to persuade regulators against allowing biosimilars to use the same International Proprietary Names (INNs), or generic names, as biologics, a notion roundly rejected by Congress during the ACA debate. With many popular brand name biologics coming off patent over the next few years, these companies are basically asking for a regulatory loophole to let them enjoy biologic name exclusivity indefinitely. And they are doing so on the backs of the most chronically ill patients relying on these drugs.

A same-name policy for biosimilars has earned broad bipartisan support on Capitol Hill in part because using unique names for biosimilars poses a very real safety threat. It would create unnecessary confusion, wasted time, and misunderstandings among patients and providers about treatments that are clinically the same. Changing standard coding and operating procedures could cause prescribing mistakes such as medication duplication. And American patients who are used to generic nomenclature would have increased doubts about the effectiveness of biosimilars with unfamiliar names.

Recently, some physicians backed by branded biologics wrote to the FDA arguing that different names are needed to track drug reactions. But safety issues are already carefully traced through national drug codes, trade names, and batch and lot numbers. Information and alerts are available to retail pharmacies, hospitals, and other providers. If you want to talk safety, talk to the pharmacists and doctors on the frontlines who will tell you that without consistency in drug names, the risk for error will put lives in danger. Moreover, the European Medicines Agency, FDA’s counterpart, has found no issue with tracking biosimilars over the last eight years that biosimilars have been on the European market.

Unfounded safety claims also threaten biosimilars’ full ability to inject greater competition into the market and drive down prices. While Medicare or private insurance may provide some coverage for those fortunate enough to be insured, coinsurance still adds up to thousands of dollars a year, hitting the pocketbooks of the chronically ill and seniors who tend to be disproportionately lower income. Whereas in Europe, competition from biosimilars has reduced patient costs by 30 to 40 percent.

And it is not just patients on the hook – all of us are impacted through higher premiums that absorb the cost of these expensive drugs. One recent example is Gilead’s new hepatitis-curing biologic, Sovaldi, that costs up to $1,000 a pill. Industry executives estimate this drug alone could increase every American’s insurance premium by $200 to $300 a year.

If the FDA requires different INNs for biosimilars, taxpayers will also lose out on valuable savings. With 20 million baby boomers entering Medicare over the next decade, lower cost biosimilars will reduce Medicare spending and extend the life of the program for future generations. The Congressional Budget Office initially estimated $7 billion in savings to the federal government from biosimilars entering the market; but each year the FDA delays implementation, taxpayers are missing out.

To encourage greater competition and lower costs, the FDA must responsibly move forward in a way that Congress intended to ensure patients, doctors, and pharmacists have the affordable choices they have long awaited.