Religion and faith news from around the world topped headlines in 2014. An online ballot cast in recent weeks allowed members of the Religion Newswriters Association to vote on the leading religion stories of the year. The Victoria Advocate also used online analytics to generate a Top 10 list.

Here are the nation's top religion stories as released by RNA. Because there were two ties, 12 stories are listed in the world column. A second list comprises the Crossroads' Top 10 religion stories of 2014.

Crossroads

Two Ghanaian priests of the Victoria Diocese, return to Victoria after vacationing in their home country and go into voluntary Ebola virus quarantine for 21 days. 10 Things you didn't know about the Rev. Dan Morales. A profile on Morales' life before and after seminary highlight interesting facts and unique achievements of one of Victoria's most beloved priests. Bread Crumbs column by the Rev. Andrew Schroer, "We will be reunited one day" discusses the grief of the town of Edna, as well as his own personal reflections after a tragic house fire killing five children ages 5 to 16 years old: Noah Ortiz, 15; Nicholas Ortiz, 13; Julian Ortiz, 11; Lilyana Hernandez, 6, and Areyanah Hernandez, 5. Buddhist Thomas Crow questions his daughter's school, Aloe Elementary, after palm-sized New Testament Bibles are distributed by Gideons International missionaries during physical education class. Revelations column, "Naughty sex toys at the mall" discusses the availability of pornographic adult toys at Spencer's in the mall. Sisters Stephanie Petrash-Ross and Shannon Longoria sell Christian fashion jewelry with faith-based jeweler Premier Designs, allowing the sisters to bond in ministry. Victoria opens first faith-based homeless shelter for women and children, House of Dreams, which aids residents with overcoming generational homelessness by building life skills and education opportunities. Victoria Police Department spreads Christmas cheer with Blue Santa program, which distributes toys to needy families. Victoria man, Ernest Rydolph, ends lifetime of alcohol addiction and homelessness through relationship with God and conversion to Christianity. The Rev. Bill Hassel, a retired Lutheran minister diagnosed with ALS, reflects on life and death Ash Wednesday.

World

ISIS rises in Iraq and Syria, declaring themselves an Islamic State. They drive out the Iraqi army from Mosul and exile ancient Christian communities, Yazidis and other religious minorities on threat of death. American journalist James Foley and other hostages are beheaded in the name of Allah. Their actions are decried around the world by Muslims and Christians and The United Nations. The Supreme Court rules Hobby Lobby and Conestoga can claim religious objections to a contraceptive mandate in the Affordable Care Act. (TIE) The Israeli-Palestinian conflict escalates, includes the kidnappings and murders of Israeli and Palestinian civilians, an Israel-Hamas war that leaves more than 2,000 dead. Tensions over Temple Mount access rise, including attacks on Israeli and Palestinians, including a deadly attack on rabbis praying in a synagogue. (TIE) The reception of Pope Francis is both widely beloved and panned worldwide for his efforts to create a church environment of inclusiveness and outreach to the needy and non-Christians. Mainline Protestants move progressively forward to perform same-sex weddings and ordaining gay and lesbian clergy. United Methodist minister, the Rev. Frank Schaefer is defrocked for performing same-sex weddings but is later restored by the church's Supreme Court. The Presbyterian Church (U.S.A.) General Assembly approves pastors performing same-sex marriages in states where they're legal. The Moravian Church's largest province approves the ordination of gays and lesbians. Faith-based health care workers remain in West Africa to help treat patients of Ebola virus. The treatment of American medical missionaries Kent Brantly and Nancy Writebol gains wide attention. Mainline denominational leaders and Latino evangelicals support President Obama's executive action on immigration reform. Conservative leaders are ambivalent, largely because of GOP complaints that Obama overstepped his authority. Pakistani Muslim schoolgirl Malala Yousafzai, still recovering from Taliban gunshots in retaliation for advocating for girls' education, shares the 2014 Nobel Prize with Kailash Satyarthi, a Hindu and children's rights advocate from India. Faith-based groups help lead peaceful protests against racial injustice in the Ferguson, Mo., shooting case amidst violent outbursts after the police officer involved is not indicted. Women make strides in the clergy. The Church of England overwhelmingly votes to allow women bishops. Seventh-day Adventists agree to vote on women's ordination in 2015. For the first time, women lead three of the nation's most prominent mainline churches, while the U.S. Navy names its first female head chaplain. (TIE) India elects Prime Minister Narendra Modi, a Hindu nationalist whose track record, and that of his government, spurs fears of discrimination against religious minorities. (TIE) Movie critics term 2014 as "The Year of the Bible" because of the release of a dozen films based on the Bible or with faith-rooted scripts chronologically from Noah and the Exodus to the Rapture. The movies, "God's Not Dead," $60 million and "Son of God," nearly as much.

SHARE