During President Obama's State of the Union address Tuesday, he spoke proudly about the millions of Americans who gained healthcare coverage last year and promised to veto any bill that would attempt to undermine that coverage. He also plugged a new Precision Medicine Initiative that uses genomic sequencing to explore cures for cancer and diabetes.

Also this week, the Office of Inspector General for the Department of Health and Human Services released a report detailing the "inadequacies" of the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) during the contract planning and procurement process. These included: not developing an "overarching acquisitions strategy," not identifying a lead systems integrator to oversee 60 federal contracts, and not properly vetting two major contractors' past performance.

On Thursday, a congressman told the American Medical Association to quit bellyaching about the sustainable growth rate formula (SGR) until Congress can formulate a plan to finance repeal.

Also this week, the FDA approved a monoclonal antibody secukinumab (Cosentyx) for plaque psoriasis, and a key FDA panel endorsed a novel anti-fungal therapy to treat rare, difficult to diagnose infections.

President Trumpets 'Good News' in the State of the Union

President Obama's State of the Union address on Tuesday may not have mentioned the Affordable Care Act by name, but healthcare did have a role to play throughout.

"In the past year alone, about 10 million uninsured Americans finally gained the security of health coverage," Obama said during the speech, adding that healthcare inflation was at its lowest rate in 50 years.

Democrats in the chamber stood and applauded loudly for both of those remarks. "This is good news, people," Obama said to the Republicans, who remained in their seats.

Congressman to AMA: Offer SGR Solutions, Not Complaints

The American Medical Association (AMA) is doing a disservice by not weighing in on how to pay for repealing the sustainable growth rate (SGR) formula for physician reimbursement under Medicare, a member of Congress said Thursday.

During the second day of a hearing on repealing and replacing the SGR, Rep. Larry Bucshon, MD (R-Ind.), a cardiac surgeon and member of the House Energy and Commerce Health Subcommittee, asked Barbara McAneny, MD, chair of the AMA's board of trustees, if the AMA could offer "substantial possible pay-fors" to cover the cost of the repeal. The Congressional Budget Office last year put the cost at about $140 billion over 10 years.

But McAneny, an oncologist in Albuquerque, N.M., who testified on the AMA's behalf, declined to do so. "Within the healthcare sector, so many are struggling now to keep the doors open, so for us to come up with specific pay-fors may not be as useful until there are some guidelines set up by Congress," she said. "The AMA stands ready to assist and help by weighing in on any specific suggestions; we don't really have the ability to give you specific pay-fors, because the devil is in the details."

Cosentyx Gets FDA Nod for Psoriasis

The FDA today approved the monoclonal antibody secukinumab (Cosentyx) for the treatment of moderate-to-severe plaque psoriasis in adults who are candidates for systemic therapy, phototherapy, or both.

Secukinumab binds to interleukin-17, blocking this inflammatory cytokine's interaction with its receptor, according to manufacturer Novartis.

"Plaque psoriasis can cause significant skin irritation and discomfort for patients, so it is important to have a variety of treatment options available to patients," Amy Egan, MD, of the agency's Center for Drug Evaluation and Research, said in a news release.

Astellas Novel Anti-Fungal Drug Wins FDA Panel Support

Astellas' novel drug, isavuconazonium (Cresemba) for treatment of invasive aspergillosis won the unanimous endorsement of an FDA advisory committee.

"I thought this was a relatively straightforward decision to make," said committee member Dean Follmann, PhD, assistant director for Biostatistics at the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases.

A second indication, treatment of invasive mucormycosis, also won approval from a majority of the members of the Anti-Infective Drugs Advisory Committee by a vote of 8-2, but that tally suggests a greater enthusiasm than that which was expressed during deliberations.

Next week

On Tuesday, the House's Energy and Commerce Committee will explore how public health legislation can impact patients and communities.

On Thursday, the Senate will hold a full committee hearing focused on improving outcomes and reducing the cost of employer wellness programs.

The Association of Maternal and Child Health Programs will hold a conference at the Hyatt Regency, Saturday through Tuesday.