Topics: Books, Editor's Picks, ICE, Immigration, New Bedford, Life News, Politics News

Nothing illustrates the “raid mentality” of immigration enforcement like an actual raid.

Just at the head of Clark’s Cove, along the waterfront where old textile mills and fish factories dot the small peninsula of New Bedford that juts into Buzzards Bay, is an unremarkable four-story red brick factory building that has housed enterprises long forgotten. It is unremarkable because so many buildings of that kind still stand in this legendary whaling town, many of them abandoned once textiles—for years the economic engine of the city—followed whaling’s earlier decline and nearly vanished. In this building, though, textiles were still being sown into vests and backpacks for the US Army, a nice bit of business in struggling New Bedford, coming as it did with a $132 million contract. Owner Francesco Insolia won the contract with help from city and state officials, took an enormous grant from Massachusetts’ Department of Workforce Development when Mitt Romney was governor, and grew to more than 500 employees to produce his army goods in what was widely known to be a sweat shop. A sweat shop with all the trappings—filthy bathrooms, draconian rules for lateness or talking or breaks, earned overtime pay never paid—an altogether substandard workplace. Insolia could do so for several years because his employees were for the most part undocumented workers, immigrants, mainly from Guatemala and El Salvador. They would work hard for Insolia and the US Army and keep their heads down. It was an open secret, of course, because New Bedford is small and jobs were scarce. But for five years Insolia and his company, Michael Bianco Inc., thrived under the nose of the military officials there and the state and city officials who poured job training funds and tax breaks into his coffers.

Then one day it all came crashing down. On a cold morning late in the winter of 2007, more than 300 agents of the Immigration and Customs Enforcement agency, known as ICE, raided the factory and rousted 362 Guatemalans, Salvadorans and a sprinkling of other south-of-the-border workers. They were handcuffed and manacled, and over the course of the day were taken from where they sat on the factory floor into buses and driven 94 miles to Fort Devens, an Army Reserve base. Many spent several immobilized hours on that floor, feeling brutalized by the federal police, while others attempted to escape, some even jumping into Clark Cove to get away. Among those taken were parents of small children, about a hundred children in all, who were suddenly without parental care. The new governor, Deval Patrick, spurred by the state’s child welfare agency being denied a role in the “processing” after weeks of pleading, called the whole shabby affair “a humanitarian crisis.”

And indeed it was. Within hours, before lawyers could be dispatched to Fort Devens, about half of the arrested workers were flown to Texas (either to Harlingen or to El Paso) to be incarcerated in detention centers run by private contractors for the Department of Homeland Security, ICE’s home department. There the possibility of being released, even with an ankle bracelet to monitor movements, was undercut by the lack of “community ties” of the detainees. Months of detention for many of the Michael Bianco workers lay ahead. About 160 would be deported outright.

In New Bedford, the reaction of the workers’ families and friends was panicked. Over the course of the chaotic day, the abandoned children were identified and placed with neighbors and extended family. Many immigrant families, legal or not, hunkered down in the north-side barrio, calling in sick to the other employers—mostly the fish-packing plants—and keeping their children out of school. No one knew what was coming next. But they gathered together almost instinctively at the Parish of Our Lady of Guadalupe, the one Catholic church that offered a Spanish mass, which is part of the old St. James Church that was less than a mile from the factory. There, Father Richard Wilson and a number of social workers (including Father Marc Fallon and Corinn Williams) ministered to the shocked community and set up a kind of operations center for lawyers and other public advocates to go to work. Senator Ted Kennedy was there within a few days, as was Governor Patrick. The complex and often confused task was to make sure the children were cared for, the fractured families stable (the loss of one breadwinner being a disaster), then unravel the tortuous detention process and sort out the legalities and the prospects for a release before deportation.

The raid was one of several dozen conducted by ICE around that time, likely a “show of force” for the benefit of those criticizing President Bush for not keeping illegal immigrants out of the country. The attempt to reform immigration laws—to give the out-of-status families a route to citizenship— was colliding with a powerful right-wing backlash against any attempt to reshape the laws. The alternative to reform, or possibly a complement to it, is the raid, whether of the workplace (the most dramatic and visible) or of homes. Raid, arrests, detention, imprisonment, deportation—these constitute the raid mentality. In nearly every major raid, human-rights abuses were reported and many lives ruined for what is in effect no greater an offense than a traffic ticket. The raid sets in motion a process of criminalization that sticks with the immigrant forever, stigmatizes children, and disrupts local economies.

The immigrants themselves see the raid mentality as punitive, intimidating, and even reminiscent of the oppression they had escaped. Assimilation under such circumstances is hindered, at least for one generation, and often more. And while the many raids of the Bush administration were regarded as the high-water mark of the strategy, the numbers of apprehensions and deportations has risen in the Obama years. In 2011, for example, the Department of Homeland Security apprehended 642,000 foreign nationals, three of every four being Mexicans; 400,000 were deported— all-time highs.

For the Latinos of New Bedford, the national debate and Washington politics and ICE statistics were far from their concerns in late winter of 2007. They, and the city, had to cope with the sharp economic, political, and emotional disruption of the raid and its aftermath.

* * *

The raid, as raids do, came suddenly and without warning. One Michael Bianco worker recalled it as follows:

I was inside when they told us to turn the machines off. When I turned to look I saw people running. I thought it was a fire or something, so I ran toward the back exit, but when I looked back I saw Immigration running toward us. There was a helicopter. There were many police. They told us, ‘Don’t run! Don’t run!’ We turned back. They told us to sit on the floor. I got very nervous and started shaking because a man from Honduras started running in the basement,” she continued, “and seven police surrounded him, they grabbed him at the neck, picked him up and threw him to the floor. They handcuffed him. Then they took us upstairs. They handcuffed us, and pushed us to the floor. Many people could not sit because our hands were tied … . That was 8 a.m. At around 3 p.m., we asked for water. I saw them bring in many boxes of water. I thought they were for us. I asked an official to give me a little water. Another woman said, ‘Yes, we want water.’ He looked at me and gave me a little bottle of water. He said, ‘You know, don’t put your mouth on it, because many people are going to drink from there.’ That little bottle was shared by about twelve people. They treated us as if we were murderers.

Many witnesses told stories about the harshness of ICE officers. A woman working in the factory informed ICE that she had a daughter who would not have anyone to care for her if she were in detention, “but they didn’t care,” she later recalled; “they still took me with the group.” “Because some of the women who had young children, who breastfed,” she continued, “[the officers] even made them take the milk from their breasts to see if it was true that they had young children. They even made fun of them. One of them told another to pass an Oreo cookie to eat with milk, that they were milking the cows.”

Others reported similarly harsh treatment. “When I saw that the agents carried guns, I thought they were going to shoot us,” one worker told a public radio reporter. “I thought we were all going to die that day.” Several described the induced panic and the agents’ callous reaction. “We saw these people coming and then when they started saying, ‘Don’t move. Nobody run,’ then we realized immigration was there,” a Salvadoran worker told an interviewer. “They were trying to grab everybody and people just started running like crazy. They panicked, they fell down. You found that they were pursuing people just like you were an animal. Like you would be running after a dog. They’d go after you that way.” He later told an ICE agent that a seven-months-pregnant woman needed some help; the agent refused and replied that he didn’t care. No food or bathroom visits were allowed, and little if any water, for seven hours or more.

“I live near the plant and went there at once before the ICE raid,” recalled Corinn Williams, who directs the Community Economic Development Center of Southeastern Massachusetts. “There were helicopters flying overhead and agents everywhere, and a mobile command center across the street. They put up barricades around the plant to keep families away.” The Community Economic Development Center became a nerve center for the lawyers who gradually became involved and others trying to locate the arrested and their loved ones. “All day,” Williams noted, “we heard from families about detainees, like the husband who had medications for his wife, who has seizures.”

Because the whole process of arrest and detention was taking so long and was so opaque, the community activists and family members realized in early afternoon that schools and day-care centers would be releasing children shortly, yet there was no word from federal agents as to who among the parents were detained. So the scene at Our Lady of Guadalupe was fraught with anxiety about the children, about infants without their mothers who were nursing, about older children getting out of school and going to an empty home, and about men suddenly assuming the role of two parents. As Williams pointed out, this was the first major ICE raid in which a majority of detainees were women—and young, child-bearing women at that. Father Fallon was told by ICE that Massachusetts’ Department of Social Services (DSS) had been part of the planning and would make amends, but people at that agency claimed they were “not in the loop” and therefore weren’t prepared.

Bethany Touré, an activist who had been on the scene, recalled that “there wasn’t a lot of outpouring of emotion or crying.” “It was really like vacant looks; vacant stares, kind of almost being in a state of shock,” she said. “This is a people who have been so traumatized before and here is trauma again.” Several of the workers recalled the helicopters as reminding them of military assaults in the highlands of Guatemala or the civil war in El Salvador.

Gradually, the arrested were loaded onto gray, unmarked buses with dark-tinted windows and driven the nearly 100 miles to Fort Devens; none were allowed to speak with family members. “It was like the hunter carting away his prey,” recalls Father Fallon, “returning time and again.” “That day was like the end of the world for me,” said one worker who was eventually deported to Guatemala.

Through the long day of the raid and the confusion and trauma of the days and weeks ahead, the city of New Bedford and its mayor came in for some sharp criticism for their placid cooperation with ICE (Mayor Scott Lang had known of the plans for the raid in advance) and their lack of preparations for the children. Lang blamed others. “Where was the mayor? That’s what we were asking,” Corinn Williams recalled. Ken Hartnett, then recently retired from editing the Standard-Times, the area’s largest newspaper, echoed that years later: “Mayor Lang was terrible. Talk Radio—the Ken Pittman show—was stoking ideas that the Guatemalans were taking jobs and ripping off the system. Lang was on his show weekly, and should have denounced that.” The chief of police was, as one would expect, cooperative with ICE, but had not pursued illegal immigration as an issue for his department before.