New insurance law: Long hours, low commissions for agents





Photo: Max Whittaker, Getty Images Image 1 of / 2 Caption Close Image 1 of 2 Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, the state insurance exchange. Peter Lee, executive director of Covered California, the state insurance exchange. Photo: Max Whittaker, Getty Images Image 2 of 2 Peter Lee is the executive director of Covered California, the state's Affordable Care Act agency. Peter Lee is the executive director of Covered California, the state's Affordable Care Act agency. Photo: Nick Ut / Associated Press New insurance law: Long hours, low commissions for agents 1 / 2 Back to Gallery

When a client called with questions about applying for insurance under the new health care law, Bay Area insurance agent Simon Chew tried to help.

He used the phone line dedicated for agents to call Covered California, the state's new health insurance marketplace. After a long wait he received a partial answer to a question about calculating income. He eventually got that client's application filed, but in the meantime many more questions from other clients started pouring in, and they haven't stopped.

That's not an unusual experience for Chew or many other insurance agents who are plunging in to help the state enroll hundreds of thousands of people in the new health insurance exchange.

Covered California says it has received 177,000 applications online, and it has no idea how many of those people needed assistance from insurance agents. Covered California spokesman Roy Kennedy maintains that the program has always thought that insurance agents would play an important role in getting applications filed. But insurance agents around the state say their experiences suggest otherwise.

Chew said his four Bay Area offices have received more than a thousand calls seeking help. In order to inform his mostly Chinese American clients about the new health program, he hosts radio and television shows in Cantonese and has run seminars for hundreds of people at Mills High School in Millbrae and elsewhere.

A miscalculation?

Chew insists that Covered California Executive Director Peter Lee miscalculated by thinking everyone would sign up online. In a newspaper interview last summer, Lee was quoted as saying that "relative to the individual market, (insurance brokers) could easily go the way of travel agents."

"So, guess what?" said Chew. "He's coming back now and saying, 'We need your help.' "

Susan Polk, an insurance agent in San Luis Obispo, said her office is getting about 100 calls a week, many of them from clients who were unable to sign up online.

"We get a lot of people who don't even know how to type, so it's not an easy thing for normal Joe Lunchbucket," she said.

Insurance agents are independent brokers, matching client needs to policies offered by insurance companies. They are paid through commissions from the companies, frequently a percentage of the first-year premium. In the case of Covered California, that can mean a small payday for a lot of work.

Chew said agents earn 4 percent of the gross premium. Monthly premiums he's processing are $200 to $300 for individuals and often require 1 1/2 hours of his time. For that amount, he quips, "I can't even take you out to lunch."

The agents are reporting a variety of problems, including delays in certifying them as Covered California counselors and a lack of solid answers about how the key components of the Affordable Care Act will work.

Applications backlog

Even simple answers from Covered California can be elusive. Monica Guzman, an agent in the Long Beach area, wanted a fax number to send in a client's application. Unable to provide one, the Covered California representative told her to mail in the application. "There's no way to track the application if it's mailed in," Guzman said.

Covered California spokesman Larry Hicks said the agency has a backlog of 25,000 paper applications. "It's like 'all hands on deck' to get these applications processed," he said.

Jeffrey Ensign, an insurance agent in San Diego, was trying to find out whether married clients could apply for separate health plans offered by different carriers, making repeated calls to Covered California.

He was baffled by the responses, which included five different answers.

"I was told, 'Yes, they can,' 'No, they can't,' 'Only if they're at the same tier,' " he said.

Ensign said wait times on the state phone line for agents can be an hour or more. He and a partner in his office share the burden by taking turns waiting on hold.

Kennedy said Covered California has increased the number of people answering the agent phone lines and said it has "dramatically improved wait times."

Not so for Connie Framberger, a San Luis Obispo agent who hasn't noticed a difference. "I was 89 in the queue a few days ago," she said.

Doctors and plans

Agents who took the training early are also seeing delays. "I was the first agent certified in the San Joaquin Valley," said Alex Hernandez, whose office is in Merced. "But I didn't get certified until Oct. 10."

Some agents are finding it difficult to pin down which doctors and hospitals are part of the health plans offered by insurance companies on the exchange. Kennedy said the list of doctors on the Covered California website is up to date, but he acknowledges the clinic and hospital lists are still in the works. He suggests that clinics and hospitals should be asked directly if they're in a network.

All of this adds up to questions about whether California residents will have their health plans up and running by January. Covered California has extended the deadline for applying from Dec. 15 to Dec. 23, which may help.

"We have to get it done. We won't leave people high and dry," said Covered California's Hicks.

On the other hand, said Mike Reaume, an agent in Corona, Riverside County, "I can say goodbye to my holiday."