STEELTON, Pa. (WHTM) – Wednesday brought more than the typical rush hour traffic down South Front Street in Steelton.

“What do we want?” Steelworkers employed by ArcelorMittal boomed over loudspeakers.

“A fair contract!” the crowd continued. “When do we want it?”

Car horns blared in shows of support as people drove through Steelton.

“Now!” The resounding cry continued for 20 minutes as dozens of steel workers stood on the sidewalk.

A bargaining committee for the United Steelworkers union is in the midst of negotiations with two companies employing 30,000 steelworkers – U.S. Steel, and ArcelorMittal, which has a plant in Steelton.

“Right now we do not pay anything for our healthcare,” USW Local 1688 Vice President Pat McHugh said. “We do not want to pay the outrageous price they’re suggesting.”

That price would be a monthly healthcare premium of $150 for individuals, $250 for families, along with a wage freeze.

“Hey hey! Ho ho! Corporate greed has got to go!” The chants continued as more drivers waved and cheered at the workers.

Is it greed, or is it survival in a struggling industry? That’s the crux of the contract disagreement. The steel companies say they have no choice – reports show steel prices in the U.S. have dropped more than 20 percent since January. But workers say they’re not buying it.

“Here in Steelton, we know they’re making money,” McHugh said. “And they have been making money. And we know that their profits for the last eight years have been very good. and they’ve put a lot of money into this plant.”

abc27 called ArcelorMittal to ask whether that’s true. No one called back. Information on GlassDoor.com shows average salaries hover between $55,000 and $90,000 per year.

“they say we make a lot of money, but in order to make a lot of money in the steel industry you have to work a lot of overtime,” McHugh said.

The debate continues, but the steelworkers say community support is on their side.

“Steelton’s a tight-knit community,” McHugh said. “And we have a lot of retirees in this community.”

Steel worker retirees say their healthcare is on the chopping block, too.

“I need that plan,” retired local union president Greg Bowers said. “I don’t want to go out and pay three or 400 dollars for a plan when I got a good plan that covers all my medical healthcare.”

Bowers says the rally is a sign of hope.

“It uplifts them,” he said with a smile. “It gives them that added strength to continue the fight.”

Share this: Twitter

Facebook

Google

Pocket

Email

Print

More

Pinterest

Like this: Like Loading...