Fargo - It was a college football season that had everyone talking: new coach, new players, ESPN “College GameDay,” 33-game win streak. But it was a season that ended with a game that really had everyone talking.

North Dakota State not only won

a fourth straight NCAA Division I FCS national championship, but it was accomplished in dramatic fashion with a last-second 29-27 win over Illinois State.

It had my brother, an art professor at the University of New Hampshire who rarely takes interest in games at this level, watching the ESPN2 telecast. And when quarterback Tre Roberson ran 58 yards for a touchdown to give Illinois State a 27-23 lead with 98 seconds remaining, it prompted my brother to text: “bummer dude.”

It also had the director of the Illinois State marching band telling his musicians to settle down in their seats overlooking the north end zone of Toyota Stadium. He reminded them there was still time left and that “this is a good team we are playing.”

It had a group of nurses huddling in an unused Fargo hospital room. And when R.J. Urzendowski hauled in a pass 5 yards from the end zone with 41 seconds left in the game, the nurses’ cheers echoed throughout the hallway.

It had one home of grown men and women glued to the TV when NDSU quarterback Carson Wentz took the snap and shuffled to his left. When he burst through a seam and fell into the end zone for a touchdown to give the Bison a 29-27 lead with 37 seconds to play, the adults screamed so loud their pet dog escaped to the basement.

It had Ellie Grooters of West Fargo, one of 17,000 Bison fans who overwhelmed the 21,000-seat Toyota Stadium, praying the Bison could hang on to this lead. When her boyfriend, NDSU linebacker Esley Thorton, wrestled a bobbled pass away from an Illinois State receiver, the Bison finally secured their momentous victory – one that made them only the second football team in NCAA history to win four straight titles.

“This is a dream come true,” Thorton said before Grooters found him on the field swarming with Bison fans and gave him a big hug.

This fairytale game had seniors like Christian Dudzik and Colten Heagle crying. It also had Gene Taylor wiping tears off his face. Taylor was NDSU’s athletic director who named Chris Klieman the head coach during last year’s playoff run – after Craig Bohl announced he was going to coach at Wyoming. Six months later, Taylor announced his departure to become the deputy director of athletics at the University of Iowa.

“I am really proud of Chris and this senior class,” said Taylor, sporting NDSU attire while attending the title game.

“I think they had a little something in them to say ‘You know what, we are still pretty good.’ But they kept it to themselves. It was pretty quiet. I knew they felt they could get here again, but I don’t know if a lot of people did. I tell you what, after they started winning those first few games, I think a lot of people started believing.”

And there probably were a lot of people who doubted the Bison could win when they were 83 yards from the goal line with 98 seconds remaining. But like they have all year, the Bison – and their 16 seniors – made believers out of us all.

“Especially to end it like this,” Thorton said standing on the Toyota Stadium field, not too far from his game-clinching interception. “To make history like this, you couldn’t have written a better story.”

A story that had everybody talking.