NC Dem: Obama didn’t lie, if you like your plan, you can keep it

The 2014 midterm elections have many Democrats running away from the Affordable Care Act. But Rep. G.K. Butterfield (D-N.C.) is embracing it, as he praised the law during an interview with Stephen Colbert on Monday and claimed if Americans like their plan, they can keep it.

“When the history of this period is written, you will see that the Affordable Care Act has been one of the most significant pieces of legislation that has ever been passed,” Butterfield told the Comedy Central host during “The Colbert Report.”

The North Carolina Democrat appeared on Colbert’s “Better Know a District” segment as he headed south of the Mason Dixon Line to chat with Butterfield, who represents the Tar Heel State’s 1st Congressional District.

Facing reelection this fall, Butterfield peddled the typical Democratic talking points and denied President Barack Obama ever lied when telling Americans “if you like your plan, you can keep it.”

“President Obama was not lying. If you like your plan, you can keep your plan,” Butterfield insisted. “The insurance companies are the ones who are dropping people. Some policies of insurance may have increased in price. That’s what this debate is all about. People are saying, ‘My insurance went up.’ Well, now you have an insurance policy that meets your needs and the needs of your family.”

Many insurance policies, though, include unnecessary coverage for things like maternity care — for men — and orthodontics — for families without young children. Additionally, the insurance policies cancelled failed to comply with new standards implemented under the Affordable Care Act, placing the blame onto the Obama administration as opposed to the providers.

Obama’s “if you like your plan, you can keep it” promise was named PolitiFact’s “Lie of the Year” in 2013.

Butterfield has represented North Carolina’s 1st since 2004 and voted for the Affordable Care Act. He faces Republicans Arthur Rich and John Shypulefski in the race for his seat.

Watch his “Better Know a District” segment below.