To some of us responsive, jet-fast tablet displays still constitute a wonder, but the industry is advancing at a very fast rate.

Not so long ago I brought you a report saying that LG was looking to make rollable display technology much cheaper by substituting aluminum wires in the displays with copper.

Sources familiar with the matter disclosed that the device maker was looking to implement this affordable technology into future tablets.

LG has already showcased an 18-inch panel that can be rolled out into a scroll, but is this the future of tablets? Maybe – would we actually need such a tablet? As you will find out below, there are a few benefits to take into consideration as far as flexible tablets are concerned.

Flexible tablets will be harder to damage

One advantage of flexible gadgets is ruggedness. Remember Samsung’s Youm flexible display at CES 2013? Well, the company claimed and showed how the flexi-tech bended all around without breaking, even if dropped on the floor.

Since 2013, Samsung flexible technology hasn’t seen the spotlight all that much, but before MWC 2014 it was rumored that the Korean tech giant was about to demo a flexible tablet behind closed doors. Sadly, we didn't get to see anything, but we still hope that Samsung is working on something like this.

Flexibility should also improve user interfaces, particularly when it comes to devices such as tablets, as the bending and twisting could make interaction more natural and intuitive for users.

And with the technology LG uses (the kind we have seen with the 18-inch panel) such displays could turn out to be more translucent, thus serving the purposes outlined above.

Since the flexible OLED screen is also semi-transparent users will be able to see what’s happening both on the 1280 x 810 pixel screen and behind it, depending on the opacity.

Flexible tablets would be easier to carry

Researchers are also working on flexible batteries that could make it easier to create devices in unusual shapes.

As you can see, flexible display and battery technologies are advancing quite fast, so it’s not hard to imagine a near future where you can really fold up or roll a tablet for easier storage.

Actually, this might be another important benefit of flexible tablets. They would allow you to carry tablets with bigger displays around without you complaining about the rigidity of the device. Or investing money for accessories such as protection folios and what not.

Flexible tablets could act like hybrids

2-in-1 tablet/notebook combos are already making a splash in the market, given their versatility. Users looking to purchase a device today are lured in by the promise of multiple functionalities. After all, a 2-in-1 can be a tablet or a notebook, depending on what you need to do with it.

However, a flexible tablet that can be bent could also be transformed into a laptop, or a smartphone. If the tablet is bigger, the lower part might be used with a virtual keyboard, while the upper part could act as a display. Or if the tablet is smaller and has cellular connectivity, it could be folded up, put in your coat’s pocket, and used to place phone calls.

To make a roundup, flexible tablets of the future could end up being tougher, unbreakable, taking up less space, and used in multiple ways. Therefore, I think they do have a potential to wow the market if they are to be given decent price tags by their manufacturers.