A freelance journalist for a local online news site was arrested Thursday while covering a motor vehicle crash, after he refused to turn over his camera to a detective from the Ocean County Prosecutor’s Office. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A freelance journalist for a local online news site was arrested Thursday while covering a motor vehicle crash, after he refused to turn over his camera to a detective from the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office.

Andrew P. Flinchbaugh, 23, of Lacey, working for The Lacey Reporter, was charged with obstructing administration of law, which is a disorderly persons offense. He was taken into custody after he was repeatedly ordered by a detective to turn over the camera so whatever pictures or video Flinchbaugh had captured could be reviewed as potential evidence in the crash investigation.

Hot topic: Should photographer have given police camera?

Detective David Margentino had responded to the scene on Dover Road just before 11 a.m., in a remote section of the township, where a fellow detective in the Prosecutor's Office had been seriously injured in a one-car accident - the vehicle had crashed into the woods. The injured investigator, who has not been identified, was airlifted to Jersey Shore University Medical Center in Neptune.

Apparently unbeknownst to the detective, Flinchbaugh recorded his entire conversation with Margentino using the video application on his smartphone. The lens of the camera on the phone was generally pointed at the ground during their exchange. That video, which is 10 minutes and 37 seconds in length, has since gone viral.

"I had been documenting an emergency response to an MVA on Dover Road for over a half hour," Flinchbaugh wrote in a title card introducing his video on YouTube. "I was making my way back to my car when I was stopped by Detective Margentino of the Ocean County Prosecutor's Office. The detective requested another officer get a property receipt and asked me to walk over to the front of a police vehicle. This is what transpired."

Ocean County Prosecutor Joseph D. Coronato said Saturday night that he has dropped the charge against Flinchbaugh.

"We could have handled this better," Coronato said.

According to the video Flinchbaugh posted on YouTube, he attempted to argue his rights as a member of the media.

Margentino countered that Flinchbaugh had entered his crime scene. Flinchbaugh said he had been given access to the scene by fire police, who were standing watch at a road block set up after the crash. At the discretion of law enforcement officers present, credentialed media members are often granted closer access to police scenes than the general public. However, access is allowed so long as such a presence does not interfere with the police work, represent an additional safety issue or compromise the integrity of an ongoing investigation.

"I'm not going to negotiate with you, I'm explaining to you, this camera is going to be collected," Margentino told him. "We will return it to you and I will give you a receipt ... This is not a negotiation, do I sound like I'm negotiating with you? Do I make this sound like it's an option?"

"Listen, you're not getting this camera," Flinchbaugh replied.

"Sir, I'm going to explain to you, I'm a law enforcement officer, you fail to obey my orders, I'm going to place you under arrest," Margentino said.

"Is there anybody with any common sense here right now?" Flinchbaugh asked.

"Absolutely, my lieutenant is coming," the detective answered. "I'm just telling you, there might be evidence on it."

A lieutenant, who was not identified, walked over and questioned Flinchbaugh about which media outlet he worked for, and whether he was on staff or worked as a freelancer.

"I'm happy to cooperate in any way, but you're not going to seize my camera," Flinchbaugh insisted.

The lieutenant explained to Flinchbaugh that he may have captured something on video before the detectives arrived that would assist them with their investigation into the crash.

"I don't understand what this is about, what are you suspicious of? ... If you want a copy of the footage, I can get you a copy of the footage," Flinchbaugh said.

The lieutenant and Flinchbaugh seemed to come to an amicable understanding. Flinchbaugh even stopped recording for a time.

In a title card about seven minutes and 20 seconds into the video, Flinchbaugh wrote: "From the Lt.'s demeanor I was expecting to get my ID back and leave, so I put my phone away. Then I decided I better keep it rolling. Shortly after, Detective Margentino came back over."

Margentino said all of the officers on the scene had reached a consensus: The camera would be collected as evidence and Flinchbaugh could come along if he wanted. Either way, the camera would be returned to him after a few hours.

"Well then, you're going to have a lawsuit on your hands," Flinchbaugh said. "You're not seizing my camera, it's just that simple. ... Listen, would you be doing this if this was a corporate media crew?"

"Andrew, let me explain to you what your options are…" Margentino began to explain.

"Listen, I know what my options are. I'm free to walk away any time I want," Flinchbaugh said.

"Absolutely, you can leave right now. That's fine with me," the detective replied.

"With the camera," Flinchbaugh said.

"No, you're not taking the camera," Margentino said.

Flinchbaugh offered to let the detective see his camera roll right there on the scene and Flinchbaugh offered to make a copy for the officer later, if he wanted. But Flinchbaugh said he and his camera were not voluntarily going anywhere with the detective - not to any police station nor the Prosecutor's Office.

"This is totally unreasonable," Flinchbaugh complained.

"Sir, give me the camera," Margentino ordered.

"This is totally unreasonable. ... You're going to have to place me under arrest," Flinchbaugh told him.

"Don't push me like that," the detective answered.

"I'm not pushing you, I'm not going to give you my camera," Flinchbaugh said.

"Hands behind your back," Margentino is heard saying, having the last word.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1IBEg10