It is almost a year since new mortgage regulations were introduced that transformed the way lenders assessed new borrowers, who must now meet tough affordability criteria. The mortgage industry has had plenty of time to adapt to the regime, but 12 months later lenders are still failing to get it right, trapping existing customers in their homes – then cynically profiting from their situation.

Month after month, Telegraph Money has written about borrowers who took out a loan before the new rules came into force and are now facing difficulties moving home, remortgaging or switching to a cheaper rate.

The reasons are varied: some want to move home, but lenders are refusing to transfer, or “port”, their loan. Others are on their lender’s high standard variable rate and are denied a better deal. Then there are the borrowers in their 40s and 50s being told they are “too old”.

The stated reason? When banks refuse the new arrangements, they claim borrowers fail to meet the new affordability criteria. This may be true, but the banks have no requirement to enforce the rules on existing borrowers. The City regulator, the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA), introduced special transitional arrangements designed to protect existing borrowers from the reforms.

But lenders are ignoring them and, as they’re “guidance” rather than rules, the FCA is powerless to act. The regulator is now undertaking a major review of the new regulations. Telegraph Money is calling for these “transitional arrangements” to become binding rules.

What are the arrangements?

Existing borrowers who don’t want to make a significant change to their loan, such as borrow more money or extend the term, should not be subjected to affordability tests. This is because they took out their loan when the rules were more relaxed.

But lenders are blatantly ignoring this, despite stark warnings from the regulator.

The FCA told Telegraph Money that lenders failing to apply the rules correctly should “review their policies to ensure that they are making judgments based on common sense and in the interest of their customers”.

Who’s affected?

We have heard from scores of home owners who have applied to port their loan and been rejected. These borrowers don’t want to borrow more money or extend their term. In many cases they want to downsize and reduce their debt, but lenders have taken the nonsensical decision that they “can’t afford” to do so. To add insult to injury, they are often forced to pay crippling fees to exit their loan early.

Other borrowers don’t want to move house but are stuck on their lender’s high standard variable rate and are told they “can’t afford” a cheaper loan.

Other targets are older borrowers whose loan will run into retirement – an area that lenders have cracked down on in the past year. They are often also kept on very high rates unnecessarily.

Borrowers with very cheap loans are also targets – they are not profitable for the banks, which are keen to get them off their books.

What are lenders saying?

Some seem to disregard the transitional rules completely. Even when borrowers have appealed the decision to senior management, it is upheld, suggesting the problems extend well beyond the underwriting department.

Barclays, for example, has said that to lend responsibly, it applies affordability checks to all borrowers.

But some lenders are disjointed in their thinking. Branch staff and in-house mortgage advisers tell customers there should be no problem porting their loan or remortgaging, for example, but the underwriters refuse the application on the grounds of affordability.

In these cases careful borrowers who plan ahead are being misled into thinking they won’t have any problems, only to find out later that their application has been rejected.

Most of the complaints in our mailbag are about moving home.

Downsizing

In February, George Panayi, his wife and their four children decided to move from their £665,000 home in Chingford, north-east London, to Leigh-on-Sea in Essex. The family found their dream home and made an offer of £475,000, which was accepted.

Mr Panayi, 41, wanted to port his £270,000 NatWest mortgage to the new property. He planned to reduce his loan – a two-year fix at 1.95pc, which he took out in December 2013 – to £160,000. This would allow him to lower his monthly repayments and pay off around £20,000 of unsecured personal debt, strengthening his financial position.

He called NatWest and applied for the port. The adviser he spoke to ran a check and said that his credit score was not high enough so he would not be able to move.

“I argued that by moving I would be paying off debt and reducing my repayments, improving my financial position,” Mr Panayi said. “I asked to speak to a manager or a mortgage underwriter and was refused.”

Faced with an early repayment fee of £8,000, Mr Panayi was determined to fight the decision.

He arranged a meeting with a regional manager and took copies of articles written by this newspaper about the transitional rules. The manager spent two hours with him and was sympathetic. He promised to raise an appeal.

The manager set up an appointment with a mortgage adviser, who explained to the underwriters why the mortgage should be approved.

“Eventually someone at NatWest saw common sense and approved my application,” Mr Panayi said. “This is obviously good news for us, but we had to go through a lot and almost lost our dream home.

“The telephonists at NatWest were useless, and their manager and underwriters refused to talk to me. Some customers would have just accepted it and not challenged the decision, leaving them with huge redemption fees.”

A NatWest spokesman said it “actively trains and encourages advisers to use the transitional arrangements wherever they believe it’s in the customer’s best interests”.

“It appears that this did not happen in this case and they were clearly put through unnecessary inconvenience and distress for which we sincerely apologise,” she said.

Moving closer to family

Dawn Bryan bought a home in Reading in March 2013. She took out a £120,000 10-year loan with Leeds Building Society at 4.29pc. The loan was sold to her as portable – an important feature given the length of her contract.

Less than two years later her life completely changed when her mother died. Suddenly she needed to move to Manchester to care for her father, who has dementia.

Miss Bryan put her home on the market for offers over £300,000 and explained the situation to Leeds. She asked to port her loan, now worth £113,000, to a new home in Manchester.

But shockingly, Leeds rejected her request. It said that since she had left her job, she didn’t qualify.

“I pay my mortgage each month via direct debit and I have never missed a payment,” Miss Bryan said.

“When my property sells, I will have more than £180,000 in the bank – more than enough to meet the repayments and pay back the outstanding mortgage when the time is right. I can’t believe Leeds has rejected my application outright, without exploring any options.”

To add insult to injury, Leeds is insisting on charging Miss Bryan an early repayment fee of more than £6,000 – a cruel penalty given the building society has insisted on ending the loan early.

Martin Richardson, a general manager at Leeds Building Society, argued that where a significant change in circumstances has occurred, such as a reduction in income, transitional arrangements do not apply.

“In Miss Bryan’s case, it would appear that a significant change in affordability has occurred which would prevent the existing mortgage from being transferred to a new property," he said.

“A cash lump sum held at a moment in time by a customer, which could be used at any time for any discretionary expenditure, cannot be taken into account as income.”

Moving closer to school

Rebecca and Peter Dewhurst want to move from their five-bedroom house in the countryside to nearby Bury St Edmunds, Suffolk, to be nearer their three children’s school.

The couple have an interest-only mortgage worth £220,000 with Santander. In July last year, their five-year fixed rate came to an end. Knowing they would need to move home in the short term, they contacted Santander to ask if they could fix for another five years but port the loan in the spring.

Santander said yes, so the Dewhursts fixed for another five years at 3.64pc.

The couple have now sold their home for £440,000. They found a new property that was initially marketed for £450,000, but the seller needed a quick sale, so they secured it for £378,000. They plan to modernise it and have been advised it will be worth more than their existing home when it is complete. Before finalising the offer they contacted Santander, which again confirmed that porting the mortgage would not be a problem.

But when the time came to lodge the application, it was rejected.

“The process has taken almost six weeks and much to our amazement we were refused by the underwriters, who said that under the new rules it is not affordable,” Mrs Dewhurst said. “However, we can stay in our larger house, which has higher running costs, and pay the same mortgage. It’s crazy.”

Mrs Dewhurst said Santander’s concerns were completely unfounded. The couple have made mortgage repayments for 26 years without any problems. By moving into town their monthly outgoings will fall because they will run one car instead of two and their household bills will be lower.

“It is all getting very urgent now as we fear the whole chain could collapse,” she said. “My husband is a head teacher with a great pension and when he retires the mortgage will be paid off, but they don’t seem to take this into account. To come out of the mortgage would cost us an £11,500 redemption penalty. This all seems very unfair.”

On Tuesday last week Santander insisted it would not honour its porting promise, but changed its mind after Telegraph Money stepped in.

A spokesman said that following “recent conversations” with the Dewhursts they were satisfied that they had the ability to pay off their car loan and credit card debt through the property sale, so approved the application.

Ongoing problems

We have written about a number of major lenders that are keen to purge borrowers on very low rates, older borrowers and those they no longer deem creditworthy by unfairly applying new affordability rules to refuse porting requests.

Cheap loans

In January, Telegraph Money wrote about Ralph Simpson, 42, and his wife, Katie, 38, of Winchester. They bought their £250,000, two-bedroom house as a newly married couple in 2008 with a £200,000 lifetime tracker with HSBC at a cheap rate of 0.79pc above Bank Rate.

Six years later the couple had grown into a family of four and their home was “bursting at the seams”.

They secured an offer on their house of £420,000 and found their ideal family home for £380,000. In October they asked to port their mortgage, which had fallen to £155,000.

“We have never missed a mortgage payment and would be increasing our equity in the property, but our request was refused,” Mrs Simpson said.

HSBC refused to comment on the case.

‘Self-cert’ borrowers

Borrowers with “self-cert” loans are increasingly becoming mortgage prisoners, trapped on very high interest rates.

Self-cert loans, where borrowers simply declared their income but did not have to prove it, are no longer available but were popular with the self-employed and those with irregular earnings.

Most still cannot prove their income, so fail to meet lenders’ new criteria.

David Waterhouse, who is stuck on a high interest rate.

David and Jo Waterhouse were caught by this trap. In January, we covered their interest-only self-cert mortgage with UCB Home Loans, Nationwide’s specialist lending arm.

The couple took out the £318,000 loan on their £550,000 Leeds home in 2002 and are now stuck paying a whopping 5.29pc interest rate.

UCB is closed to new business and, while it does allow existing customers to remortgage, its rates are extremely high. Its best two-year fixed rate is 5.19pc.

Nationwide’s standard rate is 3.99pc and it has two-year tracker deals for 1.44pc.

Mr Waterhouse contacted Nationwide and asked to be moved to a better rate, but was told he would have to meet the new affordability requirements.

“I am a self-employed property landlord, so my income is irregular,” he said. “But I have an impeccable payment history and an excellent credit rating.

“The question needs to be asked why Nationwide will not offer me a competitive interest rate in line with the transitional arrangements. It can only be to profiteer from my situation.”

A Nationwide spokesman said that UCB was a separate entity. “UCB serviced the self-cert sector of the market, which Nationwide did not,” she said.

Standard variable rates

Santander, in particular, is continuing to anger borrowers by refusing to offer them the lower rates it makes available to new customers, claiming they “can’t afford” a cheaper loan.

Jennifer Jones was stuck on Santander's standard variable rate.

In January, we reported the case of Jennifer and John Jones, from Surrey, whose 2.69pc rate was coming to an end this month.

Although they had a lot of equity, Santander refused to offer them any rate other than the standard variable rate of 4.74pc, arguing they had too much debt elsewhere.

After their story appeared, the Joneses approached their MP, who took the matter up with Santander. They were subsequently offered a rate of 1.99pc. The difference in monthly payments between 1.99pc and 4.74pc is a whopping £808.

Santander said: “We seek to treat all customers fairly and equally. If someone has an adverse credit event which occurred after we last agreed a mortgage rate, it will limit the products we will offer them at renewal.”

>> The best of Telegraph Money once a week: sign up to our newsletter