ST. LOUIS — Eager anticipation will soon turn into reality for Rockies baseball fans.

Right-handed starting pitcher Jon Gray, the top prospect in the Rockies organization, is scheduled to make his major-league debut on Tuesday night against the Seattle Mariners at Coors Field.

A major-league source confirmed the news late Sunday night.

Gray, 23, the No. 3 overall pick out of the University of Oklahoma in 2013, has been pitching this season for Triple-A Albuquerque. He is 6-6 with a 4.33 ERA in 21 games (20 starts). He’s struck out 110 vs. only 41 walks.

Fans have been waiting for Gray’s debut all season, but the Rockies were waiting until Gray reduced his pitch counts and improved the command of his fastball, slider and changeup.

WATCH: What’s one reason to watch the Rockies play the rest of the season?

“The stuff is there. It’s major-league stuff, absolutely,” Zach Wilson, the Rockies’ senior director of player development, told The Denver Post in May. “But it’s the consistency that is the next major step for him. Consistency in command, and consistency in seeing him throw a plus-changeup eight out of 10 times, instead of three out of 10 times.”

In his last six starts, Gray is 3-1 with a 2.70 ERA, with 38 strikeouts vs. 13 walks. He’s been throwing his fastball — which was clocked at 100 mph at times in college — in the mid-90s most of this season.

Outfielder and first baseman Kyle Parker, who played with Gray at Triple-A all of this season before before being promoted to the Rockies on Saturday, said he’s seen a lot of improvement from Gray.

“Playing with Jon this year, from the beginning of the season until now, he’s really developing into a more mentally tough player,” Parker said. “If you have seen the guy throw you know that he’s pretty special.

“You can tell right away that he’s a talented guy, but he’s going about his business every day. You go through some negative things on the mound as a starter, but I think that’s where he’s made a lot of improvements. His last couple of outings have been pretty good.”

In May, while he was going through some rough growing pains, Gray admitted to some frustration, but said he was staying the course.

” Just want people to see, to know, that I’m not panicking,” he said. “There is a bigger picture here. There is a reason I have to go through some things.”

Rockies management is convinced that Gray is the real deal. They don’t fear that he is the next Greg Reynolds, a husky right-hander whom the Rockies selected as the No. 2 overall pick in the 2006 draft. Reynolds became the biggest draft bust in team history, winning only six big-league games.

“There is not a doubt in my mind that Jon has the confidence, and that he has the stuff, to succeed up here,” Wilson said. “You have to remember, we are not looking for Jon Gray to be a No. 4 or No. 5 starter.

“Sure, he could come up here and just be OK. We’re trying to develop him into the No. 1 starter that he has the potential to be. To do that, it takes some time and some patience.”

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp