Hundreds to lose jobs at call center

344 Obamacare workers to be cut

By Michael Buettner

With open enrollment in the new government-administered Health Insurance Marketplace scheduled to close at the end of this month, more than 300 jobs are being eliminated at a call center in eastern Chesterfield County.

General Dynamics Information Technology recently notified the Virginia Workforce Network that it plans to lay off 344 workers under a permanent reduction, effective May 9, at its facility in the Rivers Bend Industrial Park near Enon.

The call center was working under a contract with the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) to answer questions and provide support for people seeking to enroll in health insurance plans made available under the Affordable Care Act – widely known as Obamacare.

Enrollment in those plans was originally scheduled to end in February, but the sign-up period was extended after glitches on the enrollment website (www.healthcare. gov).

Now, the deadline to sign up is March 31. After that date, according to a statement provided to the Observer by the CMS, “call centers operated by CMS contractors that have supported our effort to enroll millions of Americans in quality, affordable health coverage will be ramping down much of their activities.”

According to the statement, “the call center will staff up and down over the year to meet consumer demand and maximize operational efficiency.”

CMS officials said the call centers under contract to the agency have received more than 10 million calls from consumers seeking to obtain health insurance plans during the enrollment period, which opened in October 2013. The people hired to staff the call centers were considered seasonal workers.

A spokesman for Fairfax-based General Dynamics declined to provide any information about the local call center. According to the county Economic Development Authority, the center employed 1,000 people in January, making it the county’s 11th-largest private-sector employer.



As of March 1, more than 4.2 million people had signed up for health insurance through the new marketplace, which was created by the Affordable Care Act signed by President Obama in March 2010. The aim of the marketplace is to enable people who previously had no health insurance to obtain coverage.



Among the most controversial of the act’s provisions is a penalty some consumers will face for not having insurance. Anyone who can afford to pay for health insurance but doesn’t obtain coverage by the deadline will be charged a fee on their federal income tax next year, up to a maximum of $95 per person or 1 percent of taxable income, whichever is larger.

The penalty is set to increase annually. In 2015, it will be 2 percent of income or $325 per person, and from 2016 on, it will amount to 2.5 percent of income or $695 per person.

In addition, anyone who misses the deadline will have to wait until the next open enrollment period begins in October before signing up.

For detailed information about how the Affordable Care Act may affect you and how to get coverage if you need it, visit www.healthcare.gov or call 1-(800)-318-2596.