Beatrice Leach, 2, plays with the flowers that decorate a new shopping cart ordered just for her and other children with disabilities as her mother, Melody, watches, before shopping Friday at King Soopers in south Loveland. Beatrice has cerebral palsy, and the cart will make the shopping experience easier and more comfortable for her and her mother. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

A pink sign reading "Beatrice's Cart" hanging across the front marks a shopping cart for a special customer at the King Soopers in Loveland's Thompson Valley Towne Center.

Beatrice Leach, who is almost 3 and has cerebral palsy, sat in it Friday during her first shopping trip in a cart designed for children with disabilities, pushed by her mother, Melody, of Berthoud.

"She'll be comfortable, and I'll be able to do an entire week's of shopping," said Leach, who quit her engineering job to stay home and care for her daughter because getting the care she needed was difficult.

Beatrice, an only child, was born prematurely at 33 weeks and suffered from periventricular leukomalacia, or bleeding in the brain. She likely will be unable to walk, has intellectual disabilities, has low vision and feeds through a tube and by eating a few soft foods.

Melody Leach pushes her daughter, Beatrice, 2, on Friday in a new shopping cart designed for children with disabilities at King Soopers in south Loveland. Beatrice has cerebral palsy, and the cart will make the shopping experience easier and more comfortable for her and her daughter. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

She responds to touch, smiles and giggles and knows a few words, including "Elmo" from her favorite cartoon.

"I talk to her as I would talk to anybody," Leach said. "I feel pretty lucky, because a lot of kids with this diagnosis aren't supposed to talk. She says one word, and I'm 'oh!'"

Initially, Leach struggled with pushing both a shopping cart and a wheelchair. Or she had to shop with Beatrice, too large now for the child's seat, in the body of the cart or use a shopping basket. When she put Beatrice inside a cart, she got comments that her child looked uncomfortable or that she shouldn't have her in the cart.

In response, Leach, who needs at least an hour to do a complete shopping trip, started making quick, frequent trips to get a few items to make dinner for herself and her husband, Thor.

Advertisement

But she got frustrated with the endeavor and six weeks ago talked to Mike Myers, assistant manager of the south Loveland King Soopers, about getting a special cart called a Caroline's Cart with an extra-large child's seat that faces the person pushing the cart, just like the child's seat in a regular cart. The child is strapped in with a five-point harness.

"The special cart allows her to relax. It's got a lot of support," Leach said.

Myers, who as a child had a friend with a brother with cerebral palsy, sent in a request to King Soopers management to order the cart, which arrived at the store Tuesday.

"It just makes the shopping experience better for this one shopper in particular and anyone who has special needs and needs that cart. Now, it's available for them," Myers said.

The employees at the store plan to decorate the cart for the holidays, Myers said. For Beatrice's first ride on Thursday, they put pink ribbons and plastic flowers around the body of the cart and tied on five polka-dot balloons and a pink butterfly balloon.

"I love it and am really proud of my team and the company I work for," said Randy Klatt, store manager, saying to Leach, "I'm so happy you brought her into our lives. She's certainly the talk of our store here, because she is so precious. Everybody that's met her fell instantly in love with her."

Lauren Woolhether, mother of two, including a son, Will, 5, who has autism and epilepsy, will be one of the shoppers who use the cart. Woolhether met Leach in a certified nursing assistant class they took to be able to provide skilled care for their children.

"Will has really bad behavior, so he couldn't be left to walk with me. It will help us to be able to walk through the store peacefully," Woolhether said.

Shelley Widhalm: 970-669-5050, swidhalm@reporter-herald.com, twitter.com/ShelleyWidhalm.