According to the latest Rasmussen survey, voters strongly believe Bill Clinton was a better president than Barack Obama.

Former President Clinton was once called “our first black President,” and with President Obama’s second term now in a tailspin, he may reclaim the title if black Americans start rejecting the biracial Obama as one of their own.

Survey results show just 27 percent of African-American voters believe Clinton was a better president than Obama, so the “first black President” title is safe for now, but the unraveling of Obamacare could change everything.

Major retailer ditches political correctness,

saying ‘Merry Christmas’ this year

Overall, results show that 62 percent of “Likely U.S. Voters” believe Clinton was a better president, with just 20 percent saying Obama is doing a better job than Clinton did when he was president.

Republicans and Independents strongly favor Clinton, but even Democrats choose “Bubba” over Obama.

Sixty-nine percent of Republicans and 70 percent of Independents choose Clinton, according to Rasmussen. Among Democrats, Clinton prevails by a narrower 49 percent to 37 percent margin.

Obama was managing to keep his head above water this week amid all the criticism of the roll out of his signature healthcare law — at least until Clinton made headlines by urging Obama to keep his promise that people can keep their existing health insurance plans, Rasmussen reported.

Another interesting note, only 20 percent of those surveyed think Clinton would be a a minus as far as his wife’s presidential ambitions are concerned.

Clinton came to be known as the first black president after Nobel Prize winning black author Toni Morrison came to his defense during the 1998 impeachment proceedings, claiming he was being targeted for his blackness:

“Years ago, in the middle of the Whitewater investigation, one heard the first murmurs: white skin notwithstanding, this is our first black President. Blacker than any actual black person who could ever be elected in our children’s lifetime. After all, Clinton displays almost every trope of blackness: single-parent household, born poor, working-class, saxophone-playing, McDonald’s-and-junk-food-loving boy from Arkansas.”

[poll id=”140″]