As the waters of Okatibbee Lake washed along the banks at Pine Springs Park, the ripples due to various water crafts speeding by as people on and off the lake enjoy what many consider the end to the summer season.

“We are out here with friends and family and just enjoying it today, it’s the last day of summer, it’s before school starts, I home school my kids but either way we are just out here to have a good day,” explained Amelia Johnson an Okatibbee Lake Patron.

The First Monday of the month of September is Labor Day and with many schools and businesses closed, people take to the lake for one last day of summer fun.

“I like to play out there with my brothers and my cousin,” exclaimed Elijah Johnson an Okatibbee Lake Patron.

While families spent the day at the beach, fishing, boating, and enjoying fellowship, across Okatibbee Lake Splashdown Water Park was in full gear, getting prepared for the final rush of the summer season.

“It’s been great, we have had a lot of fun, you meet a lot of people and you know some of them but it’s cool to meet the people,” stated Ainsley Ash a Lifeguard at Splashdown Water Park.

“Yea it’s pretty sad, because it seems like summer just started,” explained Abby Reed a Lifeguard at Splashdown Water Park.

While it has seem like summer just started, summer is now in its final countdown and as the water flows down the quick turn along the lazy river one final time this summer, the park is expected to be full of kids and parents having fun to end the summer.

“The weekend has been great, we have had a lot of people come out, I think they are enjoy this last weekend with it being open, coming in and being able to get into the pool and do whatever they want. Just enjoying the time away from school and work, so it has been a good weekend,” explained Splashdown Park Manager, Marisa Barron.

With Labor Day being the last day for the summer season for Splashdown Water Park the water flows one last time before the fall and winter seasons begin, having to wait a few months before flowing again next summer.