Capt. Tom Easley of the Norman Police Department says Heuangvilay lived in Oklahoma City, and was arrested at Devon Tower Monday afternoon.

Alicia closely monitors her daughter online now, and says she just wants the man who took advantage of her daughter behind bars.

A metro mother sends out a warning about a social media site. She says her daughter was sexually assaulted by a 29-year-old man she met online. They used a site called Omegle.com.

The 14-year-old girl says she started chatting with the 29-year-old man on Omegle.com in May thinking he was in high school. She says he kept lying to her, but by July, he had already been at her home several times while her parents were gone.

"I didn't even know about it," said Alicia of Norman. "It's just a way that strangers meet strangers."

That's how Alicia describes the Web site Omegle.com. The Norman mother said her 14-year-old daughter had sex with a 29-year-old man, she met online, at least five times in their home.

"Parents don't have any clue about what's going on because the kids are hiding it so well, because you don't to have register on this Omegle site for anything," she said.

Her 14-year-old daughter says she didn't know the man messaging her was 29 years old.

"At first he told me he was 16, and I was like 'ok, what school do you go to?'" the girl said. "And then he was like 'oh sorry, I'm 18,' and then I was like 'oh.'"

Once the girl's parents found out and she fessed up to the whole thing, they told Norman Police.

The man she called Bo, whose real name is Boualiane Heuangvilay from Laos, was charged with rape on October 9.

"I'm scared that he's doing this to other girls, who aren't knowledgeable about what kind of guys are out there," the girl said.

Alicia closely monitors her daughter online now, and says she just wants the man who took advantage of her daughter behind bars.

"I don't feel comfortable with some 29-year-old man having intercourse with a 14-year-old girl anywhere," Alicia said. "That's just not right, he needs to be off the streets."

Capt. Tom Easley of the Norman Police Department says Heuangvilay lived in Oklahoma City, and was arrested at Devon Tower Monday afternoon.