Removing the “Zero Drug Tolerance” signs at the county border is a symbolic gesture, but would signal a smarter approach to minor drug violations while offering the chance for a more positive message about our community.

Cheer: The Alachua County Commission, for this week taking the first step to remove the zero-tolerance signs. The commission's suggestion for a new sign, “Where Nature and Culture Meet,” would be a better representation of our community.

Local photographer John Moran first raised concerns about the signs, arguing they send an unwelcoming message to visitors. County law enforcement officials made an unconvincing defense of the signs, suggesting they might have a deterrent effect on drug dealers.

More important than changing the signs, county commissioners should keep considering ways to keep cases of minor marijuana possession out of the criminal justice system. They have directed the county attorney to look into whether the law can be changed to treat pot possession as a civil offense, similar to what Miami-Dade County has done.

Jeer: Local Republicans Pat Bainter, Stafford Jones and Alex Patton, for being part of a shadow redistricting process that included public hearings with phony testimony.

The Tampa Bay Times/Miami Herald Tallahassee bureau reported this week that newly filed court documents show that GOP operatives faked "public" submissions, possessed draft maps more than a month before state senators, and created Republican-leaning maps that matched pieces that became the foundation of the districts adopted by the Senate.

According to the report, Jones and Patton were part of a plan to stock public redistricting hearings with people who could influence the outcome. Jones asked Patton to read from prepared talking points and pretend to be confused about the anti-gerrymandering amendments, the report said.

Former Senate President Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, touted the process as "the most open and transparent" redistricting in state history. But the report found that Gaetz conducted secret briefings with individual senators to avoid public meeting requirements.

The Florida Supreme Court struck down the Legislature's congressional maps as unconstitutional, leading to this month's special session. Lawmakers agreed to meet again in October to redraw the Senate maps.

Cheer: Hank Conner, for his 50-year career producing and hosting radio and television broadcasts and teaching video production at the University of Florida.

As The Sun reported, Conner hosted the last episode Friday of his “Conner Calling” radio show on WUFT 89.1 FM. The show, featuring interesting authors from Florida and beyond, was a welcome alternative to the bombastic rhetoric dominating the commercial side of talk radio.

Conner, 76, had retired from his production and teaching duties a decade ago, following a career in which he produced hundreds of TV programs for WUFT.

Jeer: Republican presidential candidates Scott Walker and Marco Rubio, for plans to repeal and replace the Affordable Care Act, which would leave millions of Americans without health coverage.

Walker, the Wisconsin governor, and Rubio, the U.S. senator from Florida, released their plans this week and they aren't pretty. As Slate magazine summed them up, “both Rubio and Walker would essentially give Americans a little bit of money so that they can possibly afford to buy cheap insurance.”

They would also repeal the act's provisions ensuring people with pre-existing conditions can obtain coverage. Walker instead proposes a requirement that insurers keep covering people if they have continuously had insurance — meaning a return to a time when someone with a preexisting condition who let their insurance lapse would be blocked from getting coverage again.

The proposals come as the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention reports that America's uninsured rate fell below 10 percent for the first time in decades, thanks largely to the Affordable Care Act.