Telemedicine Services Through A Third Party Administrator

By Karla Paris

Round-the-clock access to board-certified physicians is now a reality for third party administrator participants.

As an employee benefit option available to its employer-clients, Cypress Benefit Administrators has worked toward cost containment in self-funded health benefits. With the new offering of telehealth and telemedicine services that provide 24/7 access to a doctor, the Midwest-based third party administrator (TPA) is furthering its endeavor to cut unnecessary costs.

Cypress is now partnered with Teladoc to provide an innovative solution that allows employees to get round-the-clock medical advice, diagnosis information, treatment plans, and certain prescriptions, as needed.

Cypress is the country’s first to bring claims administration, consumer driven health plans, and proven cost control measures together into one package for companies ranging from 50 employees to thousands of employees. It serves employer-clients across the U.S. with additional locations in Portland and Salem, OR, Omaha, NE, and Colorado Springs, CO.

With its growing popularity in the last few years, telemedicine service is proving to be an efficient and cost-effective way for Cypress members to seek non-emergency medical treatment instead of waiting for an appointment to open up or visiting an urgent care or ER facility.

Teladoc offers members 24/7/365 access to telehealth consults via phone or online video – whenever they need it, from wherever they are. Its U.S. board-certified physicians can diagnose, recommend treatment, and write short-term, non DEA prescriptions, when appropriate.

Through the transition to this Teladoc partnership, Cypress members will benefit from several enhancements and conveniences of the telemedicine service, including:

The only physician network in the industry with NCQA Certification of Credentialing to ensure the highest level of care for members.

Phone or face-to-face video consultations that can be scheduled in 15-minute increments, making it much easier to plan around work and personal schedules.

A member mobile app available for both Apple and Android devices.

Tom Doney, president and CEO of Cypress, explains how “people’s needs for anytime medical care are expanding as their lives get busier, and so too are the conveniences offered through today’s telemedicine model. The overwhelming theme of the feedback we receive is that this non-traditional approach to patient-doctor visits offers more convenience and flexibility than ever.”