ISTOCK

ED ZIMMERMAN: In searching for startup capital, founders frequently overlook the importance of assessing the longevity—and the associated stability—of the funds they are targeting.

Savvy founders know to narrow the field of relevant potential venture capitalists to funds that invest in the relevant sector and geography, and to fine-tune the list to focus on funds that invest in startups at the right stage (don’t look for growth capital for your seed stage startup). However, even sophisticated founders unknowingly seek introductions to funds that have withdrawn from the market or that aren’t presently making new investments.

Understanding why that is a problem requires scratching the surface of how seed and venture funds work. These funds are run by one or more individual general partners. A fund’s general partners raise capital from limited partners. For larger or more established funds, limited partners are often “institutional”: pension funds, university endowments, foundations, corporations, financial institutions and funds of funds. Sometimes established funds may include wealthy “individual” limited partners, and newer funds often include a higher concentration of wealthy individuals. Family offices (offices managing the money of one or a small number of very wealthy families) straddle the category—they may not quite be individuals nor are they always institutions, but they are typically included in the LP base of both large and small funds.

The agreement between the limited partners and the general partners protects the limited partners from allowing the general partners to devote their time to sourcing new investments for a future fund rather than focusing on investing the capital of the current fund. The agreement also typically prevents the fund from spending all of its capital during a single year, to avoid investing everything at the top of the market. As a result, a venture fund has an “investment period” during which it is focused on deploying capital into new deals, as well as following on (making subsequent investments) into startups already in the fund’s portfolio. This means that the general partners can only raise a new fund once they’ve deployed the capital already at hand. As my mother chided me when I was a child, “Don’t have such big eyes—finish what’s on your plate before you ask for seconds.”

The general partners receive an annual management fee (often 2% of the fund’s assets), which declines after several years. There are also incentive payments (called “carry”) and, for smaller or seed funds in particular, this is where the general partners hope to make their real payday.

The incentive is that the general partners get a large portion (typically 20%) of any amount the fund returns over and above the contributed capital. For instance, a $50 million dollar fund that, after paying annual management fees, returns $100 million would yield $90 million to the limited partners and $10 million in incentive payments (or “carry”) to the general partners.

Here’s how this information translates into advice for startups and their founders.

First, look at a calendar. If a fund hasn’t raised a new fund in three years, it is almost time. If a venture fund hasn’t raised a new fund in five years, it is almost certainly not for lack of trying: They have either been out in the market fundraising, or they’ve decided that for some reason they shouldn’t try.

Typically the “investment period” (during which the fund can make new investments) has ended before the five-year mark, so the existing fund likely doesn’t have the ability to invest in any additional companies. If they haven’t raised a new fund by about six years after the last fund’s inception, the partners and other team members may well be considering departing.

The fund’s partners, principals and associates may seek greener pastures, as they worry about the path to promotion and the fund’s continued vitality. That means that the backers of your startup today could be out the door in six months or a year. For most founders, their relationship with the individual team member who championed investing into their startup is even more important than their connection to the fund itself. The disruption of that relationship can have ramifications for subsequent fundraising. (Will the fund’s remaining team members enthusiastically support the startup and its founders in the future if the deal champion has departed?)

When I’ve pointed out that a fund is out of the market for new investments, founders frequently ask why a fund that isn’t currently making new investments would nonetheless take meetings. Some don’t, but a good number do.

Here’s why: telling the market that they’re no longer making new investments ends their deal flow. To raise capital, funds need to show limited partners that they are seeing great deals and have “proprietary deal flow” (about which I’ve previously written).

Without that deal flow, a fund loses its competitive edge. Many of these funds have one or more portfolio companies that are doing quite well. The general partners of those funds are simply waiting for one or two of those companies to exit (achieve liquidity by being acquired or completing an IPO) to return cash to the limited partners who invested in the fund and demonstrate a good track record.

While biding time, the fund embarks on a very legitimate strategy of continuing to take meetings with startups and stay in the game. If the partners really fall in love with a company, they may make their own small angel investment or form an “SPV” to do the deal. SPVs, or special purpose vehicles, have become increasingly popular. These are entities created by a general partner to do a single deal. The general partner raises money on the strength of the startup she is backing and she receives fund-like economics from limited partners in that investment. Special purpose vehicles can be a helpful stopgap for general partners who are between funds. They tend to yield mixed results for founders, especially if the special purpose vehicles is the lead investor in a new funding round.

The bottom line is that startup founders should know when the fund has last raised capital (which is searchable on the web and can also be ascertained by a direct question).

If it has been a bit too long, founders should ask how many more portfolio companies the partners expect to add to this specific current fund. If you’re among the last two or three startups that will be added, it is a good idea to get an understanding of how likely it is that the fund will raise new capital from limited partners in the near future. These are questions founders should ask before spending too much time responding to that fund’s request for diligence and certainly before turning down other viable funding opportunities.

Ed Zimmerman is a venture lawyer, angel investor and adjunct professor of venture capital at Columbia School of Business.

Read the latest Small Business Report.