Sixteen middle schoolers stand in a large circle, listening to verses that their classmates make up on the spot and following with their eyes as if each line was an invisible ball being passed from student to student.

When the ball bounces to them, the students spout out a line that ends in a rhyme.

They speed through easy ones, such as “door” and “poor” or “heart” and “art.” But the goal is to be the last one standing, so they pass each other tougher ones, too.

Can’t think of a word that rhymes in the limerick pattern approved for the game? Sit down.

Shout out a word that doesn’t really rhyme? Thumbs down from the majority of the group and you sit down, too. (Although, if you say it with confidence, you’ll earn some extra points.)

It’s “Death by Poetry,” fast-paced, think-quick-on-your feet fun, with students pausing only when the group breaks out in giggles for a goofy verse.

And it’s just the warm-up in Great Brook Middle School‘s advanced improv class.

When teacher Maryanne V. Cullinan asks for a volunteer to hop in front of his or her peers first there’s no hesitation. This class is loud and chaotic. The students make up the school’s performance improv group, called Recycled Talent.

Improv is one of the school’s most popular classes within the Extended Learning Program, an enrichment program that allows students to sign up for fun classes that meet twice a week during the day.

Students have to be in good academic standing and receive approval from their teachers to miss class to attend the extended learning classes, something 130 students, or about 40 percent of the school population, do this year.

This year’s courses include costume design, where students design and sew outfits for the school’s play; Greek mythology; Lego robotics; and Griffins Nest, a program with next-door neighbor Antrim Elementary School that partners middle school mentors with younger students in 1st- through 4th-grade.

The school gauges students’ interests in subjects with sign-up sheets before deciding which classes to offer each year.

As the extended learning program teacher, Cullinan said she aims to cast a wide net so as many students as possible can find a class that fits their interests.

She prepares curriculum for everything she teaches, from the birding class a group of students requested a couple years back to a gaming class she taught last year, and her room reflects her flexibility.

There are no desks, just some large round tables that are pushed to the side for improv. A handful of computers line one wall, sewing mannequins are crowded together in a corner and shelves are stacked with art supplies and board games.

Back in the improv class, students run a freeze tag exercise, where two people are on stage acting out a skit. When Cullinan yells freeze, a new person jumps up, taps one person out and starts a new skit that the remaining person has to pick up on.

Cullinan tells her students that one of the skills that can fade over the summer is the ability to listen, an important job for on-stage performers when the only script they have to follow is what comes out of another person’s mouth.

The students’ acts are no doubt silly, telling of mean asparagus, fish catching on fire and alpacas kicking zoo visitors.

But every story has to make some sense and every act should establish a location, relationship and problem that the audience can understand.

Students said improv has taught them about comedic timing, how to listen and take a measure of an audience’s engagement, how to speak clearly in public and how to work well with a partner.

”It definitely has more of a purpose than getting out of class and goofing off,” 8th-grader Mya Poluchov of Antrim said.

Students might come into improv quiet and shy, but when they leave, they’ll have a lot more confidence, 7th-grader Clara Quintanilha of Bennington said.

Extended Learning Program classes are open to students in all grades, so kids make friends across social circles and ages, Cullinan said.

It can be easy to cast off extracurricular classes as less important than core subjects, but all of the extended learning classes give students the chance to problem-solve, direct their own learning and collaborate with others, Cullinan said. And those are skills they’ll use long after they leave Great Brook.

A Keene State College professor was named a Cedarcrest Champion for his volunteer work with the Keene-based Cedarcrest Center for Children with Disabilities . Julio Del Sesto , an assistant professor of journalism and 2007 graduate of Keene State, provided web design and social media consultation work worth more than $20,000 in the past year.

Each year Cedarcrest recognizes an individual or organization that significantly helped the center serve children or connect with the community.

“Julio brought our website development project the perfect balance of technical and design skills, knowledge of nonprofits and social media, and commitment to our mission and daily work,” said Jeff Fuller, director of development and community relations at Cedarcrest.