God's word determines right and wrong — but that doesn't necessarily mean mixing church and state, County Councilman Michael Peroutka said Thursday night.

"If you read all the founding documents of America, you will find this is the philosophy of American government," he told 35 people during his keynote speech at a meeting of the North County Republican Club.

With a pin of the Ten Commandments on his left lapel and one representing county Republicans on the right, Peroutka shared his interpretations of the Constitution and how these beliefs apply to recent issues facing the country and the county.

He told his audience at the Big Vanilla Athletic Club in Pasadena that both the Affordable Care Act and Roe v. Wade, the 1973 U.S. Supreme Court decision that limited regulation of abortion, were "pretended legislation."

The Founding Fathers, Peroutka said, used that term in the Declaration of Independence to describe unjust parliamentary actions.

"The purpose of civil government is to protect God-given rights, not to redistribute wealth," said Peroutka, R-Millersville. "It's not to take from one and give to another, even if one has it and one really needs it."

A checklist he had developed to evaluate legislation before the council was distributed to attendees.

"I'm trying to be transparent and complete about what I'm doing as a councilman," Peroutka said.

The checklist includes whether legislation is "in accordance with biblical standards for law and government," and whether it aligns with the U.S. and Maryland constitutions and the County Charter.

"A lot of what we do, we don't have the authority to do, in my view," Peroutka said. "(I'm) chipping away at that and working at that."

Peroutka is the co-founder of Institute on the Constitution, which offers training on his interpretation of national, state and local law. He encouraged those at the meeting to check out the organization's website.

David Zwald, the president of the North County Republican Club, said that "bringing forth and educating the citizens about the founders — I think that's healthy that we are reminded of those principles as we are reminded of our own modern problems."

One of those at the meeting, Marie Dyke of Pasadena, said today's children don't get a thorough grounding on the U.S. Constitution and American history.

"We learned history, geography and government, and now they throw three subjects together in a 45-minute period and call it social studies," Dyke said. "It's unfortunate how little young people know about our country."

Such problems, Peroutka said, come about because "government schools" neglect the Bible, the foundation of American government. He said parents need the freedom to teach students beliefs they will not get in their state-mandated education.

Peroutka ran for president on the Constitution Party ticket in 2004. He donated fossils to a creationist museum and was a longtime member of the League of the South, with has advocated Southern secession.

Asked about race, Peroutka said "there's only one race and that's the human race."

He said that during his campaign last year for a council seat in District 5, which covers the Broadneck Peninsula, many people told him "we're taxed out."

Peroutka said that he hopes the fight against county stormwater fees — which he and other opponents have called "the rain tax" — is not over.

He also supports County Executive Steve Schuh's 4.2 percent income tax cut, which would return about $19 million to taxpayers, according to a press release.

Peroutka urged club members to show their support for the tax cut.