Open enrollment begins on Saturday for health insurance plans sold through the Massachusetts Health Connector. State officials said this week they are hopeful that this year's launch will be better than last year's, when the state's new health exchange website was a technological disaster. Here are a few things to know about open enrollment.

Who must sign up for new plans?

Anyone who buys health insurance through MassHealth or the Health Connector must re-enroll. This includes anyone who has subsidized plans and anyone who is buying a plan on the individual commercial market through the state's health insurance exchange. It also includes anyone who the state put in temporary MassHealth plans last year.

Why do I have to re-enroll?

Massachusetts is required by federal law to offer plans that meet the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, through an exchange that is ACA-compatible. Because of problems with the state's health connector website last year, only about 35,000 people so far have been able to sign up for health plans that qualify under the ACA.

When can I sign up?

The state's new website MAhealthconnector.org goes live at 8 a.m. on Saturday. You have until Dec. 23 to sign up for coverage effective Jan. 1. Open enrollment runs through Feb. 15.

What can I use the state website for?

Assuming the website functions as advertised, consumers will be able to browse health plans, complete an application online, find out what program or subsidy they qualify for, select a plan to purchase and pay a premium.

What if I run into trouble?

Navigator organizations are available to provide in-person and over-the-phone assistance. Visit https://bettermahealthconnector.org/get-help/ for more information. Sites in Western Massachusetts include: Caring Health Center in Springfield; Ecu-Health Care in North Adams; Casa Latina in Florence and the Hilltown Community Health Care Centers in Worthington.

Additionally, the Health Connector will have its customer service open this weekend from 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. at 1-877-623-6765. Its regular business hours are Monday through Friday 7 a.m. to 7 p.m. and Saturday 9 am to 3 p.m. MassHealth customer service will be open Monday through Friday 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. at 1-800-841-2900.

What browser can I use to access the state website?

The site works best with Chrome version 30 or better, Firefox version 30 or better, and Internet Explorer version 10 or better. If you have an old Internet browser, you may be instructed to update your browser.

How long will it take to fill out an application?

State officials estimate that the average user will take 10 minutes to browse and an hour to fill out an application. You can save your work at any point and come back to it later.

Will the website actually work this time around?

That remains to be seen. But according to Health Connector officials, it has been extensively tested, with success rates of at least 94 percent.