Juniors looking for a place to hone their games in preparation for the big events coming up this summer and fall, even college, can get tips and training from a local tennis legend and former world’s top 50 player at Kiawah Island’s Roy Barth Tennis Center.

The Barth Tennis Academy will run weekly through Sept. 4, with son Jonathan Barth directing day-to-day operations under the guidance of Kiawah tennis director Roy Barth.

Roy Barth played seven years on the tour, going against the likes of Jimmy Connors and Bjorn Borg.

The academy concentrates on a combination of play-action drills, technical evaluation, conditioning and match play. Sessions run Monday through Friday, five hours each day. Contact Jonathan Barth (768-2706 or jonathan_barth@kiawahresort.com).

Jessie and Shelby

Family Circle Tennis Center touring pro Jessie Pegula is one win away from qualifying for the $250,000 WTA Tour event in the Netherlands, while 74th-ranked Shelby Rogers is a direct entry in the main draw of the $250,000 tournament in Nottingham, England.

Both tournaments are grass-court warmups for Wimbledon.

For the second straight tournament, the 21-year-old Pegula has notched a pair of victories in qualifying. She outlasted Jelena Ostapenko of Lativa in three sets in Saturday’s second round of qualifying.

Two state champs

League tennis’ recent 18-and-over state spring championships at Aiken and Greenville each produced one champion and one runner-up from the Lowcountry Tennis Association. Captain Tony Carmola’s 4.5 men from Mount Pleasant Rec took top state honors at Aiken, while Meghen Van Alen’s 3.5 women from LTP Tennis won a state title at Greenville.

The LTP women were runners-up in their local flight, but came alive to capture the eight-team local playoffs before marching through the state competition.

Alice Kryder’s 4.5 women from LTP Tennis were runners-up at Aiken. Kerrie Scott’s 3.0 women from the Daniel Island Club took second place in Greenville.

Local notes

Mount Pleasant’s Shianna Guo also was a third-place winner at Belton’s Palmetto Championships, taking the third-place match in girls 12. Guo trains at LTP Tennis.

Grace Baker of Maybank Tennis Center was the highest local finisher in the small-court 10-and-under competition at Belton, capturing third place in girls 10.

Family Circle Tennis Center will hold a a Grand Slam Series of adult singles/doubles tournaments, beginning Thursday with a Wimbledon event. Play will be held on Thursday and Friday nights, and weekends. Contact FCTC (849-5300).

Reach James Beck at jamesbecktennis@gmail.com.