Liberal Ohio Democratic Sen. Sherrod Brown’s recent email touting Rep. Patrick Murphy’s 2016 Senate campaign wasn’t gushing when compared to many political fundraising pitches, but it was telling nonetheless.

Murphy’s main Democratic primary rival, liberal Rep. Alan Grayson of Orlando, once cited Brown as the kind of progressive paragon he’d stand with in the Senate to fight against Wall Street. But Brown’s America Works PAC gave $5,000 to the more moderate Murphy in July and Brown made a pragmatic appeal for Murphy this month.

“Florida is going to be a key battleground state in the next election…And recent polls show that Patrick is in the best position to win this race,” Brown wrote in a Dec. 8 email solicitation. Another leading liberal, Sen. Al Franken, D-Minn., made a similar appeal for Murphy Tuesday.

Florida’s Democratic Senate primary has often played out that way during its early stages.

Polls show most voters have not yet focused on the battle to replace Republican Sen. Marco Rubio, but political insiders have zeroed in on Florida as one of the most important Senate battlegrounds of 2016. The Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee is backing Jupiter resident Murphy in the primary and more than two dozen Democratic senators have either endorsed or steered PAC money to Murphy.

+ U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson ×

Murphy is a prolific fundraiser who has won two House races in a Palm Beach-Treasure Coast district where Republicans have a slight registration advantage. Many Democrats believe Murphy’s ability to win the swing congressional district bodes well for his prospects in America’s largest swing state.

Four Republicans are running for the Senate seat: Reps. David Jolly of St. Petersburg and Ron DeSantis of Ponte Vedra Beach, Lt. Gov. Carlos Lopez-Cantera of Miami, and combat veteran and defense contractor Todd Wilcox of Orlando.

In addition to Murphy and Grayson, Democrats in the Senate race include Pam Keith, a Navy veteran and attorney from North Palm Beach who impressed many activists at the Florida Democratic Party convention in October.

+ U.S. Rep Patrick Murphy ×

Grayson has sought to make the Democratic primary a battle for the party’s ideological soul, casting himself as the only true Democrat in the race.

“It’s obvious what the real matchup is here — a committed progressive Democrat like me and a Republican masquerading as a Democrat like him. That’s the matchup,” Grayson said in an interview before Christmas.

Murphy, 32, switched his voter registration from Republican to Democrat in 2011 before challenging and defeating conservative Republican Rep. Allen West in the most expensive House race of 2012.

West and Grayson are both known for controversial rhetoric. Grayson has likened the tea party to the Ku Klux Klan and the GOP to al-Qaida. He once called a female Federal Reserve adviser a “K Street whore” and once labeled Rep. Dan Webster, R-Orlando, “Taliban Dan.”

In an interview a few days before Christmas, Murphy said he’d be able to get things done while Grayson’s “demeanor” and “temperament” could be problems in the Senate.

Grayson countered that he’s a “liberal who gets good things done.” In the 113th Congress, nine Grayson bills to extend expiring tax credits were included in a massive Ways and Means Committee package that became law and 21 of 38 floor amendments he introduced were adopted.

As a House member, Murphy has broken with Democrats and joined Republicans on some high-profile votes. In November, he was one of 47 Democrats to vote for a GOP bill setting tougher security checks for Syrian and Iraqi war refugees trying to enter the U.S. In June, Murphy was one of 31 Democrats to vote to repeal the medical device tax in the Affordable Care Act. He also has voted this year for the Keystone Pipeline and to ease some provisions of the Dodd-Frank regulations on Wall Street.

In 2014, Murphy was one of only seven Democrats to vote in favor of creating the special House committee to investigate the 2012 Benghazi attacks.

But Murphy has stuck with his party on several core votes, including support for President Barack Obama’s nuclear deal with Iran and against Republican budgets and efforts to repeal Obamacare.

Analyses of House votes typically rank Murphy among the most conservative Democrats in the House — but still place him to the left of the entire Republican caucus. According to OpenCongress.org, Murphy has voted with his party on 91 percent of House votes in 2015 while Grayson has done so on 94 percent of votes.

While Grayson wants the Democratic primary race to focus on his liberal voting record, his campaign has undergone a personnel shake-up in which his campaign manager and chief spokesman departed. Grayson has also been dogged by an ethics investigation — which he dismisses as a “smear” by Murphy’s campaign — over Cayman Islands-based hedge funds bearing Grayson’s name.

A Murphy supporter and a conservative group filed ethics complaints in July saying the hedge funds violate a House prohibition on members allowing their names to be used by a “firm, partnership, association, corporation, or other entity” and a rule that bars members from “practicing a profession that involves a fiduciary relationship except for the practice of medicine.”

Grayson says the hedge funds have partners rather than clients and he does not give advice or provide professional services that involve a fiduciary relationship. He said having his name on the funds did not violate House rules, but he removed his name from them in September.

Murphy said the Caymans funds raise “trust” issues with voters.

While the Cayman Islands are a famed haven for avoiding taxes, Grayson said the funds were never used to avoid taxes because “every penny that was ever in the Grayson Fund was always in New York bank accounts or brokerage accounts.”