To the Editor:

Rush Limbaugh often uses the term "low information voters" to describe Democrats/liberals. As a person who considers himself to be a " moderate" in regards to my political views, I reject that label, Rush. I listen to your show on a regular basis, as well as Sean Hannity (who I can only listen to for 15 or 20 mins before my head explodes). I also watched pretty much every minute of the the Republican debates in the 2012 election and the debates between President Obama and Mitt Romney. As a moderate, I listen to both sides of any given issue (unlike the Republican/conservatives, who seem to believe it simply is not possible for them to be wrong about anything). Whether it is foreign policy,abortion, climate change or the economy,Rush, Sean Hannity, Ted Cruz or Rick Santorum seem to think they have all the answers.

Rush, the real "low information voters'' are the people who listen to you and the above mentioned people who say that Obama's failed foreign policy is to blame for ISIS, because he withdrew all U.S. troops from Iraq. The truth is that it was the Bush administration who negotiated the status of forces agreement in 2008. They set the timetable for withdrawal of troops. There are those who say,"Well, Obama should have renegotiated the deal in 2011" No, Condoleezza Rice and George W. Bush should have got it right the first time!

The "low information voters" are the ones who believe you and Hannity and Cruz, when you say because Obama didn't back up the his "red line" with Syria, "our enemies no longer fear us and our allies no longer trust us." With all the complaints the right wingers have made about Obama's "unilateral actions," he did exactly as he should have; he sought congressional approval to send troops into Syria. Congress, not Obama, failed to act! And when it comes right down to it, Congress knew that after 10 plus years of two wars, the parents of the young people who would be asked to fight this war were not so eager to do so. Remember back in 2003, when Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld was asked how long he thought we would be fighting in Iraq? His answer was, " five days, five weeks, five months, I don't see it lasting much more than that." Shoot first, ask questions later is not a good foreign policy! Needless to say, Rumsfeld was off the mark on that one by quite a bit.

As for "Obamacare," since the Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010, House Speaker John Boehner, Sen. Mitch Mc Connell and all of the above mentioned made predictions about how it will a"job killer." Well, here we are almost six years later and the unemployment rate is at 5.1 percent, the lowest it has been in seven years!

The downward spiral of the functionality of our government did not begin with the election of President Obama. It began on Nov. 4, 2010, when McConnell said these words; "The single most important thing we want to achieve is to make sure President Obama to be a one-term president." When you consider that at that time, the unemployment rate was 9.6 percent, we were at war with two countries and many middle class Americans were losing their homes to foreclosure, one would like to believe that their senators would make one of those issues their No. 1 priority.

Jim Hurder

Syracuse