Dr. David Blumenthal (@DavidBlumenthal) is the president of the Commonwealth Fund, a national health-care philanthropy based in New York.

As our next president sets his or her health-care agenda, an often overlooked problem deserves the White House’s attention: big gaps in the health and health care of people in different regions of the U.S.

Most pressing is the lagging health of those in the American South.

ENLARGE

Nine of the 10 states with the highest mortality rates are below the Mason-Dixon line, where life expectancy is two to four years shorter than the national average. While the South has disproportionate numbers of African-Americans, who on average suffer from worse health than white Americans, the region’s problems cross racial and ethnic lines. For example, eight of the 10 states with the highest white mortality are also in the South. Recent work highlighting increasing or lagging mortality among working-age whites showed that this problem is especially pronounced in southern states.

We don’t know why these differences exist, but we can make some good guesses. Residents in the southern U.S. tend to have lower incomes and levels of education, and higher rates of smoking and obesity than average. They also have lower rates of social mobility. All these factors are associated with poorer health. A recent article in the Journal of the American Medical Association documented a strong association between income and life expectancy in the United States, but also noted that the negative effects of low income could be reduced by programs that address lifestyle risk factors, such as obesity and smoking.

Compounding these economic, social and behavioral issues are higher barriers to accessing health-care services. Thirteen percent of southerners lack health insurance, compared with 8.9% in the rest of the country. All eight states with the highest reported rates of cost-related barriers to health care access are located in the South. Not surprisingly, southerners are also less likely to get routine preventive services than other Americans.

To some extent, these barriers to access reflect conscious choices on the part of the local political leadership. With few exceptions, southern states have chosen not to expand Medicaid under provisions of the Affordable Care Act (ACA), rejecting the opportunity to provide access to health care for millions of their low-income citizens. Nor have most southern states encouraged residents eligible for federal subsidies to use new ACA marketplaces to purchase reduced-cost private insurance policies.

The health-care problems of the South and of other lagging regions affect all Americans. When citizens anywhere in the U.S. suffer from poor health, they are less productive economically, and they use more costly medical and social services (including federally funded disability and Medicare programs).

The solutions to regional gaps in health and health care will likely be multidimensional, and extend beyond health-care remedies to include programs related to income and education. Many such interventions will require local leadership. There is only so much our national government can and should do.

But it should do what it can. This can include examining existing health and social programs to see how they can work, within their current authorities, to address geographic health disparities. Over time, more southern states may become receptive to expanding Medicaid, but may also ask for accommodations that suit local political preferences. As they have already, federal Medicaid authorities should work hard to meet those demands, while protecting the integrity of the Medicaid program. In allocating funds to assist eligible individuals to sign up for insurance in federal marketplaces, the federal government should consider the pressing need to improve lagging access to care among southern residents.

These steps are only a beginning. Addressing regional gaps in health and health care will require a long-term effort that combines federal, state and private sector initiatives.

Read the latest Health Report.