FAMILY and school friends of eight-year-old Piper Kulk and nine-year-old William Kulk were last night mourning the death of the popular siblings in a horrific car crash on the Central Coast.

The bubbly Budgewoi Public School students died after the wet-weather accident on Saturday.

Police said Piper was in the back seat with brothers Daniel, 12, and William when the car — driven by their 54-year-old grandmother — lost control on a bend on Wyee Rd, at Doyalson, at 5.15pm.

Piper Kulk, 8 / Picture: Channel 9

Piper Kulk, 8 / Picture: Channel

The scene of the fatal crash / Picture: Top Notch Video

A mud-caked child’s toy at the accident scene / Picture: Waide Maguire

Flowers left at the accident scene / Picture: Waide Maguire 1 of n

In treacherous conditions, the Holden Astra was on the wrong side of the road when it collided with a Toyota HiLux. Piper’s grandmother and mum Chantelle, 31, who was sitting in the front passenger seat, were trapped in the wreckage, which closed the road for several hours as officers from the Crash Investigation Unit pieced together what happened.

The three children were flown to The Children’s Hospital at Westmead, but Piper died from her injuries yesterday morning.

William succumbed to his own injuries later that evening.

“We’re just devastated,’’ a relative said.

Piper and William’s elder brother Daniel was also injured but is in a stable condition. Their mum and grandmother were flown to John Hunter Hospital with fractures.

A 32-year-old woman identified as Michelle Milham and her mother Glenda Milham were also trapped for some time in the HiLux, before they too were taken to the same hospital.

Michelle’s 90-year-old grandmother, who declined to give her name, said that they had lunch earlier as a family when the pair “decided to go shopping together’’.

“They were just coming home,’’ she said.

“It’s a terrible, terrible thing.”

She said her granddaughter, who was driving, suffered a couple of fractured ribs, a broken arm and bruising from the seatbelt but was expected to recover.

She said her daughter Glenda had a fracture in her neck and was awaiting more tests but she had feeling in her arms and legs.

The tragedy led police to urge motorists to be careful driving, with a spokesman saying “we have a family that has been torn apart”.

PEDESTRIAN SHOPPER THE LATEST FATALITY

Ian Walker

THE state’s Easter long-weekend road toll climbed to three after a pedestrian was hit by a car outside Westfield shopping centre, Parramatta yesterday.

The 61-year-old woman suffered serious head injuries in the accident at the intersection of Marsden and Campbell streets at 9.50am.

She was flown to Westmead Hospital by a Westpac Rescue Helicopter, but died a short time later. The driver was taken to Westmead Hospital for blood and urine tests.

A motorcyclist and his pillion passenger were injured after a collision with a four-wheel-drive at Wentworth Falls at 12.30pm yesterday.

The 35-year-old female passenger had neck and spinal injuries, and was flown by NSW Ambulance helicopter to Westmead Hospital in a critical condition.

Other fatalities occurred at Doyalson on the Central Coast and at Macksville on the north coast where a woman, 28, died on Friday. The national Easter road toll is 14, with Queensland topping the states, with seven dead, including a boy, 4, who died after he was hit by a car while riding his scooter. He had head and chest injuries and died at the scene.

Two people have been killed on roads in Western Australia and one each in Victoria and South Australia.

NSW traffic and highway patrol commander, Assistant Commissioner John Hartley, said Easter was a time when Australian families got together and urged every motorist on the road to take extra care in their car today.