Conflict betwen town, utility, date to November 2012

This map illustrates which sections of Frederick are served by United Power, and which are served by Frederick Power & Light/War Electric. ( Times-Call staff )

If you go What: Frederick Trustees Open House When: 7 p.m Monday, Oct. 20 . Where: Carbon Valley Recreation Center, 701 Fifth St, Frederick More info: Discussion on acquiring the United Power distribution system

United Power says that if the town of Frederick chooses, it can acquire the utility's distribution system that serves roughly 2,200 customers in Frederick — but it will cost $35 million.

Frederick officials say the board of trustees wants to acquire the distribution system because the town will be able to offer better prices and more localized customer service.

Frederick resident Carl Brady, a retired engineer for General Electric, is skeptical of the entire plan.

Troubles between Frederick and United Power have been slowly building since November 2012 over a contract to provide service for the older third of the town.

Frederick, in terms of electricity providers, is currently split into roughly a third to the east called "Old Town" and roughly two-thirds of the town that have since been annexed in, called "New Town."

Frederick has owned the distribution system in Old Town since at least the 1950s while United Power owns the distribution system in New Town.

In 2003, Frederick and United Power signed a 10-year contract for Old Town, under which United Power supplied the power, provided customer support and billing, and operated and maintenance the lines.

The town says United Power "terminated this agreement in November 2012." Power, however, says that contract merely expired and they offered to renegotiate.

"It's just that 10-year contract didn't make financial sense any more. We wanted to renegotiate it," said Heidi Storz, United Power Marketing and Communication Coordinator.

'We want the best for our residents'

The Old Town contract spat has had two consequences; the town's board of trustees at a Dec. 10, 2013 meeting decided to purchase power for Old Town from United Power but awarded a contract for operations and maintenance to the less expensive Ward Electric Company.

This move saved Old Town residents roughly $300,000 a year, Frederick spokeswoman Megan Williams said in a written statement. But United Power CEO Ron Asche told the board during the public comment portion of the Dec. 10, 2013 meeting that United Power was providing Frederick with far more than what other companies were offering for $300,000 more.

So the current situation is that United Power provides the power for Old Town while Ward Electric does operations and maintenance there. United Power currently provides power, operations and maintenance for New Town.

But the second and most notable consequence of the Old Town spat is that the Frederick board of trustees notified United Power that they wanted to acquire the electricity distribution system in New Town. The town contends that on average, municipal utilities have lower rates than cooperatives and that Frederick could provide more localized customer service.

"We want the best for our residents," Williams wrote. "We wouldn't be pursuing this if we didn't believe we could provide cheaper utility costs and better service to each and every Frederick resident."

But United Power projects that rates would be about 5 percent more expensive under a municipally owned system. As far as customer service, on average, cooperative utilities earned a score of 81 out of 100 for 2014 with the American Customer Satisfaction Index. Municipally owned utilities scored an average of 76.

United Power says because of state statutes designed to protect co-ops being bought out by municipalities, the $35 million cost to acquire the system still up for negotiation is actually "conservative"

Storz added that the $35 million would include; the cost of acquiring the service area and the actual lines, trucks, poles, transformers and other facilities and tools; the cost United Power incurs by separating their Frederick portion of the system from their integrated system of power supply; plus the process of taking inventory of all of United Power's equipment and facilities, which is currently underway.

State law dictates that the town would have to pay United Power a quarter of all revenues from existing customers and 5 percent of all revenues from new customers for 10 years. That cost is included in the $35 million, Storz said.

Questions about what $35 million would buy

Williams, the Frederick spokeswoman, said the cost of acquiring the utility would be done through the issuance of bonds, but noted that trustees have not agreed to how much they are willing to pay for United Power's system.

As for Brady, he said he doesn't understand why the city wants taxpayers to pay for something that is already working fine.

"Who in the world would think a small town trying to maintain a system would do it better than a co-op?" Brady said. "The other thing is they're saying something about local control but United Power has an elected board and as members, we elect those people."

Brady said he will definitely be at the meeting to voice his concerns.

"We are going to spend $35 million or whatever it is and what do we get?" he said.

The town of Frederick will hold a Trustees open house Monday to discuss the town's plan of acquiring United Power's electricity distribution system, the first such meeting dedicated to the plan.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Karen Antonacci at 303-684-5226 or antonaccik@times-call.com