It may seem different to one day be thinking that the plastic cup you are drinking out of was once algae floating on the surface of the water, but one company is hoping that's the case. Solaplast recently held a grand opening in the Sonny Montgomery Industrial Park in Meridian, and promises upwards to one hundred jobs at the facility over the next few years. What was research at the University of Georgia to make Biofuels from Algae, has now become a groundbreaking company in Meridian.

" We're going after the algae that nobody else wants," Director of Research and Development Ashton Zeller said. "We're not going after algae that people are using to eat. We're not using algae that people are using to produce biofuels. We're taking the scraps from the biofuels guys, we're taking algae that's been grown to clean waterways, we're taking algae away from catfish farmers. We're basically taking algae that is a nuisance for people and creating it into valuable products."

The term has come to be known as bioplastics, a growing industry in the US. According to many officials within Solaplast, their company has a distinct advantage from other bioplastic companies.

"By harvesting the algae and by drying it and compounding it into a plastic product, we can drive the cost of plastic down in some cases and we can make a more sustainable packaging option for consumers to buy their products in," Chief Technology Officer Ryan Hunt said.

Solaplast says most bioplastics are being made from food sources, which is increasing prices and heavily impacting the animal feed market and requiring additional land, but with algae none of that is effected.

"When we're using algae, a lot of our algae comes from literally the desert," Zeller said. "It comes from very arid climates because there is great light visibility there, there is great exposure to the sun, great heat, it's perfect for growing algae. We're not using arable crop land, we're literally using a desert."

Solaplast says the future is bioplastics as the demand continues to rise annually.