LAS VEGAS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--LifeNexus announced today Amerigroup Nevada will be the first Medicaid health plan in the nation to use the innovative iChip® technology to improve the quality of care for its members.

Using iChip, Amerigroup will generate patient-specific health information, including a personal health record, for each member and deliver it to their doctor and other health care providers each time they need care. This information will include care reminders to both the member and their doctor about healthcare screenings and tests they may need.

"iChip is an example of a breakthrough health IT solution that today allows Nevada's Medicaid members to experience higher quality outcomes when they and their family members visit their doctors with their current medical information," said Sen. Harry Reid. “Nevada's ability to be the first state in the U.S. to deploy this technology is a testament to the innovative character of our health care leaders and I applaud their step forward to better serve this population in a bold new way. Nevada will soon be a leader in this space for the rest of the country."

iChip gives Amerigroup the ability to deliver meaningful and actionable personal health information to Amerigroup members and their doctors when the member is in the doctor’s office. The information includes medical history, medications, a visual depiction of the last 90-days of health care utilization, confirmed insurance eligibility and coverage, care reminders and more.

“iChip brings a secure, convenient and innovative solution to help our members get the preventative services and chronic care health screenings to live healthier lives,” said Eric Lloyd, Amerigroup Nevada president. “This new technology will offer a patient-centered care approach for our members, timely and complete delivery of preventative services and improved quality of care overall.”

The process to securely access and share health information is easy for both the member and the provider. Members simply present their iChip-enabled Amerigroup Community ID Card and provide their confidential security code at check in. The member’s health information is then securely delivered via cloud technology to the doctor to use in a way that best fits the doctor’s office routine. The doctor has immediate access to the health information necessary to more fully inform the member’s diagnosis and treatment, communicate with the member and coordinate their care, leading to better quality outcomes and better care for the member.

“We are pleased to partner with Amerigroup to improve care for its Medicaid members by insuring their health information is always present when they and their doctors need it,” said David R. Strand, chief executive officer of LifeNexus. “With the expansion of Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, now more than ever, it is important to insure the highest quality care to traditionally underserved populations.”

About Amerigroup Nevada

Amerigroup Nevada, a wholly owned subsidiary of Amerigroup, which is wholly owned by WellPoint, Inc., brings health care services to approximately 100,000 financially vulnerable men, women and children in Nevada. Since February 2009, Amerigroup Nevada has administered three publicly funded health care programs: Temporary Assistance for Needy Families as part of Nevada Medicaid; Nevada Child Health Assurance Program as part of Nevada Medicaid; and Nevada Check Up, Nevada’s Children’s Health Insurance Program.

About LifeNexus

LifeNexus is a San Francisco-based healthcare technology company and the creator of iChip®, a patented technology. iChip is a mobile platform that uniquely delivers personalized health information and analytics to consumers and providers at the point and time of care to help improve health care experiences, health outcomes and financial results.