Barb Tierno (Photo: Submitted) Story Highlights The commemoration is on Saturday, April 2, and the state Capitol building will be lit in blue.

The Tennessee House passed a joint resolution 97-0 on March 17.

A Senate committee will consider the resolution on April 6.

HJR 675 Commemorates World Autism Awareness Day on April 2, 2016 in Tennessee and passed the TN House 97-0 last week.

“It was a thrill to sponsor HJR 675 – and to shine a light on the thousands of Tennessee families who face the challenge of Autism each day. It is fitting that we take one day of the year, April 2, 2016, to shine a light on this growing neurological disorder across the State of Tennessee. This year, for the first time ever, the Tennessee State Capitol, will join hundreds of other iconic landmarks, in “Light It Up Blue” in honor of World Autism Day. I am grateful to Gov. Haslam, Sec. of State Hargett and the Capitol Building Commission for approving for the State Capitol to “Light it Up” Blue on April 2.”

- Rep. Kevin D. Brooks, R-Cleveland, Assistant Majority Leader, Tennessee House of Representatives

Almost every day I hear from or about families whose child has been singled out for bullying by their fellow students or is being “picked on” by their teacher or other people in authority because of their disability.

As Executive Director of Autism Tennessee, I expect people to see beyond the autism diagnosis and embrace the child, not to have preconceived notions of what our child is like or capable of based strictly on a label.

We need to continue to raise awareness and educate our community that autism, the fastest growing developmental disability in the United States, represents just a part of the individual with that diagnosis.

At Autism Tennessee we often like to say, “If you’ve met one child with autism…you’ve met one child with autism.” They are all unique individuals whose differences help add to their classrooms, their workplaces, and our state’s diversity.

Autism Tennessee is a non-profit organization working to enrich the lives and experiences of individuals on the autism spectrum, their families and surrounding community through support, advocacy and education.

The Joint House Resolution commemorating World Autism Awareness Day in Tennessee and the efforts to light the State Capitol Building blue Saturday night make us feel that our community embraces us, accepts our differences and values individuals with autism as an important part of Tennessee.

Babs Tierno is executive director of Autism Tennessee, and parent of child on the autism spectrum. The website is www.autismtn.org.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MJWBAN