I found the whole story rather bizarre. It seemed "fake" to me.

Over at another channel, I found " Bonnie & Clyde ," a new version of the old story about the young couple from North Texas.

Last Monday night, I sat down to watch something very real, or the Dallas Cowboys play the Chicago Bears. It was so painful to watch that I started doing the "channel flipping" that happens after your home team keeps dropping passes or missing tackles.

Well, it turns out, that there is a lot of "fake" in this movie, especially the part about the lady reporter P J Lane of The Fort Worth Herald. I had my doubts watching the movie that PJ Lane and Bonnie were feminist comrades years ago.

Well, the next day, my fears were realized when I read this review:

"The reporter, a woman named P.J. Lane, is completely fictional. So is the scene itself; neither Bonnie nor Clyde ever spoke to a reporter, at gunpoint or otherwise."



Read more here:

The fake went on during the week.

Well, the next day we heard that the guy doing the sign language at the Mandela funeral was a fake, too:

""The South African sign language interpreter accused of using fake signs at Nelson Mandela's memorial service this week said he suffered a schizophrenic episode at the event, but another interpreter says it was not the first time Thamsanqa Jantjie has done bogus interpretations. Jantjie, who has been called an imposter by sign experts, told Johannesburg's Star newspaper Thursday that he hallucinated and heard voices during the memorial service."

Who is doing background checks in South Africa? Maybe it's the same people who put together the ObamaCare website.

Well, the next day more fake stuff.

Secretary Siebelius goes before Congress and she can't explain a word. She tells everyone that thousands are going to the web site,signing up but she can't say a word about premiums. This lady should thank Joseph, Mary and baby Jesus that she does not have a real job. She would have lost it many weeks ago.

A week of fake, from Bonnie's feminism to sign language to enrollment for ObamaCare. Everything was fake this week except for that real Dallas defense that got blown up in Chicago.

P. S. You can hear CANTO TALK here & follow me on Twitter @ scantojr.