North Carolina's state motto is "First in Flight." Maybe someday it will be ours, too."



I had a friend who said the secret to being rich was easy: stay single and rent.

My father said it a different way.

"Boys, never own a house."

This would come after a day of us painting, raking, mowing, whatever. The worst job was hanging the heavy storm windows every November, and taking them down in May. That was only part of it. We stored them in a loft in the garage, accessible only by a shaky wooden ladder.

This comes to mind as the latest property tax news came out this week, the day after a major snowstorm with more snow coming this weekend.

The news is that average New Jersey homeowner pays $8,161, not just the highest the nation, but at the absolute pinnacle of the pyramid. Only 0.2 percent of all U.S. homeowners pay more than $8,000.

You know the old saying: The only thing certain in life are death and taxes.

In New Jersey this is amended to "the only thing certain in life are taxes and snow, and both will kill you."

Here's another: if you don't want taxes to kill you, move to the city. And rent.

Because in New Jersey, typical suburban homeowners pay sums that easily exceed the USDA's estimates for feeding a family of four on a high-quality diet. Sometimes double.

The property tax disparity between suburbs and cities - let's call it the 'Suburban Burden' -- is actually shocking, when you consider the weight of administration and services the cities carry.

In Essex County, the average property tax bill in Newark is $5,365. In Millburn, it's $21,706.

In Union, homeowners in Elizabeth pay an $8,302 average. In Summit, the bill $16,419.

In Middlesex, Cranbury homeowners pay an average of $11,061, compared to New Brunswick's $6,579.

In Passaic, the average Paterson homeowners pay $8,852. In Wayne, the average is $11,696.

The most extreme example is in Camden County. The City of Camden homeowner's average taxes are the second lowest in the state, at $1,485. The state's highest are in Tavistock, a small golf-club community in Camden County with an average tax bill is $25,346. So throw Tavistock out as a statistical anomaly, and next highest average in the county are in Haddonfield at $13,384.

Everybody likes to say "good schools" are the culprit, but city school spending per pupil outpaces even best-ranked suburbs, according to statistics compiled by NJ Spotlight.

In Newark, the cost per pupil is $24,281, while Millburn spends $18,579.

Elizabeth spends $21,722 to Summit's $18,317.

Paterson spends $20,454 to Wayne's $18,615.

Camden spends $25,575; Haddonfield spends $15,344.

Something is broken. The question is when are we going to fix it?

A Monmouth University poll in November, before the snow, said 55 percent of Jerseyans want to leave. Percentage-wide, less people fled the pogroms in East Europe or the poverty in Southern Italy to come to America during the mass immigration years. It's crazy when you think of it that way.

In the town where I live property taxes average close to $20,000 a year. This is a town with an all-volunteer fire department, where garbage must be put out in special bags that cost $20 a roll, where there is no leaf pick-up or big-item trash days, and that is a receiving district not only for the high school but a special needs school.

When people ask, "Where does all the money go?" part of the answer is to Trenton -- in the form of sales, property and income taxes -- and it doesn't come back.

When the shoveling is done and the crocuses start popping up, so do the For Sale signs. It's the annual graduation exodus: as soon as a family's last kid gets that diploma from our "good schools," the parents are gone, usually to somewhere cheaper and warmer.

Those kids, by the way, are part of a generation who racked up more debt in college loans -- $1.3 trillion - than all the credit card holders in America. That number will grow, especially in New Jersey, where our public college costs are high because they state-funding is low. And because it's hard to save for your children's education when you're spending so much on taxes.

In this model, this race to the bottom, many of our children will not qualify for mortgages needed to afford the suburban towns and houses they grew in. They'll join their parents finding somewhere cheaper.

North Carolina's state motto is "First in Flight." Maybe someday it will be ours, too.

Sad, isn't it.



Mark Di Ionno may be reached at mdiionno@starledger.com. Follow The Star-Ledger on Twitter @StarLedger and find us on Facebook.