The crowd stands for the Pledge of Allegiance before the Monday morning rally for Ted Cruz at the Wings Event Center in Kalamazoo. (Photo: Kenny Read/For the Enquirer)

KALAMAZOO — U.S. Sen. Ted Cruz hit all the conservative talking points during a campaign rally Monday, and the crowd loved it.

From lofty promises of repealing the Affordable Care Act to taking on the Department of Education and the Environmental Protection Agency, Cruz slammed the Obama Administration and said there would be change on his first day in office.

The 44-year-old Texan — who walked out to “Where the Stars and Stripes and the Eagle Fly” by Aaron Tippin — got standing ovations from some 800 supporters throughout his speech during a rally at Wings Event Center in Kalamazoo.

“The single biggest difference between me and the other very fine men and women standing on that debate stage,” Cruz said, “is that with me, when I tell you I’m going to do something, I’m going to do exactly what I say.”

Cruz said as president he would rescind President Barack Obama’s “illegal and unconstitutional” executive orders, instruct the Department of Justice to open an investigation into Planned Parenthood and “rip to shreds” Obama’s deal with Iran on nuclear weapons.

Iran having nuclear weapons is “the single biggest threat facing America today,” Cruz said, and would make the Obama Administration “quite literally, the world’s leading financier of radical Islamic terrorists.”

Cruz called for the end of sanctuary cities and securing U.S. borders. He used a joke he previously tried while speaking at the Mackinac Republican Leadership Conference last month — that he would abolish the Internal Revenue Service, and send its 90,000 employees to protect the border.

Cruz also said bringing Syrian refugees to the U.S. is “nothing short of crazy.”

“There is a reason the director of national intelligence says among those refugees are no doubt a significant number of ISIS terrorists,” he said. “It would be the height of foolishness to bring in tens of thousands of people, including jihadists, that are coming here to murder innocent Americans.”

Cruz announced his presidential run in March. He was first elected to the Senate in 2012 and led a 21-hour filibuster on the Senate floor in 2013 in an attempt to block the Affordable Care Act.

At the rally, Cruz touted his campaign fundraising despite the lack of support from what he called “Washington elites.” He said he raised the most “hard money” among the candidates, according to recent filings. Cruz’s campaign raised more than $14.3 million in a three-month period.

Polls show Cruz in the middle of the pack of 14 Republican presidential candidates. The most recent Pew Research poll gave Cruz 6 percent of the vote, compared to 25 percent for Donald Trump and 16 percent for Ben Carson.

With the help of free tickets, Belding residents Brian and Tami McNee traveled to Kalamazoo to help narrow down their favorites from the large pool of Republican candidates. They’re already fans of Cruz, saying he’s a “Christian family man,” but wanted to learn more.

“Strange things don’t come out of his mouth like some of the other people, if you know what I mean,” Brian McNee said with a wink.

The rally was held in The Cube, a secondary ice rink at the three-rink Wings Event Center.

About 30 students from Kalamazoo Central High School attended the rally on a field trip for their comparative government class. Many of them are underage, they said, but will be able to vote by the primary election.

Christopher Tyson, 17, said Cruz was clearly gearing his message toward those who already supported him. But he had doubts Cruz could get the support of Congress to achieve some of his plans.

Tyson and his classmates took photos with Cruz after the rally, smiling and holding posters they received for attending.

When asked if they would vote for Cruz, they were less enthusiastic. With slight smirks, they shyly shook their heads and said, “no.”

Contact Jennifer Bowman at 269-966-0589 or jbowman@battlecreekenquirer.com. Follow her on Twitter: @jenn_bowman

Read or Share this story: http://bcene.ws/1Le5jUV