Scott Honour, a Republican candidate for governor, meets the owner of a Stillwater, Minn., cafe on August 11, 2014. The Oasis Cafe attracted national attention for charging a "minimum wage fee" to offset costs from a newly increased state minimum wage and Honour was there to voice support. (Photo: AP )

A recent story about a restaurant in Stillwater, Minnesota, called the Oasis Cafe, caught my attention.

Coming from a family of Midwestern farmers and small business owners, I’m a huge fan of small business. I’m also a fan of being as upfront and honest as possible about your beliefs, though as you read below, you’ll see it can get you in hot water real quickly.

Here’s where Craig and Deb Beemer, owners of the Oasis Cafe, cooked up some trouble for themselves. Maybe they did it unknowingly, but in this age of instantaneous opinion and speed-of-light digital soapboxes, they shouldn’t have been too surprised.

The back story: The Land of 10,000 Lakes recently raised the Minnesota minimum wage to $8 an hour from $7.25. Many states are wrestling with the same issue, as lawmakers look to boost the spending power of workers without unfairly socking it to business owners in a free market.

The Beemers, admittedly conservative but reportedly usually rather quiet in their politics, earlier this month began adding a 35-cent “minimum wage fee” to their customers’ food bills noting their additional business expense initiated by state lawmakers.

That line item on customers’ bills quickly created a Land of 10,000-plus opinions.

I unsuccessfully attempted to contact the Beemers last week, but because the story went national, they’ve been steamrolled with media requests, not to mention backlash, so it probably wasn’t surprising I didn’t get through.

If I were to guess — and this is based on nothing but what I’ve been able to cherry pick through news stories and social media — it’s that the Beemers just wanted to operate a simple mom-and-pop eatery, grew frustrated at the seemingly casualness to which more operating expense was added to their business’s bottom line, so they decided to make a statement.

I remember a while back, customers at several Gator’s Dockside casual eateries in Florida discovered a 1 percent surcharge on their checks to “generate the additional revenue needed to cover the costs of” complying with the the Affordable Care Act — aka “Obamacare.” The corporate office disavowed the move and said the Obamacare fee was a decision by a franchisee.

Here is what the Oasis Cafe put on their Facebook page:

“Our decision to offset the recent increase in minimum wage was what we believed to be the most honest and transparent way to communicate a significant increase in our operating cost. Rather than raise menu prices, we decided to charge a flat fee per guest check.

“While our family is conservative in our views, it was never our intent to make some grand political statement about the minimum wage debate. My comment about thumbing my nose at the law is being quoted out of context.

“With regards to how much we pay our employees, our servers average more than $20 per hour when you consider the tips they receive. Our dishwashers make $10 to $11 and our cooks make $12 to $16 per hour. Anyone familiar with restaurant wages in our market knows we’re paying our staff a more-than-competitive wage.

“To those who have supported our restaurant with your business and positive comments ... thank you...your support is appreciated more than you’ll ever know.

“To those customers who we’ve offended with our minimum wage fee, please know it was not our intent to be offensive and that we hope you’ll find a way to forgive us.”

Itemizing fees and taxes isn’t new. State and federal taxes are spelled out quite clearly at gas stations and on your cable, cell phone and utility bills.

But restaurants, particularly successful ones, are weirdly influential when it comes to politics and can become a flashpoint.

Remember “Freedom Fries,” to protest against France for not supporting the United States’ effort in Iraq? In World War I, sauerkraut became “liberty cabbage” at some eateries to thumb the nose at Germany.

In 2008, a place called Geno's in Philadelphia placed a sign in its window reading, “This is America. When ordering, please speak English.” That brought the owner an investigation by the city’s Human Relations Commission, which issued a ruling that the sign did not convey a message that service would be refused to non-English speakers.

Then there were the comments on traditional marriage not so long ago by the head of Chick-fil-A, which ended up creating traffic jams of supporters.

And can you recall any modern-day president who hasn’t had some type of bologna sandwich named after him?

All of it, I guess is gastronomical democracy in a sense. Customers, like owners, can make a statement by electing not to patronize an establishment if they feel offended by a restaurant’s point of view. Or, as someone told me several years ago, “You can be a ‘Soup Nazi,’ but you better make some damn good soup to back it up.”

Finally, this reminds me that some enterprising local restaurant, looking to score some buzz this election season, should sponsor a contest and ask their customers to come up with sandwiches for our candidates for governor. It would be interesting to see what would be on a Charlie Crist or a Rick Scott.

Not taking sides, but I imagine there would be some cheese, ham, turkey and, quite possibly, bologna involved.

Price is FLORIDA TODAY’s business editor. He can be reached at 321-242-3658 or wprice@floridatoday.com. You can also follow him on Twitter @Fla2dayBiz.

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/VstE2h