Korea’s government is taking advantage of rallying share prices to sell shares acquired more than a decade ago amid a spate of purchases of distressed assets.

The Maersk Line Maersk Mc-Kinney Moeller Triple-E class container vessel sits under construction at the Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine shipyard in Geoje, South Korea. Bloomberg News

The Public Fund Oversight Committee, which was set up under the Financial Services Commission to dispose of state assets, is selling a 5% stake in Daewoo Shipbuilding & Marine Engineering for around $322 million, while state-run Korea Deposit Insurance Corp. is selling all of its shares in Korea Electric Power Corp., according to term sheet and people familiar with the matter, respectively.

The government is selling down its stakes bit by bit as and when conditions are favorable to return taxpayers’ money, a person familiar with the Daewoo Shipbuilding sale said Tuesday.

A term sheet seen by The Wall Street Journal showed that the oversight committee is selling 9.57 million shares in Daewoo, one of the world’s largest shipbuilders, at 35,550 won ($33.63) a share, a 3.9% discount to Tuesday’s closing price of 37,000 won.

Daewoo Shipbuilding was down 0.8% compared with Monday, but it is up 70% over the past year.

State-run Korea Asset Management Corp., or Kamco, originally obtained the Daewoo stake in a debt-for-equity swap as part of a bailout process for Daewoo Shipbuilding in 2000.

Kamco, established to buy distressed assets from banks and other financial institutions, was required by law to dispose of its ownership by the end of last year.

The public sector remains Daewoo Shipbuilding’s largest shareholder. Korea Development Bank holds a 31.3% stake, while the commission’s remaining stake in the shipbuilder will be 12.2% after the sale.

Meanwhile, state-run Korea Deposit Insurance Corp., or KDIC, plans to raise $260 million from a sale of 8.71 million shares in Korea Electric Power, a power utility, for 30,576-31,850 won a share, according to a person familiar with the transaction. At the lower end of the range, the price is a 4% discount to Tuesday’s closing price of 31,850 won.

Shares of Kepco rose 6.9% Tuesday after the government said the utility will be allowed to raise electricity prices by an average 5.4% from Thursday. The stock has rallied from around 27,000 won over the past month as investors anticipated the government move.

KDIC was among those closely watching the market in advance of the electricity price boost, the person said.

KDIC came by its Kepco shares during the Asian financial crisis of the late 1990s.

--Isabella Steger contributed to this post.