Over the past few years, the benefits of crowdsourcing have been touted in an increasing number of industries and functions. You can crowdsource employees, answers, R&D, data, funding and accommodations. Some of the reasons crowdsourcing works so well are that the crowd amplifies the company’s reach, the company can interact with the crowd and members of the crowd can interact with each other to gather information and solve problems.

Several years ago, when I was choosing between grad schools, I went to the University of Pennsylvania’s admissions office and asked if they could match the merit-based aid package offered by a similarly-ranked school. They plugged the school into their database and responded: “Only 8% of students choose that school over us, so no…” I remember looking around their office and thinking it would be great if applicants could have access to that information, or better yet, access to their file cabinets stuffed with the application details of accepted students. I had spent many a sleepless night speculating and worrying about the contents of those drawers.

Together with another equally frustrated classmate, I created AdmitSee. Our goal was simple: bringing transparency to college admissions. This is what we learned about building a business on crowdsourced information and labor:

Crowdsourcing work to students. To get our first users, we hit the road, handing out AdmitSee logo sunglasses at college orientations. We anticipated that students would ask questions about our then-barren website, but the most common question we received was: “Do you have any internships?” We saw an opportunity.

We created a virtual internship program modeled after the popular crowdsourcing sites Fiverr and oDesk. Recruiting interns is incredibly easy. It’s free to post on college job boards and platforms like internships.com. We ask students to submit their resumes through a contact form on our site — this helped build early traction. We interview and hire interns through Skype. Then we send out emails every Monday with a list of tasks to be completed (e.g., post flyers, write a blog post, get coverage of AdmitSee in your campus paper).

Low cost of content acquisition. College students have access to hundreds of classmates’ emails through dorm and extracurricular listservs and they’re willing to share their favorite websites with their networks. On Facebook it costs a lot less to advertise to college students than to parents — our cost per click is around $.05 for students in comparison to $.20 for parents. You still have to create incentives for students to share their personal information — we split sales with college students, pay them for mentoring high school applicants and pay referral fees for new profiles.

Willingness to disclose personal information. Some may be shocked at how much detail students are willing to share, but this is the Facebook generation. Most of our users were born in the late 1990s; Facebook launched when they were still in elementary school. We have application essays about sneaking into the country illegally, overcoming cancer, forging signatures for insurance benefits and other deeply personal experiences. These students are comfortable providing profile pictures and other identifying information alongside these essays.

Crowdsourcing as a market disruptor. We’ve received pushback from private college consultants who fear us as a market disruptor. Right now, the average consultant charges $4,035 per client. Some worry they’ll be pushed out of the market, much like travel agents were replaced by data aggregators such as TripAdvisor and Kayak. Thankfully, there are just as many who want to partner with us. Admissions consulting companies use our database to train staff, provide examples to clients and manage parents’ expectations.

Ultimately, AdmitSee’s crowdsourced data and the ability to message college students aren’t going to make one-to-one consulting for those who can afford it obsolete. However, it does help bridge the gap in access to information. That’s why we are harnessing the crowd to lift the curtain on the mysterious college admissions process.

Ms. Fayal is the co-founder and CEO of AdmitSee, a college-oriented social-networking site.

Follow @AdmitSee



Follow @WSJstartup