With yields on low-risk investments scraping rock-bottom and higher interest rates nowhere in sight, one of the best options for income seekers are municipal bonds. Most are yielding 2 percent to 3 percent, but don't be put off by the seemingly low yields. Interest from muni bonds is exempt from federal taxes. And if you buy munis issued by your home state, they're also likely to be free of state taxes (and possibly local income taxes, too).

With the top federal tax bracket at 39.6 percent and investment income for high earners subject to a 3.8-percent excise tax under the Affordable Care Act, even a modest yield on a tax-free investment looks pretty good, says Marilyn Cohen, CEO of Envision Capital Management, in El Segundo, Calif.

Consider a high-quality muni bond maturing in 10 years and yielding 3 percent. For top earners, that's the equivalent of 5.3 percent from a taxable bond, and it's way above the 1.9-percent yield of a 10-year Treasury bond. Retirees should note that although the interest earned on munis is not taxed by Uncle Sam, it's added in when you calculate your modified adjusted gross income, which the IRS uses to determine how much of your Social Security income is taxable. Thus, muni interest could subject more of your Social Security benefits to taxes.

What could go wrong: Defaults are rare, but the finances of some states and municipalities are wobbly. Rising interest rates could cause the value of existing bonds to fall. That's not a problem if you own individual bonds and hold to maturity; for you, the biggest risk is inflation, which eats into the value of your principal and the fixed stream of interest payments.

How to play them: Avoid sketchy issuers and keep bond maturities relatively short. For those living in high-tax states, such as California, New York and New Jersey, it makes sense to stick with bonds issued by your state of residence or state-specific bond funds. California residents who prefer a fund to individual munis should consider T. Rowe Price California Tax-Free Bond (symbol PRXCX), which yields 2 percent. The fund's average duration, a measure of interest-rate sensitivity, is a tolerable five years (the figure suggests that if rates were to rise by one percentage point, the fund's share price would drop by 5 percent).

If state taxes aren't a big issue, you may do better by buying a multistate muni fund. For example, Vanguard Long-Term Tax-Exempt Investor (VWLTX), with an average duration of 6 years, yields 2.2 percent. Prefer individual bonds? Recently, a New York City Housing Development Corp. bond, rated double-A-plus, yielded 2.6 percent to maturity in 2024.

(Kathy Kristof is a contributing editor to Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine. Send your questions and comments to moneypower@kiplinger.com. And for more on this and similar money topics, visit Kiplinger.com.)

(c) 2015 Kiplinger's Personal Finance; Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.