Topics: 2016 Elections, Affordable Care Act, Budget, House Republicans, Medicare, Mike Enzi, Obamacare, Senate Budget Committee, Senate Republicans, Taxes, Politics News

The Republican-controlled Congress’ budget extravaganza continued this week as the Senate GOP released their FY2016 budgetary framework. It differs significantly from the House Republicans’ budget proposal and there’s going to be a long and difficult battle between the two competing camps to hammer out a single plan they can all agree on. And while the House budget borrowed heavily from the Paul Ryan school of achieving balance through cutting and privatizing social programs, the Senate budget takes a slightly different approach: magic voodoo savings.

This difference is most readily apparent in the way the Senate budget approaches Medicare. The House Republicans have a plan for restructuring Medicare: they want to transform it into a voucher system and cut roughly $150 billion from the program over 10 years. The Senate plan also has some changes in store for Medicare: its authors promise to reduce Medicare spending by some $400 billion over the next decade, and to protect “Medicare from insolvency, extending the life of the Medicare trust fund by five years.” What the plan doesn’t do is explain exactly how any of this will happen. They just sort of throw it out there and suggest that the relevant committees will figure out a way to make it happen. “You won’t find specifics in what we’ve done, just limits,” Senate Budget Committee chair Mike Enzi said yesterday. So they’ve got the ends locked down, just not the means.

With regard to the Affordable Care Act, the Senate indulges in a bit more budget trickery that conjures trillions of dollars in revenues out of nothing. Like the House budget, the Senate plan calls for the complete and total repeal of Obamacare. However, it also achieves balance by assuming that the tax revenues the Affordable Care Act will bring in will still exist, even after the law is repealed. How can they make this assumption? Here’s the New York Times:

Then there is the $2 trillion in tax revenues assumed even after the repeal of the healthcare law that produced the taxes. Republican aides said nothing in the budget precluded the Finance Committee from producing an overhaul of the tax code this year that would bring in that revenue without the health law. But nothing the in the budget orders that overhaul either.

Hooray for magical thinking! The Senate budget is premised on the notion that nothing is impossible if you believe hard enough. And, as National Journal’s Sarah Mimms pointed out, earlier this week Enzi had criticized the House GOP for using this very same accounting “gimmick” in previous budgets. So it seems he’s a late convert to the budgetary dark arts.