TALLAHASSEE — Gov. Rick Scott headed for California on Sunday for a two-day mission to lure jobs to Florida, leaving behind a seemingly intractable budget battle and a growing rift between his administration and the Florida Senate.

The feud between Scott and the Senate blew out into the open last week, with Scott blaming senators for sabotaging his Medicaid negotiations with the federal government, and senators publicly scolding his agency heads.

The main source of the disagreement is over Medicaid. Scott is negotiating with the federal government to extend the Low Income Pool, a $2.2 billion Medicaid program paid with county and federal funds for health care for low-income and uninsured patients.

When the program was extended last year, the federal Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services said it wanted to see changes and wouldn't extend it in its current form.

But after Sens. Rene Garcia, R-Miami, and Garrett Richter, R-Naples, recently met with CMS officials to present their alternative LIP program, Scott says negotiations came to a halt, although federal officials dispute that.

Scott then backtracked from his previous support for Medicaid expansion for about 800,000 Floridians. He said because of the LIP stalemate, he doubted whether Washington would live up to the $50 billion cost of Medicaid expansion over 10 years under the Affordable Care Act, or Obamacare.

"When you see the federal government wanting to walk away from something, it's hard to trust that they'll be there for other programs," Scott spokeswoman Jackie Schutz said.

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, miffed at Scott's new position, noted the governor's previous support for Medicaid expansion did not include the "conservative guardrails" of work and co-pay requirements included in his current plan.

Sen. Don Gaetz, R-Niceville, a former Senate President, was more blunt. "The governor's entitled to all of his positions on the issue," Gaetz said.

Hospitals in Orlando and across the state, especially public ones that rely heavily on federal funding, are caught in the crossfire.

Florida Hospital officials say if LIP isn't extended and a Medicaid expansion plan isn't adopted to replace it, they'll lose $90 million. While hospital officials say they won't cut services, they'll have to look at ways to cut expenses, like labor costs.

"We'd have to assess our budget at that time, but we can't absorb a $90 million hit to our budget," said Michael Griffin, Florida Hospital vice president of public affairs.

After Scott made his skepticism of Medicaid expansion public, senators began to push back on his top appointees.

The Senate Health Policy Committee delayed confirmation of Department of Health secretary John Armstrong after he repeatedly declined to give his opinion on the Senate's Medicaid expansion plan. The committee isn't scheduled to meet the rest of the legislative session, but Armstrong could still be confirmed next year.

In a different committee, Secretary of State Ken Detzner objected to SB 7064, a bill by Richter to require counties to offer online voter registration by 2017.

Detzner's opposition drew the ire of Sen. Jack Latvala, R-Clearwater.

"You didn't have to come today. You weren't invited to come. You should've known that you were going to get these questions," Latvala said.

Latvala also voted against confirmation of Jesse Panuccio, Scott's executive director of the Department of Economic Opportunity, even though the rest of the panel approved his confirmation.

DEO oversees one of Scott's top projects: taxpayer incentive deals designed to lure businesses to expand or move to Florida. But Latvala has another bill, 1214, requiring Senate approval of the head of Enterprise Florida, the public-private group that conducts the deals.

The deals are the kind Scott hopes to secure on his trip to California, where he's been running ads touting Florida's low taxes and business climate.

The Senate also has already passed a measure, SB 7020, installing an independent oversight board for the Department of Corrections after a series of reports of inmate deaths, poor working conditions for prison guards and whistleblower reports that went unheeded.

The House is less strict in its oversight measures of Scott agencies and has rebuffed Senate pressure to expand Medicaid. Because the Senate has Medicaid expansion and an alternative LIP plan in its budget and the House budget includes neither, the chambers are $4.2 billion apart in their spending plans with no end in sight to the impasse.

Gardiner does have some support in the House from Democrats. House Minority Leader Mark Pafford of West Palm Beach said his party's 39 members are ready to pass Medicaid expansion if they attract enough Republican votes. He said he admires how Gardiner has handled the situation.

"I think the President of the Senate has done a marvelous job of maintaining his cool," Pafford said. "He's passed a budget, it was bipartisan and that budget included health-care expansion."

grohrer@orlandosentinel.com or (850) 222-5564