The recent decree handed down by President Obama allowing transgender students to use the bathroom they “identify with” is going way too far and is both illegal and, quite frankly, immoral. The Federal Government does not nor should not have the authority or jurisdiction to mandate state laws.

This is an atrocious abuse of power which amounts to nothing less than pure dictatorship. Similar to “Obamacare,” which penalized millions of people who could not afford to purchase this “affordable” insurance, the Federal Government is once again blackmailing our states with threats of loss of Federal Aid and withholding Federal school funds to schools who do not cooperate.

The sheer audacity of this mandate is outrageous and we, as a nation, should not allow another ludicrous law to be shoved down our collective throats. This is political correctness gone wild and is long past an admissible limit.

Do you want your children and teenagers to be forced to use the same bathroom with someone of the opposite sex? Do you want your daughters to be in a restroom when a male comes in to use the same facility? This is astoundingly inappropriate.

Furthermore, the decree will not require transgender students to have a medical diagnosis. This means that anyone, regardless of whether they really are transgender or not, can simply say that they are and use whichever restroom they want. This open-ended, loose approach is a certain recipe for disaster. What is to prevent then some pervert or even pranksters (because you know that inevitably there will be pranksters), from just saying that they are transgender when in reality they are not?

Supposedly this mandate is to protect and prevent discrimination against transgender students. But what about protecting and discriminating against all our other children? I’m sure most of our students would not be comfortable in sharing a bathroom with someone of the opposite sex. I know that I, as a parent and grandparent, most assuredly am not.

I do, however, want to stress one point. And let me be perfectly clear. I am in no manner an advocate of bullying of any kind for any reason. We, as adults, need to make our position on this issue heard by contacting our political and government leaders. We also need to make it absolutely clear to our children that bullying is never an acceptable answer.

With that being said, I do believe it’s time for the majority to fight back. Our country has become so obsessed with protecting the rights of minorities that the rights of the majority have ultimately been disregarded. I believe most people agree that this transgender law is not only reprehensible and ridiculous but also entirely unnecessary. Obama merely wants to dictate one more power play before he leaves office.

This new law is utterly preposterous and has gone too far over the line. Write your senators, congressmen, state legislators and other officials if you feel the same. It’s time to take a stand.

(Kyle Lovern is the Managing Editor for the Civitas Media Mountain District including the Williamson Daily News and Logan Banner. He can be contacted at [email protected] or at 304-235-4242, ext. 2277 or on Twitter @KyleLovern.)

http://williamsondailynews.com/wp-content/uploads/2016/05/web1_Kyle-Lovern-2-1.jpg

Kyle’s Korner …

Please enable JavaScript to view the comments powered by Disqus.

Disqus