By Kate Bartley

Staff Writer

Growing up in Beavercreek, Angela Hannah and Katrina McWilliams shared a lot — outfits, hairstyles, even photographs in their wedding dresses. Matching hysterectomies and mastectomies, however, was never the part of the plan.

“We have to remind ourselves every day why we are doing this,” Hannah said. “It’s not a walk in the park. There is a lot of grief that is involved.”

The 39-year-old twins used some bad news to change the course of their futures. Their grandmother died years ago of pancreatic cancer and their mother, Jayne Robertson, is currently undergoing chemotherapy during her fourth battle with ovarian cancer.

“It is exhausting,” said Robertson, who still lives in Greene County. “The fatigue is just astronomical. The fatigue never goes away.”

After watching Robertson’s struggle, her three daughters opted for genetic counseling, and ultimately, genetic testing through the My Risk test from Myriad Genetics.

More and more people are searching for clues to their health through their own DNA, a trend that accelerated after actress Angelina Jolie told the public in 2013 that she’d tested positive for BRCA, a gene associated with an increased risk of breast and ovarian cancers. Jolie subsequently had a double mastectomy.

Medical experts say such preventative measures are a personal decision that is not for everyone. It can make people anxious or depressed and give them a false sense of security. But it can also greatly reduce the chances of contracting debilitating or deadly cancers, and improve quality of life, according to health care professionals.

Robertson’s youngest daughter learned she does not carry any worrisome genes, but Hannah and McWilliams both carry the BRCA 2 gene. They were told they have an 87 percent likelihood of developing breast cancer in their lifetime and are nearly as likely to develop ovarian cancer. Their cousin, Sherry, received the same results.

“We said, ‘Why not preserve life and do what we can to prevent what my mom has gone through?’ ” Hannah said. “I knew that in the long run, if I got cancer I wasn’t going to forgive myself. I would not have been able to move forward, so I’m doing everything I can to prevent it early on.”

The twins and their cousin — all wives and mothers — opted for prophylactic hysterectomies. Williamson has already had her surgery and the other two women will go forward with the same procedure soon. They are staggering their surgeries to better care for one another.

McWilliams said the process has been positive for her family.

“My (two) boys are watching this, you know. What better way — not to say that I wish this on anybody — but what better way to teach them that family takes care of family?” she said.

The twins’ doctor is Caroline Peterson, Kettering Health Network’s director of Breast Screening & Early Detection. She says genetic testing is more affordable and comprehensive now. Doctors can screen for 25 different genes for breast, ovarian, colon, uterine, pancreatic, prostate cancer and even melanoma.

The retail cost of the test is approximately $3,500, but with changes from the Affordable Care Act that started on Jan. 1, Peterson says 92 percent of her patients pay nothing out of pocket.

“What we’re trying to do is identify those patients who are as high as 87 percent or even just greater than 20 percent,” Peterson said.

Patients who test negative have no guarantees they won’t develop sporadic cancer. For example, Peterson said the average woman has an 11 percent chance of developing breast cancer over her lifetime, and 80 percent of women who get breast cancer develop it sporadically, meaning they don’t carry the gene. The majority are in their 60s or 70s.

Prophylactic surgeries like mastectomies and hysterectomies reduce the cancer risk “to almost zero,” Peterson said.

Hannah and McWilliams get choked up talking about their mother’s struggle with cancer.

”She’s the glue to our family,” Hannah said.