Evergreen Health Cooperative said it is poised to turn its first profit this year as it continues to attract new customers and grow, even as nearly half of the co-ops created under the Affordable Care Act have failed.

Although it initially struggled to attract clients because of the bungled rollout of the state's health exchange, the Baltimore-based co-op enrolled 37,500 members as of March 1 in the exchange's third year. That's more than three times the 11,700 members it had at the end of 2014.

As its membership has swelled, it has collected more in premiums: $83 million in 2015, compared to $12 million in 2014.

That growth has helped Evergreen Health survive, even though nearly half of the other co-ops set up under President Barack Obama's health insurance reform have closed. Only 12 of the original nonprofit, member-owned 23 co-ops remain. They were established with the help of low-interest federal loans to provide alternatives to traditional insurance.

Evergreen founder and CEO Dr. Peter Beilenson said the insurer was able to make it because it enrolled a diverse range of clients that included individuals as well as small and large employers.

Evergreen also didn't low-ball prices when many of its counterparts attracted people with super-low premiums, he said. Many of those enrollees ended up being sicker, higher-risk patients who ended up costing the co-ops more than anticipated.

"We didn't try to buy the individual business," Beilenson said. "We wanted to price appropriately and conservatively."

Administrators of some of the failed co-ops have blamed their failure on the tight restrictions of the government loans that helped them launch, troubled websites that thwarted consumers from signing up for coverage and intense competition from dominant insurers that are better known.

The National Alliance of State Health CO-OPs has said startup insurers don't have the same capital reserves as well-established carriers to offset early marketplace losses.

"The co-ops generally have taken on a disproportionate amount of the high-risk population," said Kelly Crowe, CEO of the alliance.

Evergreen posted a $10.8 million net loss in 2015, but $7.3 million of that loss was a "risk-adjustment charge" it had to pay into a pool to help other insurers with less-healthy patients than Evergreen. That compared to a $16.3 million net loss in 2014.

Beilenson has been pushing to change the way such risk pools work because he says they unfairly penalize those insurers using preventive care to manage chronic conditions and keep patients healthy.

Evergreen was able to grow "very, very methodically," Crowe said

"A lot of people thought if you didn't grow very, very quickly, you were doing something wrong," she said. "In fact, what we have seen is some of the co-ops that grew quickly have wound down or put caps on their enrollment growth. Starting out a little bit slower and more methodical has proven to be a good strategy for Evergreen and others."

Beilenson also was able to switch gears in the first year when the state exchange, the website where people buy insurance, crashed, and he couldn't get enough individual members signed up. He quickly changed his focus to the small-group market.

"Dr. Beilenson was nimble and saw he would be in trouble if he just had to depend on the exchange," said Jonathan Weiner, professor of health policy and management at the Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health.

Beilenson also believes Evergreen likely gained market share for 2016 from CareFirst BlueCross BlueShield, which raised rates significantly and saw its share of exchange enrollees drop to 57 percent this year from 79 percent last year.

The company also developed a unique structure for care delivery. Alongside a traditional network of doctors, it also opened its own health care centers to directly employ health care providers and deliver services to members.

Beilenson said members like the centers and personal services.

"When issues arise, we can deal with them quickly, and we meet with our members not infrequently," he said. "We want to stay local and personal, and grow steadily and not too fast."

Baltimore Sun reporter Meredith Cohn contributed to this article.

amcdaniels@baltsun.com

Twitter.com/ankwalker