LITTLE VAMPIRES: Children dressed as vampires posed for a photograph before the Shocktober Fest at Tulleys Farm on Saturday, West Sussex, England. Peter Macdiarmid/Getty Images …

ALIEN EYES: A woman received the finishing touches of her makeup at the London Film And Comic Con at Olympia Exhibition Centre on Sunday in London. Dan Dennison/Getty Images …

A LOT LIKE SNOW: Riot police were covered with foam sprayed by firefighters during a protest for better work conditions in Brussels on Monday. Virginie Lefour/AFP/Getty Images …

ROYAL MONEY: A cast for the new coin to commemorate the christening of HRH Prince George of Cambridge was shown, before going into production at The Royal Mint on Monday in Llantrisant, Wales. Matt Cardy/Getty Images …

PADDLING: A gull paddled along empty tables in Saint Mark's Square during the first high tide, or acqua alta as it is locally known, of the season in Venice, Italy. Marco Secchi/Getty Images …

REMEMBERED: Drawings created by students relating to the recent shipwreck off the Italian coast were displayed in the Elementary School of Lampedusa on Tuesday in Lampedusa, Italy. Tullio M. Puglia/Getty Images …

MOURNING: Coffins of victims were placed in a hangar of Lampedusa airport on Saturday after a boat with migrants sank killing at least 232 people. Ettore Ferrari/Zuma Press …

DRENCHED: Pope Francis waves to the crowd as he arrives for his weekly open-air general audience in St.Peter's Square on Wednesday at the Vatican. Filippo Monteforte/Agence France-Presse/Getty Images …

BRIGHT FOLIAGE: A woman looked out from a house covered with leaves in Ballenstedt, Germany, Wednesday. Matthias Bein/AFP/Getty Images …

SLIPPERY: Polish fisherman sorted harvested carps from the Milickie Ponds during the traditional carp haul in Grabownica village, south-west Poland. Maciej Kulczynski/EPA …

COMB THE STREETS: Police officers examined the scene close to the spot where a man was shot dead in Londonderry, Northern Ireland, Thursday. Authorities blamed a resurgent Irish Republican Army faction for killing two men in separate gun attacks in the province. Peter Morrison/Associated Press …

CITY TOUR: Denmark's Crown Prince Frederik, third from left, and Vilnius Mayor Arturas Zuokas, second right, rode bikes around Vilnius, Lithuania, Wednesday during Prince Frederik's first official visit to Lithuania. Petras Malukas/AFP/Getty Images …