ENLARGE Kevin Bacon in ’Cop Car,’ which is screening at BAMcinemaFest Photo: Focus World

As many of the independent filmmakers BAMcinemaFest champions have evolved from micro-budget productions to collaborating with movie stars, the film festival has stepped up its game.

The festival opens its seventh annual edition on Wednesday at the Brooklyn Academy of Music with the New York premiere of “The End of the Tour.” The new film from director James Ponsoldt (a festival alumnus) stars comic actor Jason Segel in a dramatic role as the late novelist David Foster Wallace and is indicative of many at the festival, which is sponsored by The Wall Street Journal.

In many films, well-known actors—Kevin Bacon in the thriller “Cop Car” or Kristen Wiig in the Brooklyn parenthood comedy “Nasty Baby”—have skipped bigger paychecks in exchange for a more creative experience.

“The only reason any actors end up in independent movies at all is [that] they have fun playing with that freedom,” said Alex Ross Perry, whose “Queen of Earth” stars Elisabeth Moss as a woman who suffers a psychological breakdown. The festival’s centerpiece film reunites Mr. Perry with the actress, who appeared in his last effort, the acerbic literary comedy “Listen Up Philip,” along with Jason Schwartzman and Jonathan Pryce.

Related What to See at BAMcinemaFest





Mr. Perry began work on the new film last year not long after “Philip” had its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival. His new film’s intimate scale, tight crew and fixed location—a lake house in upstate New York—helped bolster a severe dramatic turn. “The less fingers you have in the pie,” he said, “the purer it will taste.”

Ms. Moss, he said, was onboard right away, making it easier to cast co-star Katherine Waterston. The director said he had become fascinated by “radical departures” in the work of prolific filmmakers, such as the Woody Allen’s “Interiors.” “Where basically the intention is you make this austere miserable drama with no jokes after you make ‘Annie Hall,’ ” he said.

Mr. Perry’s career has been nurtured by the festival, which featured his second film “The Color Wheel” in 2011 and prides itself on advocating for new cinematic talents.

“Our brand is much stronger now,” said Gabriele Caroti, director of BAMcinematek. “Five years ago, we didn’t have the edict of focusing on American independent cinema. I think we’ve really honed the festival. It’s sharper and tighter.”

ENLARGE A scene from Nathan Silver’s ‘Stinking Heaven’ Photo: Nathan Silver

The increased star wattage hasn’t dimmed the festival’s taste for movies that push the form. Among them are films that explore unusual camera choices (an iPhone in “Tangerine,” Betacam video in “Stinking Heaven”) and those that mess with story structure (the surreal comedy “Uncle Kent 2” turns from mumblecore into a kind of live-action cartoon; “A Woman Like Me” mixes documentary and fiction to reimagine its co-director’s cancer experience).

Although much of BAMcinemaFest is booked with favorites that had their premieres at the Sundance and South by Southwest film festivals, there also are more recent discoveries.

Chicago filmmaker Stephen Cone is near the start of his festival run with “Henry Gamble’s Birthday Party.” The ensemble drama runs the course of a day in which a minister’s son turns 17 and celebrates with a pool party. Everyone, it seems, has a secret, which serves Mr. Cone’s assertion that “religious people are forced to live inside physical bodies despite themselves a little bit.” The cast, which features a number of Chicago stage actors, and polished cinematography lends a mainstream vibe to a plot that is textured and subversive.

ENLARGE Cole Doman in ‘Henry Gamble’s Birthday Party’ Photo: Cone Arts

“I’m grateful there’s a springtime wave of festivals with sharp curatorial eyes looking for these films,” Mr. Cone said. “Because otherwise we’re lost.”

Some selections are notable simply for the perspective of their storytelling. Filmmaker Kris Swanberg, also from Chicago, made two smaller features before she co-wrote and directed “Unexpected.” Like Mr. Perry—whose film has Joe Swanberg, Ms. Swanberg’s filmmaker husband, as a producer—she was able to attract a familiar actress. Cobie Smulders, late of the CBS comedy “How I Met Your Mother” and “Avengers: Age of Ultron,” plays an inner-city high-school teacher who bonds with one of her students when they both discover they are pregnant.

“We clicked so hard and she related to the script so much,” said Ms. Swanberg, who based the story on her own experiences. “I was looking for naturalistic performances, someone who could act like themselves and have a real conversation and seem like a human, and someone who could be funny. She checked all the boxes.”

The film, Ms. Swanberg said, reflected anxieties about motherhood, which she hadn’t seen represented in film from a woman’s perspective.

“There was a constant debate in my own head whether I’m working or whether I’m staying home,” she said. “It’s something my husband doesn’t go through. He’s not racked with guilt the whole time. It’s something really unique to women.”

It didn’t hurt that Ms. Smulders, who came to the “Unexpected” set fresh from shooting the romantic comedy “Results” with microbudget pioneer Andrew Bujalski, was six months pregnant.

“Which is, you know, a good amount of pregnant,” Ms. Swanberg said, laughing.