Government Shutdown Redux: McConnell and Reid Clash Over Budget Summit (Alex Wong/Getty Images) What happened:



Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid and the rest of the Democratic leadership urged Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and House Speaker John Boehner on Tuesday to convene a budget summit, much like the one that took place in 2013 that ultimately produced a deal to relieve cuts imposed by the sequester in 2011.



McConnell, R-Ky., brushed off the suggestion.



“No, of course not,” he said. “The Appropriations Committee in the Senate is reporting out bills consistent with the budget that the Senate passed, and we’re going to move forward and see what our friends on the other side want to do,



Why it matters:



The House under Boehner, R-Ohio, is moving swiftly to pass each of the 12 annual appropriations bills at levels in line with the funding totals set out in their budget, and the Senate is considering defense authorization that will give the Pentagon more money through an emergency war fund.



But President Barack Obama has vowed to veto any appropriations bills that don’t raise domestic spending “dollar-for-dollar” in line with defense spending, or any that adhere to sequester levels. As far as the Democrats are concerned, that means funding the government can go one of two ways, and neither way is the Republicans’ current path.



A budget summit “should be congressional leaders, both parties, it should be the White House,” Reid, D-Nev., told reporters Tuesday. The implication was either the deal-making starts now, or Congress will be stuck funding the government at existing levels.



“You wait until the end, you’re going to get a [continuing resolution], which everyone agrees is a really poor form of budgeting,” said Sen. Chuck Schumer, D-N.Y. “It hurts the military and hurts families, doesn’t allow us to do what we need to do.” Obama Defied on Trade

Obama Defied on Trade Mandel Ngan/AFP/Getty Images What happened:



President Barack Obama made a rare visit to Capitol Hill on Friday in a last-ditch effort to convince members of his own party to support a pair of measures on trade. Most were unmoved by his appeals, and the first of the two votes went down in spectacular fashion, as many Democrats voted against a measure they support – trade adjustment assistance – in an effort to sink the one they despise: fast-track authority to negotiate the Trans-Pacific Partnership trade deal. Both items, officially two parts of a single bill, had to pass for either to become law, and while Republican leader initially said they would cancel the fast-track vote if TAA failed, they changed course and fast-track passed, 219-211.



Why it matters:



While the initial result is a blow to Obama and may indicate his lame-duck term has officially arrived, Republican leaders indicated their plans to bring fast-track up for another vote next week. Many members who voted against it Friday may change their tune next week: Republicans who support the trade deal will be willing to vote in favor of a program they don’t like (TAA) in order to get fast-track, while Democrats will want to show their support for the labor-friendly TAA, which offers assistance to workers and communities who lose jobs as a result of global trade.



Going forward, the issue could have lasting repercussions for Democrats as they look to improve their numbers and retain the White House next year. Hillary Clinton, the presumed front-runner for the Democratic nomination, has refused to weigh in on the matter and has been hit by candidates from both sides for her silence. But other Democrats say the issue is too technical to play much of a long-term role in electoral politics.

Republicans Want to Give Obama More Power on Oil, Too

Republicans Want to Give Obama More Power on Oil, Too Tom Williams/CQ Roll Call/Getty What happened:



A group of Republican senators unveiled a plan this week to ask President Obama to use his executive authority to sell crude oil to U.S. allies that ask for it. Pro-energy lawmakers have pushed hard to get the self-imposed ban on U.S. oil exports dropped, and this strategy can help get a foot in the door.



An amendment to the National Defense Authorization Act will urge the administration to use its executive power to grant country-by-country exemptions from the ban, in part because it would provide energy security to U.S. allies who currently depend on volatile governments like those in Russia and the Middle East for their oil supplies. More broadly, advocates say, the U.S. could increase crude exports as a power-balancing measure across the globe, although it’s unclear just how far it could go without repealing the ban altogether.



Why it matters:



In January, Senate Energy Committee Chairwoman Lisa Murkowski, R-Alaska, said the Department of the Interior and the Obama administration were declaring “war on Alaska” in blocking energy development in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge.



She has long advocated for an outright repeal of the ban on crude oil exports, but the new strategy marks a shift for her approach to the administration's executive authority and stands in stark contrast to Republicans’ general disapproval of Obama’s executive actions on other issues, such as immigration and healthcare.



Lindsey Graham is Mark Kirk’s “bro with no ho”

Lindsey Graham is Mark Kirk’s “bro with no ho” Jim Cole/AP What happened:



Sen. Lindsey Graham, R-S.C. and a 2016 presidential candidate, is used to fielding questions about his bachelorhood. But after suggesting to the Daily Mail that he would have a “rotating first lady” if he were to become president, it was his colleague, Sen. Mark Kirk, R-Ill., who got in trouble, referring to Graham as his “bro with no ho.”



Why it matters:



Graham was already causing headaches for Kirk, who is running for re-election for his second term and is considered one of the most vulnerable incumbents of the cycle. On Thursday, Graham introduced in the Senate the same 20-week abortion ban that passed last month in the House, which could complicate the re-election efforts of Kirk as well as fellow Republicans Kelly Ayotte of New Hampshire, Ron Johnson of Wisconsin, Rob Portman of Ohio, and Pat Toomey of Pennsylvania, all of whom are running in states won by Obama in 2012.



Kirk, whose opponents so far are all Democratic women, certainly didn’t help himself by uttering a poorly received joke that EMILY’s List, a group that works to elect pro-choice women, said proved he “simply does not understand, support or respect women.”



Bipartisanship Comes in Seersucker and Pine Tar