Don't miss North Shore raised (Highland Park) Ari Levy, MD, CEO of Chicago-based Engaged Health Solutions speak as part of an Expert Panel on the topic: "What Employees Want from Workplace Wellness" at the Illinois' Healthiest Employers event taking place on Wednesday, November 5, 2014 at the Radisson Blu, 221 N. Columbus Drive in Chicago. Rod Reasen, CEO of Healthiest Employers LLC will moderate the panel that also includes Alexandra Paul, business executive for Humana WELL Being & Productivity Solutions, and Renya Spak, partner at Mercer Health Benefits.

Dr. Levy will be speaking to more than 300 business leaders, managers, and human resource professionals, who are interested in starting or improving a corporate health and wellness program. The panel will discuss the latest thinking and evidence on workplace health promotion, employee engagement, organizational culture and leadership, organizational change, corporate social responsibility, and business performance from employee and employers perspectives. Health and wellness in the workplace is becoming an increasingly important topic of conversation for organizations today, especially as they navigate new mandates from the Affordable Care Act now in effect. Currently, employees who smoke cost companies an average of $5,800 per year and depressed employees cost companies $23 billion each year in productivity loss. Today, 10.8% of the workforce suffers from depression and employees miss an average of 8.7 days per year due to poor health. Companies know they can save a lot of money and be more productive with a healthier workforce. Professionals who are healthier are happier in their jobs too.

Dr. Levy commented, "The Illinois' Healthiest Employers Event and its Healthiest Employer awards program recognizes organizations that are committed to creating a healthy workplace. I am proud to be part of a panel and this organization with its commitment to highlighting innovation at healthy organizations and raising critical issues confronting employees and employers alike about achieving workplace wellness."

Dr. Levy brings to this panel considerable experience and understanding through his experience as a board certified internal medicine physician and as CEO of Engaged Health Solutions, a Chicago-based health and performance company that offers its coaching and education services to individuals, corporations, healthcare providers and their patients.

About EHS:

Engaged Health Solutions' approach is different. It's personal. And it transforms organizations. The Company believes every organization is unique and faces a specific set of challenges. Engaged Health Solutions connects with their people to deliver programs that make a significant, lasting impact on their health and well-being.

Engaged Health Solutions is a Chicago-based health and performance company with a mission to help people and organizations thrive. Fortune 100 companies, prestigious universities, law firms, and manufacturing firms partner with EHS to keep employees happy, healthy and thriving. EHS has a proven track record of transforming company cultures.

For more information visit: www.engagedhealthsolutions.com.