Expansion will cost $465M and be done by 2017, Cincinnati grocery chain says

Kroger Marketplace stores include cafes, a baby store and an apparel shop. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star 2014 file photo)

In the latest salvo in the increasingly aggressive grocery wars, Kroger says it will build 11 new stores in the Indianapolis area and expand or remodel 22 others in a massive growth plan that will cost $465 million.

The expansion signals an attempt by the Cincinnati grocer to widen its leading market share in the Indianapolis area even as new competitors are moving in.

Kroger said Wednesday that its expansion, which began last year, includes:

•Adding seven of its largest Marketplace stores, which contain 125,000 square feet and include cafes, a baby store and an apparel shop. New locations include 11700 Olio Road in Fishers; U.S. 31 and Mallory Parkway in Franklin; and 8850 S. Emerson Road and 5325 E. Thompson Road in Indianapolis. Other locations are yet to be announced.

•Spending $75 million on four new superstores, which average 75,000 square feet. Locations include Ind. 135 and Smokey Row Road in Greenwood; 116th Street and Michigan Road in Zionsville; and Southport and Franklin roads in Indianapolis.

•Spending $58 million on five store expansions, including stores at 1217 South Range Line Road in Carmel; Independence Drive at U.S. 31 South in Greenwood; and 150 W. 161st St. in Westfield.

•Remodeling 17 stores, including stores in Indianapolis, Mooresville, Greenfield and Franklin.

•Remodeling or adding 22 pharmacies, 16 new fuel centers, 24 Murray’s Cheese locations, 27 Starbucks stores and 14 Little Clinics.

The expansion plan began last year and runs through 2017, Kroger said. It will add 3,440 jobs to the 6,700 Kroger currently has in the metro area, the company said.

The president of Kroger’s Central Division, Jeff Burt, said the expansion aims to maintain the grocer’s “strong competitive advantage” in the Indianapolis market, where it has operated stores since 1924.

“Kroger has remained very competitive in the marketplace because we recognize the critical importance of investing in stores with features appropriate to the 21st century marketplace and evolving customer expectations,” Burt said in a statement.

Some observers said it was a signal that Kroger, the No. 1 player in Central Indiana’s grocery landscape, plans to stay that way — even in the face of growing competition from small boutique players, such as Fresh Thyme, and big box grocers, such as Meijer and Wal-Mart.

Many of Kroger’s stores are dated or tired-looking and can use an update, said Joe Lackey, president of the Indiana Grocery and Convenience Store Association.

“They have a lot of dilapidated stores,” he said. “They need to do this.”

Kroger spokesman John Elliott said Kroger needs to expand because it’s seeing more customers in its stores and they’re spending more money.

“Volume in stores is increasing to the point where we just have to keep pace,” he said. “The average purchase is steadily climbing as well.”

Kroger is also selling more prepared food from its cafes and delis, he said, as more customers prefer to eat out or take home cooked meals.

Elliott downplayed the competitive factors behind the expansion. “It’s really less of that,” he said. “There is a risk in our industry of being too distracted by the competitor down the street,” he said.

Kroger said the expansion will boost the construction business as well, provide more business to Kroger’s hundreds of vendors and also create more work for its four area food plants and four distribution centers.

In 2013, when a renewed expansion wave began among area grocers, Kroger controlled a leading market share of 37.6 percent, according to the market research firm Scarborough. Wal-Mart was next with a share of 22.6 percent, followed by Meijer at 13.3 percent. The market shares are based on a survey that asked grocery shoppers where they spent the most money in the previous week.

Meanwhile, the largest local grocery chain, Marsh Supermarkets, is retrenching. Earlier this month, Marsh said it would close four stores in Indianapolis, Fishers, Lafayette and Mooresville.

It’s the second major wave of store closings for Marsh in the past 15 months. In January 2014, the company announced it was closing eight locations, blaming declining customer bases and the need to invest in more promising locations.

David J. Livingston, an independent consultant in Waukesha, Wis., who does supermarket research, said earlier this year that Marsh’s sales per square foot are 20 percent to 30 percent lower than the industry average.

Meanwhile, the company has opened only one new location in recent years: a posh, $85 million Downtown store in the Axis apartment-retail complex at Michigan Street and Senate Avenue.

It was the first new store for Fishers-based Marsh since Sun Capital of Florida bought the chain in 2006.

And Giant Eagle, based in Pittsburgh, is poised to open several stores in the metro area, too.

Smaller, specialty grocers, including Fresh Thyme and Trader Joe’s, also have siphoned off business from traditional grocers.

As part of the hiring surge, Kroger will build a 7,000-square-foot regional training center in Indianapolis. Kroger said it gives hiring preference to military veterans, who made up 25 percent of its hires last year.

Indianapolis Mayor Greg Ballard called Kroger’s expansion a “fortunate” move for the city in part because the company is “one of our most generous corporate citizens.” Kroger is a regular donor to Gleaners Food Bank, Second Helpings, Susan G. Komen, the American Cancer Society, and IPS School 46, among other groups.

Kroger also has been expanding in Fort Wayne and Bloomington. Over the past six years, it has spent $125 million and added 500 jobs in the Fort Wayne area and $40 million and 300 jobs in the Bloomington area.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1GRYDrU