An imminent budget deal between Republicans, Democrats and President Obama would raise federal spending beyond mandated caps for two years in exchange for "significant reform" to Social Security Disability Insurance.

The deal, which is not final, would also suspend the nation's borrowing limit until March of 2017, according to a source familiar with the developing accord. The current debt limit is $18.1 trillion, and suspending it would allow the government to continue borrowing without limit until early 2017.

Republicans were expected to officially release the contents of the agreement as early as Monday night.

Congress and the White House have been working behind the scenes for weeks to secure both a path to increasing the debt limit by Nov. 3, and a way to fund the federal government beyond a December 11 deadline. The agreement comes as House Speaker John Boehner, R-Ohio, prepares to hand over the gavel to his likely successor, Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., on Thursday and would satisfy Boehner's desire to clear out major legislative hurdles before he departs.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

The tentative agreement required tradeoffs between the two parties and for Republicans, it accomplished a major goal of entitlement reform by tackling the nearly bankrupt SSDI, which the U.S. Treasury has warned would reach insolvency as early as 2016.

The source did not disclose the details of the SSDI reforms, but said the move would forestall an across-the-board 20 percent cut that was in the cards, in exchange for "structural reforms," that would strengthen it and save $168 billion in "longterm" savings.

But Republicans were also forced to make concessions, including a "clean" debt limit hike, which is opposed by dozens of House Republicans who want to reduce the $18.1 trillion debt.

Republicans also agreed to an increase in spending that is spread equally across both domestic and defense accounts. According to the source, the two sides agreed to hike spending beyond the caps by $50 billion in 2016 and $30 billion in 2017. The budget caps would not only remain in place under the deal but would be extended to 2025, which will force Congress to constantly seek savings every time it raises spending levels, likely through "mandatory entitlement programs," the source said.

Republicans also won an Obamacare concession from Democrats. If the deal becomes final, it would eliminate the health care law's auto enrollment for workers, which currently forces them into employer-sponsored health care coverage whether or not they want it.