Attorney General Eric Holder has authorized a subpoena that would require author and New York Times reporter James Risen to testify at the trial of Jeffrey Sterling.

Sterling, a former CIA employee, is accused of supplying an explosive scoop for a chapter in Risen’s 2006 book “State of War: The Secret History of the CIA and the Bush Administration.”

Risen has consistently said he’d rather go to jail than reveal his source, and a Tuesday court filing by prosecutors suggests they won’t ask him to do so.

Prosecutors say in the filing Holder had authorized them to compel Risen’s testimony regarding the accuracy of his reporting, a confidentiality agreement with his source and whether Sterling and Risen “had a prior non-confidential reporter-source relationship.”



[ALSO: Obama Asks Cops to Lay Off Reporters; Advocates Ask Same of Him ]

Risen could not immediately be reached for comment, nor could his attorney, Joel Kurtzberg.

The award-winning reporter’s fight has embarrassed the Obama administration, already under fire for confiscating Associated Press phone records and labeling a Fox News reporter a criminal conspirator as part of its crackdown on unauthorized leaks to the press.

Risen, winner of a 2006 Pulitzer Prize for exposing warrantless surveillance by the Bush administration, has become a hero to press freedom advocates and often denounces the Obama administration's unprecedented number of leak prosecutions.

A grand jury indicted Sterling on 10 felony counts in 2010 without Risen’s testimony, after the reporter successfully fought off a subpoena. But federal prosecutors renewed their attempt to compel his testimony at trial. Earlier this year, Risen asked the Supreme Court to establish a federal reporter’s privilege, but the court declined to hear his case.



[READ: Risen Doubts New Book Will Provoke Leak Probe]

Holder appeared to buckle in May, telling reporters, “As long as I’m attorney general, no reporter who is doing his job is going to go to jail.” Risen, however, wasn’t impressed and said he didn't know what would happen. Holder is leaving office when the Senate confirms his successor.

Amid months of uncertainty, more than a dozen fellow Pulitzer Prize winners and a coalition of advocacy groups demanded the government drop its insistence on Risen’s testimony. Activists delivered a petition with more than 125,000 signatures to the Justice Department in August.

The Department of Justice did not respond to a request for comment on Risen’s case.