Words matter.

Twelve years after GOP political consultant Frank Luntz warned President George W. Bush to stop using scary-sounding "global warming" for the more ambiguous-seeming "climate change," a new report by climate centers at Yale and George Mason universities has found that Americans react much more strongly to the term “global warming” than they do to “climate change.”

“'Global warming’ and ‘climate change’ do not mean the same thing in the minds of many Americans,” lead researcher Anthony Leiserowitz, director of the Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, said in a statement. “This study found that the term ‘global warming’ is associated with greater public understanding, emotional engagement, and support for personal and national action than the term ‘climate change.’”

[READ: Who Should Pay for Damage Caused by Climate Change?]

The “What’s in a Name?” report analyzed three other studies, finding that "global warming" and "climate change" "are often not synonymous – they mean different things to different people.”

Notably, “global warming” was more closely associated with greater certainty among liberals and members of Generation X (ages 31 to 48) that the phenomenon is occurring; with wider understanding among independent voters that humans are the primary cause; with stronger belief among independents and liberals that there’s a scientific consensus about man-made global warming; and with more intense worry about the issue, particularly among men, among members of Generation X and Generation Y (ages 18 to 30) and among liberals and moderates.

The differences were often stark: African-Americans and Hispanics, for example, were more likely to rate global warming as a “very bad thing” compared to climate change by at least 20 percentage points. The two terms also evoked differing reactions from conservatives, who were more likely to describe global warming as a “very bad thing” over climate change by 8 percentage points.



[ ALSO: Climate Science Far From 'Settled,' Says Top Chamber Official] The findings have direct political implications: “Global warming” correlated with greater willingness among men, Generation Xers, liberals and moderates to join an advocacy campaign, and with higher priority ratings for federal action on climate change, especially among liberals, moderates and women. "Climate change," by comparison – while generally preferred by scientists because the planet is not warming uniformly – was more often associated with merely the "weather," as opposed to "extreme weather."