Transcript for 'Extremely Dangerous' Radioactive Material Found

We get the latest on that truck packed with dangerous nuclear material, stolen in mexico. It was found abandoned with some of the radioactive material missing. No sign, yet, of the gunmen who stole it. Abc's chief justice correspondent pierre thomas has been tracking the story from the start. He joins us now. Good morning, pierre. Reporter: Good morning, george. It's been an incredible 24 hours with that lethal material stolen. And now, apparently recovered. The thieves are still on the run. But they are now in grave danger. Mexican authorities discovered the stolen truck and the highly-radioactive material, cobalt 60, abandoned in the countryside, not far from mexico city. It culminated in the huge search and manhunt that spanned six states and mexico, and has some officials worried about the prospects of the stolen radioactive material being used to make a so-called dirty bomb. It's a lot of radioactivity. You could get a lethal dose in just a few minutes from being exposed to this source. Reporter: Authorities say the container carrying the cobalt was found less than a mile from the truck. The thieves opened the container and left the material on the ground. Apparently all of it recovered. Police are actively checking mexican hospitals for evidence of anyone suffering from radiation exposure. It was stolen on its way to a waste facility. Two armed men confronted the truck driver at this remote gas station. The gunmen took off with the truck and its cargo. Authorities don't know who they are or if they even knew the radioactive material was onboard. Mexican officials suspect it was a carjacking. And the thieves may have been more interested in stealing the truck than the device. It's an extremely dangerous situation. The area where the material was found is surrounded. And the recovery and cleanup may take days to complete. George? Pierre, thanks very much.

This transcript has been automatically generated and may not be 100% accurate.