Topics: Bill Clinton, Editor's Picks, george bush, Gilded Age, Glass-Steagall, Hillary Clinton, jerry brown, Kevin Phillips, Pat Buchanan, Ross Perot, Thomas Frank, Tom Frank, Business News

A few weeks ago I was surprised to read that Hillary Clinton acknowledged the current economy to be “a throwback to the Gilded Age of the robber barons.” It wasn’t the comparison itself that astonished me. That we are living in a “new Gilded Age” is a commonplace that is rapidly becoming a cliché. The former senator and secretary of state’s words affected me because they reminded me of the days when talking about a “New Gilded Age” was the opposite of trite; when it was an affront to what every responsible person knew to be true. Specifically, I thought of the mid-1990s, when my colleagues and I at The Baffler magazine used the phrase to describe the era presided over by Hillary Clinton’s husband Bill. We inscribed the expression in the subtitle of our 1997 anthology, “Commodify Your Dissent: The Business of Culture in the New Gilded Age.”

I did not invent the term, of course. “The Gilded Age” was the title of an 1873 Mark Twain novel about political corruption; from there it became a label for the crude form of capitalism that prevailed from the 1870s to about 1900. The phrase “New Gilded Age,” meanwhile, began showing up in print occasionally in the 1980s to describe the wealth-worship of the Reagan years; I myself picked it up from Kevin Phillips, who wrote in “The Politics of Rich and Poor” that “The 1980s were a second Gilded Age.”

Since 1997, however, the expression has gone from obscure to ubiquitous. In 2000, it was used as the title of a New Yorker anthology; in 2002 Paul Krugman employed it in memorable fashion in a New York Times Magazine story, and then went on to make it one of his recurring catchphrases. In recent years it has been used to describe everything from the supercharged prosperity of Washington, D.C., to the complicated relationship between plutocrats around the world. But above all the phrase “new Gilded Age” denotes inequality on the grand scale—the lush, Vanderbiltian lives of the One Percent and the increasingly desperate lot of everyone else.

One of the reasons the phrase appealed to me, 17 years ago, was my belief back then that there was something essentially brutal about raw capitalism; if the nation was to suppress the regulations and the workers’ organizations that had tamed the beast over the years—even if we did so with the best of intentions—the economy would return quite naturally to its savage, Gilded Age habits. Mainstream opinion of the 1990s held the exact opposite, however: That those regulations and those workers’ organizations were no longer needed because we had entered a “New Economy” in which the old rules no longer applied. Perfect information was building perfect markets wherever you turned. The Dow and the NASDAQ were mounting toward unbelievable highs, and our leaders assured us that it was all because history had turned a corner and the common people had been financially enlightened in some miraculous way.

Has there ever been an episode of economic mania so delusional and, ultimately, so destructive? In those days, CEO salaries were smashing every precedent in living memory and yet here were our thought leaders, telling us that what was really happening was a consummation of the nation’s democratic promise. For me, meanwhile, Mark Twain’s phrase seemed exact, almost clinical: What everyone thought to be a golden age was in fact merely gilded.

It is gratifying after all these years to find that Hillary Clinton likes the phrase too, but her confirmation is a little hard to take when I recall how the ’90s actually felt. As I looked around back then, it seemed like the 19th century was bursting out all over. Thanks to a ferocious Illinois labor dispute that caught my attention in those days, I understood that unions were barely able to protect their members, let alone the middle class. Thanks to a number of fundraising scandals—admittedly, minor scandals by the standards of today—the nation was learning what politicians would do for lobbyists and donors. The point that really nailed the Gilded Age comparison, however, was the obvious return of monopoly in industry after industry. The concentration of media ownership, a development facilitated by Clinton’s 1996 telecom deregulation, was particularly scary: The Nation magazine ran a big chart showing who owned whom in the “National Entertainment State”; I myself called it the “Culture Trust.”