Buy Photo Kentucky Governor Steve Beshear (Photo: 2014 C-J file photo by Michael Clevenger)Buy Photo

Gov. Steve Beshear has appointed Queenie Averette, a longtime Democratic Party activist, to fill the vacant position of Jefferson County judge-executive, a post with no pay and very few duties.

The appointment was announced Friday and is effective immediately to fill out an unexpired term that runs through early January 2015.

Averette is on the Nov. 4 ballot, unopposed for the office, after being nominated by the Jefferson Democratic Executive Committee in mid-August. The committee asked Beshear to appoint Averette to fill the vacancy, for the remainder of the unexpired term.

The Republican executive committee declined to offer a candidate.

The post had been held by Bryan Mathews, who withdrew his nomination in August.

Averette is a member of the state Democratic State Central Executive Committee. She lives on Vermont Avenue and is the first African American to serve as Jefferson judge-executive, according to Metro Councilwoman Marianne Butler, D-15th, who backed Averette for the constitutional office.

All of the authority of the once-powerful position of judge-executive was stripped when the city and county merged in 2003. The metro mayor assumed all of the county judge's powers.

But the office holder retains the ability to represent Jefferson County at meetings of several government-lobbying groups, such as the National Association of Counties and the state judge-executive association.

Mathews was hired recently as an administrative assistant to Metro Councilman Dan Johnson, D-21st.

Mathews resigned as judge-executive after the offices of both Commonwealth Attorney Thomas Wine and Jefferson County Attorney Mike O'Connell concluded that it was a conflict for Mathews to serve as an elected county official and also to work as a legislative aide to Johnson. Mathews remains on the metro council payroll.

Mathews was nominated for a second, four-year term as judge-executive in the May Democratic primary.

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1tRIET4