Taxes have been a source of revenue and control for rulers and for governments since first recorded approximately 3000 BC. Tithes (translating to “tenths”) were paid to governments and religious institutions for many thousands of years, since the construction of Stonehenge.

Orthodox Jews, for example, participating in a system referred to as “ma’aser kesafim” which paid a sum of one-tenth from their income, believed to be a biblical obligation.

While the early church did not mandate taxation, but rather donation, Pope Adrian I appears to have been the first to formally recognize tithing.

A noxious history…

Vespasian, or Titus Flāvius Caesar Vespasiānus Augustus, as his friends called him, was the Emperor of Rome from 69 AD until his death in 79 AD. Recorded as a witty and charming ruler, Vespasian was believed to be both generous and liberal.

During this period, urine…yes, urine…had enormous value. (The New York Subway System would have been a goldmine!) It was an integral part of the tanning of animal skins as urine was used to remove hairs and fibers from the animal’s hide. Waste urine was collected…certainly a commodity one would gratefully part with…and utilized by tanners and tradesman.

Vespasian seized upon this opportunity and placed a tax on the collected urine. I shall further refer to this levy as the Pee-Pee Tributum…the use of Latin lends dignity to this tariff.

Ironically, the Emperor ultimately succumbed to a nasty bout with diarrhea…a crappy way to go! He insisted that his servants lift him from his bed crying “an emperor ought to die standing upright.” Once raised to an upright position, he did just that.

Taxes and levies have been instituted…and rebelled against…since the earliest recorded moments in history.

As a nation, the United States remained tax-free for her early years…the newly-formed government cautious while recalling the oppressive taxes levied by King George III of England. However, taxation was a common and effective mechanism for nations and rulers to raise funds for the military…for infrastructure…and, of course, for themselves. It was also a mechanism for social and political manipulation.

The beard tax…

In 1535, the bearded King of England, Henry VIII, instituted a tax on…beards. The higher one’s social status…the greater the levy. The intention was to make lengthy beards a symbol of status and wealth.

Just prior to the start of the 18th century…1698 to be exact, Peter the Great…Emperor of All Russia…Czar Pyotr Alexeyevich, ruler of the Russias…instituted a beard tax…for a very different reason.

Peter was a reformist. His desire was to modernize his nation into one more like those in Western Europe. During his reign, he enhanced the Russian army and navy, gained control over the potent and authoritative Orthodox Church. Peter the Great modernized the alphabet, began utilizing the Julian calendar and created a Senate.

Peter returned from his tour of the great cities of Europe where he observed finely shaven men. Wishing to modernize Russia, Peter ordered all men to shave their beards.

This is not to say that for a few rubles, one might not overlook the hairy appendage dangling from your face.

Peter…realizing this…recognized that a beard tax could be a “mane” source of income.

Simultaneously (1696)…in England…the King William III needed to raise revenue quickly. Like his contemporary, Peter the Great, William recognized the need for a new levy and the Window Tax was born. (I wonder if William did it out of “jalousie?”)

Homeowners were taxed on a per-window basis…burdening the wealthiest as their homes were largest and contained the greatest number of windows. This tax followed an existing “Fireplace Tax” that had been instituted 6 years prior in 1690. (The Fireplace Tax was ultimately repealed in 1689.)

The Window levy remained in place for over a century and a half…forcing many homeowners to brick-in their windows and altering the manner in which new homes were constructed in England.

Burdening the middle and lower classes, who already struggled without the hardship of additional taxes, the “tax on light and air,” as it was called, was repealed in 1851. (It would be prudent to keep these taxes in mind when one ponders the taxes levied against the colonists later on in the century.)

The British were far from done…

1789…a tax on purchased candles. Don’t try making them at home! Homemade candles were outlawed unless one obtained a license and paid tax on the subsequently produced candles.

1795 brought a tax on aromatic wig powders. Those wishing to utilize such powder must pay an annual fee. Not repealed until 1869, this duty on hair powder prompted wig-wearers to do without…creating a nation of repulsive and rancid smelling hair-pieces.

Not to be outdone…the Canadian government initiated a Chinese Head Tax.

Beginning in 1885, a tax of 50 dollars was collected from each and every Chinese immigrant wishing to enter Canada. Eventually raised to 100 dollars…then 500 dollars…the levy was roughly equivalent to several years’ earnings at that time. This tax was clearly intended to discourage Chinese immigration as the Chinese population had grown dramatically.

The majority of Chinese men had come, initially, to build the Canadian Pacific Railway. Once completed, these families formed small, segregated neighborhoods called “Chinatowns.” The growth of this population created animosity and resentment and laws were enacted to prevent the Chinese from working in professional vocations such as doctor, lawyer, accountant, etc.

The Chinese Immigration Act of 1885…also known as the Chinese Head Tax…was meant to dissuade additional Chinese from entering Canada.

Crazy taxes of today…

One would assume that the aforementioned taxes were merely bizarre footnotes from centuries gone by…irrational rulers…antiquated governmental thinking. Ah…not so fast!

When in the Big Apple…beware of the “Sliced Bagel Tax.” Should one purchase a bagel in New York…it is purchased tax free. Ask that it be sliced…that bagel is now subject to sales tax.

Passed in 2004, the state of Utah requires the Utah State Tax Commission to collect “a tax assessed in addition to sales and use taxes on admission and user fees, retail sales of tangible personal property including food and drinks, and services occurring in a business with nude or partially nude individuals.

The “Nudity Tax” is designated to offset the costs of providing treatment for convicted sex-offenders.

Illinois and Kentucky collect additional taxes for candy. Within Chicago city limits, bottled soda is taxed merely 3%…but if the soda is served from soda fountain…9%.

In Durham, North Carolina, expect to pay a tax on your dog…$10 if spayed or neutered…$75 if Fido is “still intact.”

Want that “out in the sun” look? The Patient Protections and Affordable Care Act of 2010 charges a 10% tax on tanning!

Screeeeeetch! Boooom! Involved in a motor vehicle accident? Many states are now charging a “Crash Tax” should emergency vehicles need to respond to your traffic incident.

I could continue…forever. Here’s one for the road:

Keeping in mind that the state of New York does not collect taxes for musicals…for operas…for musical comedies. However, should you operate a “haunted house” attraction…charge more than 10 cents admission and play music throughout the attraction…yes, you’re subject to taxation.

Seriously?

The Naples Herald welcomes your comments, thoughts and concerns! Beneath each article and column you will find a red comments button! We share this incredible community with you and wish to provide our readers with the opportunity to express and share their views and opinions!

© 2015 Naples Herald. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten or redistributed.

“Graph With Stacks Of Coins” By: kenteegardin/ (CC BY-SA 2.0)