Brooklyn was Bernin’ Saturday as Bernie Sanders’ campaign opened a hometown headquarters with a raucous rally, some political canvassing and a good old-fashioned block party.

Supporters of the Democratic presidential hopeful — who won’t quite let Hillary Clinton run away with the nomination — showed up to the Sanders lovefest in force. They packed Eighth St. near Third Ave. in Gowanus, grooved to hip hop and house music, and waved “Feel the Bern” signs.

Racial justice and civil rights activist Linda Sarsour was one of the first to address the fired-up crowd.

“As a Muslim American, I am proud to put my vote behind the only Jewish candidate for President,” she said to roaring applause. “That’s how we do in Brooklyn, N.Y.”

Though the Vermont senator was campaigning in Madison, Wis., the opening of Sanders’ Brooklyn office felt more like a festival than a political event.

Food trucks dished up local delicacies as Sanders was touted as the people’s candidate. The one-story red brick structure serving as the Sanders New York HQ seemed a world away from rival Clinton’s 11th-floor national headquarters in Brooklyn Heights.

“I’m supporting Bernie because he speaks to my people,” said Brooklyn City Councilman Rafael Espinal. “When Bernie speaks, he speaks about the people who are not being represented in Washington, D.C.”

Sanders, who grew up in a heavily Jewish neighborhood off Kings Highway, hasn’t hidden his Brooklyn roots, and his obvious accent has been a crowd pleaser at his rallies across the country.

The 74-year-old’s proletariat principles and message of economic equality have made him a hit with voters facing hard times.

“Younger people who come out with tens of thousands of dollars in student debt are looking at the economy and seeing a system that does not work,” said 32-year-old Brooklynite Joe Dinkin. “It’s incredibly appealing, the fact that (Sanders) listens to the masses instead of just a wealthy few. “Bernie is speaking our language.”

Mary Fitzgerald, 54, a nurse from the Bronx, said Sanders is the only viable presidential candidate in her eyes.

Ohio State senator Nina Turner speaks at the Bernie Sanders rally in Park Slope, Brooklyn. (Alex Rud)

“He can make health care affordable and realistic for all Americans,” Fitzgerald said. “The system we have right now puts profits before patients.”

Beyond health care, Fitzgerald said Sanders would make good on his promises to alleviate poverty and provide affordable education.

“You can’t get people out of poverty if you don’t get people a decent wage,” she said. “I see that in the Bronx, the unhealthiest borough in the country. He actually has a plan and a message to solve it.”

For all his spirit, Sanders has been falling behind Clinton in delegates needed to win the nomination.

Including superdelegates — party officials who can back any candidate — Clinton has at least 1,692 to Sanders’ 958. It takes 2,383 to win.

But the upstart democratic socialist still has a chance.

Sanders was looking to pull off a trifecta of wins in western caucuses Saturday. He was declared the winner in Alaska and Washington, and was forecast to come out on top in Hawaii.

No matter what the numbers say, Lisa Harbadkin, 72, of Manhattan, has kept the faith Sanders can still pull it out.

“It’s time to rebalance the Democratic Party to where it was before the Reagan years,” Harbadkin said. “The Democrats have been moving too far to the right. Bernie can fix that.”

The New York primary takes place April 19.