The Supreme Court is currently hearing arguments in King v. Burwell, a case that could substantially change the Affordable Care Act.

At issue are the subsidies that are paid in 34 states, including Alabama, that did not set up their own healthcare exchanges and instead relied on the federal program.

Bloomberg Visual Data recently looked at which states would be the most impacted if the subsidies ended in 2016. Keep in mind - 87 percent of the people who bought health insurance through the federal markets get subsidies, so we're talking some big numbers nationwide.

Alabama currently has 168,816 Marketplace enrollees for 2015, of which 89 percent - or 150,256 - receive premium subsidies. The numbers below are projections for 2016 based on current enrollment trends.

If those numbers stay as projected, Alabama would come in at number 18 on the list, far behind Florida, the state which could see the biggest impact. Florida could have more than 1.3 million people receiving healthcare subsidies. Alabama could have about 230,000.

You can see an interactive of the state-by-state impact here. For five key takeaways from today's arguments, go here.

It's Thursday - and it's cold again - but welcome to Wake Up Call. Let's get started, shall we:

Bad news for Clinton?s

The House committee investigating the 2012 terrorist attacks in Benghazi, Libya has subpoenaed former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton's personal emails. The move comes just as a report showed Clinton did not use her official account to conduct State Department business.

Alabama's Rep. Martha Roby, R-Montgomery, is a member of the House Benghazi committee.

Fruit in schools

We've talked before about the school nutrition guidelines implemented by the White House and fought by many who say they go too far.

A new report shows, however, that the regulations could be working. The Rudd Center for Food Policy found the percentage of students choosing fruit as part of their lunch increased from 54 percent to 66 percent. It also showed students ate 84 percent of their entrees, up from 71 percent before the rules were put in place in 2012.

Glad I don't have to call her

The acting Attorney General of the Virgin Island said she will prosecute the Virgin Island Daily News because of telephone calls its reporters have made in an effort to obtain comments from her. AG Terri Griffiths said the calls after business hours constituted harassment.

The newspaper pointed out that Griffiths had provided her cell phone number to reporters so she could be reached.

The Daily News has written about the entire mess and it's worth a read. I have to tell you the ornery parts of me want to get that number and call her a time or two myself.

Can you fire a fed for watching porn at work?

Getting rid of a misbehaving government employee isn't as easy as you think. A recent CBS News investigation found numerous examples where government workers were allowed to stay on the job, including an Environmental Protection Agency employee who was caught viewing porn up to six hours per day on his work computer.

He's still on the payroll, by the way.

You can read the entire report here.

Selma

We've been talking about Selma around here a lot lately, even as the eyes of the world turn to the small Dallas County town for the 50th anniversary of the voting rights march. I came across this Langston Hughes poem recently and wanted to share:

For Selma

In places like

Selma, Alabama,

Kids say,

In places like

Chicago and New York...

In places like

Chicago and New York

Kids say,

In places like

London and Paris...

In places like

London and Paris

Kids say,

In places like

Chicago and New York...

Until tomorrow. Stay warm.

Updated March 5 at 10:34 a.m. to reflect the enrollment numbers are for 2016 and based on current enrollment trends.