Photo

(Want to get this briefing by email? Here’s the sign-up.)

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• Clinton vs. Sanders, Clinton vs. Trump.

Hillary Clinton may not get to pad her delegate lead over Bernie Sanders in today’s primaries in Kentucky and Oregon. She faces tough contests there after losing two other primaries this month.

The presumptive Republican nominee, Donald J. Trump, plans to use Bill Clinton’s infidelities and the attacks in Benghazi, Libya, and portray Mrs. Clinton as corrupt. Mr. Trump will be interviewed by Megyn Kelly, with whom he has sparred in the past (8 p.m. Eastern, Fox).

One political expert says that most traditional opinion polls are inadvertently hiding a segment of Mr. Trump’s supporters.

• Divided Democrats.

A group of construction unions is threatening to boycott a big Democratic get-out-the-vote operation this fall unless a wealthy environmentalist is barred from it.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

They view Tom Steyer’s climate-change agenda as a threat to jobs that infrastructure projects like gas pipelines could create.

• Syria’s status.

Splitting up the country will not be discussed when diplomats from 17 nations meet today in the latest effort to end Syria’s civil war, according to a senior State Department official.

Photo

“Frontline” airs “The Secret History of ISIS,” exploring how the invasion of Iraq and the decisions of two American presidents helped it emerge (10 p.m., PBS, but check local listings).

• On Capitol Hill.

Senators are scheduled to vote today on competing proposals to fight the Zika virus.

One bill would fully fund the White House’s $1.9 billion request, while another would use spending cuts to offset the cost of $1.1 billion in Zika spending.

• Justices use unusual compromise tactic.

The Supreme Court decided unanimously on Monday not to rule in a major case on contraception, averting a possible 4-to-4 deadlock.

The suit, challenging aspects of the Affordable Care Act, was sent back to lower courts to avoid a ruling on birth control for employees of religious groups.

• Evacuations in Alberta.

Photo

Workers were forced to leave two major oil sands projects north of Fort McMurray on Monday, as shifting winds turned a huge wildfire back toward the city.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Inquiry into Amtrak crash.

The National Transportation Safety Board meets today in Washington to determine the probable cause of the derailment in Philadelphia that killed eight people and injured 200 a year ago.

Get the Morning Briefing by Email What you need to know to start your day, delivered to your inbox. Monday – Friday.

Business

• Warren E. Buffett, who is not known for investing in technology, disclosed a $1 billion stake in Apple.

• Networks are offering new versions of shows like “MacGyver,” “Prison Break” and “MTV Unplugged.”

Fox’s next prime-time TV schedule includes a reboot of “24.”

• Start-ups are relying on arbitration to settle workplace disputes, following the example of big corporations.

Market Snapshot View Full Overview

Noteworthy

• New nonfiction.

Among today’s releases: Siddhartha Mukherjee’s “The Gene: An Intimate History,” and Rana Foroohar’s “Makers and Takers,” on the rise of finance and the fall of American business.

Plus, Sean Wilentz’s “The Politicians and the Egalitarians” and Moira Weigel’s “Labor of Love: The Invention of Dating.”

Han Kang’s “The Vegetarian” won the Man Booker International Prize for fiction on Monday.

• Science roundup.

Photo

The discovery of a stone knife fragment in Florida proves that humans colonized the area about 14,550 years ago and coexisted with mastodons.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And scientists met to discuss building a synthetic human genome, which could be used to create humans without parents.

• Scoreboard.

Cleveland and Toronto tip off the N.B.A.’s Eastern Conference finals (8:30 p.m. Eastern, TNT). There’s also the Draft Lottery (8 p.m., TNT). Oklahoma City handed Golden State a loss in their series opener on Monday night.

On the ice, San Jose is at St. Louis (8 p.m., NBCSN). Sidney Crosby’s overtime goal on Monday evened Pittsburgh’s series against Tampa Bay.

• The intersection of race and sports.

The Undefeated, an ESPN website, is expected launched today. It’s meant to appeal to African-Americans with daily and long-form journalism, commentary, and more. The site will also have a stream of joyful items called The Uplift.

• Medal of Valor.

President Obama honored 13 police officers with the nation’s highest award for public safety officers on Monday.

• Recipe of the day.

This turkey meatloaf is so good Nora Ephron called it “remarkable.”

Back Story

Wall Street has been synonymous with American finance since this day in 1792, when 24 brokers gathered under a buttonwood tree and agreed to band together and trade securities on a commission basis.

Photo

It wasn’t the first American exchange — that was in Philadelphia — but it would emerge as the banking center.



The brokers traded five securities: three issues of Treasury bonds and the stocks of the Bank of New York and the Bank of the United States, the country’s first central bank. (Each entity had been created by Alexander Hamilton, the first Treasury secretary.)

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

The stock exchange grew in tandem with the U.S. economy, as rail, mining and steel companies listed their stocks. It, in turn, helped finance the country’s expansion.

Along the way, the exchange had plenty of fits and starts. In 1873, it closed for 10 days after the collapse of Jay Cooke & Company, a major banking institution.

The turmoil at the outset of World War I in 1914 led to its longest shutdown, four and a half months.

Its worst moment came on Oct. 29, 1929. When the market closed at 3 p.m., it had lost $14 billion — more than $300 billion in today’s dollars. The crash led to the creation of the Securities and Exchange Commission, which became the markets’ watchdog.

Today, the New York Stock Exchange lists stocks from around the world with a value of $25 trillion.

Your Morning Briefing is published weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern and updated on the web all morning.

What would you like to see here? Contact us at briefing@nytimes.com.

You can sign up here to get the briefing delivered to your inbox.