Marilinda Garcia speaks during the Republican National Committee summer meeting in August, 2013, in Boston. Associated Press

President Barack Obama last week reached out to the millennial generation as part of an effort to rally a key Democratic-leaning bloc that appears unlikely to turn out in large numbers for mid-term elections.

The White House rolled out a hefty report and Mr. Obama traveled to Los Angeles to speak at Cross Campus, a shared workspace for startups and venture capitalists, where he hailed millennials as “the best-educated, the most diverse, the most digitally fluent generation of adults in American history.”

It’s also the largest generation in the United States and the most likely to vote Democratic when casting ballots. Among adults, half of millennials identify as Democrats or say they lean toward the party, compared with only 34% who say the same about Republicans, according to a Pew Research Center report.

“Over the past 10 years Millennials have remained the most liberal and least conservative of the four generations, and the only generation in which liberals are not significantly outnumbered by conservatives,” the Pew report said.

That could help Democrats nationwide at a time when the party’s hold in the Senate is tenuous. But enthusiasm toward Mr. Obama and Democratic candidates has waned since the last election and a poll this spring by Harvard’s Institute of Politics found that less than one-quarter of 18-29 year-olds said they would definitely vote in November.

While there’s no official definition, the millennial generation was, roughly, born between 1980 and the mid-2000s. Most polls look only at voting-age adults.

The Obama administration’s 49-page report—initially decorated with emojis and given a listicle-like title “15 Economic Facts About Millenials”–highlights trends that have shaped the generation, including wide access to the Internet and high levels of education but against a backdrop of economic crisis and slow recovery.

“A lot of you entered into the workforce during the worst financial crisis and then the worst recession since the Great Depression,” Mr. Obama noted last week.

The economy and the high cost education are two key areas and may underlie some disillusionment with current political leaders.

“Economic opportunity for millennials is depressing,” said Paul Dietzel, a 28-year-old Republican candidate for Congress in Louisiana’s sixth district. Mr. Dietzel is running in a crowded field that includes Edwin Edwards, the 87-year-old former governor who served eight years in federal prison on racketeering charges. In a statewide race, Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu is trailing Republican challenger Bill Cassidy, according to a Rasmussen Reports poll released last month.

Mr. Dietzel doesn’t have the national reach of the president, but he too sees his generation as a key demographic in this election and has been working to rally young voters by speaking on college campuses, going door to door and engaging on social media with podcasts, Facebook posts and elsewhere.

Topics he talks a lot about include the Affordable Care Act, the high cost of a college education and the economy.

“Young people know a bad deal when they see it,” Mr. Dietzel said. “They face one of the highest youth unemployment rates in history. They can’t find a job.”

Marilinda Garcia, a 31-year-old Republican running for a Congress in New Hampshire, echoes many of the same concerns about the economy, education costs and employment opportunities.

“All of that combined has made for a confusing and a little bit frightening situation for millennials in terms of where they will go, what career they will pursue, whether they can buy a home, what their future will be like,” she said.

But Ms. Garcia said that hasn’t necessarily translated into voter apathy. Fellow millennials make up the “heart and soul” of her volunteer campaign staff. “If you are a candidate that resonates with them, if you’re offering a solution or offering a vision they relate to, you’re likely to be successful,” she said.

To be sure, many young candidates and voters embrace Mr. Obama and his policies.

For example, Abby Finkenauer, 25, is running for a seat in Iowa’s House of Representatives.

“People are aware of the administration and a lot of the good things that have happened,” she said, citing efforts on fair pay for women, cap college loan repayments and raise the minimum wage.

Ms. Finkenauer said 2010 midterms were “abysmal” for Democrats but she’s been encouraged this year by turnout at campaign events and response among potential voters. In Iowa’s Senate race, where Republican Joni Ernst is in a tight race with Democratic Rep. Bruce Braley, younger voters could tip the balance toward Mr. Braley, she said.

Ms. Finkenauer also said her peers are particularly prone to vote via early and absentee ballots.

“It’s a lot about who decides to show up and who decides to turn out,” she said. “If we can win in early voting, absentee voting, I think that will tip this election.”