Pat Meehan

On the heels of participating in a successful grassroots county commissioner campaign, Montgomery County businessman Stan Casacio decided he wants to ensure conservative values are being represented in Washington.

That’s partially why the 68-year-old will run in the April 26 Republican primary election for the seat held by U.S. Rep. Patrick Meehan, R-7th Dist., of Chadds Ford.

“I’m not a career politician,” Casacio said. “I’m not a Pat Meehan. He’s a nice guy and all that. I’m going to say what I’m going to do and do what I say.”

Casacio’s family business, N.C. Construction Corp. based in Huntingdon Valley, Pa., owns and manages shopping centers throughout the area.

Advertisement

It was his involvement in the campaign of Montgomery County Commissioner Joe Gale last year, however, that encouraged him to run for office.

“We were waking up in the morning and not really feeling good about things,” Casacio said. “We were sitting down and we were saying, ‘What can we do to move the dial one click?’”

So, he said a group of like-minded individuals decided to support Gale, an independent Republican.

“Joe started out like a son to me,” Casacio said of the 26-year-old. “At the end of this campaign, he was an inspiration to me. He took physical threats, verbal abuse. I said, ‘This is not America.’ I was very impressed that this young man who stayed true to his convictions, stayed true to his values, he won.”

Over that campaign, Casacio said he enjoyed speaking before crowds.

“I must’ve given 35 speeches,” he said. “People liked what I said.”

So he’s chosen to give his own congressional campaign a try.

“It seems like no one is talking about what we can accomplish ... to make America great,” he said. “Conservative values are not being sold correctly.”

Some of his key issues include immigration, the debt and the Affordable Care Act.

With regard to immigration, Casacio said, “The reality is the Constitution is not a suicide pact. If we don’t have control of our borders ... then we are fools for doing that. There has to be a way that we can start preventing these people from coming here who want to do us harm.”

In addition, he said the national debt needs to be addressed in a substantial way.

“The more you increase debt, the less we have, inflation takes over,” he said. “Everybody has to work hard.”

Casacio also criticized the Affordable Care Act.

“Who would think health care would be cheaper if we layer another bureaucracy on top if it?” he said.

On the other hand, he said conservatives and liberals need to work to try to get a consensus.

“I’m going to message my ideas,” Casacio said, adding that he also plans to sell his viewpoint to people while also taking their perspectives under consideration.

Virginia Davis, Meehan’s campaign spokeswoman, commented on the challenge by focusing on the incumbent’s work.

“Pat Meehan has a proven record of working with both parties on issues that create jobs in our community, hold D.C. accountable and keep our families safe,” she said. “Whether it’s protecting our refinery jobs, expanding research into curing disease, or getting answers from the VA, he’s broken through the gridlock in Washington and gotten results. He’s a principled leader committed to fighting for hardworking families in southeastern Pennsylvania.”

Once the Republican nomination is cast, the winner will face a November contest against one of the two Democrats vying for the spot, Mary Ellen Balchunis or Bill Golderer.

With regards to Casacio entering the race, Golderer said, “I’m focused on my own campaign right now and not terribly concerned with what’s going on in the Republican primary. However, it seems to me that this just underscores what we’ve been saying all along: people are frustrated with Congress and they’re frustrated with Congressman Meehan. Congress is broken and Pat Meehan offers no solutions. I look forward to being part of the solution.”

Balchunis did not respond to a request for comment.