LETTER: Stenehjem indisputably supported Obamacare

While it may be politically inconvenient now that he's decided to seek higher office, the fact is that Wayne Stenehjem indisputably supported Obamacare.

King v. Burwell was widely considered to be conservatives' last chance to overturn Obamacare. At issue in the Supreme Court case was whether the legislation authorized the government to give subsidies to individuals in states that had not established health care exchanges.

If the court had answered "No," it likely would have meant the end of Obamacare.

Conservatives rallied behind the chance to overturn the law. Ted Cruz, Marco Rubio and Paul Ryan put aside personal differences to sign an amicus brief urging the court to rule against the administration. Republican attorneys general representing Oklahoma, Nebraska, South Carolina and other states submitted a similar brief.

On the other side of the aisle, liberals banded together to defend Barack Obama's takeover of our health care system. Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid led other congressional liberals in submitting a brief that defended Obamacare. Another group of liberals—21 Democratic attorneys general from across the country—submitted a brief of their own.

Joining them as the lone Republican was North Dakota Attorney General Wayne Stenehjem.

These liberals succeeded in persuading the court to rewrite the law and save Obamacare. It was an interpretation that the late Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia famously described as "not merely unnatural; it is unheard of."

It was exactly the interpretation that Stenehjem and his liberal colleagues had pleaded with the Court to take.

Stenehjem continues to deny that he "supported" Obamacare, even though his actions in the King v. Burwell case show that he did. Instead of continuing to argue over semantics, perhaps Stenehjem should be asked a different question: why did he decide that Cruz, Rubio and Ryan were wrong, but Pelosi, Reid and Obama were right?

Chris Young

Bismarck