State Sen. Darren Soto launched his campaign for the U.S. Congress Thursday by spelling out a full platform of Democratic ideals and adding references to humility, love, inspiration and ties to Puerto Rico.

Those last four issues, for Soto, may be aimed at setting himself apart from the congressman he hopes to succeed in the 9th Congressional District, U.S. Rep. Alan Grayson, and perhaps to draw distinctions with his leading Democratic opponent, Grayson's district director Susannah Randolph.

Soto, 37, known in Tallahassee for bipartisan cooperation that some critics on the Democratic Party's left have called conservatism, characterized himself as a Democrat loyal to liberal causes and also as an effective legislator, saying, "I've delivered, consistently."

"I began this journey over eight years ago. I ran for two key reasons: to help people and to bring humility to elected office," he said, in both English and Spanish, in announcing his candidacy for Congress on the steps of the Orange County Courthouse.

"I must lead with love, instill hope in others and inspire the good in all of us," he added.

Soto is in his first term as a state senator, after having served three terms as a state representative from within the district. He also is Puerto Rican, running in a district that is 35-40 percent Puerto Rican.

"Many of us in District 9 are part of the diaspora Boricua," Soto said. "We are proud to share a common heritage, language and culture. It would be an honor to continue that story by making history as the first Puerto Rican congressman from Florida and the first Hispanic elected to Congress from Central Florida."

Grayson is running for the U.S. Senate, rather than for re-election. Randolph, 41, announced her candidacy Sunday evening, backed by several longtime Democratic powers in Central Florida including John Morgan, Linda Chapin and Rita Bornstein. Former Osceola County Democratic Party chair Valleri Crabtree and former state Rep. Ricardo Rangel also are running.

Soto spelled out a broad platform, touching on almost all key Democratic issues, including pushes for high-tech medical, space and solar jobs, a $10.10 minimum wage, union rights, comprehensive immigration reform, protection of Social Security and Medicare, equal rights, the Affordable Care Act, federal investment in education, environmental protection, veterans' benefits and international diplomacy before war.

Surrounded by several dozen supporters including numerous Central Florida Puerto Ricans, he also made a call for attention for Puerto Rico's fiscal crisis. "The federal government has a responsibility to assure equal treatment under the law for Puerto Ricans, stop the cuts to Medicare there, and help with the mounting debt that is ravaging the island."