Republican presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, third from left, speaks, as Sen. Marco Rubio, left, and businessman Donald Trump attempt to interrupt, during a debate sponsored by CNN. John Kasich, Ohio governor, is at right. (Photo: AP)

Millennial GOP’er on Trump

As a millennial Republican, I will not vote for Donald Trump on Tuesday. His campaign promises do not represent my core values. Regardless of how divisive the Republican primary becomes, few in the traditional press have honestly analyzed why his candidacy came to such prominence.

Using identity politics as the go-to motive for Trump supporters, many commentators refuse to accept reality. The vast majority of Trump voters are not racist, sexist, xenophobic, homophobic or Islamophobic. They are struggling, middle-class Americans who have been harmed by progressive economic policies. The federal income tax, high corporate tax rates, regressive payroll taxes and failed monetary and fiscal policies are just the tip of the iceberg. Our country has unsuccessfully practiced trickle-down government almost my entire life. Folks are afraid, angry and see Donald Trump as the only answer to their problems. However, an unchecked Trump presidency would be as detrimental as either of the prospective Democratic candidates.

Whatever happens as a result of November’s general election, it is up to Congress, state legislators and local officials to dutifully represent the interests of their constituents. Governors and other public executives must also lead with integrity and honestly.

Eric Hoppenbrouwer, Melbourne

Just what makes U.S. great?

As I watch the great political circus of 2016 two things strike me as interesting.

The first is that the only candidates to point out the destructive nature of the free trade acts are either billionaires (Donald Trump and decades ago Ross Perot) who don’t need corporate sponsorship or Bernie Sanders, who doesn’t want it.

The second is that Republican candidates want us to return to small government and the “conservative values that made America great.” When I think about what made America great, I think of labor unions that lifted working families out of the tenement slums into the middle class, public education, the WPA, land-grant colleges and public universities. The Agricultural Extension Service, public health nurses, a great highway system, programs to eradicate TB, smallpox, measles, rabies, pellagra, and other dread diseases. The Clean Air Act, the Clean Water Act, the Voting Rights Act, the Civil Rights Act, the Social Security Act, the Affordable Care Act, the space program, and our national parks, which have been the model for preservation the world over.

All of these programs are the results of a representative government that represents people who care about people. Just what is it exactly that the Republicans propose?

Stephen Blythe, Melbourne

‘Enough is enough’

I have been a 30-year customer of FLORIDA TODAY and write letters when I find it necessary. While reading my paper this morning I was so impressed with the letter written by Charles Morten, I felt like I wrote the letter myself. I also was surprised FLORIDA TODAY printed a letter from a conservative as the letter writer described the liberal media to a T.

It is time the Republicans came together and stopped the bickering and dividing the party for those who do not like Trump. Too bad, get over it. Would you prefer Clinton with all her baggage instead? The liberal media is again going after Trump and I am hoping no one is paying attention to those lies.

Romney accepted money from Trump when he ran and lost. Now he is trying to bring down Trump with his lies. Enough is enough. Get over it and be the true conservative you claim to be and let the media do their trash as usual. I know chances of this letter being published are just about nil.

Barbra Bronsberg, Melbourne

‘Thanks for the landslide,’ GOP

The Republican party establishment is getting behind Mitt Romney to get a brokered convention. What a joke they are. If that happens it will be the biggest landslide victory for the Democrats across the country, from the presidency to governors to the Senate and House. It will do the Republican party in.

They really are desperate. I would not be surprised to see Donald Trump to tell his backers to vote Democratic. If it wasn’t pathetic it would be laughable: Republican party, you are done. Thanks for the landslide.

Jim Race, Melbourne

U.S. is in ‘moral freefall’

The gay community has successfully gotten most people to believe homosexuality is a civil rights issue when in reality it is a moral one. A person is not born gay but may be predisposed to that type of behavior. Many factors may be involved but ultimately it is a choice one makes. If a robber could not stop stealing and used as a defense, “I was just born to steal,” no one would buy that.

God’s Word, the Bible, is very clear about calling homosexuality a sin, along with others such as adultery, fornication, etc. Keep in mind that morality trumps legality. Making something legal does not make it moral. A country or culture may make abortion and homosexuality legal, but they will never be moral. Sadly, I think our once great country is in a moral freefall.

William Sherman, Rockledge

Read or Share this story: http://on.flatoday.com/1pdcuF7