The following recreation centers will be open from 4 to 7 p.m. on Tuesday and Thursdays through Jan. 31 for health care enrollment: • Cyrus Green Center, 2101 E. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. Blvd. • Forest Hills Center, 724 W. 109th Ave. • Hunt Center at Al Lopez Park, 4810 N. Himes Ave. • Loretta Ingraham Center, 1615 N. Hubert Ave. • Port Tampa Center, 4702 W. McCoy St. Note: Navigators will not be available Dec. 22 through Jan.1 because of the holidays. Also, navigators will also be on hand to help with health care enrollment at the following events: • Southern Soul Music Festival at Water Works Park, 2 p.m. Saturday • Santa Fest at Curtis Hixon Waterfront Park, 11 a.m. to 4 p.m. Thursday • Snow on Seventh Avenue in Ybor City, 7 a.m. to 9 p.m. Dec. 12 For information on enrollment or health care, log onto connector.getcoveredamerica.org or call 1-877-813-9115.

For the third straight year, Tampa is planning to make it easier for residents to get health insurance through the Affordable Healthcare Act by opening up recreation centers for enrollment.

Beginning Tuesday, the city will open five centers for three hours every Tuesday and Thursday.

Residents who turn up will be able to get assistance choosing coverage plans from navigators, the name given to trained workers who guide and advise residents on insurance options.

“As mayor, it is my responsibility to do everything I can to ensure our friends and neighbors in the city remain happy and healthy for years to come,” said Mayor Bob Buckhorn in a statement. “Everyone deserves the right to see a doctor when they are injured or get medications when they are sick. There are no exceptions. As a community we are stronger when we are healthier and we, at the city, are happy to do our part to make sure all of our citizens are covered.”

The move comes as the city was chosen by the White House as one of 20 to take part in a contest to sign up the most people for insurance under the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare.

The winning city will get a visit from President Barack Obama.

Cities were chosen for the Healthy Communities Challenge based on the percentage and number of uninsured residents and also on levels of diversity and poverty.

More than 77,000 Hillsborough residents are now insured through the Affordable Care Act, according to Enroll America, an independent nonprofit, nonpartisan group that works to get more people insured.

Still, roughly 15 percent of county residents have no insurance. The percentage rises among minority populations, with 19 percent of black and 21 percent of Hispanic residents having no insurance.

codonnell@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7871

Twitter: codonnellTBO