PETA creates a graphic advertisement based on a Utah hunter who was gored by an elk that he shot.

“Payback is hell," according to a new anti-hunting billboard posted by the People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals (PETA) in Utah that features an elk with bloody horns. The graphic ad is a droll response to the plight of Bradley Greenwood, 51, who accidentally impaled himself on the antlers of a 700-lb. elk that he had shot while hunting last week.

Greenwood suffered a life-threatening wound to the neck when he tried to roll the deceased elk’s body and slipped. The antler pierced his trachea, but somehow he was able to call 9-1-1 while struggling to breathe. Rescuers found him near Davenport Draw area of Diamond Mountain, according to The Salt Lake Tribune, about 30 miles from Vernal, Utah where the billboard is set to be displayed. He is expected to make a full recovery.

“Now that a recovering Greenwood knows what it feels like to gasp what you believe to be your last breaths, maybe he'll stop killing animals and agree with PETA that compassion feels better than (bad) karma,” PETA wrote today on its blog.

PETA PETA

The animal rights group is no stranger to risqué ad campaigns. Previous demonstrations have featured public nudity and members dressed up as members of the Ku Klux Klan.

However, local hunters are not impressed and feel the ad unjustly portrays why and how they hunt.

"We use (wildlife) to feed our families, and we enjoy the sport," hunter Tracy Webster said to KSL.com. "We try to take (game) as humanely as possible. We don't want to torture and hurt them. We want a quick, clean kill."

PETA is known for making targeted statements. In 2010, after the Deepwater Horizon oil spill, the agency flew a banner over coastal Alabama that read: "Meat on Your Grill = Oil Spill." However, residents of Vernal, Utah, which has deeply engrained hunting culture, aren’t convinced this tactic will work in their town.

"I really don't think they're going to get quite what they're looking for in Vernal," hunter Jason Newman told KSL.com. "They might get it in Salt Lake, but they're not going to get it out here."