Topics: House Oversight Committee, Jason Chaffetz, John Mica, julia pierson, Mental Illness, Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder, Secret Service, trey gowdy, Video, White House, white house intruder, Politics News

The House Oversight Committee’s hearing into recent security lapses by the United States Secret Service played put pretty much how everyone expected it would. Secret Service director Julia Pierson offered unsatisfactory explanations for the agency’s Keystone Kops investigation of a 2011 incident in which several shots were fired at the White House, and the more recent debacle in which a man armed with a knife managed to scale the White House perimeter fence and make it all the way into the executive mansion. The committee members, meanwhile, took the opportunity to vent outrage, browbeat Pierson with diatribes masked as questions, and mug for the television cameras. All this was done in the name of “oversight.”

The competition for who could make the grander spectacle of themselves was stiff. Rep. John Mica held up an ADT sign and suggested that the Secret Service buy some “inexpensive vegetation” to bolster White House security. Rep. Trey Gowdy cranked his volume knob all the way to eleven and then broke it off. But the winner has to be committee-chair-in-waiting Jason Chaffetz, who demanded to know why, when it comes to fence jumpers, the Secret Service doesn’t use “overwhelming force.”

“I want it to be crystal clear. You make a run at the White House, we’re going to take you down,” Chaffetz said. “I want overwhelming force. Would you disagree with me?” The day before, Chaffetz blamed the Secret Service security failures on the desire to be “politically correct.”

No one disputes that, in the wake of all these incidents, the Secret Service either has to rethink its procedures or recommit itself to ensuring that existing security measures are properly enacted. The problems with Chaffetz’s recommendation for using “overwhelming force,” however, are numerous.

First, the level of physical protection surrounding the executive mansion already screams “overwhelming force.” Anyone who’s been to the White House has likely paused to take note the heavy visible security presence. There are uniformed Secret Service agents everywhere, patrolling on foot or on bicycles and heavily armed. There are usually black armored SUVs stationed in the pedestrian-only promenades. There are guard stations, fences, concrete barriers, anti-vehicle obstacles, checkpoints – the security you can see sends the very clear message that there are places you cannot go.

And then there’s the unseen security presence that everyone knows exists. There are sensors above and below ground to detect intruders, and snipers on the roof. If you’re like me, when you stroll past the White House you can’t shake the discomfiting sensation that someone could be peering at you through a scope and scrutinizing your movements.

All this to say that the Secret Service already does a pretty good job of communicating the fact that they are capable of inflicting physical violence upon you if you get out of line. So if someone jumps over the perimeter fence, chances are they’re either mentally unstable or a very determined assailant and already are not deterred by that threat. And, quite often, the people who do intrude upon the White House grounds are suffering from some sort of mental illness. Omar Gonzalez, the man who made it through the front doors and into the East Room, apparently has post-traumatic stress disorder from his time in the military.