Did Supreme Court Justice Hugo Black misinterpret a phrase used by Thomas Jefferson, shown here in a portrait by the artist Thomas Scully, to remove religion from the public square? (Thomas Scully/The Associated Press / The Denver Post)

Apropos of the Supreme Court ending its session, words, indeed, can have mighty consequences. In the case of America's future, one word, "wall," in the phrase "wall of separation of church and state," is proving to be of huge importance. This entire phrase cannot be found in the Declaration of Independence, the Bill of Rights, nor any other founding document of our nation, nor anything that was ever voted on. It did not legally exist until 1947, but more on that later. It is erroneously believed Thomas Jefferson, in an official capacity, created it. Wrong.

The origin of the phrase traces to a personal letter written by newly elected President Jefferson on Jan1, 1802 to the Baptist Association in Connecticut. These Baptists were a beleaguered religious minority in a state where Congregationalists dominated political life. Though a Deist himself, Jefferson's letter simply encouraged the Baptists in their struggle to enjoy the right of conscience as an inalienable right, not a favor granted by government. His exact words were that Connecticut's legislature "should make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free exercise thereof, thus building a wall of separation between church and state.

Advertisement

" No other words or thoughts in this letter, which ended with a prayer, suggest that Jefferson meant for this "wall" to be a two-way barrier; rather his beliefs over the years never wavered from the concept stated in the First Amendment of a one-way street that government could not tread in the direction of religion, but that religion could be spoken and celebrated boldly in public. In fact, that is the clear meaning of the First Amendment's words as written.

Jefferson's future presidential actions fully support this interpretation, including asking Congress to fund for 10 years a priest for an Indian tribe. Not a big expenditure in itself, but huge in reflecting his "principle" of a one-way street. Consider that since 1789 the federal courts have included "so help me God" in their testimony oath. Or that down through history, presidential speeches have been replete with religious and scriptural references , The present Supreme Court building, constructed as late as 1935, includes Moses and the 10 Commandments in its stonework. This "one-way street" principle still existed in the 1947 G.I. bill of rights, which gave WWII veterans public tax dollars to attend the college of their choice, even in a private religious institution, and even for training for clergy hood. Thus as recently as 1947, religion in America's public square was permitted and encouraged.

But that same year one Supreme Court justice changed all that, and may well have changed the course of America's future. The lawsuit was Everson v. Board of Education. The justice was Hugo Black, a former Klu Klux Klansman, a practitioner of no religion, and a recognized virulent anti-Catholic. He famously (or infamously) wrote in his opinion "In the words of Jefferson, the First Amendment has erected a wall of separation between church and state . . . that wall must be kept high and impregnable. We could not approve the slightest breach." Black thus erroneously depicted Jefferson as a leading architect in writing the First Amendment, when in fact Jefferson had no official hand in it and had been in France for several years while Congress drafted the First Amendment. But from 1947 on, as a result of Black's misconception, religion in the public square has been under attack in America.

The lesson of the "wall of separation" metaphor (privately used by Jefferson but legally used by Black), is that metaphors are a valuable literary device, but their careless use can lead to confusion and distortion. At its heart, a metaphor compares two or more things that are not, in fact, identical. And Black's blithely substituting figurative language ("wall") from a private letter, for the literal text of the First Amendment that clearly means "one-way street," fatally distorts the constitutional principle governing church-state relationships. It strains credibility that the "wall" metaphor, which doesn't exist in any government document ever voted on by Americans or their elected representatives, could become the legal basis that turned the First Amendment on its head.

"For want of a nail, a shoe is lost, for want of a shoe a horse is lost . . . " For want of a word, a nation is . . .

Richard Eggers lives in Niwot.