Welcome to the May 9 Monday Business Briefing, your private business intelligence digest from Insider Louisville.

Aetna CEO hopeful about Obamacare's long-term future despite difficulties

As health insurers including Humana are weighing whether to exit some state health exchanges, Aetna’s CEO said he believes the Affordable Care Act market will continue to be beset by difficulties -- though he remains hopeful about its long-term prospects.

Escape Lou gives customers the chance to play 007

A new type of escape game is coming to Clifton this summer.

Nestled next to The Hub at 2235 Frankfort Ave. in Suite 107, Escape Lou is under construction. Escape Inc., which operates in Minneapolis, Milwaukee, Kansas City and St. Louis, is in the same genre as existing concepts Breakout Louisville and Escape Louisville, but Escape Lou has one common theme of putting customers in the place of government agents including the CIA, MI6 and the CDC.

Texas Roadhouse settles class-action lawsuit

Pending judicial approval, Louisville-based steakhouse chain Texas Roadhouse will pay out $5.5 million in a class-action lawsuit settlement.

Jeffersontown residents opening sand volleyball court, restaurant

A group of nine Jeffersontown residents are coming together to create a new hangout for their neighbors.

Plans for the proposed J-town Beach include a sand volleyball court, an 1,410-square-foot outdoor patio and a 2,378-square-foot restaurant and bar inside. It will be located at 10315 Watterson Trail, next to Cafe on Main Street, with which the business will share a parking lot.

New boutique opens in downtown New Albany

A new business, Dream Boutique Clothing and Accessories, has opened in The Underground Station, a retail center at 37 Bank St. in downtown New Albany.

“We are offering a store where every woman can walk away with something that flatters their body type and makes them feel beautiful, comfortable and confident,” co-owner Tianna Barnes-Palmer said in a news release. “Our clothing ranges from size 2 to 22.”

Among its inventory is a maxi dress that can be twisted and tied in 24 ways, Ebony Bunny Luxury Hair extensions, and men's accessories including ties, cuff links and socks. Jewelry and women's clothing prices range from $29.98 to $119.98, according to the store's website.

KFC debuts edible nail polish

KFC is making it harder for nail biters to quit.

The Louisville-based chicken chain premiered two edible nail polishes in Hong Kong, according to BuzzFeed.

“It actually tastes like KFC,”Anna Mugglestone, marketing director at Ogilvy Hong Kong, which is responsible for the advertising stunt, told BuzzFeed.

Louisville Forward honored by magazine

For the second year in a row, Site Selection magazine has named Louisville Forward, the city's economic development department, one of the Top U.S. Economic Development Groups. Louisville Forward was founded in 2014 when the Mayor's Office decided to take over business attraction activities for Greater Louisville Inc., which focuses on the city's existing businesses community.

River Ridge hires director of finance and marketing

The River Ridge Development Authority has named Dustin Coffman as its new director of finance and marketing.

In addition to managing River Ridge Commerce Center's finances, Coffman will lead the expansion of the national and international marketing efforts of the 6,00o-acre business park in Southern Indiana to location consultants, developers, corporate real estate executives and project managers.

Valspar and volunteers to revitalize Portland's Habitat for Humanity

Valspar, one of the nation's leading manufacturers of interior and exterior paint, is teaming up with Habitat for Humanity of Metro Louisville for their National Neighborhood Week. On May 14, local Valspar employees will donate their time to revitalize the community space and building on the Habitat campus, clearing out materials from an old truck dock, and, of course, painting.

For more on these headlines, CLICK HERE