This time there is a winner.

The winning numbers in the record-setting $1.5 billion multistate Powerball lottery were drawn at 8:59 p.m. Wednesday — 8, 27, 34, 4, 19. Powerball: 10. Power Play: 2.

California Lottery officials reported a jackpot-winning ticket was sold in Chino Hills and a spokesman for the California Lottery says winning Powerball tickets have also been sold in Tennessee and Florida.

Colorado Lottery tweeted “No jackpot winner in Colorado. Gonna go cry in our green chile now. Still waiting to see what big pieces we got of it! Stay tuned…”

Colorado Lottery later confirmed that the state did have some smaller winners.

At 9:45 p.m., Colorado Lottery tweeted “We still got some big Powerball winners, folks! 5 Coloradans won $100,000, and 10 of you won $50,000.”

Powerball ticket sales in Colorado on Wednesday alone reached $7.3 million as players lined up at stores to purchase a chance at the prize.

That count was as of late afternoon, more than three hours before the lottery cut off ticket sales.

Ticket sales in Colorado have nearly doubled daily since no one won the jackpot Saturday and the lottery jumped into billion-dollar territory.

Between Sunday and 4 p.m. Wednesday, Colorado retailers sold $19 million worth of the $2 tickets.

In a typical week, lottery ticket sales in the state are about $1.3 million to $1.4 million.

For the current Powerball run of 20 drawings with no top winner, $50 million had been been spent on tickets in Colorado.

Despite the increase in ticket sales, the jackpot remained at $1.5 billion for the drawing. It had been increasing $100 million per day since the weekend.

“If the jackpot rolls, it will go to $2 billion for Saturday’s drawing,” said Brooke Christopher, communications manager for the Colorado Lottery.

Approximately 24 percent of ticket purchases made in Colorado will go toward funding state parks, outdoor recreation and schools.

At $50 million, the state’s cut is $12 million.

Last fiscal year, the state received $128 million for all lottery sales.

Should a Colorado ticket win, the winner can create a trust fund or limited liability company to stay anonymous.