Barbara Berge

There are Fremont County residents who are unable to drive themselves to medical appointments for various reasons.

Volunteers at Senior Services Solutions Plus, previously known as Friendly Visitors, provide free transportation to appointments as far away as Colorado Springs and Pueblo.

"That could include doctor appointments, chemotherapy, radiation, dialysis, outpatient surgeries, dental appointments or an occasional shopping trip if they need to get groceries or something like that. Those people who have doctor appointments have priority over shopping trips," said Executive Director Barbara Berge, who began the position in mid-February.

She said the nonprofit organization, which began in 1987, receives a great deal of positive feedback from the drivers.

"(They) say that it's actually very rewarding because they get to meet some very nice people," Berge said. "Some of them develop quite a rapport with our clients. In some cases, we can spend six weeks with our clients. We just finished up with a lady who had chemotherapy in Pueblo every day for six weeks."

She said without the drivers, SSSP would be "basically nonexistent."

"We're always looking for more drivers and donations," Berge said. "We have an increase in clients, but we can't take on more clients unless we have more volunteers. Last year, I think the drivers clocked something like 3,500 volunteer hours of driving time. We have about 25 to 30 drivers and about 100 clients at the moment."

Advertisement

Drivers must have a clean driving record, a car with insurance and a valid driver's license.

"We do provide a small stipend to our drivers for gas reimbursement, just for the out-of-town drives," she said. "You can pick and choose the days that you want and the trips that you want."

The organization also offers other services.

"We have a room that we rent out for meetings and such," Berge said. "We have a lot of medical equipment like walkers, bath benches, canes, crutches, bath rails, commodes."

The equipment is for sale by donation.

SSSP is located at 321 North Cottonwood Ave. Donations can be mailed to that address. For more information on how to become a driver, call 275-3900.

Sarah Rose: 719-276-7648 or roses@canoncitydailyrecord.com