iStock

After years of anticipation, the U.S. government last fall launched the Open Payments database, which tracks money and other items of value that drug and device makers give physicians for consulting, speaking and research, among other things. The effort reflected growing concern that financial ties between physicians and industry may have undue influence on medical practice and research.

But what do doctors think of the database?

Most physicians – 72%, to be specific – say they were aware the database exists, according to a new survey of 461 doctors. But only 53% say they are familiar or somewhat familiar with the law that created the database and the impact it can have on their activities. The survey was conducted by MedPanel, a market research firm, last November and December, several weeks after the database launched.

Meanwhile, only 46% visited the government website, and most did so out of curiosity. About half stopped by to ensure the information reported about their activities was accurate and 15% confessed that they were curious to see what had been reported about other physicians. Only 9% expressed concern about what their patients may think.

Of the 54% who had not visited the website, slightly more than half acknowledged that they did not care if any payments had been reported. What else did the survey find? Well, 54% of those who visited did not find problems with the information that was reported, although 14% thought some activities should have been recorded, but were not. And 30% did say they were “previously unaware” of some reported payments.

Here’s another nugget: 76% say their participation with industry activities had not changed since companies began reporting payments in 2013, while 21% reported a decrease. Of course, this is still the early going, but one concern widely expressed by industry and some physicians was that the database may have a chilling effect and cause some physicians to curtail work with industry. This, in turn, could limit the flow of information and ideas.

Of course, the survey contains a small sample size, so this is really just a snapshot in time. “We really haven’t seen the full effect yet,” Jason LaBonte, the MedPanel president, tells us. “Many physicians are still getting familiar with [the database]. So it’s too soon to know what will come of this or whether it will have the intended effect.”

He does make an interesting point, however, which is that physicians continue to say they need to supplement their incomes, especially since the Affordable Care Act is reducing physician reimbursement rates. And he tells us that they remain interested in “extracurricular activities, but I think they’ll be more careful” about the type of payments and work involved.

One last thought: as more physician practices consolidate and as more physicians become employees in networks instead of proprietors, the outside work done with industry is likely to become more closely scrutinized by compliance officers. “And what these officers do after looking at data will be interesting to watch,” says LaBonte. “This may also change the sort of activity we’ve seen over the years.”