Like residents, religious organziations lacked flood insurance

LYONS -- The Bible's Book of Ezekeil, Chapter 47, has taken on a new meaning for members of The River Community Church after the nearby St. Vrain River was literally "flowing from the sanctuary."

On Sept. 12, heavy rain forced the St. Vrain, which ran about 100 yards west of the Lyons church, through the sanctuary, tearing apart walls and leaving a hole in the foundation through which the river is still visible.

"The irony is not lost on us that the verse references the river of life that brings hope and healing," pastor Mickey Lohr said. "The flood has made that passage more relevant for us and made it more evident than ever that God is in control."

Congregations across Boulder County are seeking help from their communities as they pick up the pieces of their broken buildings damaged by September's floodwaters.

To donate The River Community Church http://therivercolorado.org/give.html Chabad Jewish Center of Longmont http://bit.ly/1e0jlr0 Congregation Har Hashem http://bit.ly/1eI8l4m Bible Baptist Church of Erie Mail checks to: 5050 NE County Line Road Erie, CO 80516

The Chabad Jewish Center of Longmont already has spent more than $30,000 on repairs to their synagogue and rental space for meetings, said Rabbi Yakov Borenstein.

The congregation lost thousands of dollars in educational materials, furniture, paintings, computers and vehicles, Borenstein said.

Repairs such as replacing drywall and floors are underway, and Borenstein hopes to be back in the facility next week. But several delays aren't leaving him optimistic, he said.

The Congregation Har HaShem in Boulder is estimating up to $200,000 in damage caused by the flood, with only "a fraction of the cost" being covered by insurance, according to an email from leaders.

Floodwaters destroyed carpets, drywall, shelving, furniture, curriculum materials, school supplies, mechanical equipment and other items, they wrote.

About 100 members of the Bible Baptist Church of Erie have been meeting in a barn about 2 miles east of the church since the flood destroyed their building, said Pastor Jim Duncan.

The facility was gutted to the studs and concrete floors after floodwaters filled the building three times, he said.

"We lost pretty much everything," Duncan said. "There were several handwritten notes from sermons I lost that are irreplaceable parts of my life in 43 years of being a pastor."

Facing about $100,000 worth of damage with no flood insurance, the congregation is seeking donations to help rebuild their church.

Since the flood, religious groups throughout Boulder and Weld counties have helped residents clean and repair their homes.

Now, leaders are turning to their communities for assistance.

"We were already denied insurance once but we are applying again to see if we can get anything, and we haven't seen anything from FEMA either," Borenstein said.

Pastor Mickey Lohr stands in the damaged sanctuary of The River Community Church, 18668 N. Saint Vrain Drive, in Lyons on Wednesday as volunteers cleaned the building. ( LEWIS GEYER )

"At some point we have to stop and deal with our own issues," Borenstein said. "We've been focused on helping our community but we're no good to them if we can't take care of our own members."

Inspections of The River Church aren't complete, but chunks missing from the foundation and cracks across the building are signs of costly repairs, Lohr said.

Moldy drywall is being removed and replaced and a trash pile at least five feet high stood in front of the main entrance last week.

Water warped the sanctuary's wooden floor in some places and buckled it in others. On one wall, a cross made by a member of the congregation hangs undamaged.

The deck on which Lohr's children married, as well as the outdoor pool where members were baptized, were completely washed away.

It's too early for financial estimates, but the cost of repairs may not matter if the river is not returned to its original path -- a decision that is out of the church's control.

The St. Vrain now runs a few feet from the sanctuary's west wall. If it is not moved, the church will have to move the wall east, away from the water, Lohr said.

Until the church is repaired, the congregation is holding services at a couple's home in Longmont. The Sunday before the flood was the couple's first time attending the church, Lohr said. Two weeks later, they welcomed nearly 80 members of the congregation into their basement, which the church has nicknamed "The River East."

"The church isn't the building, it's the people," Lohr said. "Our facility might be damaged but we still have hope and we're sharing that."

Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.