As I watch the Democrat primary develop, I feel I'm watching an audition for who will play the role of Santa Claus in 2016.

Between Socialist Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton, it has become a contest to see who can out promise the other on the "free stuff" the American taxpayers can provide to various segments of our population.

Right now Sanders has a slight lead in free college education for everyone plus universal health care. Clinton is in lock step on the free college approach, but she's a tad more cautious on universal health care because she doesn't want to undo Obamacare.

One of the most eye-opening exit poll results coming out of the Democrat New Hampshire primary was the fact that 40 percent of the Democrats wanted the liberal policies of Obama continued while another 40 percent wanted their candidate to be even more liberal. That's code for giving Americans more "free stuff."

So 80 percent of Democrats voting in New Hampshire seemingly could care less about our $19 trillion national debt. They just want more "free stuff." I wonder if their own personal credit cards have been issued to them with no-limit spending restraints?

It appears that much of Sanders' support comes from millennials who want free college. Apparently we are reaping the political damage of a generation raised with an entitlement mentality — everyone gets a trophy, no grading, no right/wrong answers, free and reduced lunch, food stamps ...

Perhaps the most appropriate description of Sanders and the millennials was stated by the Prime Minister of France during WWI when he said, "Any man who is not a socialist at age 20 has no heart. Any man who is still a socialist at age 40 has no head."

Although this analogy has been used in various forms by several noted leaders, it still rings true to those of us who are champions of free enterprise and the tremendous prosperity it has brought to America. No socialist nation has ever approached the United States in overall wealth, upward mobility, innovation, military strength accompanied by economic vitality and personal freedoms.

Of course, Sanders hasn't totally thought through the unintended consequences of free tuition, such as the increased impact in delivering quality education, its impact on private schools, the increased control of education by the government and the political impact on our nation.

How much dumbing down of our college curriculums will we need to do to match what has already occurred in many of our public schools K-12? Even today employers feel the majority of our college grads are not well prepared for their workplace, according to a 2015 survey by The Chronicle of Higher Education.

When you then add universal health care to free tuition, the increased financial burden to taxpayers would run into several trillion dollars more. Even Clinton believes that may be a step too far at this point, but her defense of her position on this issue is based on her protective attitude of Obamacare.

What might you guess the political consequences would be in America if our kids are raised with free public K-12 educations followed by a government sponsored four year college education, universal health care, plus a menu of other taxpayer paid benefits? The answer: a guaranteed Democrat political monopoly until the money runs out.

As former British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher said: "The trouble with socialism is that eventually you run out of other peoples money."

But at present, the two leading Democrats are fully committed to a "free stuff" socialist-oriented campaign. I've heard rumors that Santa's elves say he's very distraught, and so am I.