With open enrollment in Michigan's new health insurance exchange starting in three weeks, a coalition of health industry experts and service providers in Washtenaw County is working to make sure local residents know their options.

The Washtenaw Health Initiative has been preparing for the 2014 implementation of major provisions of the, including the expansion of Medicaid, which will take effect in March or April.

"It's going to be complicated. It's going to be confusing," assures Marianne Udow-Phillips, director of the Ann Arbor-based Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation and a member of the Washtenaw Health Initiative.

In Washtenaw County, it's estimated an additional 8,297 people will become Medicaid eligible under the Affordable Care Act, and 10,801 more will be eligible for subsidies to help pay for health insurance on the state exchange.

It's estimated there also are 2,581 uninsured Washtenaw County residents who are eligible for Medicaid right now but not enrolled.

Fourteen different insurers ranging from Blue Care Network to Blue Cross Blue Shield have submitted more than 150 plans for consideration for the state exchange, also known as the Michigan Health Insurance Marketplace.

"It's going to be a very robust market in Michigan. We have a lot of insurers," Udow-Phillips said. "Think of it kind of like Travelocity or Expedia for health insurance. You go online, you can look at what the different benefits are, and you can see what the cost is, and you can then compare health plans."

The WHI includes representatives from the University of Michigan Health System, Saint Joseph Mercy Health System, VA Ann Arbor Healthcare System, health plans, county government, community services, physicians, and safety net providers.

"One of the things that the WHI has done is to look at provider capacity — what kind of provider capacity do we need in the community to absorb the influx," said, executive director for the Washtenaw Health Plan

"We know there's going to be an increase in volume and the community is doing what it can to prepare for that," she said.

Udow-Phillips said her center surveyed primary care physicians and found an overwhelming majority are ready to take new Medicaid enrollees.

"So the physicians are telling us they have capacity," she said, noting the WHI also examined whether Washtenaw County needs more doctors.

"They're adding a few, but they were already bringing primary care physicians into the community, so really not much beyond that," she said.

Rabinowitz said www.healthcare.gov is a treasure trove of information for those with questions about how the upcoming changes affect them.

"When the exchange opens Oct. 1, that's where you'll be able to go, create your account, and begin to go through the process of picking a plan," she said.

Another great place to go, she said, is the Kaiser Family Foundation's website, which has a subsidy calculator.

Rabinowitz also is pointing people to the Enroll America website. She said it's a nationwide organization with a big presence in Michigan.

"They are doing a tremendous outreach campaign," she said. "They're actually going door-to-door in specific neighborhoods where they believe there are a lot of uninsured folks, knocking on people's doors, sharing information."

Another organization called Michigan Consumers for Healthcare has a lot of helpful information, Rabinowitz said.

"The Michigan Consumers for Healthcare is the statewide navigator and they're working to identify a regional lead agency in our community," she said. "They'll have that information on their website pretty soon."

Rabinowitz said the WHP has a large federal grant to do targeted outreach to specific populations, including immigrants and their families, homeless families and teens — all populations with traditionally lower rates of enrollment. She said they'll be be working with the school system to get information out.

Many pieces of the ACA already have been implemented since 2010. For instance, young adults can now stay on their parents' plans until age 26, small businesses have gotten tax credits, and lifetime caps on coverage have been eliminated.

Starting on Jan. 1, individuals will be required to carry minimum essential health insurance benefits as more changes take effect

Insurance companies no longer will be able to refuse anyone coverage based on pre-existing conditions or charge more due to gender or health status, and there will be an increase in small business tax credits, while Medicaid eligibility is expanded.

Rabinowitz said the Washtenaw Health Plan, a nonprofit that provides access to health care for the low-income uninsured, is planning to shift many of its members over to the state exchange or get them enrolled in Medicaid.

Rabinowitz said all health plan members are going to get a letter in the mail saying their health plan memberships are ending Dec. 31, and they're going to be asked to come in to the WHP office in Ypsilanti to figure out future coverage options.

Of the 7,000 people now enrolled in the health plan, it's expected about 5,000 will become eligible for either Medicaid or subsidies on the exchange.

"If they're eligible for insurance in the marketplace, we're going to help them enroll," Rabinowitz said. "If they're eligible for Medicaid, we're going to extend their health plan enrollment until they can enroll in Medicaid."

She added, "The program is going to continue to exist for people who aren't eligible for anything else."

CHRT is predicting nearly 127,000 people in Michigan will enroll in plans on the exchange in 2014, while an additional 327,500 people get on Medicaid — up from 1.4 million to 1.7 million — and the state's uninsured ranks drop from 13.6 to 10.3 percent.

CHRT predicts the vast majority of the more than 5 million people who have employer-sponsored coverage in Michigan will continue to get employer-sponsored coverage in 2014. But over time, more people could shift to the exchange.

Open enrollment begins Oct. 1 and ends March 31. Coverage will begin by Jan. 1 if a plan is purchased on or before Dec. 15.

Tax penalties will be assessed on Jan. 1, 2015, for anyone who goes more than three months in 2014 without health insurance.

The initial penalty for not having health insurance will be 1 percent of income or $95 per person, whichever is higher. By 2016, the penalty will be 2.5 percent of income or $695 per person, whichever is higher.

According to CHRT, about 69 percent of Washtenaw County residents under the age of 65 have employer-sponsored health care plans, 10 percent have direct-purchase coverage, 11 percent are on Medicaid or some other means-tested program such as the Washtenaw Health Plan, and 2 percent are on Medicare.

That leaves 25,249 people who are uninsured right now in Washtenaw County. After the changes under the ACA, it's estimated 3,570 of those people who are uninsured right now won't qualify for Medicaid or subsidies.

Udow-Phillips said the changes will affect people differently depending on what income bracket they fall into, but more than two-thirds of people in Michigan will be eligible for either Medicaid or some form of tax credit for health insurance.

She noted the ACA mostly affects people under age 65, and people on Medicare won't see much change in the way they get health insurance.

The roughly 2.7 million people in Michigan making up to $15,900 a year as individuals or up to $32,500 as a family of four will be eligible for Medicaid, which covers the mandated essential benefits with few out-of-pocket costs. An estimated 670,000 people in that bracket are uninsured right now.

Another 3 million people making $15,900-$46,000 as individuals or $32,500-$94,200 as a family of four will be eligible for tax credits to buy health insurance on the exchange if they don't already have health insurance through an employer. An estimated 402,000 people in that bracket are uninsured right now.

For the remaining 2.5 million people who earn more than $46,000 a year as individuals or more than $94,200 as a family of four, tax credits won't be available. Of those, an estimated 71,000 are uninsured right now.

Udow-Phillips said people can expect to hear the plans on the health insurance exchange being talked about as "metal plans," which means there will be bronze, silver, gold and platinum levels of coverage.

"Bronze plans have the highest copays and deductibles, and platinum plans have the lowest copays and deductibles," she said.

A fifth type of plan that can be offered on the exchange, called a "catastrophic plan," will be available to individuals under age 30.

"It's a very high-deductible plan," she said. "These are individuals who generally don't get sick very often."

Udow-Phillips said many people think of Medicaid, a state-administered health insurance program, as simply being for the poor.

"But today, before these changes go into effect, you have to be more than poor," she said. "You have to be old-aged, blind, disabled, a parent with foster children — you have to have something else besides being poor. And the Affordable Care Act changes that. It's all based upon your income."

In addition to dozens of federally funded and trained "navigators," who will help guide people locally through uncharted waters, there also are 12 agencies in Washtenaw County that are training certified application counselors on their staff. That includes each of the major hospital systems in the area.

"If you find yourself at U-M and you're uninsured, they will have staff available who can actually help you get information and enroll," Rabinowitz said. "We have lots of great providers who want to do what they can to help their patients."

Rabinowitz said she expects multiple portals for Medicaid enrollment, including the Department of Human Services, which has has added "a ton of terminals in their lobby" in anticipation of the wave of new enrollees.

Udow-Phillips said Michigan health insurance rates aren't out yet, but based on what's happened in other states, it's estimated the premium for a silver-level plan will be about $4,200 a year for an individual or $12,000 for a family of four.

For someone making $15,900 a year, CHRT estimates the personal share of premium costs will be about $480, while subsidies cover $3,720.

For someone making $34,500, the estimated personal share goes up to $3,280, with subsidies covering $920.

Nina Suzette, who worked in Massachusetts as a registered nurse and is now working on a master's degree at Eastern Michigan University, said she's planning to check out the exchange to see if there's a plan for her and her 9-year-old son Joshua.

"It's not affordable to put him on my student health insurance, so I'm looking for the Affordable Care Act to get him on a plan," she said. "I'm hopeful."

Ryan Stanton covers Ann Arbor city hall for The Ann Arbor News. Reach him at ryanstanton@mlive.com or 734-623-2529 or follow him on Twitter.