REDDING, Calif. -

The measles outbreak in California is not over as public health officials now report there have been 91 confirmed cases since December.

The California Department of Public Health is urging caution to people who are not vaccinated because measles is very contagious. They said the virus is preventable by getting vaccinated, but low vaccine percentages in Shasta County concern health officials.

Dr. Andrew Deckert with the Shasta County Public Health Department said only 78 percent of kindergartners are up to date on their immunizations.

"People that don't get shots for whatever reason are protected if enough other folks in the community get their vaccine," Deckert explained.

He said for a community to reach immunity, 95 percent of people need to be vaccinated in order to protect those who aren't.

A few Shasta County schools with low immunization rates for kindergarteners are Bethel Christian School with 37.2 percent, Redding Christian School with 43.6 percent and Bonny View Elementary with 57.6 percent. California law allows some children to skip immunizations if a parent submits a personal belief or medical exemption.

"Every vaccine has some risks and benefits and so does every disease, so you need to talk to your doctor about what are the risks and benefits of getting measles, and what are the risks and benefits of getting the measles vaccine," Deckert shared.

Deckert shared a few more ways people can avoid getting the measles. He said people should practice good respiratory hygiene by coughing into something, like an elbow or tissue. Deckert said if someone thinks they have the measles, they should call their doctor first before coming in to avoid infecting other people.

The measles vaccination is typically given to children before they go into kindergarten, but anyone can get the vaccine, which comes in two doses. Health officials shared the MMR vaccine is more than 99 percent effective in preventing measles.

To see what immunization percentage a certain school has in Shasta County, you can go to this website 'Shots For Schools.'