The Cupcake Cabaret burlesque-style dancers typically perform once a month at Avogadro's Number in Fort Collins, but they have scheduled a special show at Dickens Opera House in Longmont on June 12. ( Special to A&E Spotlight )

If you go What: Cupcake Cabaret Burlesque Revue When: 9 p.m. Friday, June 12. (Doors open at 8 p.m.) Where: Dickens Opera House, 300 Main St., Longmont Tickets: $13 in advance, $15 at the door Info: dickensoperahouse.com or juliadiverdi.com

The "Cupcake" part of the name is because cupcakes were trending big when Julia Diverdi started her dance company in 2008.

"It was a popular thing you saw everywhere," she said. "Cupcake shops had just opened; everyone really liked cupcakes."

The "Cabaret" part of the moniker is because Diverdi, performing as a belly dancer on the Denver burlesque circuit, realized there weren't any burlesque shows in Fort Collins.

"I thought it would be fun to bring that here, and that's how we started," she said.

And so the Cupcake Cabaret Burlesque Revue was formed.

The troupe performs monthly at Avogadro's Number in Fort Collins, but they will move to the Dickens Opera House in Longmont on June 12 when they put on "Southern Comfort."

Rose Anne Wheeler's Le Buone Azioni Productions is promoting the Longmont show.

"I started taking burlesque lessons before I turned 60," said Wheeler, whose company is based in Loveland. "I absolutely fell in love with the art. I love the freedom of movement, the naughtiness of it."

Wheeler said a venue with a bar near the action is perfect for events such as the Cupcake Cabaret, and the Dickens fit the bill.

Diverdi said her show is different than Denver shows, which feature many solo numbers. The Cupcake Cabaret, she said, is like a themed Las Vegas show with group numbers, group dances and a lot of costume changes.

The Cupcake Cabaret has performed shows such as "Sugar and Spice," where half the songs reference sweet things and half the songs are a little more sexy.

The "Southern Comfort" production will have a more country-western and southern flavor and consists of a variety of group dancing, strip tease solos and variety acts like jugglers, belly dancers, fire eaters, singers and comedians.

"There is some degree of playful nudity," Diverdi said, which is why the Longmont performance is a 21-older show. Pasties do cover the important parts.

She said the feedback has been fantastic.

"Almost all of our shows are sold out; they are packed-house shows," said Diverdi, whose troupe offers a variety of classes that include belly dancing and burlesque.

"It is a lot of fun. Everyone should come and attend a burlesque show at some time in their life. They might be surprised at how much they enjoy it."

Jessica Benes: 970-669-5050 (ext. 530), jbenes@aespotlight.com, twitter.com/jessicabenes