WASHINGTON (CBSDC/AP) — A top Republican lawmaker warns that children will die trying to get into the U.S. illegally due to President Barack Obama’s DREAM Act.

Speaking to Fox News Radio, Rep. Darrell Issa, the chairman of the House Oversight Committee, stated that these children believe they will become American citizens once they come into the U.S.

“This flood is going to mean children dying trying to get in,” Issa told Fox News Radio. “And more important, children coming here with the anticipation that somehow they’re going to be granted citizenship and then they will bring the rest of their family … that’s a false narrative. It’s not consistent with what Republicans or Democrats would choose to do to fix the immigration problem.

FBI Launches Criminal Investigation Into VA Health Care System

Many say the influx of unaccompanied minors stems from word spreading that Immigration and Customs Enforcement does not hold children in detention and from misinformation about immigrant children who qualify for Obama’s Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, which protects some youth brought to the U.S. illegally from being deported. Others say the children are looking to reunite with parents who are already in the country.

Issa blamed the Obama administration for not enforcing federal immigration laws for the problem to escalate.

“When the president made a decision that he was not going to enforce immigration laws – and some federal judges have agreed – he created a real magnet to pull in a great deal of new illegals, particularly children, who would qualify under the president’s own executive DREAM Act,” Issa explained to Fox News Radio. “And when you become all three branches of government, this is what happens.”

Issa added: “This president is purposefully willing to do it on his own and ignore the Constitution, but yes, he would also like to backdoor his way into enforcing immigration reform.”

Durbin: White House Only Finalized Bergdahl Deal Day Before Swap

The children are mostly on their own, complicating the influx of migrants last month to the Rio Grande Valley in Texas that overwhelmed the Border Patrol there. The U.S. Department of Homeland Security started flying immigrants to Arizona, where they were released and told to report to an Immigration and Customs Enforcement office near where they were traveling within 15 days.

Mexican immigrants caught crossing the border are usually deported immediately, but it is more difficult to deport migrants from Central American countries, especially if they are minors.

Immigration advocates have warned for months that they expect tens of thousands of unaccompanied minors to cross the border this year.

The number of unaccompanied minors from El Salvador, Guatemala and Honduras has soared more than 1,000 percent, according to Border Patrol data. In fiscal year 2009, border agents apprehended 3,304 such children from those three countries. This year, that figure is now more than 48,000 and expected to continue to grow. Meanwhile, the number of minors from Mexico crossing the border alone has dropped.

Arizona border officials will indefinitely continue to process hundreds of these Central American children immigrants caught crossing the border illegally from Mexico into Texas.

Immigration authorities have so far provided few details about how many of those children are being flown from Texas to Arizona and how often, but in a statement said the flights will continue.

Arizona politicians have criticized the transfer of hundreds of migrant children to a state known for its immigration problem. But the mayor of a border town where the kids are being held in a former warehouse said Monday that the conditions of their temporary housing were good enough.

Nogales Mayor Arturo Garino toured the massive facility Monday where state officials say about 700 to 1,000 mostly Central American children were sent after they were caught crossing into Texas.

“The warehouse is very nice comparing to a lot of what I’ve heard. … I’m very comfortable with it,” Garino said.

Federal authorities plan for the facility to be transitional, where the children will be vaccinated and given medical checkups. They will then be sent to facilities being set up in Ventura, California; San Antonio; and Fort Sill, Oklahoma.

Arizona Gov. Jan Brewer and other state officials have harshly criticized the transfers and called for them to stop, some even threatening criminal charges.

Maricopa County Attorney Bill Montgomery said Monday that immigration authorities may have violated state child abuse laws by dropping off women and children at Greyhound stations in Phoenix and Tucson a few weeks ago.

But border officials say that as long as the children keep coming, they need somewhere to hold them and expect to continue processing minors in Arizona.

(TM and © Copyright 2014 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)