MONTGOMERY, Alabama -- Artur Davis is back in Alabama politics, for now, and should he decide to run to be mayor of the state's capital city, the Republican Party could see a small shift back to the center.

He didn't say that, exactly. And he didn't say party politics was a priority at all. The mayoral race is nonpartisan.

But Davis indicated what he would change within the GOP when he spoke with reporters at the Montgomery Hub of AL.com on Tuesday. Davis is considering a run for Montgomery mayor in 2015.

For one, Davis said he would accept the federal government's offer to fund a Medicaid expansion within Alabama.

While that puts Davis on the same page as Parker Griffith, Democratic nominee for governor, it also puts Davis on the same page as Gov. John Kasich, the Republican chief executive of Ohio, as well as a number of other GOP governors from Arizona to Florida.

Of course, it would put Davis at odds with Alabama Gov. Robert Bentley, a Republican, who so far has not buckled on accepting the new federal funds. After winning the GOP nomination on June 3, Bentley met with reporters the next day and even expressed wariness about the compromise Indiana Gov. Mike Pence, a conservative Republican, made with the federal government in accepting the Medicaid expansion.

Bentley said President Obama seized on the compromise, saying Pence had expanded Obamacare.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government will pay 100 percent of the cost of expansion for the first three years and then 90 percent after that. It's the 10 percent cost that has some governors concerned, as Medicaid costs, like the federal government's Medicare costs, have been rising.

Still, Davis said most Republicans think the money from the federal government will help the state provide more health care to those with financial hardships.

Davis didn't stop there. He bemoaned the primary methods of both parties, saying candidates often have to take the most conservative positions within GOP primaries to get nominated. Often, that means bashing President Obama.

On that note, Bentley and Davis agree. Bentley, too, said he had problems with all the Obama-bashing going on in primary advertisements earlier this year.

In the two Alabama Public Service Commission primary races, 100 percent of the television ads for GOP candidates mentioned Obama. The races were won by Jeremy H. Oden and Chip Beeker, two outspoken Obama critics.

One GOP campaign that disappointed, Davis said, was the effort by Mississippi state Sen. Chris McDaniel, a Republican who tried to unseat U.S. Sen. Thad Cochran, R-Miss. McDaniel still hasn't conceded losing the June 24 runoff.

Davis also expressed distaste for a process in which GOP candidates for office have to shoot a paper copy of Obamacare with a gun.

Of course, Davis, who served in Congress from 2003 to 2011 as a Democrat, has been an Obama critic too. He declined to vote for Obamacare in 2010, irking his Democratic supporters.

After losing a race for the Democratic nomination for governor in 2010, Davis switched parties. In a memorable speech, Davis spoke to the Republican National Convention in 2012 as they prepared to nominate Republican Mitt Romney.

Davis mocked Obama for the earlier 2008 Democratic National Convention in 2008, and its "Styrofoam Greek columns and artificial smoke." Davis praised Obama's initial call for inclusion. But Davis noted the dreams faded and Obama had trouble governing.

It was a well-received speech -- well received by the GOP.

As Davis prepares to run in a city with a large black population that is very loyal to the Democratic Party, Davis could easily switch back to the Democrats, but he said he won't. The campaign of Parker Griffith for governor isn't exactly inspiring him to do a full-circle party switch, he joked.

(Griffith was elected to Congress as a Democrat in 2008. He switched to the GOP soon after, but lost a GOP primary in 2010. He then declared he was a Democrat again and won the 2014 nomination for governor last June.)

Davis also said he has known Alabama's black civic leaders all his life, and he can persuade them. And he noted the current mayor of Montgomery, Todd Strange, is a Republican.

Still, Davis admitted the nonpartisan race could be a test of his principles.

"I've never been through a nice campaign," Davis said.