Cañon City to be host community for 30th annual Ride The Rockies Bicycle Tour, set for June 14-20.

The route change for Ride The Rockies because of the temporary closure of the Royal Gorge Bridge made the 2013 tour the longest in the event's history. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

The route change for Ride The Rockies because of the temporary closure of the Royal Gorge Bridge made the 2013 tour the longest in the event's history. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

RTR host communities eligible for grant As a host town for the Ride The Rockies Bicycle Tour, nonprofit organizations in Cañon City are eligible to apply for a $5,000 grant. The Denver Post Community Foundation, in partnership with Wells Fargo, will award grants in each host community during the 30th annual Ride The Rockies Bicycle Tour, June 13-20. These grants will support programs that benefit children and youth; arts and culture; education and literacy; and the provision of basic human services. Beginning in 2001, Ride The Rockies host communities have been invited to apply for funding as part of the Ride The Rockies Community Grant Program. During the past 14 years, 96 grants have been distributed totaling more than $520,000. The grants are awarded in each community on the same day the cyclists arrive in town. "Every year our host communities go out of their way to make the cyclists feel welcome," said Chandler Smith, tour director. "By providing a grant to each town, we are able to give back to the communities which help to make this event possible." Grant applications are only available to nonprofit agencies in towns where Ride The Rockies stay overnight or where the Tour concludes. Qualifying towns for 2015 include: Grand Junction, Hotchkiss, Gunnison, Crested Butte, Salida, Cañon City and Westcliffe. Award announcements for The Denver Post Community Foundation/Ride The Rockies Grant Program will be made in mid-April. For more information or to request a grant application, contact Renee Wheelock, Community Relations manager, at (303) 954-6704 or rwheelock@denverpost.com, or visit www.ridetherockies.com. — Information provided by Ride The Rockies

Cañon City once again has been selected to be a host community for the Ride The Rockies 30th Anniversary Bicycle Tour.

Route for the 30th annual Ride The Rockies Bicycle Tour. (Ride the Rockies / Courtesy)

This year's tour will be June 14-20, spanning 465 miles and ascending 40,537 vertical feet through Grand Junction, Hotchkiss, Gunnison, Crested Butte, Salida and Cañon City; and joining the cast for its first time is the town of Westcliffe. The tour will roll into town June 19 and spend the night before heading to its final stop in Westcliffe on June 20.

"We are just thrilled, thrilled, thrilled," said Cañon City Chamber of Commerce Executive Director Lisa Hyams on Saturday after the official release of this year's tour schedule.

Cyclists were slated to ride across the Royal Gorge Bridge during the 2013 tour, but they were rerouted because of the Royal Gorge Fire that had sparked just days before the event. The alternate route made the trip longer and more strenuous, but they did make it to Cañon City, where they spent one night.

This year, the trek from Salida to Cañon City is 66 miles, and local headquarters will be set up at Cañon City Middle School. Hyams said a party is being planned from about 2 to 9 p.m. on the edge of the Arkansas River at Centennial Park.

"Since we are their last overnight stop, we hope to make it their biggest party night," Hyams said.

She said a large amount of volunteers will be needed for the event, and she would like to see schools and youth take part, as well.

"We need charities that want to be involved because Ride The Rockies gives a $5,000 check to the charity that is most involved," she said.

The 49-mile Day 7 of the tour begins in Cañon City, then runs through Brookside, Florence, Wetmore and Silver Cliff and ends at Westcliffe.

Ride The Rockies generates more than $1.5 million in economic impact annually in Colorado, according to Ride The Rockies' official website. Each day of the ride brings an average of $250,000 in economic impact to its host communities. Local businesses, such as hotels, restaurants, bike shops and retailers, benefit from the tour.

According to information provided by ridetherockies.com, the tour will bring in 3,000 to 3,500 people, which includes more than 2,000 registered cyclists, event staff, family and friends of riders, unregistered cyclists and others. Ride The Rockies also receives extensive media coverage. In 2014 alone, the Tour generated more than 210 million media "impressions" through radio, television and digital and print media.

For more information, visit http://ridetherockies.com/ or call Hyams at the Chamber at 275-2331.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com