With snow upon the ground you probably don't want to remove your gloves — and shoes and socks — to give the feared Quadruple Moutza to a deserving moron.

But today is the day we award the Moutza of the Month for November, and there are so many worthies, I'm asking you to risk some toe frostbite for the cause.

Nominations came rushing in across social media, including this one from Dom Sulimowski:

"The ENTIRE BEARS organization starting with the McCaskey Family," wrote Don. "They hired these boobs!"

They also hired general manager Phil Emery, who signed those boobs.

Nah!

My friends, get your palms ready, and even warm the soles of your feet, and prepare them for the giving of the Moutza, the ancient Hellenic hand signal of disgust.

It's followed by a hearty "Nah!" (Take it) or "Feesa etho!" (Blow right here) or "Pare pente" (Take five). But of course, you know this. So let's begin.

Nominees include Oliver Friedfeld, the Georgetown University future Foreign Service officer who was mugged and then wrote about it.

He blamed not his attacker but instead himself and his wealth and "privilege."

Friedfeld makes the Obamacare Pajama Boy look like a Son of Anarchy.

"This moron has been so indoctrinated with political correctness that he is no longer content with being offended by others," writes David Samaras.

"He has evolved to the point where he is actually offended by his own presence in the cosmos. Where is Charles Darwin when we need him?"

Darwin is dead. But you are alive, David Samaras. It is terrible thing to hoard a Moutza. So do not hoard this one. Use it.

Friedfeld, you sniveling insect, lift up your head.

Nah!

Don't we need a few Moutzas for retail stores that opened on Thanksgiving? What happened to family time?

And what of those who think that saying "Merry Christmas" is offensive, even as we're encouraged to rush like lemmings to the stores and spend money on gifts?

Nah! And Nah!

Reader Sanford Slansky wrote to "nominate this guy," meaning Dennis Eugene Emery of Florida, who had an argument with his wife, threatened to shoot their dog, but mistakenly shot himself in the face

Moutza of the month: Rahm, Reid, Saudi Arabia and more Chicago Tribune columnist John Kass reveals his picks for August 2014's Moutza of the Month. Chicago Tribune columnist John Kass reveals his picks for August 2014's Moutza of the Month. See more videos

Would a Moutza for Emery be considered overkill, since he's already blown his brains out?

No? OK, Mr. Dead Emery, that'll teach you not to threaten a dog:

Nah!

One of my favorites is Jonathan Gruber, the architect of Obamacare and the poster boy for Liberal Conceit.

"If you had a law that said, and made explicit, that healthy people would pay in and sick people get money, it would not have passed, OK?" Gruber noted in a 2013 video that went viral after the November midterm elections. "… And basically, you know, call it the stupidity of the American voter or whatever, but basically that was really, really critical to getting the thing to pass."

He didn't mean all American voters were stupid. Conservatives loathed Obamacare and so they were demonized by liberal Hopium smoking scribes. Republicans didn't support it. But Democrats did.

So Gruber, a liberal, was actually relying on the stupidity of Democrats to get Obamacare passed.

Nah.

Many readers nominated the Ferguson looters and Missouri Gov. Jay Nixon, who held back the National Guard as the looters burned and ransacked stores.

Many of you know that Michael Brown, an unarmed black teenager, was shot to death by a white police officer in August. Immediately, activists cast Brown as the innocent victim.

A grand jury heard testimony. Neighborhood witnesses corroborated the officer's account, that Brown attacked him and charged. That grand jury could not find probable cause to indict the officer, Darren Wilson.

Yet predictably, all hell broke loose in Ferguson. Too bad Gov. Nixon didn't have the clarity of mind to see it coming.

My favorites? Al Sharpton, noted race hustler, and Louis Head, the stepfather of the slain teenager.

It was Head who stood before the crowd moments before the fires began and shouted, "Burn this bitch down!!!"

"It has to be Michael Brown's stepfather for screaming at the rioters to burn the place down and then denying he ever said it," said Nada Celeste Meccia in her nomination of Mr. Head for the Grand Moutza.

I don't think he'll be indicted, but black-owned businesses were burned and looted and the owners were devastated.

Mr. Head? My hand is talking and it's speaking Greek. Can you hear it?

Nah!

But the Moutza of the Month of November is special, like Oliver Friedfeld, the Georgetown University senior who blamed his "privilege" for the fact that he was robbed.

Someday, in the Kass Dictionary of Future Slang, I will include the phrase, "To Oliver Friedfeld oneself," meaning a lamb that willingly puts its throat on the knife, so as not to offend those who would slaughter, flay and roast it.

Oliver Friedfeld, I have sons at college. I don't want to appear hardhearted, and if you were an isolated case I would offer pity.

But I think you're a forerunner, and the collective bleating must stop.

You're at Georgetown, an elite university, and you're in the School of Foreign Service, so you're one of the elite. You might even negotiate nuclear treaties with Iran someday.

It is obvious your professors have trained you well, to think like a victim and to kiss the hand of your attacker.

Oliver Friedfeld, you win the Moutza of the Month for November.

Nah!

Please, think nothing of it. I consider it a privilege.

jskass@tribpub.com

Twitter @John_Kass