The Medicare messaging is playing out this year even in House and Senate races. Medicare '14: New ads, old messages

There’s an element of nostalgia in campaign ads targeted at seniors. Both parties are talking about Medicare like it’s 2012.

The ads are new, but the arguments are old: Republicans accuse Democratic incumbents of cutting $716 billion from Medicare as part of the health reform law in 2010. Democrats say the GOP lawmakers have been trying to “end Medicare as we know it” since 2011 by turning it into a voucher program as part of Rep Paul Ryan’s House budget plan.

Story Continued Below

Neither attack is strictly true, but the vintage 2012 attacks just keep coming.

( POLITICO's polling center)

“He’s trying to cover up his vote for Obamacare, cutting Medicare for West Virginia’s seniors,” says a NRCC attack on Democratic Rep. Nick Rahall.

“While Scott Brown represented Massachusetts, he voted to cut Social Security and Medicare,” says a DSCC attack on the Republican now running for Senate in New Hampshire.

Those attacks are typical and common. More than 12,000 television spots touched on Medicare in just one recent week in October, according to Kantar Media’s Campaign Media Analysis Group.

There’s been scant attention to Medicare policy over the past two years, aside from a failed compromise on an intractable physician payment problem, known as the “doc fix.” But the worries about changing or cutting Medicare still resonate with voters, especially the retirees who reliably show up at the polls in midterms.

( POLITICO's 2014 race ratings)

“There’s no reason to believe public opinion would have shifted [Ryan’s] way in the last two years in favor of ending the guarantee of Medicare,” said Jeremy Funk of Americans United for Change, a labor-backed group originally formed to combat GOP efforts to privatize part of Social Security. “Therefore it remains a potent contrast message to deliver today.”

The Medicare messaging is playing out this year even in House and Senate races where neither candidate was around for the health law or Ryan budget votes. In Arizona’s retiree-heavy Second District, for instance, Democratic Rep. Ron Barber took office in 2012, and his opponent, Martha McSally, has never been in Congress. But Medicare is the subject of multiple ads for both sides

“I don’t think the majority of the Medicare recipients know what is happening to them,” says a woman identified as Lou-Ann in an ad by the NRCC. “Under Obamacare, Medicare is going to be cut. Only when it hits you are you going to know it. Ron Barber did not stand up for the elderly.” The on-screen texts refers to Barber’s vote against one of the House’s many efforts to repeal all or part of the health law.

“One thing that worries me,” says a middle-aged man working on his motorcycle, narrating a DCCC ad, “are these politicians like Martha McSally who would undermine Medicare, privatize it.” The spot concludes, “Yeah, I’m planning for retirement, and that plan starts with saying no to Martha McSally.”

Democrats push the issue more: About 58 percent of the 12,537 Medicare-related spots on the air the week of Oct. 20-26 were from Democrats. But 40 percent of all health care-related ads mentioned Medicare, in large part because it remains one of the right’s most powerful critiques of Obamacare.

Entitlement fights have gone on for years — and Republicans had been losing the rhetorical battle on both Medicare and Social Security. The Ryan budget and talk of vouchers heightened that partisan disadvantage.

Authors: