Schools, in-home care, bullet train win in state budget



























































Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 1 of / 16 Caption Close Image 1 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 2 of 16 State Sen. Mark Leno has pushed California’s hemp bill into reality.<252><137>San Francisco State Senator Mark Leno takes a phone call in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, Californa, June 13, 2014.<137><137><252><137> less State Sen. Mark Leno has pushed California’s hemp bill into reality.<252><137>San Francisco State Senator Mark Leno takes a phone call in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, Californa, June 13, 2014. ... more Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime / Special To The Chronicle Image 3 of 16 Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, left, and Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, right, walk the halls of the State Capitol in Sacramento, June 13, 2014, while lobbying legislators to oppose a budget trailer bill that would cap the amount of funds that local school districts can hold in their local reserve. less Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, left, and Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, right, walk the halls of the ... more Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 4 of 16 Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 5 of 16 Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 6 of 16 Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 7 of 16 Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, left, and Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, right, lobby a Senate staffer to oppose a budget trailer bill that would cap the amount of funds that local school districts can hold in their local reserve at the State Capitol in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. less Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, left, and Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, right, lobby a Senate ... more Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 8 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg gathers his thoughts before meeting with a reporter in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg gathers his thoughts before meeting with a reporter in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 9 of 16 San Francisco State Senator Mark Leno looks over his budget notes in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, Californa, June 13, 2014. San Francisco State Senator Mark Leno looks over his budget notes in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, Californa, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 10 of 16 Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Due to the drought, the state of California has stopped watering the State Capitol lawn in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 11 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, center, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left, and his communications director Mark Hedlund, right, in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. less State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, center, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left, and his communications director Mark Hedlund, right, in his State Capitol ... more Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 12 of 16 Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, left, and Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, right, walk the halls of the State Capitol in Sacramento, June 13, 2014, while lobbying legislators to oppose a budget trailer bill that would cap the amount of funds that local school districts can hold in their local reserve. less Martha Alvarez, Director of Government Relations for the San Diego Unified School District, left, and Andrea Ball, legislative advocate for the California School Boards Association, right, walk the halls of the ... more Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 13 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 14 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg, right, goes over the state budget with senate finance director Craig Cornett, left in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 15 of 16 State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg goes over the state budget with staffers in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. State Senate president pro tem Darrell Steinberg goes over the state budget with staffers in his State Capitol office in Sacramento, California, June 13, 2014. Photo: Max Whittaker/Prime, Special To The Chronicle Image 16 of 16 Schools, in-home care, bullet train win in state budget 1 / 16 Back to Gallery

Sacramento --

After days of wrangling over the state budget, lawmakers are set to vote Sunday on a more generous spending plan than proposed by Gov. Jerry Brown - expanding preschool and high school career programs, providing overtime pay for in-home caregivers and dedicating hundreds of millions of dollars now and in future years to high-speed rail.

With a deal reached, it appears Democratic lawmakers who have pushed for more money to restore programs cut during the recession are getting some additional resources, but not nearly to the extent they had hoped as the word "compromise" was the word of the day.

Brown initially proposed spending $107.8 billion in 2014-15 for the general fund, which pays for public schools and universities, prisons, health care and other services. Democratic lawmakers and the governor, however, agreed to a $108 billion plan.

"The leaders of the Legislature have worked very hard to build a solid and sustainable budget that pays down debt, brings stability to the teachers' pension system and builds at long last a reliable Rainy Day Fund," Brown said in a statement Friday.

Among the closely watched proposals struck down was a bipartisan call to restore a 10 percent cut to the reimbursement rates doctors receive for treating Medi-Cal patients as well as plans to require annual inspections at assisted-living facilities for the elderly and disabled following last year's botched closure of a Castro Valley care home.

Boost state's economy

"We don't always get exactly what we want, but this is a package that has some very smart investments for California that will help California's economy, help shrink that opportunity gap, provide some really needed resources to folks who sadly have not had the lift from the economic recovery that our general fund has seen," said Assemblywoman Nancy Skinner, D-Berkeley, who led the budget conference committee, which has met over the past several days to work out a plan.

The full Legislature will vote on the plan Sunday, which is the constitutional deadline for passing a budget. Some advocacy groups are still pushing for last-minute changes, particularly education groups that say they were taken by surprise over a last-minute policy change proposal that would restrict how much school districts can keep in budget reserves.

School districts and groups that represent school boards and administrators say they are vehemently opposed to the new policy, which would cap how much districts can carry over each year and instead make that money available for school programs, new hires and teacher raises. The California Teachers Association is supporting the proposal, which would kick in only if voters pass a rainy-day fund on the November ballot.

Officials from several education groups - including the California School Boards Association, Association of California School Administrators and California Association of School Business Officials - said they are likely to oppose the rainy-day fund as a result of the school reserve provision.

Teacher pay

Josephine Lucey, president of the school board association, said the last-minute policy change is a blatant maneuver by the teachers association to increase teacher pay.

"This proposal is fiscally irresponsible and detrimental to the public educational system in California," said Lucey, who is also a school board member at Cupertino Union School District.

The budget proposal includes $264 million for expanding early education programs, such as adding 11,500 preschool slots for low-income families by June 2015 and 31,500 additional slots in the coming years. Funding would also go toward improving transitional kindergarten curriculum and increasing child care reimbursement rates.

The preschool expansion falls short of a push by state Senate President Pro Tem Darrell Steinberg, D-Sacramento, for free preschool for all kids, but will still cover roughly half of the state's 4-year-olds.

"You always begin with a big goal and aspiration, then you define success by whether or not you made significant, even large, progress," Steinberg said. "And we did. I'm very pleased."

Farmworker insurance

The budget also includes $3 million to bring the medical insurance plan for some unionized farmworkers into compliance with the Affordable Care Act and $2.5 million for renovations to the Governor's Mansion State Historic Park in Sacramento. Career technical programs at high schools would receive another $250 million in one-time money.

The state Legislature successfully pushed for in-home caregivers to receive overtime after Brown, concerned that it could cost California $600 million by 2015-16, proposed barring it. In exchange, the Legislature dropped a proposal for an additional $140 million to restore hours in the In-Home Supportive Services program that were cut in 2012.

In-home caregiver pay

U.S. Department of Labor regulations made in-home caregivers eligible for time-and-a-half beginning in January 2015 for working more than 40 hours a week, as well as additional pay for travel time between clients and trainings. In-Home Supportive Services assists 450,000 low-income elderly, blind or disabled people in their homes as a way to avoid more costly out-of-home alternatives.

"There is much to celebrate and there are some disappointments. It's the nature of compromise," said Sen. Mark Leno, D-San Francisco, who is chair of the Senate's budget committee.

Emissions and train

Lawmakers and Brown agreed to spend $250 million on the high-speed rail and dedicate 25 percent of future cap-and-trade funds toward the $68 billion project.

Under cap and trade, California began collecting the new revenue in 2012 by auctioning "carbon credits" that essentially permit businesses to exceed the cap on carbon dioxide emissions. Credit holders who do not emit carbon dioxide beyond a cap set by the state can sell them to businesses that are exceeding the cap.

Lawmakers also dedicated 35 percent of cap-and-trade funds for new transit and affordable housing projects near mass transit.

"There is a big pipeline of projects that would benefit from this," said Shamus Roller, executive director of Housing California. "The Bay Area would be very competitive for these dollars because of Muni and BART."