WASHINGTON, June 12, 2015 /PRNewswire/ --

NEW ANNOUNCEMENT: Honored Guest Speakers

Ms. Sheila Nix, Chief of Staff to Dr. Jill Biden

Ms. Joan Lunden, Award-Winning Journalist, Author, TV Host, ALIVE Network Founder

On Wednesday, June 17th, 2015, the Tigerlily Foundation will host the Fourth Annual Young Women's Breast Health Day (YWBHD) on the Hill. This event falls in timing with the Sixth anniversary of passing the Breast Cancer Education and Awareness Requires Learning Young (EARLY) Act, and to commemorate the Re-Authorization of the Act.

The YWBHD is an educational luncheon and panel event that engages a diverse range of leaders in an open dialogue on an important women's health topic. The goals for this event are to discuss the risks of breast cancer for young women under the age of 45, and to empower young women to be their own best advocates for their breast health, by making informed decisions.

Event Information

Date & Time: Wednesday, June 17 th , 2015, from 12:00 pm until 3:00 pm EDT

, 2015, from Location : Rayburn House Building

45 Independence S.W., Room 2168: The Gold Room

Washington, D.C.

: Rayburn House Building 45 Independence S.W., Room 2168: The Gold Room Register here : http://tigerlilyfoundation.org/events/young-womens-breast-health-day-on-the-hill-2015/





: http://tigerlilyfoundation.org/events/young-womens-breast-health-day-on-the-hill-2015/ Event Hosts: Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz (D – FL), DNC Chair & Congresswoman Ms. Maimah Karmo , CDC Advisory Member & President, Tigerlily Foundation Ms. Noelle Karmo , Chief Inspiration Officer, Tigerlily Foundation



*NEW ANNOUNCEMENT*

Honored Guest Speakers : Ms. Sheila Nix , Chief of Staff to Dr. Jill Biden Ms. Joan Lunden , American Journalist, Author, TV Host, ALIVE Network Founder



Panel Moderator : Ms. Judy Kurtz , The Hill, In the Know Columnist





: The Hill, In the Know Columnist Featured Panelists : Rep. Jackie Speier (D-CA), Congresswoman Ms. Temeika L. Fairley , Office of the Director, Center for Disease Control (CDC) Dr. Regina Hampton , Medical Director Co-Founder for Breast Care for Washington Ms. Valerie L. Rochester , Director Programs & Training, Black Women's Health Imp. Ms. Nikia Hammonds-Blakely , Ambassador to Komen for the Cure Ms. Juliet Disparte , Educational Ambassador for Bright Pink Mr. Fernando Ascencio , Executive Director for Nueva Vida Ms. Elana Silber , MBA and Director of Operations, Sharsheret Ms. Kristen Berset , Breast Cancer Survivor & Ambassador, Tigerlily Foundation Ms. Cydney Taylor Hill , Miss District of Columbia's Outstanding Teen 2014 Ms. Maggy Francois , Founder and Executive Director of Special Events Ms. Karen Jaynes , Founder, Allways Yoga

:

EARLY Act Background & Event History: This event was first held in 2009, in response to creating advocacy and awareness about the issues young breast cancer survivors faced. In 2009, Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz authored and introduced the EARLY Act, which President Obama originally signed into law as part of the Affordable Care Act. The EARLY Act directed the CDC to launch a national education campaign to raise awareness of breast cancer in young women. Last year, Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz and Congresswoman Renee Ellmers (N.C. - 02) led the Re-Authorization of the EARLY Act and President Obama signed the bill into law last December, which extended the EARLY Act for another five years.

Congresswoman Wasserman Schultz, who wrote the EARLY Act with significant contributions from the Tigerlily Foundation, said:

"Early detection and prevention of breast cancer are more important than ever. We must never write off young women in their quest to detect and beat breast cancer. As a young survivor, mother and legislator, I will continue to work tirelessly with groups such as the Tigerlily Foundation to secure comprehensive breast health care for all women."

Joan Lunden, shared her personal experience as a fellow breast cancer survivor, and added that:

"Going through a cancer diagnosis and treatment is a confusing and overwhelming process, and the ability to look up to others who have traveled the path before you is extremely helpful. My life and my career took on a whole new meaning, and my passion became my mission by creating the community and founding the online network, ALIVE in 2015."

Tigerlily Foundation is a national breast cancer non-profit, based in Washington, D.C. It was founded in 2007 by Maimah Karmo, and its mission is to educate, advocate for, empower and support young women (15-45), before, during and after breast cancer. The organization is dedicated to global awareness for breast cancer for women under the age of 45.

For more information, go to: www.tigerlilyfoundation.org and www.maimahkarmo.com.

Facebook: TigerlilyFoundation

Twitter: @Tigerlilycares, @Maimah

For press queries, please contact:

Lisa McCarty

The McCarty Group, LLC.

571-216-5648

Email

SOURCE Tigerlily Foundation