Lifespan is Rhode Island’s largest private employer, a not-for-profit medical giant with $1.7 billion in annual revenue. It’s also facing major challenges: Lifespan’s continuing operations posted a net loss of $5 million last year, and controversy is still swirling after a WPRI 12 report revealed former CEO George Vecchione’s nearly $8 million pay package in 2011.

Rob Lazerow is an expert on the hospital industry at The Advisory Board Company, a Washington-based consultancy. He previously worked as an analyst in the Rhode Island health insurance commissioner’s office. We talked this week about the problems confronting Lifespan and other hospitals and what the outlook is. The transcript has been lightly edited for clarity.

First off the bat, is the Advisory Board Company doing any work with any of our hospitals or hospital systems in Rhode Island?

I don’t know how familiar you are with the Advisory Board and the type of business model we have, but we have a membership-based model, so organizations are basically members for a year or multiple years, and that does include some organizations in Rhode Island. We’re also, through our Southwind consulting division, working at the state level to support the Healthy Rhode Island initiative. So some of my colleagues would certainly have collaborated with some of the providers in the state.

And you yourself actually went to Brown University, right?

I was a Brown graduate, that’s right.

OK, let’s dive right in. Lifespan, as we reported last week, is going through some significant financial challenges. How much is Lifespan having the same experience as other big hospital groups and how much is it sort of in a unique situation here?

Without being able to comment on the specific drivers of their situation, I think it’s safe to say that hospitals across the country are facing some pretty challenging economic circumstances right now.

Hospitals have traditionally grown in two principal ways: one by getting price increases, and two by growing volumes. And across the last couple of years they have begun to face major challenges and threats to both of those.

For example, hospitals are contending with an onslaught of new price cuts. Some of those come from the Affordable Care Act, so those have kicked in – those are reductions to what’s called the market-basket update, or the amount that the Medicare payment rate gets increased each year. Then you have the cuts from the [federal] sequester process. That was 2%; it’s actually going to go up slightly as a result of the [Ryan-Murray budget] deal being negotiated right now. Then you have the new pay-for-performance programs, things like the hospital value-based payment program and readmission-reductions program – those take away more revenue in some cases.

So there are a lot of direct pressures on pricing at a time when the population is slowly getting older, and – what is it? – some 7,000 people a day turn 65 and move into the Medicare program. So you have more and more patients reimbursed by the Medicare program, which pays generally at a lower rate than private commercial payers – plus there are, even within that world, pressures on that pricing. I think of it as the difference of the shifting payer mix – more Medicare, less commercial – and deceleration in price growth – so basically putting the brakes on the price increases the hospitals have had in the past.

That’s just from a pricing side, though. At the same time that’s all happening, across recent years there have been some hits to volume as well, as the recession has hit patients particularly hard, so patients not necessarily wanting to have elective procedures – especially if they have high-deductible health plans. And not only are more people moving onto high-deductible health plans, but the deductible is going up. So if someone has a $5,000 or $6,000 deductible, that cane make them think twice about having an elective procedure done.

So we’re definitely hearing about weak volumes on the physician side and on the hospital side nationwide.

Here in Rhode Island, we have a very fragmented health-care sector in terms of providers, and we also have a weak economy, with the second-highest unemployment rate in the country. Could those be adding to the problems for Lifespan, or is it probably primarily these national issues that are affecting all hospitals in the same way?

It could be a combination. Certainly, a high unemployment rate would mean fewer people who have employer-sponsored coverage, or who may elect to go without COBRA [coverage] at that high price point. I think it will be interesting to see what happens as [the Affordable Care Act’s] health insurance exchanges come online, and if that provides some relief for the high rate of uninsured.

It sounds like it’s important for people trying to understand what’s happening with Lifespan to look beyond just Lifespan’s own decisions and management team to these larger trends, that there are big challenges all hospitals are facing across the country, and Rhode Island’s are feeling that too.

Exactly. The sheer aging of the population alone has huge ramifications for hospitals and health systems. Part of it is that payer mix shift. The American Hospital Association has great data on this – it’s called the payment-to-cost ratio, and they say commercial payers pay something like 130% of cost, whereas Medicare and Medicaid pay about 90% of cost. So that could be a 40 cents on the dollar pricing differential just based on who’s sending the check.

Going back to Lifespan, it’s the biggest player in our hospital market and owns a number of key institutions. It has our main safety-net hospital, Rhode Island Hospital here in Providence. It’s also our biggest private employer, so just a huge enterprise in the state. Do you find that these problems are harder or easier to solve if a hospital group is very dominant or is a very big organization?

That’s definitely market-specific. There are definitely certain advantages to being part of a larger organization; for example, more diverse business lines, so if there are weak volumes in one particular area, hopefully there’s an opportunity to make it up in other areas. Second, larger organizations, more stable organizations, may have favorable access to capital in the debt markets, so that’s been able to fuel some of the expansion and technology investments that some of the large systems have made in recent years.

Lifespan actually just borrowed $50 million partly to fund IT upgrades.

I believe it. I’ll tell you, as I think about the independent hospitals that we work with – the standalone facilities – they’re all in a moment of soul-searching right now. They’re asking, can we continue to make ends meet as a standalone provider and can we figure out how to plug into this emerging population-health-focused delivery system, or do we need to seek shelter in numbers and be part of a broader, more stable organization? That’s at least part of the perspective I hear from other hospital leaders.

Are there other ways you see hospitals around the country addressing these financial challenges, like the ones we’re seeing at Lifespan – certain steps you see them take? We’ve seen Lifespan have job cuts, you just mentioned looking to diversify and growing lines of business. Are there other things a lot of hospital executives are looking to try to do?

Sure. We do a lot of work around what we call long-term margin management. I think it’s really important to emphasize that the goal is sustainable margins. The goal isn’t cost-cutting, the goal isn’t massive profits, but it’s to have sustainable margins that let these largely not-for-profit – 85% of them are not-for-profit organizations – continue to fill their role in their community.

As we work with organizations around margin sustainability, there are four big areas of opportunity that we tend to focus on in our research.

The first is ensuring adequate revenue capture. That’s everything from accurate coding to revenue-cycle management to the collections when more and more of those dollars come directly from the patient through the high-deductible health plan every year. So that’s largely about making sure the providers are getting paid for the services that are delivered.

Second, focus on reducing cost growth. And I think there’s some important nuance there. A lot of he solutions that hospitals have looked to in the past have created one-time cost savings that got them through whatever the crisis of the day was. We frankly saw a lot of that during the recession. But the types of challenges that we see now aren’t cyclical in nature; they’re more structural. We don’t think these one-time savings are sufficient. So rather than slash that we would like to see organizations empower their staff and use their staff as an area for innovation, and help harness their collective wisdom about what can be done better and more efficiently. There is certainly focus on reducing long-term cost, but it’s more about making sure costs grow more slowly than they have in the past – and that can involve things around labor and benefits at times, technology purchases absolutely, facility purchases – rather than looking to just slash the cost base.

The third area of focus is all about capacity management. How do organizations make sure that they’re using their fixed-cost capacity effectively? For some organizations this is about focusing on length of stay and eliminating bottlenecks; for others it’s about how do they make sure the right services are provided on an outpatient basis where possible, and that’s less expensive capacity to add, and make sure that inpatient capacity is used effectively.

And then finally the one that is probably most challenging but also most important long-term is the idea of protecting the case mix over time as we face an older, sicker population, with not only more Medicare reimbursement but more medical cases. I like to think about it as the difference between what a 65-year-old needs and what an 85-year-old needs. A 65-year-old needs a hip and a knee and a stent; an 85-year-old is in there for their diabetes and their heart failure and their COPD [chronic obstructive pulmonary disease].

So what can hospitals do to make sure they’re not running these large Medicare medical wards that won’t bring in enough revenue per case to keep the doors open? And that’s a one-two punch from our perspective. It’s first making sure that there isn’t inappropriate use of capacity – think of heart failure readmissions or pneumonia readmissions; those are admissions that aren’t good for the patient and aren’t particularly good for the hospital, either. So even if you take the readmission penalties off the table, we’re still seeing focus in proactively managing those patients to avoid that utilization so that the bed is open for a more profitable case. And then second, making sure they’re growing in the right areas. So we still see a lot of focus on working with surgeons, for example, to capture market share of the elective and more profitable procedures now that there’s a bed open.

You put all four of those together, and over a decade for example we think that the average hospital will be able to make some very important margin improvement. Now that still is predicated on a fee-for-service payment system – some organizations are saying, we look out 10 years and even if fee-for-service payments are available, they stink. And rather than try to make that formula work for fee-for-service, they say, well when we look out, in 10 years we would rather take risk-based payments and orient everything we do around population health, rather than try to walk this tightrope of making fee-for-service margin sustainable.

One of the debates we’re hearing now in Rhode Island is the question of whether we may just have too many hospitals and too many hospital beds at the moment, which is obviously a sector-wide thing beyond Lifespan or any other organization. Exhibit A had been Landmark Medical Center, an insolvent hospital in Woonsocket that now looks like it will not be closed. Is that adding to the problems nationally, a surplus of beds in some markets?

It’s totally market-specific. If you look at an area like New York, they have the Berger Commission, which started with the premise that we probably have too many beds, and they went around and did some consolidation and closed some facilities and some inpatient became outpatient centers – things like that. So in some markets, that’s the case. In other markets, I hear of hospitals that are filled to the brim with patients. A lot of it depends on issues like, were there major expansion projects before the recession? Or were they planning for something and then the recession got in the way? It is just so market-specific.

The Woonsocket hospital I mentioned, Landmark, is being bought by Prime Healthcare from California. It’s the first time we’ll have a for-profit hospital in the Rhode Island market. Should we expect any major shifts with the introduction of a for-profit hospital? Will it put new pressure on Lifespan and the other hospital groups?

It’s a good question. Again, it’s so specific to the particular organization and the types of strategies that they would pursue, and what type of role they want to seek in the market. Are they going to focus on growing just those most profitable surgeries? In which case, maybe the landscape for those cases gets more competitive, which could play out a number of ways. If it’s healthy competition, that could mean lower prices and better service for patients. In other models, it could mean more focus on physician-alignment and physician employment.

It’s hard to predict how that plays out, but you could see it changing the competitive landscape depending on how aggressive the new organization is.

Time magazine made a splash with that big Bitter Pill cover story by Steve Brill earlier this year. It seems like that came down to a thesis that a lot of the problem for U.S. health care is nominally not-for-profit hospitals charging way too much services and overcompensating top executives. Do you think that was off base? Do you think some of it was on target? What was your reaction to that story, and the discussion it kicked off?

It was certainly provocative reading. Our take: it was a bit sensational. Because the point that he didn’t make – and I certainly don’t want to litigate Steven Brill here – but the point that he didn’t make is that the “chargemaster” is a dusty old negotiating document, and has little to no reflection on the amount that organizations are actually getting paid.

Prices for hospital services are set one of two ways. One, they are negotiated with commercial payers, or two, they are dictated by the federal government and states through the Medicare and Medicaid programs. So it’s not like hospitals are just putting out their price on a shingle and expecting folks to walk in the door and pay – except for the small amount of international medical tourism; I’ve heard it called “the Saudi prince problem.”

So I think that part was a bit exaggerated. Pulling out the line items on a hospital bill doesn’t actually reflect the amount that anyone is actually paying at the end of the day. I think it was Uwe Reinhardt, the Princeton economist, who wrote that you could eliminate all hospital executives’ compensation and it would be a drop in the bucket. That was his analysis.

Now that all said, it is safe to say that in the past health care providers’ growth has in many cases been fueled by price increases, and they’ve been relatively reliable price increases. So if you look at recent years when volumes have been flat or in some cases even down, if organizations’ revenue has grown, that’s been principally if not completely because of pricing. As we look out into the future – and the future being even just the next three years – we don’t think that type of growth is feasible anymore.

We’ve spent most of 2013, really from May onward, talking to hospital executives that come to our conferences and read our research about the end of price as a growth lever – if for no other reason than, again, that aging of the population and the types of steps that the Medicare program is taking or Congress is taking to reduce or slow the growth of Medicare pricing. So I think hospitals and hospital executives now have a pretty healthy understanding that even if price was a growth lever in the past, that’s just not realistic moving forward. We view the future of growth much more about capturing market share by being better in a competitive market. And at a time when commercial payers are looking at narrow networks, and patients are choosing health plans on the exchanges and in many cases the networks that go with them, and patients are bearing more out-of-pocket responsibility – there’s a lot more active purchasing going on for health care.

So we think rather than try to win by increasing price, hospitals will win be being better, just like every other consumer product out there. And hopefully that then increases service levels and quality, as organizations view for market share.

Anything else I should ask or any final thoughts as we watch what happens with Lifespan and the rest of our hospitals here in Rhode Island in the coming years?

We’ve covered the big ones. I think it will be interesting to see what other organizations in the future we’re talking about, and not just in Rhode Island but across New England and even the rest of the country, as they contend with these big four forces: decelerating price growth, increasing cost pressure, shifting payer mix, and deteriorating case mix. •

(photo: The Advisory Board Company)