Topics: Birth Control, iuds, the pill, unplanned pregnancy, Life News, Politics News

A single half-day training that teaches medical clinics how to provide better birth control can radically improve outcomes for patients, cutting unplanned pregnancies by half according to research published in the prestigious medical journal, the Lancet.

Better Birth Control

Improvements in family planning change lives. On the pill, nearly 1 in 10 women gets pregnant each year, and for couples relying on condoms that number is 1 in 6! That may be better than the rhythm method or an abstinence commitment or no protection at all (annual pregnancy rate over 8 in 10), but it’s still a big deal for couples who would rather avoid an abortion or another baby.

By contrast, state-of-the-art IUDs and contraceptive implants drop the annual pregnancy rate below 1 in 500. The key is this: Every-day and every-time methods have a big human error factor. The ordinary challenges of daily life — things like forgetting, fights, finances and fumbling — make it virtually impossible for couples to use pills, condoms or intermittent abstinence with perfect consistency; and the more chaotic a person’s life, the more likely he or she will end up facing a surprise pregnancy. Long-acting contraceptives eliminate these factors, which means they work equally well for empowered women whose lives are secure and predictable, and for disempowered women whose lives are not.

Three kinds of long-acting contraceptives (hormone-free copper IUDs, hormonal IUDs and implants) effectively flip the fertility switch to off until a woman wants it on, making pregnancy “opt in” rather than “opt out.” Depending on the method, they can last from three to 10+ years; but in each case a quick, easy removal restores normal fertility at any point. Bonus health benefits can include protection against some cancers and lighter, less frequent periods.

Despite these advantages, only 7.2 percent of women used a long-acting contraceptive in the U.S. in the years from 2011-2013. IUDs and implants are rapidly gaining popularity, thanks in part to Obamacare, which eliminates high upfront cost as a barrier. But for historical reasons, lack of knowledge remains an obstacle.

In the 1970s, a defective IUD traumatized women and providers alike. Afterward, fears and litigation drove long-acting birth control out of the U.S. market, putting North America decades behind Europe in solving unplanned pregnancy. In the intervening decades contraceptive technologies advanced, and today modern IUDs are the healthiest method available for most women, which has made them popular around the world.

Even so, many American doctors and nurses still lead family planning conversations with familiar pills and shots rather than top-tier long-acting methods. In fact, research in the U.S. and Canada shows a dismaying level of misinformation about IUDs and implants among doctors. Lack of knowledge among providers creates lack of knowledge among members of the general public. In a 2013 survey by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen and Unplanned Pregnancy, most young people between the ages of 18 and 29 said they had never heard of the implant.

When women have full information about contraceptive options, things change. Researchers at Washington University in St. Louis provided comprehensive information and then offered 9,000 women and youth the birth control of their choice for free. Three-quarters chose a state-of-the-art IUD or implant, and the rate of teen pregnancy and abortion plummeted.

How can we ensure that the same excellent options become available to all women? The obstacles are legion: Receptionists sometimes offer outdated information, schedules are optimized for old ways of doing business, counselors omit key questions, providers tilt toward old familiar shots and pills, billing offices use the wrong codes, and managers fret about losing money … in sum, a host of factors make it easier for clinics to keep offering the same old, same old.

Half-day Training Cuts Unplanned Pregnancy in Half

Between 2011 and 2013, Planned Parenthood and the Bixby Center for Global Reproductive Health at the University of California, San Francisco (UCSF), conducted a study aimed at testing whether medical practices can be updated via an intensive training that engages the whole clinic staff. Forty Planned Parenthood affiliate clinics participated in the study. In 20, the entire staff, from receptionists to counselors to doctors, received a half-day training on how to provide excellent access to IUDs and implants. The primary focus was on ensuring that women get full information about all available birth control methods and that they can get the method of their choice in the same visit. The other 20 clinics continued business as usual.

Dramatic differences emerged during the following year. In the 20 clinics that received the training, 71 percent of providers discussed IUDs and implants with their patients, while only 39 percent did in the control group. Women responded to additional information by choosing IUDs and implants at a higher rate — 28 percent in the clinics that received the intervention vs. 17 percent in the control group. In both settings 99 percent of women felt that the decision was theirs, meaning that providers maintained respect for patient autonomy and choices. Over the course of the following year, the rate of pregnancy among patients seeking contraception in the intervention clinics was half what it was in the control clinics.

Expanding Training Expands Access

As America’s largest and best-known provider of family planning services, Planned Parenthood Federation of America participates in more than 70 research projects each year, often in collaboration with universities and pharmaceutical companies, with the goal of continuously updating and upgrading clinic practices. But independent clinics and systems that provide care for underserved populations sometimes find it more challenging to retool when new practices and technologies become available.