Delhi's new high street

Once considered the middle-class cousin of tony Hauz Khas village, Shahpur Jat is slowly coming into its own

Once considered the middle-class cousin of tony Hauz Khas village, Shahpur Jat is slowly coming into its own

Say village and the urban, mall-hopping, gourmet will point you in the direction of Hauz Khas village. To the delight of many, Hauz Khas is no longer the lone star when it comes to designer villages cramped with high-street fashion stores and quaint cafes. is now giving fierce competition as it gains in popularity.



As you enter the village, tucked away in the green environs behind Siri Fort complex in south Delhi, it seems like just another semi-urban settlement with the humdrum noises of clothes being washed and the sizzle of pakoras from the local halwai. However, walk on a little further and a completely different world of high-end fashion and contemporary cuisine greets you.



Like Shahpur Jat, Hauz Khas village too had started out as a hub for but was soon overpowered by the numerous little cafes. Moreover, the designer boutiques took a backseat as young crowds strolled through the by-lanes of Hauz Khas village mostly to spend time at the niche restaurants and cafes. The story is quite different for Shahpur Jat which still remains a commercial settlement for designers - both budding and established - to showcase their creations. A few cafes exist to allow shoppers to take a breather. Take, for instance, the Dada Jungi House lane. The narrow street is dotted with numerous designers' stores on both sides, with only two or three cafes on the stretch. One of them, Cafe Red, offers an ideal space for a cup of coffee, or a quick bite of stuffed omelettes and sandwiches.



The other cafe in the lane is inside Les Parisiennes, a French boutique for apparel and home decor. Run by Catherine and Lucy, two French women who have made Delhi their home, the restaurant space merges perfectly with the showroom, giving it a feel of someone's living room. The duo designs its own clothes and home accessories at a small workshop inside the store, with Dipika Rai's help, the store manager. They have been in business for the last two years and going by a steady flow of customers inside the store, it seems that their affordable prices find favour with both Indian and international clients.



For Kareena Vinaik, co-founder and stylist at the accessory and apparel store, House of Blondie, it is the sense of community at Shapur Jat that sets it apart. She is excited about the Christmas Carnival, to take place on December 15, which will have all stores participating - be it through gifting ideas, special sales or wine tastings. This initiative is a collaborative effort of all the stores in the village, which she says would never have been possible at Hauz Khas village. Adding to this sense of community is the colourful map of the village, available at Cafe Red which all store and cafe owners created together. Going through the labyrinthine lanes of Shahpur Jat can be quite a task, with the UCO Bank and Dada Jungi House being the only two landmarks.



Designer Nidhii, co-founder at Monica and Nidhii, feels that Shahpur Jat is a more conducive space for designers to work in and promote their creations. For one, the entry into the real estate space is easier here, though not completely devoid of hassles. She has been running a large store in Shahpur Jat for the last two years. Their bridal creations are priced upwards of Rs 40,000, offering a kind affordability that most designer studios in Delhi don't.



Walk towards the UCO Bank and one comes across The Shoe Garage or TSG, a store that has been on every shoeholic's radar, even before Shahpur Jat came to be recognised as Delhi's new high street. They offer a wide range of designer shoes, apart from, of course, the option of customising your own designs. Run by Vanita and Rajan Khanna, the store has gained popularity over the years, enough to have them open another store in Delhi at Mehar Chand Market. Right across is the quirky Wishing Chair cafe with a wide selection of teas, warm drinks and quick bites - offered in tasteful and creative interiors. You can pick up home decor accessories from the cafe as well. Adding to the quirk factor is the Potbelly Restaurant that offers Bihari cuisine, something that the average Delhiite never knew existed. Both these cafes have been in business for around two years, signalling the fact that Shahpur Jat has been gradually gaining a name for itself in the shopping and leisure space.



Walking through the maze of lanes on a winter evening, just when the neon boards and fairy lights light up, Shahpur Jat reveals itself as a hidden treasure of beautiful clothes and dainty cafes. And a revelation it is, with new discoveries in store with every visit here.



Manavi Kapur