Two weeks ago the African American Heritage Society of Maury County unveiled a Tennessee Historical Commission Marker in front of College Hill School on Bridge Street here in Columbia.

The marker describes the history of the H. O. Porter School at College Hill, as it is now known. Currently the school is used as an “alternative school” for wayward scholars. The president of the AAHSMC, Ms. Jo Ann McClellan, conducted the meeting, and there was a big crowd in the auditorium. Both the plaque and the comments made at the meeting were mostly about the recent history of College Hill School, but I knew the early history and it needs a re-telling.

Back in the 1840s the Widow Ann White lived on Mapleash Avenue in east Columbia. She owned two remarkable young men who happened to be her slaves. One was soon to be known as the Reverend Edmond Kelley, who demonstrated an early devotion to God and his church. His power as a minister of the gospel was so strong that he was soon preaching to large crowds of town slaves and freedmen. It was through his preaching that the first African-American Baptist congregation was established somewhere on or near Mapleash in a small structure. Soon the Widow White realized that her slave had a true gift for preaching, and she gave him traveling papers that would permit him to go where ever the Lord called him.

Edmond Kelley ended up in Massachusetts where he found a home and a church. He first obtained his own freedom, and then worked to secure the freedom of his wife and children from the household of James Walker and his wife, Mariah, the sister of President Polk. Kelley would become a strong voice in the abolition movement, and was a co-worker with Frederick Douglass in the years up to the Civil War. Reverend Kelley’s further contribution to Maury County, however, was just beginning.

Another slave in the household of the Widow White was a man named Dyer Johnson. He was a carpenter by trade, and Ms. White allowed him to work for others and keep his wages. He was soon able to afford to buy his own freedom. He then asked the Widow if he could marry one of the young girls who also was a slave in that household. Widow White, to her credit, insisted that he could only marry her if he first built her a house. That house still stands to this day on Mapleash Avenue where Dyer Johnson built it for his young wife. Like Rev. Kelley, Dyer Johnson also had a future role to play here in Maury County.

With the end of the Civil War and Reconstruction, the South began to recover, and finally, to look forward again. In the very early 1880s Mayor James Andrews was working to re-introduce public education. The City of Columbia opened two schools at about the same time. They took over the old Tennessee Conference Female College on Woodland Street, and renamed it after the mayor. Andrews School was the result. A couple of blocks away on Bridge Street another school was built – this one for African American students.

Mayor Andrews had met a remarkable man that we will call Professor Kelley. He was the son of Rev. Edmond Kelley and had been educated in Massachusetts. He had come back to the South to help the newly made freedmen and their children, and he had found an ally in Mayor Andrews. Together they built College Hill School that would go on to educate generations of African American students in Maury County. Professor Kelley would also remember his old neighbors from Mapleash Avenue, and he saw to it that the son of Dyer Johnson would get a college education so that he could also come home to teach. Robert G. Johnson, son of Dyer, would eventually take Kelley’s place as the principal of College Hill.

Sometimes when we think that we have no effect on the world around us it is important to remember what a couple of dedicated people can do.

◆◆◆

Bob Duncan is director of the Maury County archives. Email him at bduncan@maurycounty-tn.gov.