Evan Ruggiero, a 2008 township high school graduate, and other graduates, will return to their alma mater to help raise funds for the Old Bridge Marching Knight’s trip to Normandy, France, in June.

A fundraiser to benefit the Old Bridge Marching Knight’s trip to Normandy, France, will be held May 1 at Old Bridge High School. (Photo: Courtesy of Lors Photography) Story Highlights A benefit for the Old Bridge Marching Knights will be held 7 p.m. May 1 at Old Bridge High School.

Evan Ruggiero will perform his show currently running at Studio 54 in New York City.

Other OBHS grads will be on hand at the fundraiser.

The band is performing at the 71st Anniversary D-Day Remembrance Ceremony in France.

Evan Ruggiero, a 2008 township high school graduate, and other graduates, will return to their alma mater to help raise funds for the Old Bridge Marching Knight’s trip to Normandy, France, in June.

The benefit will be held at 7 p.m. May 1 in the Old Bridge High School auditorium, 4207 Route 516.

The event also will feature Olivia Polci, Ray Carega, Brendan Daily and Justin Hunt.

Singer and actor Evan Ruggiero will perform his critically acclaimed show currently running at Studio 54 in New York City.

The Old Bridge Marching Knights will perform at the 71st Anniversary D-Day Remembrance Ceremony at Normandy, France. One of only five bands from the United States invited to participate in the ceremony, the nationally recognized Marching Knights will perform at the American Cemetery and in the annual parade at Sainte-Mere-Eglise, the first village to be liberated by the American troops, according to a prepared statement.

“I am very proud of the Old Bridge High School Marching Knights to be selected to represent the United States at the 71st Anniversary D-Day Memorial in Normandy, France,” Band Director Melissa Thatcher said. “This is a once in a lifetime opportunity for the Marching Knights that they will never forget. These dedicated students are so talented and deserve every part of this great honor. We are all looking forward to an amazing performance by the Marching Knights. They will certainly make Old Bridge proud!”

Ruggiero began dancing at age 5, and by 10, he was accepted into the New Jersey Tap Ensemble. He performed at Lincoln Center, The Shomberg Museum of Harlem and the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark.

Upon entering his sophomore year at Montclair State University, Ruggiero was diagnosed with osteosarcoma, a rare bone cancer of the right leg. After enduring nine surgeries, his leg was amputated, but despite the surgeries and undergoing 16 months of chemotherapy, Ruggiero continued dancing. After hearing about Clayton “Peg Leg” Bates, who taught himself to tap dance after losing a leg in a cotton gin accident, Ruggiero received a peg leg and learned to perform. He has appeared on such programs as “American Idol” and the “Ellen DeGeneres Show.”

Last year, Ruggiero was awarded the The Courage Award by the Sarcoma Foundation of America and was inducted into the Old Bridge Hall of Fame.

Admission to the event is $5. For additional information about the Old Bridge Marching Knights or to make a donation, visit www.TKOB.org.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1GCcylZ