4393018

President Barack Obama now swears his executive amnesty will be good for American workers, but formerly illegal immigrants will have at least one big advantage over legal immigrants and Americans: they won’t spark Obamacare penalties for businesses.

Illegal immigrants eligible for amnesty after Obama changed the law will not be eligible for Obamacare, according to the administration, in a move to cut down on political opposition to the president’s executive action. (VIDEO: Flashback: Obama Says Illegal Immigration Hurts ‘Blue-Collar Americans,’ Strains Welfare)

According to The Washington Times, because those who have received amnesty will not be eligible for Obamacare, those workers won’t count against business’ employee total that trigger employer mandate penalties — making illegal immigrants much more attractive than either native-born Americans or legal immigrants, who are eligible for Obamacare coverage.

Obamacare’s employer mandate, which will partially take effect in January, requires businesses with a certain number of full-time employees to provide “affordable” health coverage (as defined by the federal government) or pay a $3,000-per-worker penalty for failing to do so.

Federal Reserve banks across the country have reported that the mandate is forcing many businesses to stop hiring or to cut back workers’ hours to part-time only in order to avoid the tax and costly health coverage.

But illegal immigrants, because they don’t qualify for Obamacare, won’t count against the total; The Washington Times reports that the loophole has been confirmed by congressional aides. That will give illegal immigrants a massive edge not only over native-born Americans and citizens, but those immigrants who came here legally. (VIDEO: Hasselbeck To Josh Earnest: Isn’t This A ‘Slap Across The Face’ To Legal Immigrants)

The Obama administration, of course, could deal with the loophole in several ways. Once again changing the law to make illegal immigrants eligible for Obamacare — a move supported by Health and Human Services secretary Sylvia Burwell — would likely cause a political uproar.

Brain Rogers, a spokesman for Republican Sen. John McCain, told The Washington Times Congress should eliminate the incentive to hire illegals by eliminating the employer mandate entirely.

Follow Sarah on Twitter