The next case on the docket for the Supreme Court, Zubik v. Burwell, is one of the most controversial this year. Like Burwell v. Hobby Lobby in 2014, it brings three big issues to a head: employer-sponsored health insurance, women’s right to contraception and religious freedom.

And its intricacies are complicated, to say the least. That’s why we created this handy primer to the critical case.

The case

It centers on an exemption to the Affordable Care Act’s legal requirement that employers must cover contraception costs without charging copays. Certain employers (see below for more) can opt out, but to do so the employer must fill out a two-page form explaining why.

The plaintiffs of Zubik v. Burwell argue they should not have to fill out forms because doing so makes them complicit in providing women with contraception, which goes against their religious convictions.

Why should I care?

The case will ultimately affect the health of millions of women, including college-aged women.

Students who are enrolled in health-care plans through their universities may be unable to get birth control if their school elects to opt-out for religious reasons. And graduates will have to consider how they’ll receive birth control coverage if their employer is opposed to offering it for the accepted reasons.

Ultimately, affected women would have to go through a more complicated process to secure birth control.

The status

Oral arguments were made on March 24. In an effort to avoid a 4-4 split in the ruling (more on that below), on March 29 the justices ordered the two parties to file supplemental briefs by April 12 outlining proposed resolutions to the disagreement. Now, we wait to see if the high court accepts the proposed compromises in its response brief, which is due April 20.

If the justices reject the proposed compromises in their response brief, they can theoretically keep the case from going to court until a ninth justice is chosen to replace Scalia, according to Paul Rothstein, a law professor at Georgetown University. And there’s a chance we won’t have a new justice on the bench until least January of 2017 (more on that below).

Let’s backtrack — how did we get here?

Under the Affordable Care Act — commonly referred to as Obamacare — employers’ insurance plans are legally required to cover contraception costs without charging copays.

But since some religions, like Catholicism, are morally opposed to the use of contraception, the Obama administration agreed to make two exceptions to the mandate:

Churches and houses of worship are entirely exempt from offering contraception coverage. If non-profit religious organizations — such as hospitals, charities and higher education institutions – or for-profit organizations with a limited number of shareholders (i.e. “closely held”) do not want to pay for employees’ contraception for religious reasons, they can fill out a two-page form explaining why it wants to opt out of doing so. From there, the organization’s insurer takes over. It can either work with employees directly to provide no-cost contraception coverage or locate a third-party to do so.

The plaintiffs’ argument that they should not have to fill out forms is rooted in the Religious Freedom Restoration Act of 1993, which prevents the government from placing a “substantial burden” — in this case, paperwork — on religious beliefs.

Ultimately, the case will decide whether or not requiring such employers to complete the opt-out paperwork does, in fact, place a “substantial burden” on their religious beliefs.

So, what’s the difference between this case and Burwell v. Hobby Lobby?

The Affordable Care Act originally only offered the opt-out option to non-profit religious organizations. But the Hobby Lobby decision expanded those parameters by also giving closely held for-profit corporations the ability to opt-out of offering contraception coverage for religious reasons.

Essentially, the Zubik v. Burwell ruling aims to expand upon the Hobby Lobby ruling.

The plaintiffs

There is no single plaintiff in this case. Instead, the court is considering seven related cases – a fairly common measure.

The lead plaintiff in the group: Bishop David A. Zubik of the Roman Catholic diocese of Pittsburgh, Pa. He leads the joint appeal from dioceses based in the City of Brotherly Love and Erie, Pa., according to the Pittsburgh Post Gazette.

Among the better-known plaintiffs are the nuns of the Little Sisters of the Poor, who run nursing homes for approximately 13,000 elderly poor. The list of plaintiffs also includes three private Christian higher education institutions: East Texas Baptist University, Southern Nazarene University and Geneva College.

“Everyone knows the government can provide free services to anyone it wishes without our signing a form,” Mother Loraine Maguire, the Mother Provincial for the Little Sisters of the Poor, wrote in an editorial for USA TODAY. “It has always been clear to us that rather than being an ‘opt out,’ the form is an opt-in.”

The defendant

Sylvia Burwell, the secretary of the United States Health and Human Services, is the defendant in the case. So, in other words, the U.S government is being sued.

Since a secular third-party insurer takes over once these religious employers sign the paperwork, the defense is arguing that religious freedom is no longer a point of concern – and that these companies are actually attempting to infringe on women’s rights, not protect their own religious freedoms.

Women’s rights activists have raised concerns regarding the accessibility of preventative birth control for women if the Court were to rule in favor of the plaintiffs. Adding yet another administrative hoop for women to jump through may make it extremely difficult for some to access birth control, they say.

“(Zubik v. Burwell) could establish a precedent concerning when religious institutions or religiously connected business could evade or avoid all kind of laws that bind everyone else,” Rothstein says.

Does either side have the upper hand?

Not really. And this is where things get complicated.

Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia died Feb. 13, and has yet to be replaced. While President Obama nominated Merrick Garland for the open seat on March 16, the Republican-controlled Senate has threatened to block any of Obama’s nominees from taking the seat.

Republicans argue that the next president (who they hope will also be a Republican) should name the next justice. That way, another conservative would likely replace the conservative Scalia.

Ultimately, the current eight justices want to avoid issuing a 4-4 ruling. If that were to happen, the initial rulings reached by the lower courts would be upheld, which means different areas of the country would having varying policies on employer-sponsored contraception coverage, Rothstein says.

And since the Affordable Care Act is a federal law, the court doesn’t want different states to have different policies.