Cornell Williams Brooks, executive director of The New Jersey Institute for Social Justice in Newark, will become the new president and CEO of the NAACP, the organization's board announced Saturday.

He will serve as the 105-year-old organization's 18th leader.

“Mr. Brooks is a pioneering lawyer and civil rights leader, who brings a wealth of knowledge and experience to the Association," said Roslyn M. Brock, the board's chairwoman. "We look forward to leveraging his legal prowess, vision and leadership as we tackle the pressing civil rights issues of the 21st century.”

Brooks, a 53-year-old African Methodist Episcopal pastor who lives in Annandale, Hunterdon County, said he has spent the entire arc of his life preparing for his new role as the leader of the nation's oldest and largest civil rights organization.

"As a graduate of both Head Start and Yale Law School, I am a beneficiary, an heir and a grandson, if you will, of Brown v. Board of Education," Brooks said. "My life is the direct product, if you will, of the legacy of the blood, sweat and tears of the NAACP."

Civil rights, Brooks said, is in his DNA. His maternal grandfather, the Rev. James Prioleau, ran for U.S. Congress in the 1940s, although he knew he couldn't win. Brooks said he did it to encourage African Americans to register to vote and to get them involved in the political system.

The job of fighting for civil rights, he said, is who he is as a person.

Brooks grew up in Georgetown, S.C., received his bachelor's degree from Jackson State University, a Master of Divinity degree from Boston University School of Theology, and a law degree from Yale Law School. He is a fourth-generation ordained minister.

At the Federal Communications Commission, he helped small minority- and women-owned companies get financing. He also served as executive director of the Fair Housing Council of Greater Washington and as a trial attorney with the Lawyers' Committee for Civil Rights Under Law. He has been anadvocate for public education, affordable healthcare, and fiscal responsibility, according to the NAACP.

Brooks came to New Jersey 6½ years ago to head New Jersey Institute for Social Justice, a research group that advocates for minorities and the poor. Most recently he advocated for legislation that would ban employers from asking about an applicant’s criminal history until the end of the interview process.

Brooks will officially become president at the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People's annual convention in Las Vegas in July.

He replaces interim CEO Lorraine C. Miller, who took over for Benjamin Jealous. Jealous led the NAACP for five years before stepped down late last year.

The nationwide search for a new NAACP president was conducted by Hollins Group of Chicago. The agency reviewed more than 450 applications.

Related coverage

• Equity and economic development in post-Sandy reconstruction: A Q + A with Cornell W. Brooks

• New Jersey Institute for Social Justice gala honors decade of accomplishments

• N.J. Assembly panel to take up bill that would ban employers from asking about applicants' criminal histories until job offer