Trying to use the Holocaust to promote the migration of Muslim anti-Semites to Europe is bad enough. But when it's the chairman of the Social Democratic Party of Austria, it's just too much.

Austria's chancellor criticized Hungary for its handling of the refugee crisis on Saturday, likening the country's policies to Nazi deportations during the Holocaust as refugees complained of their treatment in the eastern European country. In an interview with German news magazine Der Spiegel, Austrian Chancellor Werner Faymann likened Hungarian Prime Minister Viktor Orban's treatment of refugees to the Nazis' deportation of Jews and others to concentration camps.

That would be Faymann, the chairman of the SPÖ, a party with a rich history of Nazi collaboration and helping murder Jews until fairly recent times.

The Social Democratic Party of Austria had key figures who engaged in blatant collaboration with the Nazis. After the war, the whitewashing of ex-Nazis only got worse. Nazis like Erwin Frühbauer, Günter Haiden, Josef Moser remained SPÖ politicians and even cabinet members well into the 80s.

And these Nazi Social Dem scandals keep popping up even more recently. Like 2014.

It turns out that Paul Scherpon was significantly more than an inconspicuous official in the Nazi regime. Rather, he had explicitly recommended the deportation of Jews to concentration camps.

The only reason anything has changed is because the Nazis began dying off of natural causes.

In three federal states later SPÖ chairman had previously been Nazi members. Without exception, all Ministers of Agriculture in the Kreisky era had been in the Nazi party. A former Gestapo man, Ferdinand Feldner, served for 23 years as SPÖ Deputy Mayor of Innsbruck. An SS man, whose unit was involved in shootings of Jews, Johann Biringer, was chief of police in Salzburg.

Kreisky's cabinet had four Nazi members. Four.

That was the era when the Kreisky government helped Muslim terrorists kill Jews.

Two Muslim terrorists armed with machine guns and grenades attacked a synagogue where a Bar Mitzvah celebration for children was taking place. Hesham Mohammed Rajeh, a mathematics student, had been living in Austria for two years. When he was later put on trial, he tried to kick the judge and shouted, "When I am out of here, I will spit on you." Hesham Mohammed Rajeh and Marwan Hasan shouted "PLO, PLO" and began to shoot and throw their grenades. Ulrike Kohut, 25, rolled in front of a grenade to protect another woman's child. She died of her injuries on the way to the hospital. Lotan "Nathan" Fried, 68, died of shrapnel wounds on the same route. Many more were wounded including a pregnant woman and a 12-year-old girl. A month earlier, two terrorists had been stopped at the airport after Kalashnikov rifles and hundreds of grenades were found in their luggage. The terrorists had been deported and the authorities had lodged a formal protest with Ghazi Hussein, the PLO representative in Vienna, who had been there to meet them at the airport, and eventually kicked him out of the country. Four years later, that airport was the scene of a famous grenade attack in which 39 people were wounded. Austria's Socialist Chancellor, Bruno Kreisky, despite being of Jewish ancestry, was fond of Muslim terrorists and Nazis. He had a habit of filling his cabinet with former Nazis while comparing Zionism to Nazism. His political success rested on a welfare state built with Soviet money funneled through commercial orders and turning a blind eye to terrorist attacks carried out with Soviet and Polish machine guns was part of the price. Even though the two terrorists had shouted, "PLO", Kreisky announced, "I am firmly convinced that the attackers had nothing to do with the PLO," Instead he suggested that they had been out to sabotage "Palestinian interests." During an interview, he offered that "the bad, unqualified treatment of Palestinians in Israel is one of the causes for these extreme actions." Kreisky, the first Western leader to officially receive Arafat, refused calls from the Jewish community to end ties with the PLO and rejected criticism from the conservative opposition that his courting of the terrorist group had brought terrorism to Austria.

Kreisky's collaboration with Muslim terrorists was nothing short of obscene. The Social Democratic Party of Austria has the uniquely disgusting honor of collaborating with Hitler, Stalin and Muslim terrorists.

You don't get to collaborate in the Holocaust and the persecution of Jews, as the party's first post-war chancellor did, continue aiding in the murder of Jews all the way into recent times, and then try to hijack the Holocaust to promote the migration of more Muslim killers of Jews.

That's a level of obscenity that should be too much to stomach.