Almost daily of late, The Bulletin’s opinion page has printed an article criticizing Donald Trump. Garrison Keillor for instance: Keillor opines the stupidity of even the consideration of the election of a “blowhard ignoramus.” Nasty words from a person I once highly regarded.

Trump may not end up the GOP nominee, and I will be disappointed. Mostly because the GOP establishment is in full-scale panic over the prospects of his becoming president. And no wonder; here is a crowd that four years ago gained control of the House of Representatives. And with arguably the worst president this country has ever seen still in office, nothing has been achieved.

Two years later when the GOP took control of the Senate, same scenario: with control of both houses in hand, nothing has been accomplished. It’s obvious to me that the GOP establishment is deathly afraid of Trump. Not only is he not addicted to their ideology, he evidently knows way too much about what they have and have not been doing. And given their basic lack of accomplishments, I can see why they are nervous.

And who would not agree with Trump’s basic assessments of the current situation the U.S. is in as a result primarily of the last 7 years? Companies and jobs leaving in droves; median income is less than 7 years ago; an economy that is anemic; an Iran “deal” that is questionable — if not downright stupid; ridiculous trade imbalances; taxes and regulations that stifle businesses large and small; spending and resulting debt approaching insanity; terrorist attacks here at home; and Obamacare, for the most part, a disaster.

But I find it refreshing when a man can find good when his contemporaries do not. Planned Parenthood is a good example. The GOP wants to defund that group because of their abortion practices and selling of fetus parts (both are barbaric and utterly despicable practices in which I totally agree with the GOP).

But Trump reminds us that millions of women benefit from Planned Parenthood, suggesting that the despicable practice could be eliminated, leaving the rest intact to continue providing very useful women’s health benefits.

I suggest that an instinct to look for and see the good in situations would allow common sense to influence thinking and decision making more often than rigid ideology. I find it amusing the level of hand-wringing detractors have over the prospects of Trump as president. Trump’s detractors focus on style, rather than substance. They presume, it seems, that his obnoxious and brash persona is his typical operating mode.

That campaign style has gotten him the media attention he needs, but that is not what has made him a successful man. Substance has made him successful. Substance that includes the ability to manage mega-sized activities and to identify and attract competent people. Substance that has no tolerance for failure and which maintains a determination that will not accept anything but success.

Those are positive attributes. Attributes that will stay with him. Attributes this country sorely needs. In addition, the fact that he isn’t addicted to a particular ideology suggests that good solutions, regardless of the source, are the priority.

And unlike his opponents he is not obligated to anyone, thereby resulting in decision making free of limitations of ideologically bound influence. But perhaps his finest attribute is that, unlike his opponents, he does not represent more of the same. His opponents can’t legitimately say or claim that.

Like all candidates, Trump deserves objectivity and respect. He is running for the highest office in our land and so far is spending his own money to do it. But he is getting little objectivity or respect.

Typically, those who don’t like or agree with Trump call him, quite incorrectly, a racist or use words similar to Keillor’s that shuts off all resemblance of objective consideration. We can and should do better.

— Al Phillips lives in Prineville.