CLEVELAND, Ohio -- If you're keeping tabs on Gov. John Kasich's possible presidential campaign, prepare to hear a lot more about his move Friday to end collective bargaining for home health and in-home child care workers.

Organized labor will see it as Senate Bill 5 Light, a smaller version of the measure Kasich backed in 2011 to restrict bargaining by public-employee unions. Voters overwhelmingly repealed the law at the ballot box later that year.

And many will see Kasich's move as a politically calculated step timed to enhance his conservative credentials as he prepares to launch a White House bid.

"It's a sad day when those who care for our children, our seniors and Ohioans with disabilities -- and who simply want to be able to make ends meet while providing that invaluable service -- become the target of a cynical political attack," Ohio Democratic Party Chairman David Pepper quickly charged. "Unfortunately, this is yet another example where Ohio workers and families are used as pawns in the world of presidential politics. They should not have to pay the price for John Kasich's need to compete with the likes of Scott Walker and Bobby Jindal."

Walker, the Wisconsin governor and top-tier presidential prospect, took on the public employee unions in his state and won. He survived a recall campaign that cemented him as a Republican hero. And earlier this year, Walker signed a right-to-work bill aimed at weakening private-sector unions by ending dues-paying requirements.

Kasich has resisted calls for right-to-work legislation in Ohio and has boasted of peace with organized labor since accepting SB 5's defeat. Just this week, the Ohio Civil Service Employees Association reached a deal with the Kasich administration that will bring 30,000 state workers their first raises since 2008.

But no one should be surprised with Kasich's Friday decision, which rescinded the two executive orders his Democratic predecessor, Ted Strickland, signed to extend the bargaining rights to health and child care workers who are not state employees.

The move affects about 7,000 workers affiliated with Service Employees International Union District 1199 and roughly 2,700 members of American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees Council 8.

Kasich promised such action shortly after winning his first term as governor -- all the way back in 2010. He had expressed concerns about treating independent contractors as government employees and worried that they would be forced to unionize and pay dues. The only real surprise is that it took Kasich so long to nix.

Why so long? The answer, found in Kasich's executive order, shows why it won't be so simple for the governor to turn this into a I-fought-the-unions section for his stump speech.

The governor indirectly credits President Barack Obama's Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act for expanding access to health insurance. Kasich's administration asserts that the workers no longer need a union to obtain health care coverage.

Irony! If he is trying to appear anti-union for a GOP primary, Kasich also has to be pro-Obamacare. And he already is under fire from conservative quarters for embracing the Medicaid expansion component of the president's signature law.

Kasich's advisers, though, insist that he is not anti-union and that his executive order should not be seen as such. Nor, they say, should it be seen through a prism of presidential politics in which Kasich is trying to compete with Walker.

The real tell will be if Kasich brags about the move on the campaign trail. His aides say they would be surprised if he does. Only one thing is certain. Unions will use the issue to dispute Kasich's post-SB 5 image as a blue-collar pragmatist.