Thunder rolled late Sunday afternoon in LoDo and shook Coors Field to its core.

In the seventh inning of the Rockies’ 7-4 victory over the Cincinnati Reds, Todd Helton scorched a 3-2 pitch off reliever Curtis Partch for a double.

It was not just any double. It was the 2,500th hit of his big-league career, making him just the 96th player in major-league history to touch that milestone. After the deed was done, the 40-year-old Helton stood on second base, let the cheers from a crowd of 30,954 wash over him, and then took off his batting helmet to acknowledge the standing ovation.

The victory gave the Rockies a 2-1 series win over the Reds, who entered the day as the leader for the National League’s final wild-card spot.

It was perfectly fitting that Helton, one of the most accomplished hitters of his generation, would reach the milestone on a 3-2 pitch, and that it would be an opposite-field double down the left-field line. Since he made his rookie debut in 1997, opposite-field doubles have been a Helton trademark.

Helton’s double was his 584th, moving him past Hall of Famer Robin Yount into sole possession of 17th place. Helton is the Rockies’ career leader in nearly every hitting category, including hits, home runs, doubles and RBIs.

“It’s really, really hard to be that good for that long,” said right fielder Michael Cuddyer, who went 4-for-4 with three RBIs and was a triple short of the cycle. “People from afar can appreciate it, but guys who play this game realize how hard it is to sustain that level of success for that long. I mean, only 96 people have ever done it.”

When asked on Saturday about Helton’s pending milestone, manager Walt Weiss said: “It basically comes down to this: You’ve got to be really good for a really long time. Todd, for his whole career, has put his head down and worked. That’s what I most respect about him.

“There’s not a lot of fanfare or hoopla with Todd. He just shows up and works. He’s been grinding for 17 years and he’s had a hell of a career. This guy has given this franchise credibility.”

Helton was 0-for-2 on the day when he came to the plate in the seventh a moment after Cuddyer hit a solo homer to give the Rockies a 7-2 lead. Helton had been intentionally walked in the fifth, much to the consternation of a crowd that booed lustily.

An overshadowed star of the day was the Rockies’ defense, particularly rookie third baseman Nolan Arenado. The Rockies turned three double plays, including a Gold Glove-level gem by Arenado in the sixth in which he ranged left to scoop up Zack Cozart’s grounder, sprinted to third to force out Chris Heisey, and then fired across the diamond to nail Cozart.

The Rockies even turned hits into outs. In the third, Heisey hit a screamer up the middle, which shortstop Troy Tulowitzki somehow reached and made a spinning throw to Helton at first. Heisey beat out the throw for an infield hit, but Helton alertly fired home to nail Joey Votto who was trying to score from second.

Starter Tyler Chatwood, coming off the disabled list and making his first start since July 31, didn’t last long. He was lifted with no out in the third inning with a bruised right thumb. He’s listed as day to day.

Reds starter Mike Leake scorched a ball up the middle, clipping Chatwood’s right hand as Chatwood reached for the ball. Chatwood stayed in, but promptly gave up a two-run homer to Shin-Soo Choo and then walked consecutive batters before he was removed.

Left fielder Corey Dickerson, making the most of his playing time with Carlos Gonzalez on the disabled list, continues to make his mark. Dickerson went 3-for-4 with a walk, and he scored the games first run after leading off the first with a double and boosted his average to .289.

Patrick Saunders: psaunders@denverpost.com or twitter.com/psaundersdp

Looking ahead

Dodgers’ Clayton Kershaw (13-8, 1.72 ERA) at Rockies’ Chad Bettis (0-3, 4.80 ERA), 2:10 p.m. Monday, ROOT; 850 AM

Dodgers lefty Clayton Kershaw, with a major league-best 1.72 ERA, is on track to become the first pitcher since Greg Maddux to win an ERA title in three consecutive seasons. Over the last 20 years, only two — Justin Verlander and Dennis Eckersley — have won the Cy Young Award and the MVP in the same season. Kershaw could be next. He was actually human in his last start, though, giving up two runs (one earned) and seven hits in 5 innings in a 3-2 loss to the Chicago Cubs. It was Kershaw’s shortest outing since April 23 and only the third time this season he failed to pitch at least six innings. He was hit on the leg with a line drive early in the game, but it didn’t appear to hinder his throwing motion.

Tuesday: Dodgers’ Ricky Nolasco (11-9, 3.26 ERA) at Rockies’ Jhoulys Chacin (13-7, 3.08 ERA), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Wednesday: Dodgers’ Hyun-Jin Ryu (13-5, 3.02) at Rockies’ Jorge De La Rosa (15-6, 3.33), 6:40 p.m., ROOT

Thursday: Off

Patrick Saunders, The Denver Post