United States Olympic Winter Games bobsledder Lolo Jones on Monday, September 30, 2013 in Salt Lake City, Utah. ASSOCIATED PRESS

Throughout the 2014 Sochi Winter Olympic Games, Guggenheim fellowship-winning poet Kwame Dawes will be writing verses that capture the spirit of the day’s action.

In this installment the poet offers a meditation on cold-weather sports, and thoughts on Lolo Jones, the telegenic but controversial Summer Olympian who changed gears to land a place on the Winter Olympic team.

CONFESSIONS FROM THE EQUATOR

I have to tell you,

me, I love my sports:

the race the dance

the feats of power

winners losers almost made it

but when I look

at skiers, skaters, sledders,

boarders, curlers,

all I think is cold.

LOLO, QUEEN OF THE PRAIRIES

Exotic is what white folks call

the mixed up look by many other names.

Exotic is the wild side of take-home-to-mum

but not so wild to make folks wonder,

‘cause the thing they call beauty

is all over her face, plus great

skin tone most un-Victorian—

no bloodless porcelain glow. No alabaster

pure, Rushdie’s dirt in the mix,

the Native near enough the surface

to imagine some mountain snow spirit.

And no one cares to scratch

the surface to the Iowa parcel

passed around from do-gooder to

do-gooder to rescue this elegant piece

of driftwood—nothing exotic there,

nothing so cute in the con for a father

and the hustle for a life. Lolo, Lolo

all motion and power, floating

over hurdles, then stripping for the mags.

Lolo, Lolo, in your thermal neon

jumpsuit, sprinting on ice, before

the hop and duck, and then speed

speed, speed, speed. Pretty is pretty,

win or lose, and the camera wants to love

her tear-upped or hyped, and that

is the game, it’s always been the game,

for exotic skins against cold white ice.

Feel the smile creep over your face,

every champion must have a story,

every loser must have an epic lurking,

and then the race is worth the time

for we who stare at the spectacle,

suckers for a story. So, go Lolo, go Lolo, go!