This Father's Day weekend, barbecue is in the blood for one Oklahoma family, passed down from one son to the next. And it's their love of food that has become a family tradition for 85 years.

Van's Pig Stand in Shawnee opened in 1930 and has been in its current location on Highland Street since 1935.

“I started working down here probably when I was about 14, off and on, mainly when I got in trouble, I'd come down and wash dishes,” said Jev Vandegrift, a third generation owner of the restaurant. “I can remember my grandfather at the front door when I was a real young child.”

His grandfather, Leroy Vandegrift, worked in the oil fields and often would cook food for his friends and coworkers and turned this love into a successful sandwich shop that survived the Depression.

“If you go back to like the menus in the 30's and 40's, they served things like cow tongue sandwiches, right? And pimento cheese and chicken salad,” Jev said.

Jev's father, Jerry, eventually took over the business and changed the menu to focus more on barbecue. The trademark “Pig Sandwich” is still a favorite. While the menu has changed, the management has remained the same; in the family.

“It's a really big responsibility to come in and be put in charge of something that has been in business since 1930 and for a long time it was overwhelming,” Jev remembered.

However, he's found his comfort in the food.

“When I'm in the restaurant and I'm working in the kitchen and we get nice and busy and I'm filling the orders and it's all clicking on all four cylinders and we're pushing the food out and you get caught up and you walk out into that dining room and it's full of happy customers, that's a really good time,” he said.

Jev's 9-year-old son is already in-training, earning some extra money by busing tables.

“I just like hanging out with my dad,” Blake said.

“He really enjoys it, I think he likes talking to the people,” Jev said.

But running the place someday?

“Yeah, maybe,” said Blake.

The family has four restaurants now, two in Shawnee, one in Norman and one in Moore. The family is also taking franchise applications.