The state's new therapist law is creating uncertainty for insurers. (Photo: Katarzyna Bialasiewicz, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

A rush of therapists taking advantage of the new state law allowing them to turn away clients who don’t align with the counselors’ "sincerely held principles" could undermine access to mental health services guaranteed under federal law.

Experts said a small number of licensed counselors or therapists won’t carry a significant impact. But the controversial new law is raising concerns about whether health insurers will be able to provide access — particularly in rural areas — to mental health providers, as required by the Affordable Care Act, if it’s widely used.



Mental health services are required to be covered alongside medical and substance abuse services under the ACA. Health insurers and other industry officials are closely watching how the law plays out.

Health insurers include anti-discrimination clauses in the network contracts they sign with providers as a way to protect members.

In fact, the TennCare contract with the managed care organizations that administer the program, as well as the providers and subcontractors, requires companies to “promote the delivery of services in a culturally competent manner to all enrollees, including those with limited English proficiency, disabilities and diverse cultural and ethnic backgrounds regardless of an enrollee's gender, sexual orientation, or gender identity.”

TennCare does “not anticipate a change to our program based upon this new law because of the expectations and requirements we already have for our providers and MCOs with respect to our enrollees receiving medically necessary covered services,” said Sarah Tanksley, a TennCare spokeswoman.

Still, the legislation signed by Gov. Bill Haslam this week raises questions about how it will impact access.

“You can expect them to pay a lot of attention to this,” said Keith Dennen, a lawyer at Dickinson Wright.

Networks — the web of providers covered under a health insurance plan — are increasingly a source of contention for the industry as patients grapple with narrowing networks as insurers, and employers who self-insure, try to control costs.

Widespread use of the law could further whittle down the number of mental health providers in the state — which is already taxed by the number of people seeking care, according to experts.

Federal and state language loosely defines "network adequacy" because it depends on the market and the specialty. States have authority from the U.S. Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services to set their own standards through 2016, said Kevin Walters, spokesman for the Tennessee Department of Commerce and Insurance. The authority remains in place starting in 2017 contingent upon the state's efforts.

Mary Danielson, spokeswoman for BlueCross BlueShield of Tennessee, said its contracts with providers contain non-discriminatory language but also directs the insurer to follow state and federal laws.

“We will comply with the law as we do in all instances,” Danielson said, adding there is not “an apparent impact on access” for members.

Critics say the law targets the LGBT community, but is crafted in a way as to not single out any specific groups.

The impact could surface in the future, legal experts said.

“I think it would take some time and data to show that a particular group is being discriminated against for any lawsuit to be successful regarding this law,” said Alex Fisher, an associate at Thompson Burton law firm in Franklin. “I think this is a law that would have to be found discriminatory in practice, rather than on its face.”

In response to a question about whether the law will restrict mental health resources, Fisher replied with a “resounding yes.”

Katie Sulkowski, a spokeswoman for Cigna in Nashville said the company is “currently evaluating the new law and any impact on our operations or contracts.”

There could be questions of how, or if, an insurer interacts with a provider who chooses not to see people based on sexual orientation or life choices, such as premarital sex.

It could also bring scrutiny to state and federal language on network adequacy, such as what is “accessible without unreasonable delay,” according to a federal regulation.

“To determine preemption, you would have to look at whether or not this law prevents the insurers from being able to meet the requirements. It seems like from a practical perspective that the insurers are likely in the best position to argue this law contradicts the ACA," said Deborah Farringer, assistant professor of law at Belmont University College of Law.

If patients and insurers encounter problems with providers, a database — such as the one run since 2012 by the Secular Therapist Project — could be important to tracking which providers are accepting referrals in addition to providing a glimpse into regional access, said officials.

In the last month the Secular Therapist Project has had more applicants than it has had in the last three months combined, said Caleb Lack, director of the Secular Therapist Project. It lists about 270 professionals nationwide with 11 in Tennessee. A search for professionals within 200 miles of Nashville brings up eight professionals.

Right now, the industry is in wait-and-see mode.

“At this point, insurers probably don’t really know whether patients are going to be turned away,” Farringer said. “Is it a law trying to solve a problem that didn’t exist and thus creating a new problem?”

Reach Holly Fletcher at 615-259-8287 or on Twitter @hollyfletcher.

Buy Photo Gov. Bill Haslam signed into law a controversial bill that says no licensed counselor or therapist must serve a client whose "goals, outcomes or behaviors” conflict with the counselor’s “sincerely held principles.” (Photo: Samuel M. Simpkins / The Tennessean)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1TB9mxb