Last week’s riots and looting in Baltimore shock the conscience.

But increasing gang violence in Colorado, including the April 28 murder of a man in the Cole neighborhood and April 25 killing of 22-year-old Nolan Ware as he was about to attend the funeral of his great-uncle — who had been murdered just two weeks earlier — should motivate Colorado’s leaders to ensure we never descend into a Baltimore-like conflagration.

As The Denver Post has reported, Denver is “on track to record its most violent year since 2010” with 12 gang-related deaths and over 120 people injured in gang-related assaults so far this year. With one bad police-citizen interaction, it is not a giant step to large-scale social unrest. News of police working with gang members on a “cease-fire” shows that Denver’s leadership are paying attention.

Some argue that riots represent a long-suffering community’s legitimate reaction to police officers who treat them as guilty until proven innocent. The death of Freddie Gray while in Baltimore police custody plays squarely into that narrative.

But regardless of what may be legitimate complaints about any given police department and despite President Obama’s calling for police “soul searching,” the injuries to people and destruction of property that we’ve seen in Baltimore — a city with roughly the same population as Denver — are intolerable.

Baltimore’s mayor, Stephanie Rawlings-Blake, claims to have been misunderstood when she said that her policy “gave those who wished to destroy space to do that as well.” I’m skeptical, having seen lines of police retreating in the face of rock-hurling protesters and watching as looters went from store to store, destroying their neighbors’ livelihoods.

“Charm City” law enforcement agencies were aware of social media conversations among high school students planning civil unrest once the afternoon school bell rang. City leadership knew — not just should have known — what was coming. Yet Baltimore’s police commissioner said the rioters had “outnumbered us and outflanked us.” Reports also suggest an explicit “stand down” order from the mayor. Unacceptable.

Public display of weakness invites misbehavior. It’s true in foreign affairs, in parenting, and in the policing of our cities. People, especially young people, need limits. When parents, pastors and peer pressure don’t provide those limits, all that’s left is the police.

That’s why it’s was so dangerous for Baltimore to have emphasized “balance” and “giving space”; it was, as the Beastie Boys might have put it, a “license to ill.”

Colorado Gov. John Hickenlooper, Denver Mayor Michael Hancock and Denver Police Chief Robert White should heed the lessons of Baltimore.

In February, vandals participating in an anti-police protest in Denver poured red paint on a memorial to fallen police officers. Denver police union president Nick Rogers told CBS Channel 4 News that “officers monitoring the protest were told by their superiors to not to interfere and to let the vandalism happen.”

This excessive desire to show the softer side of law enforcement invites criminality and chaos. It’s universal: Would-be bad actors will always take a mile when given an inch.

Beyond inspiring misbehavior, impeding law enforcement’s fundamental mission with roadblocks of political correctness leaves officers wondering whether city or police leadership adequately value their safety.

Politicians who expect cops to risk life and limb must not rationalize for thugs assaulting the Thin Blue Line with bricks and bottles and cannot “give them space” for bedlam and destruction.

There must be a balance between avoiding a police state and maintaining order. I don’t envy those who must find and maintain that balance. But Baltimore shows the perils of passive policing and the enormous costs that such a strategy can suddenly impose on innocent citizens, business owners, and other residents of ineffectively policed cities.

Leaders around Colorado, particularly those in cities with active gangs, should hope for the best but plan for the worst, working with community leaders and publicly setting expectations for, as a wise man once said, “peace through strength.”

I don’t expect that Denver will be the next Baltimore. But then, Baltimore didn’t expect they would be, either.

Ross Kaminsky is host of “The Ross Kaminsky Show” on Saturday mornings on 850 KOA and writes a monthly column for The Denver Post.