Topics: Books, Branding, LA Review of Books, literature, Mark Twain, name, Media News, Life News, Entertainment News

This article originally appeared on the L.A. Review of Books

IN THE 150 YEARS Samuel Clemens has been better known as Mark Twain, journalists, scholars, and even bartenders have offered competing theories as to where America’s first signature wit acquired his nom de plume. According to Twain, his pen name once belonged to a Mississippi riverboat captain, and he merely “laid violent hands upon it.” Newspapers at the time however claimed he earned his alias drinking at a one-bit saloon in Virginia City, Nevada. Both stories fit the author’s roguish persona. Both recall his bio. But neither has stood up to scholarly investigation, and the truth has been elusive until perhaps now. In the new issue of the Mark Twain Journal, a rare book dealer presents his discovery of an 1861 magazine sketch that offers the first fact-based theory on “Mark Twain”; it suggests Clemens found his pseudonym in a popular humor journal, then invented the riverboat story to promote his Missouri roots. A slightly unromantic, yet nonetheless redolent theory, it summons a lesser-known part of Twain’s personal character: his proven cunning in respect to his brand.

Kevin Mac Donnell, a book dealer and scholar in Austin, Texas, found the potential source while searching Google Books for unknown pieces of Twain’s writing. To his astonishment, one of the hits led to a mention of “Mark Twain” in the humor journal Vanity Fair — one of the author’s early influences — two years before he adopted it. In a burlesque titled “The North Star,” the sketch reports a farcical meeting of Charleston mariners who adopt a resolution “abolishing the use of the magnetic needle, because of its constancy to the north.” These characters include a “Mr. Pine Knott,” (a pun for dense wood), “Lee Scupper” (a drain), and “Mark Twain,” (shallow depth in shipboard jargon).

“I wasn’t looking for what I found. I stumbled across it,” Mac Donnell said in a phone interview. With a flair for folksy humor that made Twain famous, he also added that “you could train a cat to do what I did. You could train a garden slug to do what I did, but the cat would be quicker.”

The majority of Mac Donnell’s work for the Mark Twain Journal was spent documenting Clemens access to the 1861 maritime sketch. Vanity Fair (which bears no relation to today’s brand) was often cribbed by newspapers in the American West, which is where Clemens worked as a reporter in 1863, the year he adopted his pseudonym. “It’s a magazine we all agree Twain read, and I can put it in Virginia City. I can put it in every newspaper in California and Nevada during his time there,” Mac Donnell said.

Alan Gribben, the editor of the Mark Twain Journal, wrote in an email statement that, “Mac Donnell appears to have found the long-hidden key to the conundrum. Moreover, his theory adds to our sense of Twain’s cleverness at hiding his sources.”

Prior to Mac Donnell’s discovery, the first known use of “Mark Twain” as a name came in a letter Clemens sent to the editor at the Territorial Enterprise of Virginia City, Nevada. As opposed to his other pseudonyms, such as “Thomas Jefferson Snodgrass,” it stuck. Yet when asked about his inspiration, according to one account, Clemens simply said he intended to “shorten the work” of the Nevada legislature; they would no longer have to call him “that disreputable, lying, characterless, character-smashing, unscrupulous fiend who reports for the Territorial Enterprise.”

It wasn’t until 1873, when the travel book The Innocents Abroad and the Western romp Roughing It made Twain a celebrity, that a theory emerged on his nom de plume. According to the Nevada Sentinel, during his “early days” as an Enterprise reporter, Clemens spent most nights drinking at the Old Corner saloon in Virginia City, a bar that “always had an account with the balance against him” tallied in chalk marks on the wall. Twain was an old-fashioned way of saying two, a usage Clemens was supposedly fond of because the article said “mark twain” was his order to mark two more on my tab: a request he allegedly became known for and attracted as a sobriquet.

This story appeared in several Western newspapers (often with liberal embellishments) despite the fact that its author’s claim of familiarity with Clemens was always dubious. The theory even appeared in the Daily Alta California — one of Twain’s former employers — at which point he responded in the following letter:

“Mark Twain” was the nom de plume of one Captain Isaiah Sellers, who used to write river news over it for the New Orleans Picayune: he died in 1863 and as he could no longer need that signature, I laid violent hands upon it without asking permission of the proprietor’s remains. That is the history of the nom de plume I bear.

Twain also used the pen names “Josh” as in just joshing and “John Snook” as in to snooker, which bears mentioning because no record of the name “Mark Twain” exists in Times Picayune archives, nor those of any newspaper in the region. Isaiah Sellers always signed his river reports “I. Sellers.” And the captain died one year after Clemens adopted that pen name, not before.