MINNEAPOLIS--(BUSINESS WIRE)--International law firm Dorsey & Whitney LLP announced today that Bob Seng is returning to the Firm as a Partner in the Benefits & Compensation Group in the Firm’s Minneapolis office.

Mr. Seng rejoins the Firm, bringing over 20 years of experience in employee benefits work with an emphasis on broad-based employee and fringe benefit plans and the rapidly evolving regulatory regime in which they operate. Mr. Seng has also been a pioneer in fixed fee relationships with large law firms.

Mr. Seng returns to Dorsey after 12 years at Target Corporation, where he served as Assistant General Counsel for Pay and Benefits and headed the legal team responsible for all of Target’s ERISA employee benefit and fringe benefit plans. He actively participated in development of regulations implementing the Affordable Care Act and most recently served as co-author of “A 2020 Vision: Flexibility and the Future of Employee Benefits,” a major policy document prepared by the Washington, D.C. based American Benefits Council which will serve as a critical policy paper for Congress as they move towards tax reform and changes to the Affordable Care Act. Before joining Target in early 2002, he was a Partner in the Benefits & Compensation Group in Dorsey’s Minneapolis office, having joined the Firm originally in 1989.

He received his J.D. degree from the University of Minnesota Law School, was a Policy Fellow at the University of Minnesota Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs and received his B.A. degree from St. John’s University. Mr. Seng serves on the board of directors of the American Benefits Council, Washington, D.C. and MAP for Nonprofits. During his time at Target, he also played an active leadership role in local and national organizations supporting in-house compensation and benefit lawyers. He is a past chair of the Minnesota State Bar Association Section on Employee Benefits and a frequent lecturer on employee benefits issues.

“We are very pleased that Bob has rejoined the Firm,” noted Dorsey Managing Partner Ken Cutler. “He brings a great depth of experience to our strong, multi-office Benefits & Compensation Group, including a client’s perspective thanks to his extensive work at Target. Bob was an early adopter of a fixed fee model for employee benefits legal work and intends to use that expertise here at Dorsey. We continue to add talent strategically across the Dorsey platform to better serve our clients around the world.”

“I am delighted to be returning to Dorsey and its great Firm-wide team of employee benefits lawyers,” noted Mr. Seng. “Through appropriate staffing and fee arrangements, large firms like Dorsey have a unique and critical opportunity to serve the needs of business in an area that is key to the employment relationship and struggling under many layers of regulation. Dorsey has a very strong institutional history in my area of expertise and an exceptional client base. I look forward to serving those clients.”

About Dorsey & Whitney LLP

Clients have relied on Dorsey since 1912 as a valued business partner. With locations across the United States and in Canada, Europe and the Asia-Pacific region, Dorsey provides an integrated, proactive approach to its clients' legal and business needs. Dorsey represents a number of the world's most successful companies from a wide range of industries, including leaders in the banking, energy, food and agribusiness, health care, mining and natural resources and public-private project development sectors, as well as major non-profit and government entities. www.dorsey.com