A group of New York fourth graders have taken “mean girls” to a whole new and slightly murderous level. The three students were accused of planning to purposely harm their teacher by putting her in direct contact with a chemical they knew she was highly allergic to: hand sanitizer. Although no charges have been pressed, since no crime was committed, it's unsettling to know that all three parents of the young girls admitted to knowing the plan, but only one came forward.

According to the SF Gate, the fourth grade teacher at Elba Elementary School in New York informed her students that hand sanitizer would not be allowed in the classroom because she had a severe allergy. Rather than adhere to their teacher’s request, the trio of sadistic 9-year-olds planned to use the teacher’s allergy against her.

“The suspects made comments to other students that they were going to kill [the teacher] by putting antibacterial products around the classroom,” the police report from Genesee County Sheriff’s Department read. According to Chief Deputy Jerome Brewster, the children claimed they wanted to harm their teacher because she was mean.

The plan was foiled when one parent overheard her daughter's intentions and then informed a board member, who in turn alerted the police. When the school met with the parents, it is reported that at least one admitted that he or she knew the girls were aware of the teacher's severe allergy. Another set of parents admitted that they had overheard the girls' intentions but said nothing.

The police department is disregarding the intentions as “idle chat” and not charging the children with any crimes. "Because nothing had happened, with the juvenile laws the way they are in the state of New York, for a person under the age of 16 to be charged with something, they have to commit either a misdemeanor or a felony," explained Brewster, as reported by ABC 7 News.

The school, on the other hand, has taken the threat seriously and plans to use the incident as “a vehicle for educating the district's students regarding appropriate behaviors.”

Allergic reactions to hand sanitizers are known as dermatitis, which is a general term for inflammation of the skin caused by contact with a substance. It may cause an itchy rash, swollen reddened skin, and at times blisters which can ooze and develop a crust. The condition, though uncomfortable, is not life-threatening.