On Jan. 26, Rocky Mountain National Park will turn 100 years old.

Just as the park was created from the grassroots efforts of Coloradans, so was the effort to finally go from recommended to designated wilderness in 2009.

Like a fine wine, good things take time. It only took 35 years! The park now has a greater level of protection than it had when it was created. Rocky enjoys strong support from our neighbors, Coloradans, and people from throughout the country and the world. Since 1996, our visitors have contributed over $60 million through their entrance and camping fees for improvements.

The park has received close to $70 million from the Federal Lands Highway Program administered by the Federal Highway Administration. A small portion of the federal gasoline tax goes to places like Rocky. Since 2000, we have been able to reconstruct or repave all of the park's major roads. When roads are as old as Rocky's, that's critical! The most recent project was the final phase of reconstruction on Bear Lake Road. We also had unplanned projects due to the 2013 flood event. The Federal Highway Administration stepped in and Old Fall River Road has been repaired. We anticipate opening it this year on time for the 4th of July weekend. We also made good progress on repairing many of the stream crossings in the park's backcountry that were damaged by the flood.

Advertisement

Rocky can't rest on its laurels or management actions internal to the park. We need to actively engage with our neighbors, the state, the U. S. Forest Service and many others if we are to maintain this special place and its biodiversity.

Working with the Colorado Division of Parks and Wildlife, the park continues to implement our elk and vegetation management plan designed to restore biodiversity to important winter range areas in Moraine Park, Upper Beaver Meadows, Horsehoe Park and the Kawunenchee Valley.

For a national park like Rocky to be successful, it takes the support and efforts people and organizations. Groups like the Estes Park League of Woman Voters, which lobbied Congress to pass a scenic over flight ban at Rocky in order to preserve the natural sounds of the park's wilderness; and the towns of Grand Lake and Estes Park, Boulder, Grand and Larimer counties who have been supportive on issues including the park's wilderness designation.

We have concessioners who serve our 3 million plus visitors. Xanterra operates Trail Ridge Store, Colorado Mountain School offers guided climbing, and we have a variety of local stables that provide guided horseback rides. We also have a whole host of other guided services permitted to operate in the park. Others like the Estes Valley Land Trust are working to protect land near and adjacent to the park from incompatible development.

Finally, a special thanks to the Rocky Mountain Conservancy, our park partner and advocate for eighty-four years. They have raised over $20 million since the mid-1980s to support a variety of projects including educational programs, trails, land acquisition, and the construction of the Fall River Visitor Center.

We couldn't operate without volunteers . Volunteering dates back to the beginning with the Estes Park Woman's Club and campers at Cheley camps. Since 1984, volunteers have served over 2.13 million hours at Rocky. That's over $48 million in donated labor (at today's rate.)

We have a committed and dedicated staff who take pride in being public servants and take seriously their responsibility of being stewards of this special place for present and future generations.

The reasons people visit now are the same as 100 years ago -- to experience nature, to seek solitude, to enjoy scenic grandeur, to watch wildlife, and to partake in outstanding recreational activities.We face many challenges and opportunities as we move into the next century -- these include a warming climate, crowding in popular areas on summer and fall days, and the need to engage the next generations of Americans in support of their national parks.

The latter is also a focus of the National Park Service Centennial in 2016. With your continued support, Americans will be able to gather 100 years from now to celebrate Rocky's 200th birthday.

Vaughn Baker is the superintendent of Rocky Mountain National Park.