Whitmer

IASIS Healthcare Corp. is angling to list on the New York Stock Exchange, about a decade after a private equity fund bought the hospital operator.

IASIS filed an S-1 with the U.S. Securities and Stock Exchange last week to list as “IAS.” TPG Global, the private equity fund that bought a majority stake in IASIS for $1.4 billion in 2004, will continue to be the majority shareholder after a successful IPO, according to the filing. JLL Partners and Trimaran Capital also will retain a stake.

The Franklin-based company has not determined how many shares will be offered or at what price. Proceeds from the initial public offering will be used to repay debt and for other general corporate purposes. According to the S-1, the company expects to have a stock split in its 2015 fiscal year.

The company is in a quiet period and cannot comment further on the IPO, according to a spokeswoman, noting that “activity with respect to any equity securities offering will be reflected in our filings with the SEC.”

J.P. Morgan Securities, Bank of America Merrill Lynch and Barclays Capital are the joint lead bookrunners. Evercore Group, Goldman Sachs & Co. and Citigroup Global Markets are managers while BMO Capital Markets Corp. and TPG Capital BD are co-managers.

IASIS owns 15 acute care hospitals and one behavioral health hospital that have a total of 3,604 licensed beds, as well as several outpatient service facilities and 132 physician clinics. It operates in Salt Lake City; Phoenix; West Monroe, La.; and five cities in Texas.

The company has seen a drop in uninsured patients under the Affordable Care Act, including a Medicaid expansion in Arizona. In 2014, self-pay admissions dropped to 6.9 percent from 8 percent the year prior, according to the S-1. It also saw a nearly 2 percent decrease in uncompensated care as a percentage of acute care revenue in the same time periods.

The S-1 specifically mentions, in several places about risk factors that potential investors should consider, continued uncertainty about the future of the ACA as a result of the upcoming King v. Burwell case at the Supreme Court. That case, to be argued on March 4, questions whether tax subsidies for health insurance are valid on both exchanges at the federal and state level.

IASIS will be the fourth publicly traded hospital operator in the Nashville area upon a successful IPO, joining Community Health Systems, HCA and LifePoint. IASIS pulled a proposed IPO in March 2001 over unfavorable market conditions.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1CSMG47