This is a test. This is only a test.

Which of the following statements is false?

1. America is just like “Nazi Germany.”

2. Joseph of the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat built the pyramids.

3.Ben Carson applied to and was offered a full scholarship to West Point.

4. Obamacare is the worst thing since slavery.

5. Ben Carson is only running for president by popular demand.

6. The media is easy on Hillary and tough on Ben.

7. The Theory of Evolution is a bunch of fairy tales encouraged by Satan.

8. Many Americans are dumb.

9. Kid Carson wanted to attack his mother with a hammer and “Bob” (or not Bob) with a knife.

10. Ben Carson is the craziest person to ever run for president.

If you guessed True to 1-9, you are a through-and-through, tried-and-true believer that the guy who was nicknamed “Dummy” in elementary school is actually brilliantly sane.

Ben Carson before he delivers the keynote speech at the Black Republican Caucus. (JOE SKIPPER/REUTERS)

If, however, you checked off only number 10 as true, than you are probably a pathetic, lying member of the mainstream media, and are definitely full of garbage.

Therefore, as a bonafide member of the dwindling group of garbage grinders who still pathetically cling to that outdated, so-called freedom of speech thing, I figure, hell, why not use it while we still got it, to shine some light on Ben’s boasts.

The Answers

1. False. America is nothing like “Nazi Germany.” Unlike the Nazis, we still have freedom of speech, which is why presidential candidates get to compare America to Nazi Germany.

2. False. Joseph could not have built the pyramids, since they were built between 2589 and 2504 B.C. and biblical scholars date little Joe’s birth anywhere from 2000 to 1200 B.C. Sure he lived to 110, but that still puts him 500 years too late by the best estimate.

3. False. Hey, so waht that Carson never applied to West Point or that they don’t even offer scholarships, since it’s free. Carson’s minions told Politico on Friday that if he had and they had he would have. Or something.

4. False. The 700,000 enslaved sex workers today would definitely pick Obamacare over slavery.

5. False. Carson’s claim that running for POTUS isn’t something he particularly wanted to do makes him KOBS: King of BS.

6. False. Hillary’s been asked the tough ones on Keystone, her vote on the Iraq invasion, her massive failure in Benghazi and her email scandal. Carson’s confused asking with answering.

7. False. Evolution is not the work of the Antichrist — unless Darwin transformed himself into a serpent. But then again if he had, that would also prove evolution. A conundrum to be sure.

8. False. Americans aren’t dumb — unless we elect a guy who says we’re dumb.

9. False. Carson did take a hammer to his mother and a knife to Bob, making him the only candidate in history who is furious at the media for questioning his rage.

10. True. (See all of the above.)

Bonus Quiz: If you lie, is it: A) Your fault, B) The media’s fault? or C) “Bob’s” fault?

Documents and photos detailing Greg Hardy's physical abuse of girlfriend Nicole Holder were recently revealed. (Christian Petersen/Getty Images)

LEAGUE’S FAILURE

Another spousal slam dunk by yet another NFL brute, followed by another NFL forgiveness fest.

That would be 278-pound, 6-foot-4, Cowboys defensive end Greg Hardy, who beat his girlfriend, Nicole Holder.

In court documents obtained by Deadspin, Holder said Hardy had “tossed her against a tiled wall, thrown her on a futon and choked her ...”

Hardy was arrested and made to hand over his 10 shotguns and assault rifles.

Nicole Holder outside the Mecklenburg County Courthouse after Greg Hardy was found guilty of assaulting her and communicating threats. (ROBERT LAHSER/MCT /Landov)

After his conviction, the NFL placed him on an exempt list. Good? Bad. He still collected his $770,000 weekly salary. Yes, that’s weekly.

Remember how, after the Ray Rice fiancée-beatdown, the NFL said that they’d trained a Critical Response team of “200 specially trained league and club leaders” to deal with abuse? Rice got fired, but

Hardy’s boss, Jerry Jones, called him a “real leader.” The difference? Don’t beat your girlfriend on video.

Former President George Bush Sr. rips former Vice President Dick Cheney in his new book. (Rick Barbero/AP)

CROTCHY BUSH RIPS DICK

You’ve heard of Iron Man, Iron Chef and even iron abs, but who knew that a guy with iron-rimmed specs who looks like he’s never lifted iron could have an iron ass?

That’s what former President George the First called President George the Second’s second, Dick Cheney, in his new book, “Destiny and Power: The American Odyssey of George Herbert Walker Bush.”

The New York Times reported that in the soon-to-be-released book, Bush told biographer Jon Meacham re: Iraq, “I think he served the President badly.” You think?

Bush Sr. said Cheney has an “iron-ass view of everything.”

He also minced no words about Junior’s Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld, calling the monster architect of the Iraq war “an arrogant fellow” who “lacks humility.” Really?

Rummy, now 83, responded arrogantly, “Bush 41 is getting up in years.” That’s the pot calling the kettle wack.

William "Wobbles" Soler (Michael Schwartz/for New York Daily News)

JOE’S ‘SONG OF LOVE’

Rep. Joseph Crowley — never one to back down from spontaneously breaking into song at political functions — will record a “Song of Love” in Forest Hills Monday. It’s a love song for a sick kid as part of the

nonprofit “Song of Love Foundation” that records personalized songs for kids with life-threatening illnesses.

Joe’s song, “Victor Rugerio,” was written by John Beltzer and Alex Forbes for Brooklyn kid Victor Rugerio, a cerebral palsy patient at Elmhurst Hospital Center. Way to go Joe — a human being in the midst of the congressional zoo.

NOTHING 'RUNS' IN HIS FAM

Wobbles Soler, the 500-pound alleged gun runner, has one fan at least: His dad. The elder Soler said Wobbles is too sick to be “charged with all these bad crimes.” He didn’t say he didn’t do the bad crimes just that he’s too sick to be charged with them. It bothers him to see his son this way. No, not 500 pounds, just behind bars.

Model Gisele Bundchen (Dimitrios Kambouris/Getty Images)

EXPRESS LINES

Inflategate: Did supermodel Gisele get her boobs inflated because hubby Tom had his balls deflated? ... Ripped from the headlines: Australian teacher Richard Patterson says he’s identified Jack the Ripper as Francis Thompson, a poet with a penchant for penning poems about killing prostitutes. It took 150 years to figure this out? ... Divorce judges: Blake Shelton and Miranda Lambert broke up, and two weeks later Gwen Stefani and Gavin Rossdale broke up. Five minutes later, the “Voice” judges hooked up, but Miranda’s blamed for cheating on Blake. To quote that old country flop, I Don’t Know Whether To Kill Myself Or Go Bowling.