Sen. Paul Hornback defends child labor on tobacco farms. (Photo: The Daily Show)

If you're looking for someone to make look silly when talking about having children as young as seven years old work cutting tobacco, to whom would you turn?

Comedy Central's Daily Show turned to Kentucky state Sen. Paul Hornback, who grows tobacco on his Shelby County farm and is chairman of the Senate's agriculture committee.

The show, which aired Thursday, had Hornback defending the practice and trying to convince Daily Show correspondent Samantha Bee that the loophole in the law that allows for child labor is actually good for kids.

"It's long days, it's in the heat, it's out there in the sun, some days it may a hundred degrees, but that's not bad. They have lots of places to get shade, to cool off, to rest for a while," he said.

In the piece, Bee juxtaposed Hornback's statements against those of young laborers on a tobacco farm in North Carolina who said they often work from sun up to sun down, with few breaks.

MORE: Search for subjects in 20th century labor photos leads to Louisville

"Children need to experience things," Hornback said. "We don't need more laws on the books to try to protect everybody from everything there is out there."

Among other things, the kids told Bee that they have to buy their own gloves and plastic garbage bags that they wear to protect themselves from acute tobacco poisoning, which can leave them dizzy and vomiting. A young girl told Bee she gets sick several times each summer.

"I felt like I was gonna die," she said, describing the worst episode.

"Acute nicotine poisoning is really not that big a problem," Hornback counters. "it's no different from having a 24-hour virus where you have a stomach virus."

When told of what the young farm workers told Bee, Hornback's response is this: "All kids complain about work. We're raising a society that's too soft."

Hat tip to former U.S. Rep. Mike Ward who flagged this for me.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1lop7DU