For Immediate Release

Chicago, IL - February 18, 2016 - Today, Zacks Equity Research discusses the Health Insurance, (Part 2), including UnitedHealth Group Inc. ( UNH ), Aetna Inc. ( AET ), Cigna Corp. ( CI ) and Centene Corp. ( CNC ).

Industry: Health Insurance, Part 2

Link: http://www.zacks.com/commentary/72467/us-health-insurers-provide-defense-amid-volatility

In a volatile global economic environment, the U.S. health insurance industry provides investors a defensive shield thanks to the industry's largely domestic orientation. While some of the bigger players like Cigna Corp. ( CI ), UnitedHealth Group Inc. ( UNH ), Centene Corp. ( CNC ) and Aetna Inc. ( AET ) do derive part of their revenues from abroad, they are largely domestic businesses with only modest international exposure.

The sector is, therefore, largely insulated from global headwinds -- falling oil prices , interest rate hikes, strengthening dollar, Chinese economic slowdown -- which have been plaguing other sectors lately.

The sole factor that has shaken the industry and changed it wholly is the Health Care Reform or Obamacare, enacted in Mar 2010. Though initially intensively lobbied against by the players, the health care reform has turned out beneficial to the industry. Courtesy of Obamacare, the players have witnessed meaningful gains in their membership, which has beefed up their revenues.

Total revenues of the top eight players increased to $437 billion in 2015 from $383 billion in 2014 with medical enrollment rising to 150 million members in 2015 from 145 million in the prior year. Along with posting strong operating numbers for the fourth quarter of 2014, most of the players provided positive guidance for 2016, highlighting the fact that despite hurdles, the industry presents enough growth opportunities.

Now, after sharing the space with Obamacare for almost six years, insurers have embraced the law. Most players are now looking for newer avenues to expand their businesses. They are reassessing the entire business models from the perspective of product, pricing, risk management, distribution and claims to fraud management for sustainable growth going forward.

The trend of share price movement of the four biggest health insurance companies also attests to the fact that the market has been optimistic about the ultimate effects of the law on these operators. While the S&P 500 index has gone up 73% since the passing of the bill, the top players in the space are all up triple-digits.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days . Click to get this free report >>

Zacks "Profit from the Pros" e-mail newsletter provides highlights of the latest analysis from Zacks Equity Research. Subscribe to this free newsletter today . Find out What is happening in the stock market today on zacks.com.

Want the latest recommendations from Zacks Investment Research? Today, you can download 7 Best Stocks for the Next 30 Days. Click to get this free report