Topics: 2016 Elections, GOP, John Kasich, Ohio, Republicans, Elections News, Life News, Politics News

Yes, I saw the Kasich victory speech on Tuesday. It was a good speech, especially for those of us who’ve been despairing over the fact that the GOP frontrunner’s speeches tend to be composed of disjointed screaming soundbites and outright calls to violence.

John Kasich is good at making speeches. He’s good at looking and sounding “moderate”. His lines about his fellow Republicans’ “War on the Poor” from 2013 and his Bible-based defense of Obamacare in 2015 were inspiring enough that Democrats in red states should have all been taking notes.

The temptation to latch onto him as an alternative to Donald Trump and Ted Cruz–especially now that Marco Rubio is gone–is huge, especially for bridge-builders on the Left, to the point of people losing the script enough to call for Hillary Clinton to invite him onto a cross-party presidential ticket.

The political press is more fretful about the continued survival of the “moderate Republican” than they are the giant panda. Seeking out a Rockefeller-style Republican who has no chance of achieving national office to champion as a throwback to a better age of conservative is now an election-year ritual; John Kasich is basically a replay of Jon Huntsman four years ago.

This is a shame. Because John Kasich is, in fact, terrible, as any even sort-of-left-of-center Ohioan could tell you, and watching people from the coasts who hadn’t even heard of him until 2015 fete him is terrible, and the whole concept of the desire of moderates to push “moderation” as a valuable brand for its own sake is terrible.

The first thing to point out is that Kasich being a “moderate” at all is a rebranding and a sign of shifting political alignments. John Kasich defeated Ted Strickland in the governor’s race in 2010 as the Tea Party candidate. It’s easy to forget now that the Tea Party turned its back on him after his recent facelift as a bleeding-heart pro-Obamacare moderate, but in 2010 he was the firebreathing right-winger and Strickland was the soft, gooey centrist whose loss was widely blamed on pandering to everyone and standing for nothing.

When he was the Democratic Governor of Ohio from 2006 to 2010 it was Ted Strickland who prized his endorsements from Republicans, who boasted of cutting back business-unfriendly regulations and of his consistent pro-gun record and endorsement from the NRA. Now that Strickland is back on the scene to go for Rob Portman’s Ohio Senate seat, it was Strickland’s primary challengers P.G. Sittenfeld and Kelli Prather trying to remind everyone of this while his former Republican friends gleefully tore him down. Now, with political memories shrunk to less than a decade he’s hugging Sherrod Brown’s platform, foregrounding his love for unions and his hatred of Wall Street, claiming a road-to-Damascus moment on gun control after Sandy Hook, etc. The moderate and the populist have switched places.

So far, so typical. This is all part of how the chess pieces rearrange themselves after every election. Even in 2010, in fact, Strickland called out the weird contradiction in Kasich running as a Tea Party populist when he’d been a managing director for Lehman Brothers for years. Politicians contradict themselves–it’s inherent to what they do and how they keep their jobs, given that the American public itself gives wildly contradicting signals to what they actually want every few years. This is why, even though I don’t particularly like Hillary Clinton, I’m not appalled by her numerous flip-flops the way many Sanders supporters are and why I rolled my eyes when Bush’s supporters introduced “flip-flop” into our national conversation to smear John Kerry back in the ancient year of 2004.

So yes, Ted Strickland 2016 is a better candidate than Ted Strickland 2006 and it doesn’t matter to me all that much whether that’s the result of a sincere change of heart or cynically shifting with the political wind. And John Kasich 2016 is a more palatable candidate than John Kasich 2010, even if the shifts that have pissed off his former Tea Party base are ridiculously small things to be celebrating, like mild taxes on fracking companies and tech startups or not calling for Obama’s impeachment for the grave sin of letting freelancers like me buy health insurance.

It’s not the places where Kasich has genuinely flip-flopped on policy that bug me. It’s where he hasn’t–where, in fact, he’s remained steadfast and consistent–but his image has somehow flipped that bothers me.

Kasich ran as an anti-union firebrand in 2010, part of a wave of such candidates in the Year of the Tea Party. His colleague Scott Walker in Wisconsin has kept that reputation, whereas Kasich has been trying to cozy up to unions after his trademark anti-collective-bargaining measure was overturned by voters in 2011–in other words, he changed his rhetoric after his actions were forcibly blocked and he had no choice.

Which is why it’s so telling that in 2015–well within living memory even in the Internet Age–Kasich cracked a joke about how if he were King of America he’d ban teacher’s lounges, because they provide a space for teachers to complain. (Not a joke over drinks in a bar, mind, but a joke intended as part of a talking point in support of “education reform” and the continued assault on teacher’s unions and public education going on today.) It’s telling that in that same hazy, misty ancient era of 2015 “moderate” John Kasich went after the collective bargaining rights of that well-heeled, affluent, high-status “special interest group,” in-home health-care aides and child-care workers.

It’s telling that outside of “feminist” and “women’s issues” spaces it’s been hard to find anyone talking about Kasich’s wholesale assault on reproductive rights in Ohio. It’s quite telling that Kasich has managed to get seen as a moderate on this issue because he spoke out against the anti-Planned Parenthood federal government shutdown (despite quietly signing a bill to do the exact same thing on the state level) and because he’s kept his face out of pro-life rallies.

Here’s the thing. There is a difference between doing things like threatening a federal shutdown to defund Planned Parenthood or calling for a constitutional amendment to overturn Roe v. Wade and just quietly signing every piece of legislation that crosses your desk to restrict abortion access based on technicalities, until you’ve ended up shutting down half the abortion clinics in the state and putting half the remaining ones at risk. The former ends up being much more newsworthy than the latter, but the latter is much more effective.

Bob Taft, the Republican governor who preceded Strickland and a Republican stalwart in the 2000s, got himself in trouble for allowing pro-life license plates. Kasich doesn’t rant about abortion or give speeches about it and, indeed, famously keeps mum as much as possible when asked direct questions about it–and has done far more damage to reproductive choice than Taft ever dreamed himself capable of doing, and been able to do so precisely because he’s kept it quiet. (In retrospect, on most issues, including the issues Kasich gets “moderate” credit for like taxes and the environment, Kasich makes Taft look like FDR–and Bob Taft is literally the grandson and namesake of the author of the Taft-Hartley Act.)