You have submitted an Offer in Compromise to the IRS, with all documentation attached. You are excited that you have taken the right steps to put your tax troubles behind you. You feel the IRS should accept your Offer.

Courtesy of IRSMedic

On the contrary to your belief, you just received a formal rejection letter from the IRS notifying you that your Offer is not accepted. You feel devastated!

Getting an Offer in Compromise (OIC) rejected is not uncommon because on average, only 30% of all offers are accepted by the IRS. Having a solid understanding of why it was rejected might help you to find out what you need to do to fix it. This article will provide you some insight into the most common reasons for rejection of OIC applications.

1. Not staying current in tax filing/payment

The IRS hates it when you continue to accumulate more and more tax debt while your offer is pending. You have to stay current with your offer if you want the IRS to consider your OIC application. Avoid “pyramiding” additional taxes and be up-to-date with current year tax obligations. There is a myth that the IRS Fresh Start Initiatives will magically waive the entire back taxes or any accrued penalties. But the reality is the Fresh Start Offer in Compromise program does not provide any kind of quick fix to help you make tax compliant.

2. No substantiation, no offer

If you think that you just need to send the Offer in Compromise form 656 and the forms 433A/B/F and in a few months you will hear the good news, then you are wrong as it does not work that way! Sending an Offer in Compromise is not like filing a tax return, which will be rarely scrutinized.

There will be an Offer in Compromise examiner who will carefully review the information you put on the above-mentioned forms and most likely he or she will want you to be in their office to discuss the information you have provided. Be prepared to provide additional documentation to substantiate your income and assets as the IRS representative will often request them.

3. You didn’t refute the OIC examiner’s version

Do you know nearly 25 percent of all IRS notices contain incorrect calculations? IRS examiners are just human, they too can make mistakes. If your proposed offer in compromise is rejected and if you find any discrepancies in calculations, you have the right to rebut the examiner’s basis for objection.

When rejected, the offer in compromise examiner will send a detailed letter to the taxpayer and this letter will explain the reason why the IRS rejected the offer. But often taxpayers overlook any errors made by an OIC examiner when calculating Reasonable Collectible Potential (RCP) or will accept the letter plainly without taking any further action.

4. You didn’t exercise your right to appeal

People presume that the IRS is always correct and take the IRS rejection letter as final, but this is not the end of the road. Taxpayers have the right to appeal the OIC rejection, but they commonly give it a miss. You can get things straight – you can turn rejection into acceptance – if the whole story is told in the right way.