Sioux Falls, SD

The Sioux Falls School District is now offering more insurance coverage when repairs are needed. The District hopes this new policy will help ease the financial blow for parents.

Chromebooks are being used in classrooms all over the Sioux Falls school district this year. But this new technology is not indestructible.

"There's going to be a certain number that get dropped. We understand that. If they just learn to pick the Chromebook up by the base and not the screen, where they can crack it just by applying pressure to it, it will cut down on a number of cracked screens," said Bob Jensen, Director of Assessments Technology & Information Services.

The original insurance policy for the Chromebooks had parents paying 100 percent of the cost of all repairs under $75.

After reevaluating the numbers, the District realized the most common repairs cost less than that.

For example, fixing something like a broken screen only cost about $57--which left parents picking up the entire tab. Under the new policy, the District will now cover 50% of those lesser costs.

"We had parents asking and realizing, oh this really isn't protecting me for anything other than if it's lost or stolen. And so as parents asked about it, and we reevaluated it, it made sense to change it," said Jensen.

Bob Jensen with the School District, says they weren't sure how many accidents to predict with this first launch year. But he hopes it stays about where it is right now.

"We've probably at this point, we've deployed around a little over 10,000 devices. And we've replaced probably 100 screens. So 1%, maybe," said Jensen.

If you don't want to pay for any repairs, Jensen says, make sure your child takes the proper care with their new technology.

"If they're carrying them around, have the lid closed. Never pick the Chromebook up by, when it's open, by the lid that has the screen on it," said Jensen.

The most a parent will pay for repairs is $75, after that the insurance will cover the rest.

Lost or stolen Chromebooks still have a cap of $120 parents have to pay.

The premium for the insurance coverage is $40.