In the last two installments of the Your Money column, I answered questions about the new health insurance exchanges. The first column discussed many of the basics, and the second column answered reader questions. You can find more readers’ questions and answers on In Practice, with the latest series below. If you’re still not sure how the law affects you and your family, please e-mail me your questions: tsbernard@nytimes.com.

Household Members Want Different Plans

Q. My husband and I are self-employed and file our taxes jointly. We will qualify for subsidies. Do we have to get identical policies since we file jointly? Or can one of us get, say, a bronze plan and the other get a silver plan? –Annah

A. It’s your choice. “They can buy one plan that covers them both or they can buy two separate plans,” said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation. If you decided to get two separate plans, and you qualify a tax credit, you can also allocate the credit across the two plans. But that starts to get complicated, so it might be best to ask for more specific advice from your state’s exchange.

Why Premiums Increased

Q. My 33-year-old husband is self-employed. For the past three years, he has purchased an insurance plan on the individual market from Kaiser Permanente. The plan is a high-deductible, health savings account eligible plan. The deductible is $4,000 and the out-of-pocket maximum is $5,500. He pays about $140/month for it.

This plan will be eliminated at the end of the year, and the closest option from Kaiser is $250 a month. Plus, the deductible and out-of-pocket maximum are higher. All of the bronze-level plans offered in California are approximately the same price so he can’t switch and get a better deal.

This was shocking to both of us. We absolutely support the president and the goal of insuring everyone in the U.S., but we didn’t expect to be so negatively affected. Fortunately, this 75 percent increase in premium does not present a financial hardship for us, although it does significantly increase his business costs.

So I guess my questions are: Why did the premium go up so much and yet the benefits have gotten worse? Is Kaiser taking advantage of this opportunity to raise their rates? Are relatively young, healthy people seeing a similar increase in premiums? Is there anything we can do? –Christine Fry, Oakland, Calif.

A. I sent your question to Kaiser Permanente. To summarize, the company said they haven’t had to raise the premiums on your husband’s plan for the past three years. The increase between your husband’s existing coverage and the new plans available next year may seem especially stark because the insurance will now cover an entire population of individuals, not just healthy ones, a spokesman said. In addition, the plans will also include several essential services, which also contributed to the price increase.

Here’s a more specific explanation, as explained by Christian Stenrud, a Kaiser spokesman: