SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Fox News Channel host Greg Gutfeld argued “Donald Trump is a liberal” and that the criticism of Trump by talk radio hosts Mark Levin and Rush Limbaugh shows “the establishment versus outsider shtick was baloney meant to halt criticism” on Friday’s broadcast of “The Five.”

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

After playing audio of Trump expressing support for invading Iraq in 2002 and Democratic presidential candidate former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton saying that she’s “always tried” to tell the truth, Gutfeld said, “[W]hen assessing a candidate, do lies, in fact, matter? Does it matter that one lies to the families of the Benghazi dead, or another lies about not supporting a war, when maybe he did. More important, what would this candidate do if given more power? Because we’re about to give them more power. The past predicts the future. What would your candidate do? That question forces you to put principal before personality, specifics over strength. See, Donald Trump taught us it’s okay to be wrong, as long as you’re strong. It’s why you see so much child-like adulation from grown men. If Trump said, ‘Make daddy a drink,’ how many talking heads would rush to the bar? But that’s not his fault, it’s those who let personality trump principle. We hate left-wing tribalism. You know, when you’re critical, you’re disloyal. Maybe we’ve become that, too, calling lifelong conservatives RINOs for criticizing a lifelong, whatever. We see now the establishment versus outsider shtick was baloney meant to halt criticism. For as Rush and Mark Levin now hit Trump too, are they establishment also? Again, what would your choice do if he or she had more power? Would they abandon promises for popularity? Or choose revenge over reason? If you don’t care to ask, then you get the president you deserve.”

Later, after playing a clip of Trump saying that he likes the mandate in Obamacare and doesn’t want people dying in the streets and that poor people could be taken care of “under concepts of Medicare.” Gutfeld stated, “[T]his is a liberal canard, that if you are not for a social program, you want people to die in the streets. That’s something you heard in a cocktail party in 2007, 2008 along with ‘Bush lied, people died.’ So, he — this is — I mean, he is a liberal. Donald Trump is a liberal.”

Follow Ian Hanchett on Twitter @IanHanchett