HOUSTON, March 5, 2014 — Big Government programs are bound to fail; the government is unable to do anything more efficiently and more effectively than the private sector. No program or regulation that the government has promised would help alleviate whatever manufactured “crisis” the politicians claimed demanded action has never done what they said it would do.

How do Big Government politicians continue to get away with implementing these failed policies, and how do they escape responsibility for the devastating consequences that inevitably arise from them? In Thomas Sowell’s incredible deconstruction of the mindset of Big Government politicians, “The Vision of the Anointed – Self Congratulation as a Basis for Social Policy,” he lays out a 4-step pattern that explains clearly how Big Government programs fail and how the politicians responsible cover up their failures. The failure of Obamacare, like the failure of every other program to rely on the federal government, exemplifies this pattern.

Stage One in the pattern Sowell describes is “The Crisis.” This is when proponents of Big Government make “assertions of great danger to the whole society, which the masses of people are oblivious.” Sowell explains that evidence is “very rarely asked for or given” to confirm the alleged crisis.

In 2009, Obama and Nancy Pelosi started talking about tens of millions of uninsured Americans who they said would be dying in the streets unless taxpayers subsidized their health insurance. Forget that a huge percentage of those were younger people who chose to go without insurance, and another huge percentage were illegal aliens, who Obama has said will not be eligible for Obamacare – this manufactured crisis must be dealt with immediately and by the government.

Also in 2009, the year before Obamacare was signed into law, the vast majority of Americans who were insured were very happy with their health insurance. Out of 11 mainstream polls done in 2009, anywhere from 75-90% of people were satisfied or very satisfied with their healthcare.

Stage Two of Sowell’s Pattern is “The Solution,” in which the Big Government proponents advocate for policies which they say “will lead to beneficial result A, and they dismiss any critics who say the policy will lead to detrimental result Z as “absurd, simplistic, and dishonest.”

Obama’s solution to this manufactured crisis was to force taxpayers to provide insurance to the alleged tens of millions who were uninsured using a goverment facilitated system, based on a bill that was over 2,000 pages long, that Nancy Pelosi claimed we needed to pass “to find out whats in it.”

Allegedly this incredible bill would not affect anyone who had insurance and was happy with their plan. Obama made this his mantra and no one in the media legitimately questioned him about it. Opponents who claimed that simple math proves that many people who currently had insurance would have to pay much more in order to subsidize the tens of millions who would be added to the system and would not be paying anything were dismissed as evil, stupid, or crazy.

Stage Three of Sowell’s Pattern is “The Results,” in which the policy inevitably leads to the predictions made by the opponents of the policy that were initially deemed as “absurd, simplistic, and dishonest.”

Exactly as opponents had repeatedly warned, within two months after Obamacare launched in October of 2013 it forced over 5 million people who previously had heatlh insurance through the individual market to lose their healthcare plan and to pay much higher premiums in order to subsidize the uninsured who refused to pay for their own insurance.

In 2015 when the employer mandate kicks in (unless Obama chooses to play dictator again and change the plain language of the law with a speech or a blog post) tens of millions of Americans will be kicked off their current insurance plans because of the unsustainable cost the requirement to provide insurance would place on employers.

Regardless, people like Sen. Ted Cruz, who did everything he could to defund or delay this disaster, including a 22 hour speech to attempt to block the funding for the law, are ridiculed and accused of not having Americans best interest at heart. The media still does not ask Obama about this failure.

Stage Four of Dr.Sowell’s Pattern is “The Response,” where “the burden of proof is put on the critics to demonstrate that this policy alone is the only possible cause of the worsening of the problem. No burden of proof whatsoever is put upon those who so confidently predicted improvement, and it is often asserted that things would have been much worse were it not for the wonderful program.

In addition to the fact that 5-6 million Americans lost their insurance policy and doctor within three months, the Congressional Budget Office has also stated that Obamacare will leave tens of millions without medical insurance. Finally, just recently the CBO said that Obamacare will result in teh loss of at least 2.5 million jobs and will disincintivize people from working.

Obamacare is resulting in exactly what the opponents -labeled crazy, evil or stupid – said it would. In addition to the more than five million million who have already lost their plans, tens of millions more will lose their plans and doctors when the employer mandate kicks in. The Congressional Budget Office (CBO) recently said that after Obamacare is fully implemented there will still be tens of millions of uninsured Americans. Additionally, the CBO released a report in Feb. of 2014 that said that Obamacare would result in the loss of 2.5 million full time jobs and that it would disincintivize work. Essentially every single piece of empirical evidence shows that Obamacare has failed based upon the standards laid out by the programs’ proponents.

Obama and the Democrats have reacted in ways that Dr. Sowell, no doubt, would have expected: blamed insurance companies, said that it would be much worse if not for Obamacare, appealed to our moral sense of duty to transfer money to those who refuse to work, and completely moved the goalposts.

In a November 2013 interview with Chuck Todd from NBC, Obama was asked if he regretted the repeated statement that anyone who was happy with their plan and doctor could keep them. The essence of his response was that he was sorry that Americans misunderstood him. Apparently, what he really meant was that Americans can keep their plans if the federal government deems those plans to be sufficient.

Dr. Sowell perfectly sums up this situation in The Vision of the Anointed: “In short, no matter what happens, the vision of the anointed always succeeds, if not by the original criteria, then by criteria extemporized later- and if not by empirical criteria, then by criteria sufficiently subjective to escape even the possibility of refutation. Evidence becomes irrelevant.”

Welcome to Big Government.