A day after Kansas Secretary of State Kris Kobach publicly called on members of Congress to support a health care compact between several states, the research arm of Congress wrote a memo informing lawmakers that the compact isn’t constitutional.

On Monday, Kobach released a letter dated July 9 that urged Republican members of Congress from the nine states that have signed onto the health care compact to approve the interstate agreement and allow their states to circumvent the Affordable Care Act.

“It is the only legal path that we have left to end Obamacare and to restore our Constitution, short of a future Act of Congress to repeal it,” Kobach said.

In the letter, Kobach identified himself as a former professor of constitutional law “who recognizes the unconstitutionality of the Affordable Care Act.” The graduate of Harvard, Oxford and Yale Law was a law professor at the University of Missouri-Kansas City in the late 1990s.

The benefit of the health care compact, Kobach argued, is that it wouldn’t be subject to a veto by President Barack Obama. A sentence stating this is underlined in Kobach’s letter to Republican congressmen.

“It is important to note that Compact Clause does not require the President's signature — only Congress need approve,” Kobach wrote in the underlined passage.

However, on Tuesday, the nonpartisan Congressional Research Service wrote a six-page memorandum obtained by The Topeka Capital-Journal detailing the constitutional arguments laid out by Kobach and ultimately dismissing them, ruling instead that such a compact would, in fact, require the president’s signature.

Andrew Nolan, a legislative attorney with CRS, made his case that compacts require a presidential signature by citing two clauses in the U.S. Constitution.

The Presentment Clause in Article 1, Section 7 states that “every bill which shall have passed the House of Representatives and the Senate, shall, before it become a law, be presented to the President” for his signature or veto. The clause goes on to state that a law has been constitutionally enacted only if it passes through both houses of Congress and the president, according to Nolan. While there are exceptions, such as impeachment proceedings, state compacts aren’t one of them.

The second clause Nolan cites is the Compact Clause in Section 10 of the Constitution. It states, “No State shall, without the consent of Congress … enter into any Agreement or Compact with another State …” Taken together, the two clauses require Congress to agree to the compact and send it to the president before it can become law, Nolan contends.

In an interview Thursday night, Kobach said the Presentment Clause doesn’t apply because the compact isn’t a federal statute, adding that “CRS reports are to be taken with a pinch of salt.”

In 2014, the Kansas Legislature and Gov. Sam Brownback approved legislation setting up participation in the health care compact. Georgia, Indiana, Oklahoma, Missouri, Texas, Utah, South Carolina and Alabama have passed similar bills.

In his letter, Kobach concedes that a compact would require the approval of Congress but argues it wouldn’t require Obama’s signature.

“The Framers wanted these compacts to be possible in the future, but subject to a congressional veto so that the states could not circumvent the federal government,” Kobach wrote.

Kobach’s argument amounts to a strict reading of the Constitution, which doesn’t explicitly mention the president in regard to state compacts. Nolan, however, writes that “the text, structure, purpose and function of the Constitution, coupled with the sustained practice of Congress strongly suggests that legislation approving of the Health Care Compact should be subject to the limitations of the Presentment Clause.”

“I would rather be on the side of the words of the Constitution,” Kobach said, adding that CRS reports “are often wrong.”

The Congressional Research Service is an agency within the Library of Congress that conducts nonpartisan research and writes reports at the request of members of Congress and their staff. Its reports are not made available to the public.

According to Nolan, state compacts have been subject to a presidential veto “since the founding of the country.” The researcher cites a study by former Supreme Court Justice Felix Frankfurter that found every interstate compact approved by Congress between 1789 and 1925 was presented to the president. “This practice appears to have continued after 1925,” Nolan wrote.

Nolan concludes that both the Constitution and the manner in which it has been interpreted for 226 years suggest that the health care compact would have to be approved by the president. Kobach, however, said a strict constructionist judge — one who prefers a more literal reading of the Constitution — would side with the states in a future legal battle over the health care compact.

“I don't think this report will scare Congress away,” Kobach said.