RTD will hold public hearings in March and April on two important issues that will effect Boulder County transportation for years to come: the proposed U.S. 36 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) operating plan and changes to the RTD fare structure. It is important that the public be aware of the opportunity to provide comments to RTD.

There are a number of positive elements in these proposals. All-day frequent service at a local fare connecting all the communities along the U.S. 36 corridor is an important step to providing affordable mobility for the increasing numbers of people who commute between Louisville, Superior, Broomfield, Westminster and Boulder for work and school. Changing the fare from express to local for the BOLT/J route serving the Diagonal is good news for those who travel between Longmont and Boulder. We also support the creation of all-day fares that will reduce costs for those who rely on transit for multiple trips each day, as well as the proposed reduction in fares for the airport service.

There are, however, a number of serious concerns that we believe must be addressed prior to adoption of either plan.

With regard to the U.S. 36 BRT operating plan, we believe that no one should experience worse service or pay more than they do today as a result of FasTracks. Yet that is exactly the combined effect of the plans proposed by RTD. For what is currently one of the highest ridership segments of the U.S. 36 BRT corridor, the operating plan proposes a significant decrease in peak period service along Broadway in Boulder as well as the elimination of mid-day express service connecting Boulder, Louisville and Superior to Denver.

Advertisement

Further, the proposed plan does not account for areas experiencing significant growth and increasing demand for transit service, such as the Boulder Junction/Google Campus area, the new Boulder Community Hospital complex, and the CU East Campus. In fact,the current direct service between Denver and this growing employment center would be eliminated, and employees, patients and students traveling to and from Denver would require a transfer to a shuttle at Boulder Junction. The proposed service plan would also increase travel time and decrease frequency of service from the Denver Civic Center Station to Boulder Junction, and would provide no direct service from Denver Union Station to Boulder Junction.

We are also concerned that, in some cases, identical trips are charged different fares. For example, someone traveling from Louisville or Superior to Boulder would pay a local fare if they rode on an All Station bus, an express fare if they got on the Express bus, or a regional fare if they rode the Regional bus, even though they would have the same experience with the same number of stops while heading to the same destination in the same type of vehicle.We believe all westbound trips from the McCaslin to Boulder, as well as trips within Boulder, should be charged local fares.

The proposed plan does not provide the U.S. 36 corridor with any significant net new investment in improved service comparable to that provided to other FasTracks corridors; rather, it re-allocates the funding already programmed to the corridor. Increased FasTracks funding should be allocated by the RTD Board in order to provide more robust service throughout the U.S. 36 corridor, ensuring the immediate and long term success of BRT and showing our communities a significant and meaningful benefit from their contribution to FasTracks.

With regard to the fare study, we have an overarching concern with the inequity of reducing light rail fares while simultaneously increasing bus fares. This seems fundamentally unfair as the current proposal would result in bus riders subsidizing light rail service even more than is currently the case and would further divert the already scant funding for improved bus service to rail service in other corridors — which Boulder County is not likely to see for another 30 years.

There are both positive and concerning aspects in these proposals. The combined effect of the two plans would be improved service and reduced costs for the travelers along the U.S. 36 and Longmont Diagonal corridors while many Boulder riders would pay more for less transit service than they receive today.

We urge Boulder County residents to attend the public meetings and provide comments that you may have to RTD. Please visit www.BoulderCounty.org/Roads for information on the public meetings and more information on the proposed studies.

George Gerstle is transportation director of Boulder County.