HAMPTON TOWNSHIP, MI — The waiting room at the Helen M. Nickless Volunteer Clinic looks a lot like any other doctor's office. People quietly fidget while watching an episode of Family Feud, kids present challenges to their parents, and patients regularly shuffle in and out of the office for a moment with the doctor.

There's one key difference: none of these patients are well-insured.

Bay City resident Mike Arnold was among a small group of people waiting at the clinic on the evening of Wednesday, April 2, suffering from a sinus infection just two months after moving from Arizona to Bay City. Usually, he said, he just tries to "Dayquil or Nyquil it" if his symptoms aren't severe. Now, though, he found himself at the clinic for the first time, seeking his first professional treatment in nine years.

"It's pretty much the only place I've got to go," he said.



A decade of service



Clinic history and facts 2003 – Administrators at McLaren Bay Region hospital commit to open a clinic for the locally underinsured. 2004 – The Bay Area Volunteer Clinic opens. 2005 – After a significant fundraising campaign raises $4 million dollars, with a large donation from the Nickless family, the clinic is renamed the Helen M. Nickless Volunteer Clinic. 2005 – Average weekly clinic attendance is roughly 36 patients. 2006 – Space for dental services offered at Delta College and the Bay Arenac ISD Career Center provides for dental care. 2006 – Bay County Health Department offers space for women's health screenings. 2009 – As a result of the large demand, the clinic begins only accepting new patients from Bay County. 2008 – Mental health counseling added to clinic's Wednesday evening services. 2011 – Average weekly clinic attendance grows to 50 patients. 2013 – Average weekly clinic attendance drops to 41 patients as more than 200 patients move to an insurance program offered by the Bay Health Plan. 2014 – Clinic celebrates 10th anniversary with gala celebration planned for Friday, April 11, at the Doubletree hotel and conference center in downtown Bay City. Source: Helen M. Nickless Volunteer Clinic

The Nickless Clinic, located at 1460 W. Center Ave. in Hampton Township, turned 10 years old on Monday, March 31, marking a decade since the group opened its doors to people like Arnold in 2004. Since then, the clinic has strived to serve the uninsured and underinsured, marshaling resources to help patients see primary care physicians and specialists alike, receiving x-rays to lab work, all for free.



Today, the clinic is open Wednesday evenings until every patient is served, with sign-in open from 4-6:30 p.m. Patients with chronic problems are seen on Wednesday afternoons.

"It is a big milestone," said Dr. Floyd Stevens, medical director at the clinic. "We were discouraged by some very high-standing people in the beginning who said there was no need for it, that we were creating a need for it by being there. They were saying we had no people living under bridges, we had no people in desperate need. But those weren't the people we were trying to serve — we were trying to serve those who had no insurance and didn't qualify for insurance."

The clinic is marking the occasion with a 10-Year Clinic Gala, an event recognizing volunteers, both medical and clerical, scheduled for 6 p.m. on Friday, April 11, at the Doubletree hotel and conference center in downtown Bay City. A buffet dinner is scheduled for 7 p.m., with a celebration, featuring words from Alice Gerard, president and CEO of McLaren Bay Region hospital.

Tickets are $50 each, available by calling the McLaren Bay Medical Foundation, the clinic's financial supporter, at 989-895-4727. Tickets also are available at the door.

Proceeds benefit the Nickless Clinic, which has an annual operating budget of $250,000.

Among the clinic's volunteers is Alice Cornejo, who has been with the clinic for much of its existence.

"I love it," she said, sitting behind the clinic's front desk. "I love it. To me, the charts aren't charts, they're people. It's not just a piece of paper." In particular, Cornejo remembers what it was like to see the need in the community when she first joined years ago.

"To think that there were so many young kids, young people, or older, that were working two jobs or three jobs and couldn't afford a doctor," she said. "I used to do intake, when a patient comes back and you interview them. I did that for six months, and then I told (the clinic manager) I couldn't do it. She said, 'Why?' I said, 'I feel like crying.' "



Humble beginnings



Stevens has served as medical director of the clinic since its earliest days. He said he recalls the discussion beginning to coalesce around the project 15 years ago.

"The idea was actually proposed back in '99," Stevens said. "It seemed like there were more patients being seen in the emergency rooms and the residency clinics that were unable to afford it more than we had ever noticed before."

The idea lacked funding in 1999, though, and it waited years until groups around the community put their weight behind it, finally launching in 2004. Within the next several years, the group was renamed in memory of Helen M. Nickless, after her family made substantial financial contributions to the clinic.



Stevens said starting the clinic was intimidating — "fear and trepidation" was the phrase he used.

"We were fearful," he said. "Either No. 1, are we interpreting (need) correctly, or No. 2, are we going to be able to meet the needs? Because the needs included things like medication, laboratory, x-rays, connecting people with places they can get ongoing care. We didn't want to just be a Band-Aid clinic and then step back. We were creating the concept at the same time we were furnishing care."

In the years following the clinic's opening, the group saw a strong response, with as many as 90 patients visiting the clinic one evening. Because the clinic serves everyone who visits, that can mean keeping the office running until 1 a.m., Stevens said. In 2009, the clinic limited its coverage area to Bay County to cope with demand.



The Affordable Care Act and beyond



Though Stevens said that changes to healthcare law, including the Affordable Care Act, have decreased the number of patients seeking care, he doesn't think the need for care will go away.

"We see that the numbers of patients that we have to take care of has gone down," he said. "But the number of patients that still contact us for information is very, very high." Stevens added that 15 to 20 percent of patients they see every week are new to the clinic. "I think there's always going to be people who fall through the cracks, but I think that number will diminish."

Joyce Hardy, a longtime nurse and the manager of the clinic, noted that Medicaid expansion taking effect in Michigan this month likely will decrease the number of people using the clinic.



"That's a lot more affordable," she said, noting that many of the clinic's patients aren't welfare recipients. "Most of the people who come to the clinic are people who work but can't afford health insurance."

Hardy also said the Affordable Care Act will take some time to be implemented, especially with confusion surrounding the law. Additionally, she said that even when it is implemented, large deductibles may still make a number of individuals eligible for the Nickless Clinic's care.



Cindy Charters of Essexville came the clinic for the first time on April 2. She placed a call to the staffers at the healthcare.gov website before the insurance exchange closed on March 31, and now she's waiting for a call from government officials to help sign her up. In the meantime, though, she still needs care.

"I could get (insurance) through work, but they don't pay anything and I can't afford what they offer," she said.

Kimberly Knapp, another patient, said she's been unemployed since the summer of 2013. The Nickless Clinic is a place she has come to rely on, since plans offered through the Affordable Care Act are too expensive for her, she said.

Knapp said she's been coming to the clinic for about eight years.

"Pretty much everything I've needed I've come here for," she said.

Hardy said that as of October 2013, the Nickless Clinic had seen about 7,500 patients, resulting in about 23,000 visits.

In 2013, a total of 2,000 visits were made to the clinic, down from 2,400 in 2012.

When asked if the clinic will still be around 10 years from now, Stevens said, ”The intent was to create a clinic to meet peoples’ needs. If there are no needs, we’ll close our doors.

"Right now, we have enough money to keep on going, and we have enough interest to keep on working.”

— Sam Easter is a general assignment reporter for The Bay City Times. He can be reached at seaster@mlive.com.