PARSIPPANY, N.J.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Jackson Hewitt Tax Service® today announced the best results it has seen in over five years following what has been a transformative 2015 tax season with the launch of a new consumer brand promise and growth across all major areas of its tax business. Total revenues increased 7.4% compared to prior year, and same store sales increased 4.3%. Total returns were up nearly 3% with same store assisted returns increasing 0.5%, driven by new customer growth and improved customer retention. These results are in contrast to a flat in-person tax preparation industry as a whole, according to Internal Revenue Service statistics through April 17. Jackson Hewitt also upgraded its online platform, which grew almost 400%. The company expanded its footprint, adding 34 new franchise groups and nearly 250 new locations in Walmart stores nationwide.

“It’s gratifying to see how clients responded to our new ‘Working Hard for the Hardest Working℠’ brand promise and our focus on our 100% accuracy and Biggest Refund guarantees. Our new products, services and promotions helped drive positive results this tax season,” said David Prokupek, CEO of Jackson Hewitt. “By providing expert and affordable tax services, helping clients navigate the ACA tax implications, and committing to the best customer experience in tax, we made a difference in our clients’ lives and that made a difference in our business results.”

Programs Focused on Value, Service and Convenience Attract Clients

Through their nearly 3,000 locations in Walmart stores, Jackson Hewitt offered a convenient, trusted option for clients to file their tax returns. They also piloted Walmart’s Direct2Cash program in select locations, offering clients the option to pick up their refunds in cash at Walmart for a low fee of $7.

Clients also benefited from one of the best values in online tax preparation with the ability to download their W-2 and import last year’s online return information for free even if it was filed with an online tax service competitor.

For the first time, Jackson Hewitt also offered free online tax services as part of the Free File Alliance (FFA). Through this partnership with the IRS, individuals with incomes of $60,000 or less were able to use Jackson Hewitt online for free.

“The entire Jackson Hewitt team was determined to make good on our new brand promise to work hard for the hardest working Americans,” said Prokupek. “We focused our partnerships and programs on delivering value, service and convenience to those often underserved.”

This was especially important this year with the confusion taxpayers had regarding the Affordable Care Act. Jackson Hewitt’s personal advice helped clients understand how the Affordable Care Act may impact them, and by answering a few simple questions during the tax interview, learn if they qualified for money-saving tax credits. Jackson Hewitt also renewed its partnership with GetInsured, a leading private health insurance exchange that helped clients learn about and enroll in a health insurance plan that fit their budget.

Planning for Continued Growth

Jackson Hewitt plans for continued growth, expecting to add approximately 50 new franchise groups as well as additional locations in Walmart stores nationwide for the 2016 tax season. In addition, the company will continue to innovate in its core tax and financial service business, and begin to roll out new low- and no-cost products to help Americans manage their taxes and finances year-round.

“For many of our clients, their tax refund is the biggest paycheck they receive all year. These taxpayers also want help to make smart financial choices,” said Prokupek. “Jackson Hewitt aims to bring access to innovative offerings and services to help hardworking Americans provide for themselves and their families, and to get ahead.”

About Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc.

Jackson Hewitt Tax Service Inc. is a leading full service multi-channel tax preparation company with approximately 6,300 franchised and company-owned locations including nearly 3,000 locations in Walmart stores throughout the United States. Jackson Hewitt also provides a full suite of online and mobile tax filing solutions for the “do-it-yourself” marketplace at www.jacksonhewittonline.com. We stand behind our 25,000 professional tax preparers with our Biggest Refund and 100% Accuracy Guarantees. For more information, product and offer details, or to locate your neighborhood Jackson Hewitt office, visit www.jacksonhewitt.com or call 1-800.234.1040.