THE ASSOCIATED PRESS

Woman on the $10 bill

A recent survey selected a group of American women as possible candidates for a redesigned $10 bill. All on the list are admirable women who have done any number of beneficial acts for the good of American women and Americans in general.

One of the most influential women in American history has been overlooked. She is Martha Washington, the very "first lady" of the new United States and wife of a beloved general and the first president, George Washington.

She was a gracious woman who supported Gen. Washington and the Revolutionary War troops with her own money to provide warm clothing and food during the harsh winter at Valley Forge. She gave up her own comfort at Mount Vernon to stay with Gen. Washington at Valley Forge providing moral support and encouragement. She nursed the sick and provided comfort to the dying.

She also rallied other women to help provide food, clothing and comfort to the troops.

She never lived in a "White House" but kept the president's houses in New York and later Philadelphia and managed Mount Vernon plantation at the same time.

The troops called her "Lady Washington." Many of them would not have survived without her efforts on their behalf. If they had not survived, we might have lost the Revolutionary War, and we would not have become the United States of America. Martha Washington is a more than worthy candidate to be the first woman to grace American paper currency.

Jacqueline Pettit Burd

Colorado Springs

Impending national suicide

I'd like to express my appreciation for the excellent and common-sense perspective by Philip E. Mella (Gazette, June 26). Mella succinctly described what is happening to our country. Apparently, we have lost the will to secure our borders, execute murderers and effectively ensure our national interests. We keep electing and re-electing weak, incompetent leaders and don't have the will to hold them accountable. As a result, our economy is faltering, our foreign policy is a joke, and American prestige and influence have never been lower. Fox News liberal Juan Williams explained it thus: "Other countries don't like us because we're rich and powerful. If we become less so, they'll like us better." Really?

I'm wondering if we can come to our senses in time to avert our impending national suicide - or is it already too late?

Robert Vegvary

Colorado Springs

Nothing to be proud of

David Baker writes in a letter to the editor that Americans should be proud of Obamacare; like most supporters, he claims it is a "success" because it is "working." Polls show that 74 percent of the 8 million "recipients" are "satisfied" but leave out the 12 million Americans who are eligible for Obamacare but can't afford it or refuse to sign up. I use the word "recipients" because 87 percent on Obamacare are receiving taxpayer subsidies. The average Obamacare annual subsidy is $3,312 per recipient.

No wonder Baker - perhaps getting health care almost totally paid by taxpayers - is writing The Gazette with lavish praise - and cursing "Republicans" that are likely having to pay for it.

The truth is that none of President Barack Obama's promises in regard to health care - $2,500 per family savings, lower health care premiums, "keep your own doctor" have come true.

Medical costs continue to spiral out of control, several Obamacare cooperatives have gone bankrupt, and some health insurance premiums will increase by double-digit percentages next year. I don't call that something to be "proud of."

No Republican that I know begrudges helping out the 10 percent of the population always in desperate need of social services, including health care. What is not sustainable (see our $18 trillion federal debt) is a political party (Democrats) that keeps buying votes with ever-increasing "goodies."

Michael Lowery

Colorado Springs

Lamenting radical interpretations

Based on the latest three Supreme Court rulings, it would appear we are now ruled by an oligarchy that has difficulty reading and understanding the English language. As such, I propose that we, the people, forgo future elections for the Senate and House of Representatives. Such a move would allow us to save billions on elections and future salaries. And since states' rights have been moved to federal jurisdiction, we could also eliminate state legislatures for further tax savings. Soon we might have a balanced budget.

Our future presidents could write or as in the current environment, dictate, rules and regulations for the country and the court would rubber stamp and approve. Some may question this in light of our Constitution, but since the court views it as a living document subject to individual, modern interpretations, why should anyone worry? George, John, Thomas, James and Alexander among others are surely lamenting the radical interpretations of their creation.

James Gaffney

Colorado Springs

Fading light on the hill

The recent two days of the Supreme Court rulings have been staggering to our conservative, constitutional republic form of government. Our forefathers did not want or expect our country to force upon the citizens a burden such as Obamacare. If let go and not corrected, our country and way of life as we have known it will vanish. This will happen rather quickly, and this tragedy must be stopped. Additionally, homosexuality has no place in marriage. The Bible states this and our Constitution was written by that higher authority of influence. Our Supreme Court judge activists (six of them) have gone way beyond their abilities and overreached in their last two decisions.

Supreme Court Justice Antonin Scalia did a superb job in explaining the error in this ruling by the six justices and gave the activist judges an education of our Constitution, which evidently they do not understand very well. What a bright mind Justice Scalia is and thank God he is willing to stand up for our country and he is on the highest court bench in our nation. Our country has not only been transformed by this dangerous Obama administration, but Obama is fundamentally destroying our wonderful way of life. The beacon light on the hill is fading and fading fast.

Bob Simmons

Colorado Springs