Hillary Clinton is eagerly seeking the mantle of Barack Obama as she campaigns for the Democratic presidential nomination. Her goal is to reanimate the coalition that twice propelled Obama to victory as her best strategy for winning the nomination this spring and capturing the White House in the November election.

Clinton may have no choice. It's probably impossible for her to successfully court Republicans because so many of them deeply dislike her. And it will be difficult for her to successfully court independents, many of whom don't trust her, according to the polls.

[READ: Clinton Pressures Sanders, DNC on New Hampshire Debate]

Many of those same independents also have very negative feelings about the Republican presidential candidates, so they may not show up at the polls at all in November. As a result, Clinton and her strategists seem to believe that it will be a "base election," with core Democrats vying with core Republicans, so turning out the base constituencies will be a paramount objective.

Clinton tied herself closely to President Obama at this week's Democratic forum in Des Moines, Iowa. She reminded voters that Obama, in an interview with Politico published this week, had called her "wicked smart" and well-prepared for the presidency. "I was really touched and gratified when I saw that," said Clinton, who was Obama's secretary of state during his first term. "He knows how hard the job is. He knows first hand."

Clinton's praise for Obama has become a regular feature of her standard campaign speech as she tries to rally his core supporters, especially single women, African-Americans, Latinos and young people. "I am proud of the progress we have made under President Obama, and I don't want anyone sending us back," Clinton said Jan. 21 during a rally before 1,600 people at the University of Iowa in Iowa City, where she appeared with singer Demi Lovato. Clinton seemed to be referring not only to Republicans but also to Sen. Bernie Sanders, I-Vt., her main opponent for the Democratic nomination. Clinton says Sanders' proposal for a single-payer health care system would undermine support for Obama's Affordable Care Act, create more stalemate in Washington and hinder efforts to expand benefits and improve Obamacare in the near future.

At the Democratic debate in mid-January in Charleston, S.C., Clinton repeatedly and almost worshipfully linked herself to Obama, which surprised longtime Clinton supporters who remember her bitter struggle with Obama for the 2008 Democratic nomination, which he won. She praised Obama for having "led our country out of the Great Recession," and for negotiating a nuclear deal with Iran which she said represents a step toward stability and peace.



[RELATED: Bernie Sanders Has a Whiff of Tea Party About Him]



Clinton is particularly interested in linking herself with Obama in order to curry favor among African-American voters who will be key to winning nominating delegates in many states. Obama is the first black president and enjoys overwhelming support among African-Americans. This is part of the reason why Clinton is attacking Sanders for the senator's criticisms of Obama – to undermine Sanders with black voters.

"The comments that Senator Sanders has made don't just affect me, I can take that, but he's criticized President Obama for taking donations from Wall Street, and President Obama has led our country out of the Great Recession," Clinton said. "Senator Sanders called him weak, disappointing. He even, in 2011, publicly sought someone to run in a primary against President Obama."

For his part, Sanders calls Obama a friend and says he is only trying to take the country in a better direction after Obama leaves office.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – January 2016]

Clinton's strategy is risky. Obama, while relatively popular among Democrats, isn't popular with other Americans. Polls show that his job approval and disapproval are about even, below 50 percent in each case. And many Americans appear to be tuning him out as they turn their attention to choosing his successor. His final State of the Union address in January drew only 31.3 million viewers on television, the lowest State of the Union audience of his presidency. Last year, 31.7 million watched. President George W. Bush's final State of the Union in 2008 attracted 37.5 million viewers, according to the Nielsen research firm.

For his part, Obama highly praised Clinton during the Politico interview this week, coming close to endorsing her. "I think that what Hillary presents," Obama said, "is a recognition that translating values into governance and delivering the goods is ultimately the job of politics, making a real-life difference to people in their day-to-day lives."