They have become the New York Yankees of the NFL.

Duke Elway is playing the role of Boss Steinbrenner.

The Broncos, since John Elway took charge of football operations in 2011, have become big spenders. Their draft work has been spotty. They’re not much on re-signing their own.

Yet, the Broncos have won four consecutive AFC West titles in the four years of Elway’s regime. Why? He spends. Much like when the late George Steinbrenner was emperor of the Yanks.

RELATED: Potential Broncos targets in free agency

New York doesn’t do farm systems. Let the small-market teams develop prospects. The Yanks win now. NOW! Or else.

In another life, Elway once worked for Steinbrenner. It was a brief dalliance that might have planted long-lasting philosophies into Elway on how to best build a franchise.

Sights in the NFL this week are on free agency, where no team has been more aggressive in recent years than the Broncos.

Peyton Manning, Louis Vasquez, Wes Welker, DeMarcus Ware, Emmanuel Sanders, Aqib Talib, Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, T.J. Ward, Manny Ramirez and Terrance “Pot Roast” Knighton are among the 27 full- or part-time starters Elway has signed from the past four free-agent periods.

“That all comes down to where our budget is, and I think that the bottom line is our philosophy to build in the draft and then add with free agency,” Elway said. “We’ve just been fortunate in the fact that we’ve been able to in the free-agency market get some very good, high-profile players. … But we’re always, no matter what it is, we’re always going to try to get better as a football team and stay within what the budget tells us to stay in, but try to find the right guys for the Denver Broncos.”

The 2015 free-agent market opens March 10, but a soft opening begins Saturday when teams are allowed to discuss interest and contracts with agents of free-agent players. No contract can be finalized, though, until the market opens at 2 p.m. March 10.

After the Broncos designate a $12.8 million franchise tag to their own free-agent receiver Demaryius Thomas on Monday, the team will have approximately $13 million of payroll cap room.

There is hope a restructured contract with Manning will provide a little more spending money. Still, it will be difficult this year for the Broncos to duplicate the buzz they created through free agency in the three previous seasons.

When Elway first got the job as head of Denver’s football operations, the league was coming out of a lockout and he had little choice but to begin modestly with an abbreviated free-agent period. Still, he signed running back Willis McGahee and three other starters, including Ramirez, who is still a Bronco.

Elway needed only one year of experience to successfully recruit arguably the greatest free-agent prize of all time: Manning. There were six other starters from that 2012 free-agent class signed. Wes Welker created the greatest splash from the league’s 2013 market, although Dominique Rodgers-Cromartie, Louis Vasquez and Knighton weren’t bad, either.

Manning might have single-handedly made 2012 the Broncos’ best free-agent class, but the 2014 group was deeper with Ware, Talib, Ward and Sanders all earning Pro Bowl berths in their first season with the team.

Among the free agents the Broncos might pursue next week are Kansas City center Rodney Hudson, Miami tight end Charles Clay and Baltimore defensive end Pernell McPhee.

Far more recognizable names, at least in Denver households, are expected to leave Dove Valley. Broncos tight end Julius Thomas, safety Rahim Moore, left guard Orlando Franklin and Knighton are all expected to command huge contracts and sign elsewhere as free agents.

The Broncos can’t meet those players’ asking prices while also seeking to redistribute the balance of their roster. A few players favored by coaches John Fox, Jack Del Rio and Adam Gase might not fit quite as well for Gary Kubiak, Wade Phillips and Rick Dennison.

Specifically, a new type of blocker is needed on offense. The Broncos have four needs up front: left guard, center, right tackle and tight end.

The draft might fill one need. Incumbents might fill another. Free agency will fill two, maybe three.

While right tackle might be the Broncos’ No. 1 need, their 2015 starter might come from their No. 28 draft pick. Or that No. 1 pick might be a tight end if the Broncos can’t nab Clay, Owen Daniels or Jordan Cameron from free agency to replace Julius Thomas.

Where the Broncos are almost certain to sign a quality free agent is at center. Hudson is considered the best. Oakland’s Stefan Wisniewski is young and experienced with the zone-blocking system.

On defense, the Broncos will seek at least two new linemen — one through free agency, the other through the draft.

At safety, the Broncos would love to bring back Moore. But in a safety market where demand is greater than supply, Moore should wind up with a big-money deal.

And the Broncos already have one of the league’s highest-paid secondaries after they secured Talib, Ward and Chris Harris for top dollars.

It appears the Broncos will have to be financially creative to keep their Boss’ streak of free-agent star signings going.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis