Buy Photo Saritha Prabhu (Photo: File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo Story Highlights The eeriest thing is that Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders are sounding similar on some things.

Who needs entertainment when we have the 2016 presidential election? “House of Cards” and “Scandal” can’t hold a candle to the real-life drama on the election stage.

It seems to me that we’re having a kind of Arab Spring moment in America, except that voters here aren’t, of course, rising up against dictators like in the Middle East, but against the oligarchy and the political establishment it props up and supports.

And that is something to celebrate in this election — even though the process seems raucous and chaotic, and even though unlikely leaders like Donald Trump are saying some foul, dangerous and illiberal things.

It’s interesting to see what’s been happening with the bases of both political parties.

On the GOP side, the news that trickle-down economics doesn’t work seems to have trickled down to its rank-and-file. The base seems to have finally realized that its establishment mainly serves plutocrats and not ordinary Americans.

On the one issue that animates the GOP base, illegal immigration, the base has realized that one reason undocumented immigration wasn’t tackled more seriously in the last decade and a half is because the steady stream of cheap, exploitable labor from across the border serves the plutocrats and their industries.

All this and more has caused a civil war within the GOP or, to borrow a Palinism, a “squirmish.” Don’t you love this word? I do, and it translates to me as a skirmish that makes the viewer squirm.

Things aren’t, obviously, pretty over on the Democratic side either. The base isn’t behaving itself as per establishment expectations. As experienced and able as Hillary Clinton is, her candidacy is flailing for two reasons.

One, the candidate is giving the appearance of feeding at the very trough that she’s promising to regulate and bring to heel. And two, her presidency, if it materializes, will deliver crumbs after the plutocracy has had its fill, but the base is in no mood for crumbs anymore.

The issue most animating the Democratic base is rising income inequality, and on this the base wants cake, and not crumbs meant to placate them and maintain the status quo.

Clinton may yet prevail, but she’s obviously getting a run for her money, quite literally.

Probably the eeriest thing is that Donald Trump and Bernie Sanders are sounding similar on some things. They certainly aren’t equivalent, but are voicing similar thoughts on a rigged system, on the influence of the donor class, on politicians not acting as per the interests of ordinary Americans, and so on.

Meanwhile, let me indulge in some schadenfreude. It’s been satisfying, to say the least, to see some establishment politicians and their surrogates in establishment media struggle to both explain and live with the Trump and Sanders phenomena.

The biggest example here is Gov. Jeb Bush, with his $100 million Super PAC, and his roster of big-name advisers, struggling almost pitiably and fighting for third or fourth place in state primaries.

Other examples are Marco Rubio and also Hillary Clinton — both backed by big donors and establishment leaders, and both being buffeted by stormy political winds.

In a strange way, we’re seeing Citizens United being overturned, in effect, by voters in this election so far — yes, there is big money involved (just 158 ultrawealthy families contributed half of the early funds, $176 million) but it’s yielding low returns for them.

Meanwhile, there’s the 2014 Princeton study saying that the U.S. is no longer an actual democracy but an oligarchy, where wealthy elites wield power and effect policy often against the will of a majority of voters.

The above was the 2016 plan, until ordinary voters decided to run the show, promising to put a billionaire or a socialist in charge.

It would all be “funny ha ha, not funny,” as the eminently quotable Palin said in another context, except there are, obviously, high stakes and serious issues involved.

Saritha Prabhu of Clarksville is a Tennessean columnist. Reach her at sprabhu43@gmail.com

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XF4vN7