Program for kids at Boys & Girls Club in Oshkosh explores important topics and gives hope

hands of woman and man goes to each other (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

My wife, Lynne, and I have been married for nearly 45 years. During that time, we have seen and experienced a lot. We grew up in the country with a lot of poor families, attended small and large schools, and confronted many of the challenges facing today’s young adults.

A couple of years ago, we began working with small groups of high-school-age members of the Boys & Girls Club in Oshkosh. Each group consisted of eight to 10 Club members, a facilitator, and Lynne and me.

The program consisted of a series of one-hour “Life Lessons” meetings, where Lynne and I would answer questions and address concerns on a range of subjects suggested by the kids. Topics included personal issues such as self-confidence and self-esteem, depression, bullying, dysfunctional families and relationships, job application, career choices, and resources available.

The young adults were a mix of white, black and Hispanic. Most were from poor families with one or more significant issues. For many, school is a challenge for concentration and relationships. Students have problems fitting in and finding positive role models.

For the kids, the Boys & Girls Club is a home away from home. The Club offers a safe environment, food, clothing for some, programs and mentoring. The staff is capable and non-judgmental. The kids are their focus.

The Club offers an alternative to “running the streets” and an escape from home. In the Club environment, these young adults are relaxed, open and willing to both learn and help other kids. It’s amazing to observe.

I can recall discussing the suicide topic following the death of two 14-year-old girls one month apart. All of the “Life Lessons” participants have had personal experience with attempted suicide or have friends that have died or attempted to end their life.

We approached this chilling subject by trying to identify reasons and root causes. We also discussed strategies and tactics to deal with self-destructive thoughts and behavior.

After a couple of meetings, we began to develop a relationship and friendship with the participants. We experienced openness, trust and mutual respect. The attendees would give Lynne and me a big hug and “thank you” at the end of each meeting. This says a lot.

The takeaway from these meetings was helpful information, coping tactics and hope. These young adults had an opportunity to spend time with a successful couple that has life lessons that can be shared.

Lynne and I enjoyed the opportunity to share. We hope to continue these meetings in the future. We also encourage others to become involved with helping young adults.

— Robert Keller is a Kaukauna resident. He can be reached at pcletters@postcrescent.com

Read or Share this story: http://post.cr/1w0OJ2R