The future of U.S. agriculture: Will it involve a diverse mix of family farms or will we have huge tracts of land tended by drone tractors?

One scenario would help keep rural America vital while the other would further accelerate the exodus underway in America’s heartland.

Consider the following facts, drawn from the U.S. Department of Agriculture’s latest Ag Census:

— The average age of the U.S. farmer is 58. Nineteen percent of the nation’s farms are operated by those 65 and over.

— The midpoint acreage of the U.S. farm in 1982 was 589 acres. By 2007, the average size was 1,105 acres.

— The amount of corporate-owned farmland has grown more than 18 percent in the last 15 years.

While one generation remains hard at work on the farm, the question becomes what happens when that generation is ready to pass on the ag baton? When there’s no one in the family to carry on?

What happens to the family farm?

Terra Brockman, founder and director of the farmland programs for the Land Connection, a non-profit organization dedicated to protecting farmland and training sustainable and organic farmers, knows there’s an emotional tie to the land, a bond that city folk can’t always understand.

“People need an informal way to talk about the future of their farm,” she said.

So Brockman’s group has set up a series of roundtables to facilitate those discussions. The next one is planned at the Peoria County Farm Bureau, 1716 N. University St., from 6 to 8 p.m. on Sept. 23.

“We often hear people say, ‘I know I should think about our farm’s future but I’m just not sure how to get started,’” she said.

At the roundtable, the Land Connection will help folks get started with worksheets and exercises to assist with a self-assessment on succession.

“Before going to an estate planner or an attorney for a resolution, we’re saying consider other options that might allow farming to continue on the land,” said Brockman.

She suggested that the question people need to ask themselves is “What would you really like to have happen on your farm?”

Brockman said the opportunity exists for a win-win where farm families, old and new, could both benefit in a succession plan.

Cara Cummings, the Land Connection’s executive director, noted that the group held its first farm transition roundtable in February. “We had a terrific response. People found the roundtable an easy way to start the important conversation about options for their farm,” she said.

Seats at the roundtable are limited and advance registration is required. For more information, call (217) 840-2128 or visit thelandconnection.org. The $20 registration fee covers a light supper featuring local foods.

Steve Tarter is Journal Star business editor. Tarter’s phone number is 686-3260, and his email address is starter@pjstar.com. Follow his blog, Minding Business, on pjstar.com and follow him on Twitter @SteveTarter