Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Which cases might leave U.S. Supreme Court divided?

Related Stories California teachers union survives U.S. Supreme Court challenge The U.S. Supreme Court's deadlocked vote in the challenge to public employee unions highlights the political and legal stakes of the high court deciding cases with a roster of eight justices equally divided between liberals and conservatives. With the possibility of other 4-4 votes on the horizon, here are some of the hot-button cases left this term that could leave the Supreme Court divided again without a successor to late Justice Antonin Scalia: Evenwell v Abbott -- Argued in December, the case out of Texas involves a challenge to the "one person, one vote" principle that could force states to redefine how they draw legislative boundaries. In this March 23, 2016 file photo, nuns and their supporters rally outside the Supreme Court in Washington as the court hears arguments to allow birth control in healthcare plans in the Zubik vs. Burwell case. (AP Photo/Jacquelyn Martin, File) ( Jacquelyn Martin ) Fisher v. University of Texas -- The latest case to address whether public universities can use affirmative action in the admissions process. Whole Woman's Health v. Hellerstedt -- In one of the high court's first chances to wade into the abortion fight in years, the case involves a challenge to Texas health regulations that abortion rights advocates say will effectively prevent women from securing abortions in the state. Affordable Care Act cases -- In challenges to the contraceptive mandate in the Affordable Care Act, the high court is considering various legal arguments from religious organizations seeking to be exempt from providing their employees with contraceptive coverage. Advertisement U.S. v. Texas -- A challenge by dozens of states, led by conservative Republicans, to the Obama administration's executive orders altering immigration policy to allow millions of undocumented immigrants to remain in the country. Howard Mintz covers legal affairs. Contact him at 408-286-0236 or follow him at Twitter.com/hmintz