It’s not his scholastic major, but Wyoming freshman wide receiver Tanner Gentry must have a minor in football history.

Either that or it was youthful enthusiasm that entered his thoughts earlier in the week when he talked about Saturday’s game in Laramie against the University of Northern Colorado.

The football history shows that Wyoming and UNC have played 25 times, but not since 1949. But 64 years ago, Wyoming thumped the Bears 103-0, setting an NCAA record for most points in a game. A mark that still stands.

“We’ve talked about putting a 100 on them,” Gentry said. “We can’t come out lightly and play down to their level.”

The Bears, a member of the Big Sky Conference, are playing up a notch in the NCAA’s competition levels when playing the Cowboys of the Mountain West.

They’re facing a Wyoming team that is a contender for the Mountain Division title. The Bears are building on a program that could finish down in the pack of their conference and lost last week to NCAA Division II CSU-Pueblo.

The Cowboys are led by quarterback Brett Smith, one of the top offensive players in the Mountain West.

Gentry has become a reliable target for Smith.

Gentry, who came to Wyoming out of Grandview High School in Aurora, has caught eight of Smith’s passes for 97 yards in the first two games. Smith already has 51 pass completions for 678 yards and eight touchdowns.

“This is a great program for receivers,” Gentry said. “This is the place I want to be. Brett’s a great quarterback and the leader on the offensive side of the ball.”

Gentry is playing his first season of college football at 6-foot-2, 190 pounds. Coach Dave Christensen noted Gentry’s work in preseason practice.

“He earned a starting spot on a team that has a lot of depth at the receiver position,” Christensen said. “He’s a great young prospect.”

Christensen isn’t talking 100 points.

“I’m only concerned about our execution and hope that we execute well enough to win the game,” Christensen said.

Irv Moss: 303-954-1296, imoss@denverpost.com or twitter.com/irvmoss