Sometimes reporters can be like archaeologists, digging deep to find a single fragment that helps tell a valuable story.

Take, for example, Carrie Feibel’s report earlier this year titled “Teen Pregnancy in Texas” for Houston Public Media’s News 88.7.

Feibel was able to find local voices to help illustrate an otherwise obscure study from the Centers for Disease Control, which shows that while the teen birth rate has reached a new low in the U.S., Texas ranks No. 1 in a newly explored sub-group: repeat teen births.

The report captured a regional Edward R. Murrow Award from the Radio-Television Digital News Association (RTDNA) for hard news reporting. As a regional winner, the report is now in play for national recognition.

In addition to the Baylor Teen Health Clinic, which works with sexually active teens, Feibel’s local sources included a Greenspoint teen pregnant with her second child and a now 35-year-old mom who wants to mentor at-risk girls “who remind me of how I was.”

Feibel acknowledges that statistics can be tough to report, especially for a radio audience.

“What you want to keep in radio to keep people listening is the voices, so I really tried to keep the two women front and center,” she said.

“I saw the statistic — through the CDC study — I was just surprised because I hadn’t thought about repeat teen births. People talk about teen pregnancy, but I never thought about teens who get pregnant more than once,” she added.

Feibel, who lives in Montrose, was lured from 10 years as a print reporter in 2010, when News 88.7 radio station opened a new beat to cover health and science, a topic she had covered previously for a New Jersey newspaper. Her experience also includes covering city hall for the Houston Chronicle.

“I wanted to cover health again,” she said.

In the four years since, her reporting depicts a city of “medical haves and haves-not,” she said.

She was invited to be part of a collaborative between Houston Public Media affiliate NPR and Kaiser Health News on the Affordable Care Act. Texas is the largest state to not subscribe to the law.

“What we decided to do is important for a lot of people,” she said. “It’s fun to cover, and it’s a lot of responsibility, too. There’s been misinformation about ACA and a lot of political fighting about it.”

Feibel’s “Teen Pregnancy in Texas” was selected from a competitive field of entries from major market commercial and public radio stations in Texas and Oklahoma, which comprises the RTDNA’s region six.

“I am very proud of this recognition for Carrie Feibel,” said Jack Williams, News 88.7 news director. “Carrie exemplifies Houston Public Media’s mission to consistently deliver quality journalism to our audience.”

The awards dinner and show for RTDNA honorees and their news organizations will be held in New York City on Oct. 6.

In addition to News 88.7, the Houston Public Media family includes TV Channel 8 and Classical 91.7 and has a combined weekly audience of more than 1.5 million. A community service of the University of Houston, Houston Public Media is supported by financial gifts from members and the community through Houston Public Media Foundation, formerly known as the Association for Community Broadcasting, a non-profit 501(c)(3).