Florida Gov. Rick Scott didn't take long to go on the offensive against a woman who yelled at him in a Gainesville Starbucks.

The Republican governor endured a tirade of criticism from the woman, Cara Jennings of Lake Worth, Fla., while he and his entourage stopped in to the coffee shop. She called him an "a------," saying she was unable to get Obamacare because she falls into a gap with no subsidies between Medicaid and the Affordable Care Act coverage. She blamed Scott for refusing federal funding to expand Medicaid coverage in Florida.

The video shows Scott attempting to rebut her arguments, and a Scott staffer briefly tries to engage Jennings. After a couple minutes of Jennings' rant, Scott and his entourage turn and leave without their coffee fix.

Scott posted his video, which he titled "Latte Liberal Gets and Earful," on April 8 just a couple days after video of Jennings' verbal assault went viral. Scott's video had more than 760,000 views as of Monday morning. The video of Jennings has more than 2.2 million views.

Scott's video describes Jennings as an "anarchist" who refused to say the pledge of allegiance while serving as a city commissioner in Lake Worth, a small suburban beach town north of Fort Lauderdale.

Scott's video says "that woman clearly has a problem" and goes on to counter her argument against Scott's claim to have created a million jobs in the state.

"A million jobs? Who here has a great job?" Scott's video quotes Jennings from the first video. The voice over actor chuckles in Scott's video and says "Well, almost everybody. Except those who are sitting around coffee shops, demanding public assistance, surfing the internet and cursing at customers who come in."

Reception to Scott's video on his Facebook page was chilly, calling Scott "petty," "classless" and "vindictive" as many saw it as inappropriate for a governor to publicly attack a citizen.

Facebook user Cliff Eserman said "I am offended when a governor in Facebook goes to discredit someone. You represent all people in this state, not just the ones you agree with. You are subject to protest and much more. If anything, this posting proves you are not representing all people. Very shameful." His comment had more than 9,400 likes.

Facebook user Mark Field said "Wow! I can't believe the governor of my state would harass a private citizen publicly regardless of her rude behavior." His comment got more than 5,600 likes.

There was some support in the comments, whith user Toni Ragan posting "Way to go Governor Scott, she wasn't afraid to attack you in a public place and then place it on Facebook. All he did was do his research and place it on Facebook just like she did. ..." Her post had 50 likes.