WOODBURY — Voters in Woodbury will choose from a full slate of city council candidates on Nov. 5, with competitive elections in all three wards as well as a race to fill an unexpired seat.

Following the resignation of third ward GOP Councilman Harry Trout in August, the board appointed Republican Rich Hock as a replacement. He is now defending his new found seat to fill out the remaining year of Trout’s unexpired term.

Democrats currently enjoy a 6-3 majority on the city council — and three of their seats are up for re-election.

To help readers make a decision at the polls, the South Jersey Times asked the candidates for biographical information about themselves and also asked them to answer the following question: “What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?”

This is how they responded:

Ward 1

Name: Danielle Carter, Democrat

Age: 38

Profession: Surgical Coordinator

Education: High school Diploma. Currently working on Associate’s degree in health information.

Family: Fiance, Moises. Two children, Briana and Moises, and one grandchild, London.

Volunteer Background: Woodbury Midget Football and Woodbury Basketball.

Previous Elected Positions: Councilwoman, First Ward.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“I moved to Woodbury 17 years ago in order to raise my family in this nice city. One of the main reasons I decided to run for city council three years ago was to make Woodbury a better place for my family and for all the other families who want their children to be able to grow up in a safe community with a promising future.

“I am so proud to be part of a great newly elected team that, in the last ten months, has brought great promise and has aggressively started to put some things in place to better the city. I currently chair the public safety committee and, with Mayor (Bill) Volk’s participation and help from my fellow council members, we are in the process of moving our police station to the old Wachovia Bank site, which is located at Broad and Barber streets. I am also proud that our team negotiated a one-dollar-a-year-lease with Gloucester County for 55 Delaware Street, so that now both our police station and municipal courts will have much greater visibility in our community.

“This will certainly cost far less than remodeling our current police station and municipal court. As a member of the Community Development Committee, I will support and lend a hand in any way to all our schools, sports teams and businesses. I will always listen to the residents’ needs and implement their ideas, whenever feasible. Even though I may sometimes appear quiet and reserved, I think my strength is in being a team player and a supporter of this new administration.

“I know I will always voice my opinion and ask the tough questions in order to ensure that our team makes the right choices for Woodbury.”

Name: Harry R. Riskie, Republican

Age: 65

Profession: Retired Beneficial Finance

Education: Walnut Street Grammar School; Woodbury High School, 1966; and Bachelor of science degree in history, Union College, Barbourville, Ky.,1970.

Family: Married to Rita, 37 years. Two sons, Ronald A. Riskie and Timothy J. Riskie.

Volunteer Background: Three-time winner of March of Dimes Battered Boot Award (raised over $500). American Cancer Society Relay for Life. Woodbury Little League, 15 years.

Previous Elected Positions: Woodbury City Council (council president 2004-2006). Woodbury mayor (2011-2012).

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“The most important issues are to continue with the progress made in economic development that initiated in 2011. We need consistent growth in new ratables. The city initiated the Bottom Dollar in 2012, and began the renovation of the Green Building (The old Charming Shoppes), also in 2012. These two structures are $20 million in ratables. We need to supplement the tax base, and that doesn’t happen without vision and growth.

“We have a redevelopment plan that we all need to work on. Some redevelopment areas still do not have any progress. They remain vacant lots. If we don’t address this issue aggressively, Woodbury will not improve.

“We need to all join together to promote our city. Social events such as the Arts Fest at the train station and down town areas have helped. The municipal clock at the train station also has attracted people into Woodbury. The Merchants Association has worked hard to have special events such as the Labor Day Antique Car Show. All these help to bring in downtown foot traffic, that keep people in the city to shop and eat.

“Taxes are the biggest issue, and keeping them under control through ratables and social events is good. We also need to explore shared service with other towns. Public safety and street maintenance must continue to be explored and brought to a positive conclusion with other towns.

“With ratables, shared services and mutual respect for everyone (we cannot remove an administrator with 1 year of experience), Woodbury can move forward. This has been stated in the past. We can continue to improve, and we will succeed.”

Ward 2

Name: Dave Trovato, Democrat

Age: 56

Profession: Former actor who played the role of Major Cantrell on the HBO series “The Wire,” and Officer Graul on the NBC Emmy Award wining series, “Homicide: Life on the Streets.” Currently the owner of AVC Pictures on Broad Street, a full service advertising agency and production company.

Family: Married to Cindy Cirone Trovato. Two children, Alicia and Vincent.

Education: Associate’s degree from Camden County College and Bachelors Degree from Rutgers University

Volunteer Background: Current Director of the Citizens Crime Commission of the Delaware Valley; Former Youth baseball, soccer and basketball coach.

Previous Elected Positions: Current member of Woodbury City Council. Chair of the Woodbury’s Economic Development Committee, member of Woodbury Public Safety Committee, and current member of Woodbury Planning and Zoning Board.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“The three biggest issues that residents bring up to me are taxes, the downtown and the country club.

“It is getting to the point that many people, specifically our senior citizens, won’t be able to afford to stay in the homes they have raised families in. As a current member of council, the budget committee and I worked hard to stabilize taxes this year, with the average homeowner seeing less than a ten-dollar increase in the city portion of their tax bill. We must continue to look for ways to reduce the burden on the taxpayer, not only from the city but also from the county and school that make up sixty five percent of a resident's tax bill. As a city, we need to reach out to the county and the schools and ask them to do all they can to ensure that they are doing their best to reduce their burden on Woodbury’s taxpayers. I will continue to look into shared service agreements with other communities, such as merging our construction office, which we are currently in negotiations to do. I have and will continue to reach out to the larger non-profits in the city and ask them to give back in the form of a pilot.

“Over the past year the downtown landscape has seen a dramatic change but we need to keep things moving forward. Working with the Economic Development Director of the City I have met with redevelopers who for the first time are showing great interest in our city’s downtown. These redevelopers bring the potential for new development and new businesses to the city, which will help reduce the tax burden and secure jobs for local residents.

“As chair of economic development and as a member of the planning and zoning board I have worked with the city administration and other board members in the development of the Woodbury Country Club site. This development will be a showplace for our city and bring in needed revenue, with construction slated to begin in March.”

Name: Julie Elkins Dear, Republican

Age: 68

Profession: Journalist, as a reporter and copy editor for (in order) the El Paso Times, Orlando Sentinel, US News & World Report and the Washington Post. Did not do press during my 18 months on the Hill as an aide to a Florida congressman.

Education: Bachelor’s degree in mass communications, University of Texas at El Paso (then Texas Western College); Old Testament courses, El Paso Bible Institute; music history (classical and opera) courses, Western Carolina University in Cullowhee, N.C.; World Affairs Council, Camden Conference in Maine; Freedom Center in Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania Museum of Archaeology and Anthropology monthly lectures.

Family: Husband, Craig Booth Dear. Children, Meredith Leigh Dear Riedel and Barry Wayne Dear. Grandchildren, Alexis Nicole Dear, Tyson Alexander Dear and Cameryn Elizabeth Dear.

Volunteer Background: Girl Scout leader, voter registration worker for 1976 presidential campaign, helped organize school orchestra and community library during two-year sabbatical in Appalachia

Previous elected positions: Student government officer at University of Texas El Paso (Arts & Sciences representative).

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“Woodbury is one of the finest small towns in America, which is why we decided to buy here rather than in New Castle, Del.; Society Hill, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania; or Haddonfield, our other three options at the time when Craig was working at Becket in Swedesboro and I was commuting to D.C.

“Woodbury is a walkable, convenient, congenial mixture of all types of people who get along well. I’d like to see downtown revitalized into an outdoor mall experience. My goal is to have more affordable, responsive and efficient local government, making the city much more business friendly, resident friendly and event friendly.

“As a parent, I love the schools in each neighborhood, so the little ones can walk instead of wasting hours on a bus. Downtown parades, festivals, fireworks, farmers’ markets and other events spur community spirit. Our police, fire, medical and other services are enviable. The park system is superb, and our library is exceptional. Quality of life is key.

“Our biggest problem is onerous property taxes that make it difficult to persuade people to move to town. The tax rate is more than twice what it should be, so we must find ways of augmenting and enhancing revenue from other sources. More businesses will bring more jobs to town and more shoppers into downtown. As a 2010 Census worker here, I was able to meet so many of our new residents and welcome them. I see enormous opportunities for stable growth and harmonious interactions and welcome ideas from every source.”

Ward 3

Name: Heather S. Tierney, Republican

Age: 48

Profession: Tax associate, Premier Accounting Services, Pitman.

Education: Bachelor’s degree in Economics, Gettysburg College; Master’s degree in Economics, Temple University.

Family: Husband, John Tierney; children, Jack and Kevin.

Volunteer background:Woodbury Relays, Woodbury High School Band Parents' Association, Woodbury Main Street’s Fall Arts Festival.

Previous elected positions: Woodbury City Council, Third Ward.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“Among the many issues facing Woodbury, the three biggest concerns are the tax rate, property maintenance and downtown revitalization.

“I will continue to fight for fiscal responsibility, as Woodbury’s tax rate is simply too high. Controlling the rate of increase is no longer enough — we must make a concerted effort to reduce the rate. Thus, I will push for shared services agreements with other municipalities, as these agreements bring cost savings. I will advocate that Woodbury combine its police and municipal court services with another municipality in the proposed new police station.

“As I walk around the city’s neighborhoods, I am distressed by the number of abandoned properties. City council needs to get serious about enacting an abandoned properties ordinance. The recession hit many of Woodbury’s working families hard, causing them to lose their homes. However, many banks that have foreclosed on these properties have neglected their responsibility to maintain them. I will push for an abandoned properties ordinance to hold banks more accountable for the upkeep of the foreclosed properties.

“The redevelopment of the downtown continues to be an area of major concern. I will advise council to offer real financial incentives to make investing and staying in the downtown enticing for new businesses. In my role as council president, I was actively involved in negotiations with the GG Green Block Building developer, and worked tirelessly to make that project a reality. I pledge my knowledge and experience to work as a team with the city’s economic development office, municipal government and volunteer organizations to achieve the goal of economic revitalization.”

Name: Jessica Floyd, Democrat

Age: 38

Profession: Special Education Teacher at Black Horse Pike Regional School District.

Education: Rowan University.

Family: Husband, David; three children, Nolan, Charlie and Penny.

Volunteer Background: West End Parent Teacher Association, West End Principal’s Advisory Committee, Woodbury Soccer and Road Runners Club of Woodbury Youth Track Program.

Previous Elected Positions: None.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“My husband and I moved to Woodbury 11 years ago, with the hopes of what appeared to be a town on the verge of great things. Over the past 10 years that my opponent has been in office, we of Woodbury have watched the number of homes and businesses for sale in our town double.

“I can no longer in good conscience watch Woodbury continue down a path of continued foreclosures, bad decision making due to bipartisan transition, and old ideas that are not working. I am a firm believer that we must utilize the ideas of our residents to make our town better. Walking door to door, I and our constituents want safer roads, more stop signs, and more law enforcement downtown and at all of our schools’ pick-up and drop-off areas. Our people are also tired of paying the highest property taxes around. Sadly, many cannot afford to stay and many cannot afford to leave. To hear our residents' ideas and provide better communication, I want to create public forums and hold various open-houses around town.

“The new direction that last year’s elected administration has taken has shown great promise. It finally sold our golf course, it plans to move our police station and our courts to more accessible and visible locations, and it is striving to make our construction office more cost-effective and efficient. I, like all of Woodbury, want to help carry out progressive plans that are not obstructed by silly politics, stagnant ideas and disappointing complacency. I want to return to that town that was on the verge of great promise and make Woodbury a town my children can be proud of.”

Unexpired term for Ward 3

Name: Richard (Rick) F. Hock, Republican

Profession: Industrial sales.

Education: Woodbury Jr.-Sr. High School; Bachelor of business administration, University of New Mexico.

Family: Wife, Sheri; sons Jeffrey and Hamilton.

Volunteer Background: Woodbury Little League, Woodbury Library Board of Trustees members and Rotary Club of Woodbury Breakfast.

Previous Elected Positions: None.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“Responsible Government: Woodbury needs women and men working together for the common good of the local taxpayers, residents and citizens. Councilpersons that will be good stewards of the community above party politics.

“Responsible Spending: Let’s address property taxes. For the future of Woodbury, we need to act now. Woodbury currently has the highest tax rate in Gloucester County. High property taxes is a hardship for all residents. Next year the rate will be even higher. This issue should be our top priority. Shared services with other local communities need to be expanded. Can Woodbury reduce our cost of providing city services currently being provided? These opportunities need to be explored and discussed.

“Responsible Planning: The redevelopment of the GG Green building has been in construction-restoration for several years. It is almost ready for both retail and residential occupancy. Woodbury is ready and needs to be business friendly, one block at a time.”

Name: Christopher LaCroix, Democrat

Age: 28

Profession: Member of Local 322 Plumbers and Pipefitters

Education: (No information provided)

Family: Wife, Amy.

Volunteer Background: Current Deputy Chief of the Woodbury Fire Department and volunteer at multiple city events including the Fall Arts Festival, Fall Parade and Santa Around Town.

Previous Elected Positions: None.

What do you consider to be the three biggest issues in your town and how do you plan to address them if elected?

“As a life-long resident of the City of Woodbury, I’ve seen the city change time and time again throughout the years. The small town feel gives a person a sense of pride in their community, and confidence in their local government. I feel that previous administrations have altered that level of confidence people have once had. I want to regain that pride and confidence and bring Woodbury back to the way it once was.

“Unsafe traffic areas and the multitude of foreclosed homes and businesses plaguing our city is unacceptable and in dire need of change. Children are walking to and from school and playgrounds along streets which are treated more like raceways. Businesses are closing and homes are being foreclosed at an alarming rate. Woodbury is a city with an enormous amount of history and potential to be great. The fresh ideas proposed by myself and my running partners, like adding stop signs on longer stretches of roadways and more police presence in schools and playground areas, will make the neighborhoods altogether safer places to raise children.

“Last year's newly elected administration has made gigantic steps towards improving many issues which have gone unnoticed and ignored. Working together with this administration, I will bring new ideas and keep the city moving in a positive direction. The newly elected officials have already accomplished so much in such a short amount of time, like selling the country club, moving our municipal court to a more suitable, accessible location, and the possibility of moving the police station to a more centralized location. The administration has already offered incentives for business owners to open businesses downtown, giving the city the motivation it needs. I strongly agree with and believe that these ideas and changes will move the city in the right direction.

“I have pride and confidence in this city and want nothing but success for both residents and businesses. I want people to be proud to say they live in Woodbury, and to have the confidence, trust and pride in their local government that they should have and deserve. Let’s keep this city moving in a positive direction and bring Woodbury back to the city we had once known and loved.”