Despite enrollment gains, co-op losses pile up

With help from Arthur Allen, Sarah Karlin and Jason Millman

Story Continued Below

CO-OP LOSSES PILE UP — The good news for Obamacare’s start-up insurers: Enrollments this year have doubled. The bad news: The nearly two dozen co-ops have lost roughly $200 million in the first six months of the year, putting them on pace match last year’s losses, according to a POLITICO review of the co-ops’ NAIC filings. A Nevada co-op this week became the third to fail, and insurance experts are expecting more to follow suit. The news isn’t all bad, with four co-ops turning a profit in the first six months of this year. However, as Pro’s Paul Demko details, the odds are truly stacked against these nonprofit insurers: http://politico.pro/1Im2Mlw.

OBAMACARE TAX COULD WRECK FSAs — The popular middle-class tax benefit could be one of the first casualties of the ACA’s Cadillac tax on high-cost workplace health plans. Pro’s Brian Faler and Paul Demko report: “Flexible spending accounts, which allow people to save tax free for everything from doctor’s co-pays to eyeglasses, may vanish in coming years as companies scramble to avoid the law’s 40 percent levy on pricey health care benefits.” That could be a huge surprise for middle-class voters, who might only vaguely know what the Cadillac tax is or realize it could up end one of their treasured benefits. “If the Cadillac tax doesn’t change, FSAs will go away very quickly,” one actuary said. The Pro story: http://politico.pro/1JmMuL6

HAPPY FRIDAY, EVERYONE and welcome to PULSE, where your #Millennial-PULSErs are curious if Portland-based startup ZoomCare can actually make a visit to the doctor feelmore like a trip to an Apple store, as its website suggests. “What if, insteadof a forbidding concrete complex full of beige walls and depressing pamphlets, a medical facility looked like some place you’d want to visit, with inviting colors and natural light, spacious interiors and even amenities —like upscale food and enrichment activities for kids,” the website says. Ok, ZoomCare, you’ve piqued PULSE’s interest. Call us if you’re ever in D.C.

“Call me (call me) on the line, call me, call PULSE any, any time … Call me (call me) oh love, when you're ready we can share the wine, call me …”

HHS TIGHTENS UP THE 340B PROGRAM — The long-awaited draft “mega-guidance” on the rapidly expanding drug discount program contains stricter controls on which patients, drugs and providers will qualify. Pro’s Brett Norman writes: “[O]nly drugs prescribed by providers who are employed by or are under contract with covered entities would be eligible for the discounts. This requirement would apply to all drugs, but the guidancespecifically highlights infusion drugs, including high-cost cancer treatments that are sometimes administered in hospitals based on orders from community-based clinics delivering patients’ primary care.” Under the proposal, hospitals would have to submit more documentation, and eligibility for the discounts would be evaluated on a prescription-by-prescription basis rather than per individual patient. More from Brett: http://politico.pro/1KbBtlk

CMS WANTS MORE INFO ON RISK CORRIDORS — The Obama administration is asking insurers to submit more data to help calculate payouts for the ACA’s risk corridors program. Payment information was originally slated to be released on Aug. 14, but CMS delayed the release because of significant data problems. There appears to be major discrepancies in the data some insurers submitted for the risk corridors program and what they sent in for the other ACA risk-mitigation programs, CMS said. More: http://politico.pro/1U92rPp

FDA APPROVES SECOND CHOLESTEROL MED — Amgen scored FDA approval of its drug Repatha, the second high-priced cholesterol-lowering treatment representing an improvement over widely used statin medicines. Amgensaid it will price the drug at $14,100 each year, just under the $14,600 pricetag of its competitor, Praluent. Thursday’s approval is likely to set offintense price negotiations among payers, who’ve warned that this new class of drugs, known as PCSK9 inhibitors, could bankrupt the system if used too widely. The Pro story: http://politico.pro/1NXTO2P

PLANNED PARENTHOOD HANDS OVER FETAL TISSUE DETAILS TO LAWMAKERS — Planned Parenthood Federation of America President Cecile Richards sent congressional leaders a letter Thursday saying that on rare occasions, the organization’s doctors make adjustments to an abortion procedure if a patient wants to donate fetal material. Richards explained that if a woman who has decided to have an abortion wants to donate the fetal tissue or organs ,she and her doctor choose which method is best suited to her case. But the decision to donate is only made after the procedure is chosen. With certain methods, a physician can adjust the procedure to better facilitate the requested donation, she said. Abortion opponents saythe statement amounts to a smoking gun that suggests illegal activity — underfederal law, physicians are prohibited from switching the abortion method to facilitate donation when the tissue is used for federally funded fetal transplantation. Richards’ letter maintains that Planned Parenthood complieswith the law, indicating that a physician does not adjust which procedure to use, and instead only makes adjustments during the course of the procedure as warranted to donate tissue. The Pro story: http://politico.pro/1JmODGp

BARSON TO LEAD HHS' INTERGOV & EXTERNAL AFFAIRS — Emily Barson is taking over as director of HHS' Office of Intergovernmental and External Affairs, effective immediately, a tipster tells PULSE. Barson has been the office’s principal deputyd irector and acting director since Paul Dioguardi left earlier this month.

PROGRAMMING REMINDER — PULSE is going dark next week. But not to worry, we’ll be back in your inboxes after Labor Day. Although PULSE is taking a break, your trusty POLITICO team is still on deck for all things health policy. Don't forget to keep those tips and scoops coming our way: behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com and check out our updated Medicaid Watch and Exchange Watch pages.

And make sure to follow us on Twitter: @brettnorman @jenhab @SarahKarlin @rachanadixit @pauldemko @jasonmillman @joannekenen @SkLevine @eemershon @briannaehley

ANOTHER REASON TO LOVE UDIs — Supporters of the Unique Device Identifier, UDI to health IT nerds, have long urged its inclusion in medical records, since the UDI can help FDA, doctors and manufacturersdouble down on defective devices and short-circuit epidemics of device failure. (The 2010 episode involving metal-on-metal implants, which went into thousands of elderly people before their tendency to crumble was confirmed, comes to mind.) But CMS has been reluctant to require a field for the UDI in medical claims, saying an update in the form will be costly and challenging. Now, the West Health Institute has offered CMS more reasons to include UDIs: transparency and cost-savings. In a letter to HHS Secretary Sylvia Mathews Burwell earlier this month, West Health said failure to include UDIs “will not only frustrate efforts to create a learning, value-based health care system, but will hamper the private sector’s efforts to develop innovative approaches to improve care and reduce costs for patients that rely on medical implants.” So there, CMS. The letter: http://politico.pro/1MY1u8i

HAPPENING NEXT WEEK: While PULSE is off, here are some things to keep your eye on:

— WILL FIRST BIOSIMILAR LAUNCH NEXT WEEK? — Sandoz could become the first company t o launch a biosimilar approved under the Obamacare-created pathway that streamlines the process of getting cheaper versions of biologics medicines to patients. But the drug could hit yet another stumbling block before the scheduled Sept. 2 launch. Amgen, which makes the branded version of Neupogen, has been in a legal battle with Sandoz over biosimilar policy. A federal circuit court decision in July was a mixed bag, and both companies have asked for the entire court to hear the case. Amgen this week asked the court to issue an injunction preventing next week’s launch of the Sandoz biosimilar until the court decides whether to further review the precedent-setting case.

— ORAL ARGS IN WEST VIRGINIA ACA CASE — A D.C. judge on Thursday will consider West Virginia’s challenge to the administrative “fix” from fall 2013 that allowed expiring health plans to continue in some states. West Virginia argues the fix was unlawful because it violated the Anti-Commandeering Doctrine by making states responsible for federal law.

PORTRAIT GALLERY: NOPE, NOT TAKING DOWN THE SANGER BUST — The National Portrait Gallery is not bowing to protestors’ demands Thursday to take down the bust of Planned Parenthood founder Margaret Sanger. A gallery spokesperson said: “The museum’s intent is not to honor her in an unqualified way, but rather to stimulate our audiences to reflect on the experience of Americans who struggled to improve the civil and social conditions of 20th-Century America.”

FOR YOUR PLANE RIDETO FIJI — Or wherever else you might be traveling during this last week of August recess: the latest Freakonomics podcast tackles end-of-life care. Guests like UPenn's Ezekiel Emanuel and Princeton's Uwe Reinhardt offer their thoughts on an end-of-life option that lets patients choose between wildly costly care and a payout for one last grand vacation or providing a legacy for their kids. Audio and transcript here: http://bit.ly/1MY0npd

PULSE LYRICS

Monday: Jimmy Cliff,“I Can See Clearly Now”

Tuesday: Dead Kennedys, ”Government Flu”

Wednesday: Mya, “Take Me There”

Thursday: ThePostal Service, “Sleeping In”

Friday: Blondie, “Call me”

WHAT WE'RE READING



Antidepressants: There's an app for that. BuzzFeed writes about Start, a new app designed to help people do a much better job figuring out whether their antidepressant is working for them: http://bzfd.it/1MY7NIU

FDA warns cigarette makers not to market products as “additive-free” or “natural,” The New York Times reports. http://nyti.ms/1Eo7STC

CDC cautions unvaccinated children leaving others “vulnerable to outbreaks,” Reuters says. http://reut.rs/1i6gqEs

Fox News has the story of “big pizza” taking on Obamacare’s menu labeling rule. http://fxn.ws/1F0x9xS

Kaiser Health News talks about why we don’t have parity inmental health coverage. http://bit.ly/1Vg5bYa

A Washington Examiner editorial denounces the ACA’s success, citing recent studies. http://washex.am/1LznX8z



** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **