Florida's fledgling health exchange, Florida Health Choices, has always accused the federal Affordable Care Act's insurance exchange of stealing its thunder. The two exchanges operate in similar fashion but have different origins and offer very different services.

Florida Health Choices is the brainchild of U.S. Sen. and then-Florida House Speaker Marco Rubio, and it has the backing of conservative lawmakers. Right now, the state-based site allows individuals to purchase comprehensive insurance coverage. (UPDATE: This paragraph was corrected to reflect current offerings.) The state exchange has struggled to attract customers.

The rival Affordable Care Act exchange is partially to blame, because 1.5 million Floridians have obtained insurance coverage on the federal exchange. A provision of President Barack Obama's signature reforms, the federal exchange operates in Florida only because state lawmakers refused to have Florida operate its own.

Back in 2013, Florida Health Choices leaders were irritated when the federal government began marketing its exchanges by describing them as "insurance marketplaces." Florida Health Choices had already started calling itself "Florida's health insurance marketplace" at that time.

Fast forward to Jan. 30, 2015, when Florida Health Choices submitted an application to the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office that included its logo and the slogan “Health Insurance Marketplace," according to a blog written by chief executive officer Rose Naff.

Three months later, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services submitted its own application and asked to register the slogan “Health Insurance Marketplace," Naff wrote.

The Patent Office didn't sign off on HHS's application, and now the feds have filed a challenge to Florida Health Choice's request to use the slogan. You can read Florida's response to the challenge here.

It looks like the fight between the feds and Florida over which insurance exchange can call itself a "health insurance marketplace" may be headed to court.

By the way, Florida Health Choices uses a "TM" on its logo with the disputed slogan. But the internet taught me today that it doesn't mean there is an official trademark in place. The "TM" is used by companies that want to thwart people from duplicating their slogan even if there are no formal protections in place.