Regardless of political ideologies, President Barack Obama was a one-of-a-kind man with grace, humility and unbridled kindness. As the curtains close on his presidency, America will look back on his presidency say: “Thanks, Obama.”

Even if you disagree with some of Obama’s policy proposals, executive actions or political philosophies, what cannot be denied is that he is a class act. Despite unprecedented obstructionism and pervasive racist attacks , Obama stood above it all. Like a dove hovering over the masses, he was the perfect model of decorum. In the face of hatred and never-before-seen racialized attacks he never faltered or broke character.

For instance, compare Obama’s treatment of protesters and dissidents to that of potential presidential candidates —namely, Donald Trump. Through his violent rhetoric Trump has incited mobs of people to harass and attack protesters at his rallies. On the other hand, when Obama was heckled, called a liar and derided he never devolved into a rabid animal.

Obama has perfectly traversed the first-ever “social media presidency.” While it may seem shallow on the surface, in the ever-changing world of media it is important for the leader of the free world to stay relevant with new communication styles and techniques.

Outside of his pleasant disposition, Obama has accomplished as much as he could have, given the political climate. He has moved America forward in terms of economic growth and social progression.

Obama was the first sitting president to support same-sex marriage and denounced “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.” He has been the singular best sitting president in regards to the rights of the gay community, though his record on the greater LGBTQIA community is admittedly nonexistent. He continues to be on the right side of history.

The Affordable Care Act is not particularly popular, but no one can deny that millions of people who were once uninsured can now get the help they need . Putting the lives of the American populace above profit margins is the mark of a leader.

Outside of social issues, the economy may not be booming but Obama has conquered the greatest economic crisis America has had since the Depression. Right now America’s unemployment rate is sitting below 5 percent for the first time since before Obama took office in 2008.

While the presidency is naturally polarizing due to the two-party system, the facts are not up for debate. Aside from policy, however, Obama has been a symbol of what a president should be.

Frankly, Obama is just a really cool president . Love him or hate him, he’s smooth, cool, calm and laidback. He may not be everyone’s ideological cup of tea, but he’ll definitely be missed.

America could use his kindness and quiet humility, especially in these trying political times. It seems everyone running for president, on both sides of aisle, is rude or aggressive. They lack his charisma and wit, and more importantly his compassion. For seven years of relative progress and much-needed humanity, The University Star says offers a sincere “Thanks, Obama.”