Topics: Barack Obama, David Petraeus, Edward Snowden, the daily dot, Whistleblowing, Media News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on The Daily Dot . Enter the URL of the original Daily Dot story.

The administration of President Barack Obama once promised to be “the most transparent administration” of all time. Instead, Obama’s Department of Justice has led the most targeted campaign against whistleblowers of any president ever, charging more government employees under the Espionage Act than all previous presidents combined—almost all of whom sit in prison serving sentences up to 30 years.

More from The Daily Dot: “U.S. military base gets a visit from a ‘Halo’ Warthog vehicle”

As the relative slap on the wrist Gen. David Petraeus received this week revealing classified military information to his mistress and biographer proves, this aggressive pursuit of leaks does not, however, extend to the leadership of his intelligence agencies, revealing a deep seated double standard.

More from The Daily Dot: “Disney is putting out 24 movies in 24 months”

Petraeus is not the exception here. Current CIA director John Brennan once leaked classified details of a busted terror plot to the Associated Press yet saw no charges. Former CIA Director Leon Panetta once revealed classified details about the raid that captured Osama bin Laden to Hollywood filmmaker Kathryn Bigelow for the purposes of her film about the raid, Zero Dark Thirty, but he also saw no charges.

More from The Daily Dot: “Mila Kunis is being sued for stealing a chicken 25 years ago, and now she’s fighting back”

All three leaks were not done in the interest of the public but respectively as a political stunt, a bow to Hollywood jingoism, and pillow talk. The disregard for the criminal activity of these men, all former or current top administration officials, reveals a systemic hypocrisy within an administration failing to live up to its own standards. In order to highlight their hypocrisy, it’s worthwhile to look at seven lower government employees who shared classified information and paid a heavy price for it.

1) Jeffrey Sterling

Sterling was a rank-and-file employee of the CIA when he gave New York Timesreporter James Risen top secret documents about Iran’s nuclear program. In his 2006 book State of War, Risen tells the story of a failed attempt by the CIA to sabotage an Iranian nuclear program way back in 2000. In January 2011, Sterling was arrested for revealing this information and spent much of the last four years awaiting trial as the court debated whether it could force Risen to testify against Sterling. Earlier this year, Sterling was convicted of nine felony counts under the Espionage Act, each carrying up to 10 years of prison time. Sterling is currently awaiting sentencing.

2) James Hitselberger

Working on contract as a linguist for the Navy in Bahrain, Hitselberger stuffed a military computer containing military secrets into his backpack and took them back to the United States. Those documents now sit in a collection named after Hitselberger at Stanford University and, while kept lock-in-key, supposedly contain classified information about troop positions and gaps in the military’s intelligence, as well as reports as far back as 1979 about the Iranian Revolution. Because Hitselberger pleaded guilty to one count under the Espionage Act last January, he is serving a minimal one-year sentence in a federal prison.

3) Stephen Jin-Woo Kim