SPRINGFIELD ‒ Republican presidential candidate Ben Carson called to repeal the Affordable Care Act and offered his own health care overhaul proposal to take its place in a Boston Globe editorial published this week.

Pointing to his experience as a retired neurosurgeon, Carson, whose campaign has seen support drop in recent polls, contended that "any broad government mandate, however well-intended, can cause a cascade of effects that reduce the quality of care patients receive. Obamacare has proven to be no exception to this rule."

He called for repealing the contentious law, known as "Obamacare," and replacing it "with a system that empowers the American people with control over their own health care."

Carson laid out his health care proposal, which would establish Health Empowerment Accounts - an expanded version of Health Savings Accounts - to Americans with valid Social Security numbers.

The accounts, he explained, will not be owned by the government or large corporations, but rather individuals and they will remain with the owner despite job changes or relocation in other states. They would be created for every child at birth and be "freely transferable" among family members, Carson added.

"This system will enable Americans to build their own health accounts and grow them through a lifetime," he wrote. "Combined with high-deductible major medical coverage, HEAs will ensure that all American citizens have the ability to make health care choices that meet their individual needs, while also protecting them from the potential costs of major health problems and hospitalizations."

Carson further contended that instituting HEAs in Medicare and Medicaid would reduce the financial burdens that threaten their long-term solvency.

Among other things, he added, his health care proposal would increase the age of Medicare eligibility to keep pace with the growing average American lifespan. The age would be increased by two months each year until reaching age 70, when it would be indexed to keep pace with life expectancy.

Carson's plan would also allow Medicaid enrollees to obtain the same private health insurance as other Americans. Medicaid would provide fixed-dollar support to states, which the GOP candidate said must use the funds for insurance premium payments and to seed HEAs for enrollees.

"By expanding HEAs and high-deductible major medical coverage, my plan returns money and decision-making where it belongs — to the hands of American patients and their doctors," he concluded. "Consumers will have more choices, lower costs, and a higher quality of care.

"At the same time, Medicare and Medicaid enrollees will have equal access to the same doctors and hospitals as the rest of the population. My plan puts faith in the American people, not a massive, faceless bureaucracy."