Tattoo Making (Photo: guruXOX, Getty Images/iStockphoto)

Graffiti, considered an expressive curse of the lower class, gravitates naturally to the application of tattoos. Graffiti and tattoos are both considered forms of drawings or inscriptions outside of an archeological context — graffiti falling somewhat into a social nature, with tattoos being more personal.

What do tattoos and graffiti have in common? Graffiti and tattoos share a kinship due to both being forms of advertising. They are begot from a desire or need to make a personal statement or be recognized or acknowledged in a manner synonymous with wearing of a uniform or badge — an elevation of pseudo importance.

But, would you place graffiti on a new car or similar investment? Not likely. It could be very expensive to eradicate. Besides, it would devalue one’s property, not to mention that people might consider one daft. Yet, some people will put graffiti on a more valued commodity. They write or draw on a gift that comes along but once in a lifetime — their body!

An automobile can be cleaned, repainted or replaced. But removal of a body tattoo is a difficult and painful process and can never be effectively removed 100 percent. A laser tool, used for tattoo erasing, can only attempt to remove tattoo ink. One’s skin will always show the effects of tattoo needle scarring.

Typically, graffiti and tattoos are outlets for those whom are expressing disdain, dissatisfaction, rebellion or hurt in their life — usually against authority or something in life or society with which they cannot effectively cope with. People whom are driven to these extreme forms of expression are attempting to make their point of view known the only way they know how in order to get recognition, importance and satisfaction.

Yet, some people whom indulge in graffiti or tattoos don’t fit this profile. It’s called, the “monkey see, monkey do” syndrome — or just being copy cat, faddish or simply foolish. It’s found among the uninformed and/or impulsive — usually naive young people. They do these things simply to get attention — seeking acceptance and approval, usually from among one’s peers, or are simply “showing off,” believing they are “with it” — trying to be “cool” or different.

Also, of late, a practice called “body art” is coming into the limelight. Body art is simply another name for tattooing — a defacing, denigration and devaluating of the human body. Nothing more, nothing less.

The most foolish act of graffiti is placing a tattoo on a child. Tattooing a child is considered outrageous and mindless — synonymous with rape — violation of an innocent persons body. One who would do this is likely grossly immature, irresponsible and/or mentally deficient.

Defaming the human body with tattooing is no different than writing graffiti on a fence or a building wall. The perpetrator likely possess little or no appreciation or regard for human values and lives in a world of their own making, in which human life and property worth are awarded lessened appeal, stature and most important, respect.

The bottom line: Desecration or defamation of one’s body, in any fashion or manner, is an act of impiety (violation of nature). This degradation of respect for living things, whether for commercial and/or selfish interests, whether it be called tattooing, body art or graffiti, is never acceptable. Human nature tends to distance itself from people whom show such low respect and little value for one’s body.

Burke Sloan Nelson

Exeter

Read or Share this story: http://vtd-tar.co/1pgFtkQ