MONTGOMERY, Ala. (AP) - Some senators Wednesday questioned Gov. Robert Bentley’s proposal to build four new prisons as the massive construction project heads to its first legislative test.

Bentley has asked lawmakers to approve an $800 million bond issue to build four large prisons and shutter most existing correctional facilities in the state.

Corrections Commissioner Jeff Dunn told members of the Senate budget committee in a public hearing that the new prisons would alleviate overcrowding. Dunn said state-of the-art facilities would help problems that have plagued the state’s prison system for decades.

“Overcrowding, understaffing, millions of dollars spent in litigation, security issues, safety issues - the whole gamut of which many of you are very familiar - have been an issue you have dealt with year after year,” Dunn said.

Some members of the Senate Finance and Taxation Committee questioned aspects of the project during a public hearing, including the cost and Bentley’s proposal to include design and construction work in a single contract to save money. The committee is expected to vote next week.

Sen. Greg Albritton, R-Range, said he had concerns about the assertion that the consolidation would save enough money to pay back the bond issue.

Sen. Paul Sanford, R-Huntsville, said he liked the idea of experimenting with the “design-build” construction approach but was worried about trying it on a project of this size.

“The size and the scope of this project really concern me. … When half-a-billion is at stake, the risk versus reward is a little too great,” Sanford said.

Dunn said the state would close 16 existing facilities and leave two open, although it hasn’t been decided which facilities would close.

Sen. Billy Beasley, D-Clayton, said he had concerns about jobs leaving his district, and other areas, when existing prisons are closed. “I’m concerned about the devastation to the communities,” Beasley said.

However, Sen. Clyde Chambliss, R-Prattville, said he had become convinced the project would work after seeing the department’s numbers, although he added that he wanted to see additional figures.

Alabama prisons hold nearly twice the number of inmates they were originally designed to house. Dunn said when he left the hearing Wednesday that he was going to visit a corrections officer who is hospitalized after being stabbed by an inmate at St. Clair Correctional Facility. The prison has been the site of multiple incidents of violence.

Bentley showcased the construction project in his State of the State address on the opening night of the legislative session.

The governor met with lawmakers Tuesday seeking to build support for the project.

“We have the opportunity to really solve the problem of overcrowding in this state. I truly believe we will go from the worst in the country to the best of the country,” Bentley said.