More Video... Officers search a house near Toronto, Kansas Several law enforcement officers set up along Highway 54 east of Eureka. Courtesy of Robin Wunderlich, Eureka Herald Two photos of Kevin Rober Welsh that authorities released last Wednesday. He is wanted in a connection with a double-homicide near Eureka. (Photos submitted)

Sunday, October 6, 2013

Officers from multiple law enforcement agencies continue to search for a man accused of killing two people and seriously wounding a third.

The search has entered its fifth day, but there's no sign of 35-year-old Kevin Robert Welsh of Toronto, Kansas. The Greenwood County Sheriff's Office said authorities are still searching for Welsh and had no new information.

Deputies were first dispatched to the report of a burglary around 7:30 Wednesday night at a home located at 1575 130th in Eureka. When they arrived, they found three people suffering from gunshot wounds, two of whom were dead. The injured woman was flown to a Wichita hospital for treatment.

The Greenwood County Sheriff's Office said the shooting was domestic violence-related. The 26-year-old woman who was injured was Welsh's ex-girlfriend, and her 52-year-old mother and 54-year-old stepfather were killed. Their identities have not been officially released.

Investigators believe that Welsh fled the scene in a 2007 Ford Explorer, but that SUV was found abandoned Thursday morning in eastern Greenwood County. Several officers and SWAT teams searched various other locations in Greenwood County on Thursday, including the suspect's home in Toronto.

Welsh may have fled to Park City in Sedgwick County, and is to be considered armed and dangerous.

Court documents show that Welsh was arrested on August 23 for kidnapping a woman and two children. He was charged with three counts of kidnapping, three counts of using criminal restraint, two counts of aggravated assault, one count of criminal threat and one count of domestic battery. He bonded out on September 3 and was scheduled for a preliminary hearing later this month.

Anyone with information on the whereabouts of Kevin Welsh is asked to call 911 immediately.