Congress struck a deal to reopen the government and raise the debt ceiling. Yet for some reason, lawmakers excluded from the final agreement a policy prescription supported by Democrats and Republicans alike that had been part of an earlier version of the deal: repeal of Obamacare's medical-device tax.

Scrapping this tax should be Congress' next priority. Not only will the levy raise health costs borne by patients, but it will also put tens of thousands of Americans out of work.

As of this year, medical-device manufacturers must pay a 2.3 percent tax on their sales. This is supposed to raise $30 billion to help offset the trillion-dollar cost of the president's health reform law.

The levy will effectively double the total tax bill paid by device firms. And because it's assessed on revenues, not profits, companies will have to pay regardless of whether they actually make money.

That's especially bad for companies in their infancy. It takes $31 million to shepherd a low-risk medical device through the federal Food and Drug Administration's regulatory process. For higher-risk devices, the cost more than triples. Add the tax onto those outlays, and startups will have a whole lot more trouble recouping their initial investments.

Startups are the lifeblood of the industry. Eighty percent of medical-device firms have fewer than 50 employees. Ninety-five percent post revenues of less than $100 million.

Advertisement

Firms are responding to the tax by raising prices for patients. According to a survey conducted by Silicon Valley Bank, nearly one-third of startup firms say that they will try to pass some or all of their new tax burden onto consumers.

Device companies are also putting off plans for growth, or are shrinking. The Silicon Valley Bank survey found that one-quarter of companies "will focus on expanding overseas instead of domestically" as a result of the tax. Others are planning on "reducing their workforce or foregoing new hires" and "shifting resources away from growing their business."

The industry could see as many as 45,000 job losses nationwide, more than 10 percent of its current workforce, with more than $3.7 billion in lost employee compensation. Fourteen states, including California, could lose more than 1,000 jobs each.

And those are just the direct casualties of the tax. The device industry supports another 2 million jobs in other industries, many of which could disappear.

Many of the cuts could come from research divisions. The Silicon Valley Bank report finds that a number plan on "investing less in R&D for existing and new devices." My colleague at the Pacific Research Institute, economist Benjamin Zycher, estimates that the industry will cut investment in new products by 10 percent through the end of the decade, or $2 billion less per year.

The United States is the world leader in medical device technology. According to the federal Commerce Department, the U.S. medical technology sector's value "exceeded $110 billion" last year and represented about 38 percent of the total worldwide. This tax puts America's perch in jeopardy.

No wonder that both Republicans and Democrats have come out against it. Some 266 members of the House, including 40 Democrats, have signed onto legislation that would repeal the levy. Earlier this year, 79 senators, 34 of them Democrats, approved a nonbinding resolution to scrap it.

Congress should repeal the medical-device tax before it does any more damage.

Sally Pipes is president, CEO and Taube Fellow in Health Care Studies at the Pacific Research Institute. Her latest book is "The Cure for Obamacare" (Encounter 2013). She wrote this for this newspaper.