Singer Kip Moore returns to Milwaukee Saturday after playing a near-capacity set at Summerfest last June. His previous Summerfest gig was a midafternoon set that included a few dozen listeners, two of whom played cards throughout his show.

By ,

Last June, as Kip Moore looked out over a near-capacity crowd at Summerfest's Briggs & Stratton Big Backyard, he couldn't help but share a vivid memory.

Playing a midafternoon set on the same stage just two years earlier, Moore encountered a sparse gathering of a few dozen people. To top off the underwhelming welcome, there at the front of the stage were two fest-goers playing cards through his entire show.

Looking back, Moore said he still thinks about the response he received when he returned to the Big Gig, watching bleachers full of fans singing along to the country hits from his 2012 debut album, "Up All Night."

"I had a blast that night," he said in a recent phone interview ahead of his headlining show Saturday at the Rave.

Even so, the Georgia native still remembers the frustration of a songwriter and artist who spent years knocking on doors in Nashville, driving in his Jeep to any gig he could get and learning his craft as a songwriter ahead of anything else.

"It was madness, man," Moore said, laughing about the Milwaukee card players. "I've never wanted to kick people in the face more in my whole life."

"People don't know what goes on behind the scenes," he said. "They see you explode in popularity and they think, 'Hey, he's got a great life.' This road for me has been the longest (expletive) grind to get to where I am — the tireless hours practicing, reading books and studying until 4 in the morning, getting up and going to a job at 7 in the morning where I'd fall asleep because I was up all night writing or playing gigs.

"It's been such a fight to get where we are. So to have that (sparsely attended show) in Milwaukee two years before, and then come back to so many fans, was honestly emotional to me."

With three songs from his debut album reaching the country top 10, including the chart-topping "Somethin' 'Bout a Truck," Moore's music has taken him to the top of the genre. The vivid characters and experiences in Moore's songs, carried by the singer's gritty vocals, have resonated with fans.

"I think a lot of people come into this wanting to be a star," Moore said. "That was never me. My thing was I wanted to be the greatest writer."

"I studied people like Dylan, Springsteen, Jackson Brown, Kris Kristofferson and Willie Nelson, people who could craft a song better than anyone. I tried to figure out why they were so great at it. I studied their lyrics and musical arrangements. That's a reason I feel like I can paint such a picture. I learned from the best."

As Moore prepares to release his yet-untitled sophomore album in late April — which will include his current single "Young Love" — he said he's feeling confident.

"If you write what you know, it's going to hit home, because there are going to be other people like you," he said.

"If you're truly honest with yourself in a room, and you pull the honesty out of stories that have happened to you, or are happening to you right now, if you really speak the truth — and I've done that a lot on this new record — that's when the characters in those songs come to life."

IF YOU GO

Who: Kip Moore with Joey Hyde and Chris Cavanaugh

When: 8 p.m. Saturday

Where: The Rave, 2401 W. Wisconsin Ave.

Tickets: $25 and $30 at the box office, (414) 342-7283 and therave.com.