Instead, Steve Hayward believes 'Obamacare' will fail on its own

For being alive more than 150 years ago, James Madison was remarkably accurate in his predictions about American politics in 2013, according to the University of Colorado's new conservative scholar.

Steven Hayward, who this past summer was named CU's first visiting scholar in conservative thought and policy, said that as the partial government shutdown drags on, he's been revisiting Madison's Federalist Papers.

"He anticipated the situation the public complains about now," Hayward told the Camera in a recent interview. "If you brought him here today, he would not be the least bit surprised to hear this kind of situation. He talks about what would happen if the House and Senate disagree. He said at some point both houses will worry about the condition of the country and reputation of the nation abroad, which bears on the debt ceiling.

"It was a remarkably prescient description of the conflict we have today."

Hayward was brought to the university this year as part of a three-year pilot program to add a conservative perspective to the Boulder campus, long perceived as a haven for liberal thought.

As Republicans in the House of Representatives use President Barack Obama's Affordable Care Act as a sticking point for funding the government and raising the debt limit, Hayward said he doesn't agree with their tactics -- but isn't surprised they're using them.

"It's not a good tactic, only because it's unlikely they would win," Hayward said. "Going after a thing that is the central part of Obama's legacy, it's like charging the strongest part of your opponent's forces. That's the thing Obama's most known for, of course that's going to provoke the biggest resistance."

Hayward said the House has "every constitutional right" to a spending bill that makes changes to or tries to get rid of the Affordable Care Act.

He added that the health care law is off to a "very rocky start," and that House Republicans would have been better off to "sit back and watch it fall on its face."

"I think the (health care law) is unworkable in its present form, only because it's too complicated," Hayward said. "We've seen in the last week a lot of websites crashed and are not working. I think it's going to be changed or repealed in the place of something else."

To Scott Adler, a professor in CU's Political Science Department, it seems that things like the government shutdown and down-to-the-wire fights over raising the debt ceiling are the "new normal" in American politics.

Adler said funding the government and raising debt levels used to be the bare minimum for lawmakers. Now, Americans are lucky if those once-simple tasks even happen at all.

"For the most part, continuing resolutions were considered a normal level of functioning, a status quo and then if there weren't agreements on other things, at least we were keeping the government open," Adler said. "What we've seen in the last two years, three years, four years, is that the minimal level of governance is now in question as well.

"I think that is a fundamental change in the way lawmakers are thinking of what their responsibilities are."

Adler, who has written books on Congress and studies elections and political institutions, couldn't say how he thinks this political impasse will end, but he said he's worried about his new normal theory. If this is the way the government works from now on, it's not going to get much better in the future.

"There are countries in the world where this is how they operate," he said. "They basically stumble from one crisis to the next and the government barely functions and provides far fewer services. These are probably not places that most Americans want to live."

Contact Staff Writer Sarah Kuta at 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta.