With India’s national elections in full swing, the campaign promises of the Bharatiya Janata Party, the presumed front-runner to lead the next government, are drawing more scrutiny. Among the more troubling proposals in the party’s election manifesto is one to “revise and update” the country’s nuclear doctrine.

Neither Narendra Modi, the party’s candidate for prime minister, nor any of his allies have fully explained what they have in mind. Some news reports suggest the B.J.P., the Hindu nationalist party, may not just reconsider but jettison India’s “no first use” policy that was adopted in 1999 when the party was previously in power. The policy committed the country to show restraint in not being the first to use nuclear weapons in a conflict.

The lack of clarity about the party’s intentions on this issue introduces more uncertainty into an already unstable region. Should Mr. Modi scuttle the “no first use” policy if he wins, he would exacerbate tensions with China, which subscribes to the policy, and Pakistan, which does not.

The unresolved conflict over Kashmir between India and Pakistan, which have fought three wars since 1947, and the existence of extremist groups in the Afghan-Pakistan border region make any shifts in nuclear policies particularly dangerous.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

India and Pakistan, each with about 100 nuclear weapons and building more, have little regular communication, which raises the potential for miscalculation. Pakistan, in fact, has the world’s fastest-growing nuclear arsenal and recently added short-range tactical nuclear weapons that experts say are more likely to be used in battle. That existing threat, however, is not a reason for India to abandon its “no first use” doctrine; its conventional arsenal is far superior to Pakistan’s and sufficient to respond to most threats.

Although the B.J.P. initiated the “no first use” policy in India, a B.J.P.-led government also conducted a series of nuclear tests in 1998. In signaling its willingness to take a more provocative stance toward Pakistan and China, the party does not advance India’s interests.

The current government led by the Congress party has focused somewhat more on developing the country’s civilian nuclear energy sector rather than on nuclear arms. In fact, last week, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh proposed a global framework to promote a “no first use” doctrine among nuclear weapons states, a laudable goal.

Instead of abandoning the “no first use” doctrine, whoever wins the election would do better to commit himself to improving ties with Pakistan and starting an arms control initiative that could lead to a regional equilibrium on these dangerous weapons.