By Emma Crawford Kent

Daily Journal

TUPELO – Tupelo High School gained three new assistant principals this week at a special-called school board meeting.

The board voted to approve the hires Thursday morning. Two of the new administrators at THS have been promoted from within the school district, while one will be new to the district.

The three positions opened up as current THS assistant principals Betsy Grubbs, Adam Lindsey and Jeff Credille plan to move to different positions either within the district or in a new school district next year.

The new administrators will join Tyrone Catledge, who will stay in his assistant principal role at THS for the 2016-2017 school year.

Current Milam assistant principal L.V. McNeal will move to Tupelo High School to take on one of the assistant principal roles.

McNeal has 10 years of experience in education and has been working in the Tupelo Public School District since 2009.

Before coming to Tupelo Schools, McNeal worked in the Greene County School District in Leakesville.

“I am blessed and honored by the opportunity to serve the students of Tupelo as an assistant principal at Tupelo High School,” McNeal said of the promotion. “I look forward to working with the teachers and staff at Tupelo High and to serving our community at the most outstanding high school in Mississippi.”

Mark Enis, current assistant principal at Lawndale Elementary, will also move to Tupelo High School to be an assistant principal.

Enis is a graduate of THS and returned to the high school after college to teach and coach for 16 years.

Enis said he is thrilled to rejoin the THS team.

“I hope to continue the tradition of excellence by supporting our students, teachers and staff,” Enis said.

Lastly, joining THS from the Meridian Public School District is Candi Moore-Robertson. Robertson has also been named an assistant principal at THS.

Robertson has experience as a teacher in Columbus, Tunica and Memphis, Tennessee. She has also held administrative positions as assistant principal at West Point High School and most recently as principal at West Hill Elementary in Meridian.

Robertson said she looks forward to working with the other administrators, teachers and staff at THS and across the district.

“So far, they have been so supportive and empowering and I’m excited to work with such a close-knit team because it makes me feel like part of the family,” Robertson said.

emma.crawford@journalinc.com

Twitter: @emcrawfordkent