In an effort to create competition and microwave player evaluations, the Broncos held joint practices with the 49ers this past week. The prevailing silence was unsettling because it sat in stark contrast to the chirping of the 5,000 fans during training camp. There were no fights. No pushing. No shoving. And little talking, save for San Francisco linebacker NaVorro Bowman accusing an official of a hometown call on a juggling reception by Denver's Cody Latimer.

With one play, Darian Stewart returned the cacophony to the Broncos sideline by intercepting a pass by the 49ers' Colin Kaepernick. Denver's defense boasts 12 sacks this preseason, and with tempered optimism, general manager John Elway said it is the most talented defense since he arrived in 2011.

Interestingly, there is only one prominent new starter: Stewart. The conclusion remains easy to draw: Wade Phillips' 3-4 defense fits the personnel better, and Stewart's addition fortified a secondary that aims to be the NFL's best.

"No doubt," Stewart said. "That's the goal."

Signed as a free agent from Baltimore, Stewart took hold of the free safety position in the spring and has only tightened his grip over the past month as the Broncos face the 49ers on Saturday in their preseason home debut.

"Stewart has done a really good job, he's learned the defense, he really plays well," defensive coordinator Wade Phillips said. "He plays fast in the games. I like that about him."

Advertisement

Stewart struggled with inconsistency in Baltimore last season, losing his job at one point. However, he played his best game in the Ravens' playoff upset of the Steelers. Stewart replaced Rahim Moore, who signed with Houston as a free agent. They couldn't be more different. Stewart is softspoken. Moore is an energetic run-on sentence. Stewart seeks contact. Moore plays a deep center field.

Stewart's skill set makes him interchangeable with strong safety T.J. Ward, varying the defensive looks.

"The defense is just pretty much straight forward. That has helped," Stewart said. "I am believing what I am seeing. Playing with T.J. helps. You know you can count on him. He has your back. "

A stout 5-foot-11, 214 pounds, Stewart has made three tackles in 42 snaps in the first two exhibition games. With two new starters last season, the secondary required time to gain trust, finally coalescing in November. The communication has improved dramatically this season, helped by Stewart's quick learning curve.

"He's very smart and calm back there. That's what I like about him," Ward said. "You never really see him flustered, you never really see him out of position."

Performance and maintenance carry equal importance to Stewart. Playing at altitude and in a dry climate, leg issues are prevalent. Stewart has worked extensively on his flexibility.

"Every off day I find something to keep my body right, whether that's stretching or massage," Stewart said. "And it helps that Coach (Gary) Kubiak takes care of his players like he does. You are already seeing the results."

Through two games, the first-string defense has not allowed a touchdown. There are reasons to believe, Stewart insisted, that this is a preview not just another preseason mirage.

"It's just coach Wade. He challenges us. Everyone's job is to get to the ball," Stewart said. "When you have 11 guys with good speed, doing that, good things are going to continue to happen."