WASHINGTON -- House Speaker John Boehner's (R-Ohio) announcement that he is leaving Congress at the end of October likely won't have much of an effect on efforts to repeal or severely handicap the Affordable Care Act (ACA), experts said Friday.

"Without a Republican majority in both houses and a Republican president, substantive reversals to the ACA are unlikely -- though the act could use some real tweaking," Jay Wolfson, DrPH, JD, senior associate dean at the University of South Florida's Morsani College of Medicine in Tampa, told MedPage Today in an email. "The danger is that the politics of a more conservative house leadership could create additional shutdowns and roadblocks in government that are only likely to anger even conservative voters."

Daniel Blumenthal, MD, MPH, president of the American College of Preventive Medicine, agreed. "Boehner's resignation will mean nothing for the future of the ACA," he said in an email. "The House, under Boehner's leadership, has voted at least 56 times to repeal the ACA, to no effect. Whoever replaces him can do no more than he did."

ACA Not in 'Mortal Peril'

"I don't think the ACA is in mortal peril," said Robert Field, PhD, MPH, JD, professor of law and public health at Drexel University in Philadelphia, in a phone interview. "There are too many steps necessary to actually repeal it." However, he added, "It may put more pressure on Democrats to try to block proposals to chip away at it, and it could mean that proposals will get as far as Obama's desk and force him to veto them."

Daniel Ehlke, PhD, assistant professor of health policy and management at the State University of New York-Downstate Medical Center in Brooklyn, was less cautious, but only slightly. "His departure could make aspects of the ACA marginally more vulnerable -- though Republicans still fail to possess a veto-proof majority in the Senate," Ehlke said in an email.

David Howard, PhD, a professor of health policy and management at Emory University in Atlanta, said that he expected House conservatives to push for a more confrontational replacement as speaker. "If they are successful, expect more efforts by House Republicans to use Congress's power of the purse to defund the ACA," he wrote in an email.

"In general though, the new speaker, like Boehner, will face two unavoidable facts: 1) Congressional Republicans have limited ability to change policy given who occupies the White House and 2) House leadership must preserve their majority and protect Republicans from moderate districts," Howard said.

Even some smaller tweaks to the ACA that might have garnered agreement from both parties may be in jeopardy now that Boehner is leaving, said Alan Sager, PhD, professor of health policy and management at Boston University. "Was there any hope for bipartisan agreement on any ACA improvements or even on 'Cadillac tax' repeal under Boehner? If so, there's probably less hope now," he wrote in an email.

Credit for SGR Repeal

Healthcare organizations reacted cautiously to Boehner's announcement, giving him credit for successfully helping Congress to pass a permanent repeal of the much-maligned sustainable growth rate (SGR) formula for physician reimbursement under Medicare.

“We thank Speaker Boehner for his leadership and efforts to bridge differences in challenging times,” the American Medical Association said in a statement provided to MedPage Today. “We respect his integrity and commitment to what he believed was best for the country and his work to strengthen the nation and the House of Representatives by helping to build a strong bipartisan solution to modernize the Medicare payment system will benefit patients now and in the future.”

"Speaker Boehner was committed to improving healthcare for all Americans," Marilyn Tavenner, president and CEO of America's Health Insurance Plans, a trade group here for health insurers, said in a statement. "His leadership led to a bipartisan, permanent fix to the flawed Medicare Sustainable Growth Rate formula that put Medicare on a better path forward. His solutions-oriented approach will be missed."

Other than SGR repeal, however, experts were hard-pressed to think of major healthcare accomplishments by the soon-to-be-former House speaker. "I don't think he's going to leave much of a healthcare legacy because he spent much of his time as speaker inside of a sandwich," said Field. "He had Obama and the Democrats on one side, and he was pushing back against them, and he had the party's [right] flank on the other side, and he was pushing back against them, and it left him with little room to come up with anything of his own."

"Speaker Boehner's legacy on healthcare will likely be that of the leader of a force against any national health policy change -- without ever having been able to create a credible alternative to the bona fide cost and quality crisis this country has been facing in healthcare," said Wolfson. "He led a Republican House at a time when the most serious (and successful) discussions and policies about the system were on the floor -- and he categorically failed to do anything except lead the complaint division ... In the end, it may have been Shakespearean -- more sound and fury -- and that is a sad legacy."

Planned Parenthood Issue Dominant

Planned Parenthood, a group that has been under fire by conservative Republicans in Congress over videos showing the group's officials discussing fetal tissue donations, almost sounded sad to see Boehner go. "It looks like leadership in the House may go from bad to worse," Dawn Laguens, executive vice president of the Planned Parenthood Action Fund, said in a statement. Planned Parenthood saw a victory Thursday when Senate Democrats blocked a move to remove federal funding from the organization.

"While John Boehner was never a champion of women's health in this country, even he recognized that defunding Planned Parenthood wasn't what the American people wanted," Laguens continued. "The extreme flank of this Congress has become so obsessed with ending women's access to basic healthcare that they'll pursue it at all costs -- no matter how many Americans disagree, and how many women they hurt as a result."

Ehlke agreed. "[Boehner's] departure could further embolden those House members who refuse to approve any bill preventing a government shutdown that fails to also defund Planned Parenthood, and that defunding drive will likely continue even beyond the current 'crisis.'"

Blumenthal said it was "likely" that the new speaker "may be somebody who will be willing to shut down the government over that issue. That would be unfortunate because ultimately Planned Parenthood will be funded (as it should be)."