TRENTON — A prominent healthcare advocate is calling on the Christie administration to take a more aggressive role in determining whether New Jersey's largest health insurer's plan to form a partnership with more than one-third of New Jersey's hospitals next year will drive their competitors into insolvency.

Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey has signed an agreement with 34 of the largest hospitals which will accept lower reimbursement in exchange for higher patient volume — presumably achieved by employees who choose "tier one" hospitals and get cheaper premiums. But hospitals left out of Horizon's top tier are crying foul because their consumers will face higher co-pays and deductibles.

Linda Schwimmer, the CEO of consumer advocacy group the New Jersey Health Care Quality Institute, said the Christie administration needs to be more involved in vetting the plan and its impact on consumers and the hospital landscape.

RELATED: Hospitals excluded from Horizon's proposal worry about future

Participating hospitals include some of the largest in the state, such as Barnabas, Atlantic Health, Hackensack and Robert Wood Johnson, but excludes most Catholic and city hospitals, which historically treat the largest number of poor and uninsured people. Burlington County and Trenton have no "tier one" hospitals at all.

"From my perspective, the state has been too passive," Schwimmer said. "The overall ... impact on the hospital system and the essential safety-net hospitals is the crucial policy issue, and it doesn't seem to have been top of mind for anybody when this was designed or approved."

Horizon spokesman Thomas Rubino said consumers will still have a wide choice of hospitals and physicians, and access will not be a problem. But employers and consumers are clamoring for less expensive insurance options.

"Our customers look to us to develop a variety of affordable products to meet their insurance needs," Rubino said.

The centerpiece of Horizon's new plan is the creation of the Omnia Alliance, with 22 of the 34 tier-one hospitals earning more if they show they are providing quality care by keeping people healthier at a lower cost.

Horizon officials have said they expect the transition will be gradual with an estimated 250,000 people joining in 2016.

"Horizon will continue to offer all of its broad network products, which we expect will remain the most popular among consumers in 2016," Rubino said.

Insurance companies in the state and across the country are already offering "tier network" plans to hold down costs, and cost-conscious consumers benefit from them, Schwimmer said. "They are better than a high-deductible plan you are afraid to use."

But there are other people to consider, Schwimmer said, such as "vulnerable" people who don't have transportation to tier one hospitals, and those who want to remain with a hospital they trust but no longer may be able to afford.

Schwimmer said state departments responsible for insurance and hospitals should examine how Horizon created this new plan and share that information. They include Banking and Insurance, which oversees health insurance; Human Services, which oversees Medicaid; Treasury, which negotiates the state health benefits plan; and Health, which regulates hospitals.

"We need to make sure the safety-net system is there for them," Schwimmer said. "That is a state responsibility."

Banking and Insurance spokesman Marshall McKnight said the department "has reviewed the Omnia-tiered plan and found that it satisfies network access requirements." He did not elaborate on how Horizon met these state regulations.

"While the department does not have discretion to approve or deny a plan based on considerations outside of the scope of the regulation, we are aware of the concerns raised by legislators and members of the Trenton community and have encouraged Horizon to address these concerns directly," McKnight said.

The Department of Human Services did not review the plan because Medicaid recipients will not be enrolled in it, department spokeswoman Nicole Brossoie said.

The departments of Treasury and Health did not respond to requests seeking comment.

Schwimmer said the Horizon plan will hurt hospitals that derive a large share of their patients from Medicaid. If the city "workhorse" hospitals, which see a large number of uninsured or Medicaid patients, lose their patients with private insurance, "what happens to them?"

Alarmed state lawmakers last week said they would push for more information about the impact of Horizon's plan.

Assemblyman Reed Gusciora and Assemblywoman Elizabeth Maher Muoio (both D-Mercer) sent a letter Thursday to acting Banking and Insurance Commissioner Richard J. Badolato calling on him to "place on hold the implementation" of Horizon's plan.

State Sens. Nia Gill (D-Essex) and Joseph Vitale (D-Middlesex) announced they plan to hold a joint hearing of their committees, Commerce and Health, respectively, on Oct. 5 "to hear directly from Horizon about how the alliance was developed and get a full understanding of this newly-announced overhaul of their health plans."

And state Sen. Shirley Turner (D-Mercer) called on Horizon to include Trenton's two hospitals, St. Francis Medical Center and Capital Health Regional Medical Center, saying "health care accessibility, affordability, and quality should be available to everyone, not just to those who are geographically advantaged."

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio.