The collective noun for elephants is “herd.” In my history of directing the Iowa Poll, which I have done most of the time since 1987, I have never seen a herd of elephants this big. I haven’t seen a drove of donkeys this big either.

When you have that many candidates and ask likely caucusgoers to choose just one, it masks a lot of worthiness in other candidates. There are only 100 percentage points to allocate. In a field of 16 candidates, the average is around 6 percent. The consequence is you have a lot of candidates within 1 to 3 percentage points of each other — in other words, they look the same. Even if you ask for a second choice, there is still a lot of potential support that will remain unknown.

Imagine going to Baskin-Robbins and picking out your top two flavors of ice cream. It might be hard, because you like something about many of the flavors. So, maybe you choose Baseball Nut and Rum Raisin. But you also really like Daiquiri Ice and Jamoca Almond Fudge.

If Baskin-Robbins were to use this method to cull their list of flavors, they would discard a number of worthy flavors.

Same goes for candidates. But that’s what could happen as media organizations try to figure out who will stand on their debate stages and who will not. If they look only at the first choice and take the top 10, they may discard a candidate or two with potential to move up.

I devised a formula to better define candidate potential. In the interest of full disclosure, Bloomberg Politics reporter John McCormick (formerly of the Des Moines Register) helped me tweak it. Bloomberg columnist Al Hunt liked the idea and insisted it be called the Selzer Score.

Here’s how it works. The percentage of first-choice votes is the most important metric. We give that double weight. The percentage of second-choice votes is the second most important metric, but not as important as first choice. So we include that number as it stands.

Then, we look at the percentage who say they think they could ever support the candidate. This was asked only for candidates who were not already the respondent’s first or second choices. Obviously, this is not as important as first or second choice, so we discount this number by half.

When you do the math for all 16 candidates, the scores range from 64.5 for Scott Walker to 11 for George Pataki. It spreads the field — it puts some daylight between candidates clumped in single digits.

It also helps a few candidates rise in the standing. Marco Rubio, for example. He got only 6 percent first-choice votes — that left him tied with Rick Santorum for 6th place. But he got double that number of second-place votes — 12 percent. He also had a strong “ever” score. So, with the Selzer Score, he moves up ahead of Rand Paul and Jeb Bush; he trailed them in first-place votes. His potential upside, hidden in the horse-race question alone, is now obvious. His score is equal to Ben Carson, who tied for second in the first-choice horserace.

If some candidates are going up, some must be going down. Jeb Bush, for example. He tied for fourth in first-place votes with Mike Huckabee. But he drops to 6th place with the Selzer Score, because of a relatively low “ever” score of 38 percent. Huckabee’s was 51 percent.

Donald Trump drops as well. He got 4 percent first-place votes — enough to rank him in the top 10 of the 16-person field. At least one news organization plans to invite the candidates who, on average, rank in the top 10 of the most recent national polls. If you applied that rule to Iowa on the basis of this poll alone, Trump is in; Rick Perry, Carly Fiorina, and Bobby Jindal are out. The Selzer Score takes into account Trump’s high “never” percentage — which necessarily means a lower “ever” percentage for Trump. Instead of ranking 9th as a first choice, he ranks 13th on the Selzer Score.

No state is asked to look at more candidates than Iowa. In 1995, eight candidates were traipsing across Iowa. In 2001, it was 10. It’s a bumper crop this year, a good time for a new mechanism to sort things out.

J. ANN SELZER is president of Selzer & Co., which conducts the Iowa Poll. Contact: jaselzer@selzerco.com

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1IppsHA