, Christian Post Reporter By Leonardo Blair Christian Post Reporter

(Photo: Facebook/Mark Harris) Pastor Mark Harris (l) and his wife Beth of First Baptist Church of Charlotte, N.C.

A North Carolina pastor who God called to the pulpit more than 26 years ago says he is pushing to represent the state in the U.S. Senate because 'I have to.' He believes that he can unite conservatives and Republicans to beat Democratic incumbent Kay Hagan in the midterm election in November.

"After 24 and a half years of walking through life with people, the concerns of individuals have only intensified. I mean people are worried. They are worried about this latest economy, they are worried about our eroding values, they are worried about the intrusion of the federal government into our daily lives and most importantly I really feel like they are worried that they've got elected leaders who no longer care," said Harris who is the senior pastor of First Baptist Church in Charlotte in explaining his candidacy to The Tea Party Express.

"I've been in a life of service for 26 years. I do care and frankly that's why I'm in this race," added Harris who is also President of the Baptist State Convention of North Carolina.

YouTube/ Mark Harris for U.S. Senate

"If you're fed up and want to stop Barack Obama, Harry Reid, and Kay Hagan's policy agenda AND elect a candidate that can unite the conservatives and Republicans across our state and lead us to victory in November, this is the time to get involved," said Harris in a message on his Facebook page.

"We have one hundred days to go before the May 6th primary election. This is our first step to elect a Republican majority in the United States Senate to cut government spending, help small businesses create new jobs, repeal Obamacare and make our President and elected officials more open and accountable," he noted.

Harris told The Tea Party Express that two weeks before he got married to his wife Beth and two months before he was supposed to start law school "God called me to preach."

And for the last 26 years he's been faithfully yielding to that call. Over the next few months those, he said he intends to go on sabbatical to engage in his political pursuit full-time.