Updates a story posted Tuesday at 12:25 p.m.

PALMER — Wing Memorial Hospital and Medical Centers cut staff and worker hours Tuesday in response to a changing marketplace and falling numbers of both inpatient and outpatient visits.

The cutbacks involve 54 Wing employees in various departments, but no physicians, said Wing President and CEO Dr. Charles E. Cavagnaro III. Of the 54, 16 jobs will be eliminated and 38 employees will have their hours cut back. The layoffs were effective immediately. He blamed falling numbers of patients in part on a shortage of doctors.

In total, the cutbacks are the equivalent of 25 full-time jobs, or 3.8 percent of workforce at the 74-bed hospital. Cavagnaro said Wing had 840 employees both full and part-time f or a full-time equivalent of 625 employees.

Wing is Palmer's largest employer.

The reason, Cavagnaro said, is that inpatient hospital visits are down 2.5 percent in the most recent fiscal year from the 3,300 recorded a year before according to the hospital's website. Outpatient admissions are down 9 percent for the fiscal year ended in September, or about 16,000 visits below Wing's budget.

Wing Memorial had 244,798 outpatient visits in the 2011-12 fiscal year, according to statistics kept by US News & World Report.

“We are not doing this because of fear. We are doing this because of trends," Cavagnaro said ;The trend is not reversing. We don’t do this when one month goes bad, we don’t do this when three months go bad, we do this when five months go bad. Five months is a trend.”

Cavagnaro the loss of business left Wing Memorial $1.2 million short on the fiscal year that ended in September. That left the hospital with a margin of $2 million in stead of $3.2 million on a $98 million operating budget.

Wing Memorial Hospital is a member of UMass Memorial Health Care. The parent organization last week announced a projected operating loss of approximately $57 million for fiscal year 2013 and plans to correct the operating losses in fiscal 2014 and beyond with layoff s across the board.

In February 2012, UMass Memorial announced plans for 700 to 800 job cuts at its Worcester operations alone.

Cavagnaro said the last layoffs at Wing were 12 years ago.

"We don't take this lightly," he said. "We call our employees caregivers. This is not an easy decision."

Hospitals across the state are seeing a 3 to 4 percent drop in inpatient admissions, Cavagnaro said. Part of that drip is because folks are looking for treatment in outpatient settings or doctors offices.

"I think for Wing in particular it is mostly driven by a lack of specialists in certain key areas," he said.

Wing doesn't have enough gastroenterologists to treat the number of people with digestion issues or internal bleeding. Wing also lacks orthopedic specialists to treat those with severely broken bones.

"For example, at times we only have an orthopedist on call for two out of three weeks," Cavagnaro said. "If you don't have that specialty, you don't get that patient."

Outpatient numbers are down because Wing has too few primary care physicians, a category that includes pediatricians and family doctors. A shortage of such first-line physicians is a national problem especially hard felt in Western Massachusetts.

"It's a very very difficult recruitment. It can take up to two years to recruit a primary care doctor," he said.

Cavagnaro said he is also said he fears the loss of federal Medicare funds meant to equalize for personnel cost the hospital had come to depend on. Federal sequestration cuts also eliminated 2 percent of Medicare payments.

"But if patient volumes had stayed the same, we wouldn't be having this conversation," he said.

The federal Affordable Care Act, known to some as Obamacare, were not a direct cause of Wing's woes. But Cavagnaro said the part sof federal health-care reform that could hurt Wing won't go into force until 2014, 2015 and 2016.

"The Affordable Care Act is not making it any easier," he said.