The Obama administration on Thursday released the long-awaited final version of a sweeping new rule that, for the first time, allows the agency to regulate all tobacco products, including cigars, electronic cigarettes, hookahs, personal vaporizers and electronic pipes.

The rule prohibits companies from selling any of these newly deemed tobacco products to anyone under the age of 18 and requires sellers to check photo IDs when making a sale.

The rule also prohibits the products from being sold in vending machines, distributed as free samples or marketed as "light," "low," or "mild" unless authorized by the Food and Drug Administration (FDA).

Manufacturers will also be required to put health warnings on product packaging and on advertisements.

When the rule was first proposed in April 2014, the industry was most concerned about a provision that would have required all products that hit store shelves after February 2007 to apply retroactively for approval -- a process that companies claimed would be prohibitively expensive and wipe out the e-cigarette industry.

To address these concerns, the FDA said it's staggering the compliance date for newly deemed products. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1T3VqyZ

Dems renewing call for new funding to fight opioids A group of 53 House Democrats is calling on Republicans to approve $600 million in new funding to fight opioid abuse as part of a package of bills coming to the floor.

Rep. Joe Courtney (D-Conn.) led the letter to Speaker Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) saying that emergency funding is needed in addition to a range of bills aimed at fighting opioid abuse that are expected to be voted on next week.

The message echoes a debate that occurred in the Senate in March, when Democrats there also called for emergency funding, saying that a measure being voted on was a good start but lacked the needed funding.

Republicans countered that funding has already been approved as part of the spending bill for the year that passed in December. Read more here. http://bit.ly/21BoX3q

Over 2,000 doctors back single-payer plan More than 2,000 doctors on Thursday signed onto a single-payer healthcare plan released by an advocacy group.

The proposal was put forward by the group Physicians for a National Health Program, which advocates for a single-payer system where the government provides coverage for everyone.

The issue has been brought back to the forefront of the political debate by Bernie Sanders, who has advocated for such a system as part of his presidential campaign.

The doctors backing the plan, like Sanders, say that ObamaCare has not gone far enough, given that millions remain uninsured. Read more here. http://bit.ly/1T1kbsz

WHAT WE'RE READING

California wants ObamaCare for undocumented immigrants (Kaiser Health News)

As Obama's term winds down, more Dems wish 'Obamacare' reforms went further (AP)

IN THE STATES

North Carolina Blue Cross, still dealing with system failure issues, may drop ObamaCare marketplace (WNCN)

Alabama House passes abortion bill; opponents sing, protest in chamber (Montgomery Advertiser)

ICYMI FROM THE HILL:

GOP subpoenas ObamaCare documents

Send tips and comments to Sarah Ferris, sferris@thehill.com, and Peter Sullivan, psullivan@thehill.com. Follow us on Twitter: @thehill, @sarahnferris, @PeterSullivan4