Roberts' FG streak comes to an end

Colorado State wide receiver Joe Hansley drops back to throw a pass for a touchdown on a fake kick in the second quarter against UTEP on Saturday at Hughes Stadium. ( Steve Stoner )

FORT COLLINS - Colorado State coach Jim McElwain is pretty sure Joe Hansley didn't spend all of his youth sitting on the couch and playing video games.

He said earlier this year the sophomore out of Highlands Ranch is a young man of many talents, and that's what made him a good choice to be the holder on kicks. Saturday, he showed by, breaking out of the formation and taking a direct snap, then throwing the first touchdown pass of his career, a 34-yarder to Kivon Cartwright to put the Rams up 28-7 in a game they eventually won 59-42.

"He's a guy that grew up playing ball as a kid," McElwain said. "This guy can actually throw. He can run, he can kick, he can catch. I don't know how much time he spent playing PlayStation or whatever, but I think somewhere along the line he actually went out and caught the ball in the yard and played catch somewhere."

Hansley did a lot, catching five passes for 78 yards, rushing once for 9 and throwing a key block that allowed Rashard Higgins to score on a 56-yard play in the third.

Cartwright said he'd still take Garrett Grayson's arm over Hansley's, but the play went just the way it had in practice this week, a ball thrown over the shoulder he had to run down. But running a play in practice doesn't always mean it will see the light of game.

"After, I talked to Coach (Jeff Hammerschmidt), I was like, 'who pulled the trigger, who called it?' Cartwright said. "He said Coach Mac called it. That just means he has confidence in our team that he can call that play."

Advertisement

Blake injury - After the game, the injury of cornerback Bernard Blake was very much on the mind of his coaches and teammates. CSU coach Jim McElwain said the junior passed on a message to the team through the coach.

"The CT part of the scan looks good so far," McElwain said. "We have to do some more testing. He did call to let us know, he wanted me to let the team know we had a great win and he'll be there with us."

Blake was on coverage when UTEP quarterback Jameill Showers hit Jordan Leslie in stride for a 75-yard touchdown pass to open the second half. Blake was beaten on the play, and after making a swipe at the ball when Leslie caught it, he went down and appeared to hit his head on the ground. A cart came on the field, his neck was braced and he was taken to Poudre Valley Hospital. He was released by 8 p.m. and is being treated for a neck injury and according to CSU head trainer Terry DeZeeuw, was doing fine.

Safety Trent Matthews, who had his own scare getting rushed to the emergency room during fall camp because of dehydration, said the play very much weighed on the mind for the team, adding they were playing for him.

"We were worried about him during the whole third and fourth quarter," Matthews said. "We just hoped he was fine. That text right there let us be at ease."

Of note - True freshman Deonte Clyburn made his first start at middle linebacker, replacing Max Morgan, who came up with a shoulder issue last week. However, Clyburn left the game with a knee injury in the first quarter and Morgan replaced him.

Clyburn is one of eight true freshmen to play this year, but only the second one to record a start (wideout Rashard Higgins). Clyburn had three tackles before his exit.

For kicks - Colorado State kicker Jared Roberts missed a third-quarter attempt from 35 yards, ending his school-record run of 14 consecutive made field goals. It was also the first time in his career he has missed inside of 50 yards. He also had the longest active streak going with those 14 made kicks.

In support - For the second straight week, Colorado State wore a helmet decal to honor those in the state affected by the recent floods. This week, the university took it a step further, having the raindrop-shaped logo with the Colorado flag colors inside made into 'CSU Cares' T-shirts, which were sold on campus this past week and at the game Saturday.

During pregame warmups, offensive line coach Derek Frazier was on the field wearing one, as was the team equipment crew. The shirts, which could be purchased for in Ag Day orange or the regular green of CSU, were sold for $10 through the bookstore and at the games. All proceeds were sent to aid flood victims through funds set up by Community Foundation of Northern Colorado and to CSUCares, which helped supply immediate support for school staff, retirees and students who were affected.

Mike Brohard can be reached at 635-3633, mbrohard@reporter-herald.com and @mbrohard