More than half a million low-income residents in New Jersey can expect a bigger break on their taxes under a bill that passed both houses of the Legislature on Monday.

In a rare display of bipartisan unity, the Assembly voted 62-4 and the Senate 38-1 to boost funding for the Earned Income Tax Credit, a tax break for the working poor created by President Ronald Reagan.

Governor Christie is expected to sign the bill into law. The shift is expected to benefit more than 500,000 New Jersey residents who have jobs yet still live in poverty – adding hundreds of dollars to their bottom line every year. The cost to the state would be $120 million in lost revenue for the fiscal year beginning Wednesday, state officials estimated.

Both houses voted to concur with amendments offered by Christie, who is expected to sign the bill before it expires in 10 days.

“The EITC has received strong bipartisan support over the last 40 years, because it is a manifestation of the fundamental idea that hard work should pay off,” said Assembly Speaker Vincent Prieto, D-Secaucus.

The latest proposal to boost tax credits for low-income workers came from Christie, who had cut funding for the EITC during his first year in office. The governor signed a $33.8 billion budget on Friday that assumed higher funding for the tax credit.

Raymond Castro, an analyst with the left-leaning think tank New Jersey Policy Perspective, called it “a major victory for struggling families.”

“Combined with the state's increase in the minimum wage and the Supreme Court's decision to maintain health insurance premium tax credits in all states under the Affordable Care Act, working families are finally starting to get some of the help they desperately need to live in a high cost of living state like New Jersey," Castro said.

Christie, who is expected to enter the race for the Republican presidential nomination Tuesday, surprised Democrats last week by offering to reverse his EITC cuts. His proposal, in fact, would fund the EITC at an even higher level than when he took office.

Democratic leaders had been trying to secure more funding for the EITC for five years, but could not get Christie to agree until last week. Democrats welcomed Christie’s change of heart, although they noted that the timing of his proposal – days before he enters the presidential race – raised questions about what he was trying to achieve: a tax break for New Jerseyans or a talking point for his campaign.

“For whatever reason the governor did it … we're very happy I think on this side of the aisle that they’re recognizing that the working poor deserve a break,” Senate President Stephen Sweeney, D-Gloucester, said at a news conference Monday.

New Jersey’s version of the EITC supplements a similar credit handed out by the federal government.

Nearly 524,000 families in New Jersey stand to benefit from the added funding, according to an analysis by New Jersey Policy Perspective. New Jerseyans qualify for the tax credit if their annual earnings fall below a certain threshold: $15,000 for single residents, and $52,000 for married couples with three or more children.

“The annual take-home pay for the lowest earners would rise by as much as $600, enough to cover most of one month’s rent for some families,” according to a report by Policy Perspective. “The average New Jersey recipient of this credit would get about $250 more each year.”

In 2010, New Jersey offered a tax credit worth 25 percent of what the federal government provided.

Citing hard economic times, Christie cut the credit to 20 percent that year. Now, Christie is proposing to boost funding to 30 percent of the federal credit, the same rate as neighboring New York.

Last week, Democrats sent the governor a bill to raise the top income tax rate, from 8.97 percent to 10.75 percent on any earnings above $1 million. Christie issued a conditional veto, removing the income tax increase but offering to pump more money into the Earned Income Tax Credit.

Email: rizzo@northjersey.com