There’s more than meets the eye to California Gov. Jerry Brown’s plan to hike the state minimum wage to $15 an hour — about $3.50 more.

Including nonwage costs — payroll taxes, paid sick leave and ObamaCare’s employer mandate — minimum compensation for a full-time worker could rise as high as $18.52 an hour by 2022, an IBD analysis finds.

Social insurance taxes would add $1.15 an hour to the $15 wage. Three days of paid sick leave now on the books in California would add another 19 cents. And the ObamaCare after-tax fine, now $2,160 per uncovered full-time worker and rising each year, will equate to roughly $2.18 an hour in pretax wages. Adding in workers’ compensation insurance and unemployment insurance would push the total close to $19 an hour.

One big change from a $15 minimum wage has flown below the radar: Many low-wage workers would no longer qualify for Medicaid. For example, a single mom with one child who worked 32 hours per week would earn more than the 138% of poverty cutoff for expanded Medicaid under ObamaCare, though her child would still qualify. A single adult who works just three full days a week also would exceed the income threshold.

Shift Social Welfare To Fast Food

To no small degree, the $15 minimum-wage movement is asking low-wage employers to lift their workers up closer to the middle class and to provide a full menu of social benefits on top. It looks like a recipe for trouble, and even Brown may be wary about it, insisting that the governor retain authority to delay wage hikes if the state sees a fall in employment or retail sales, or if the state faces a budget deficit. Brown had little room for maneuver because a $15 wage initiative that qualified for the November ballot looked like a sure winner and would have provided no flexibility if the wage hike started backfiring.

One early-warning sign for California’s wage experiment was Wal-Mart’s (WMT) announcement in January that it would shutter stores in Oakland and Los Angeles and cancel two planned stores in Washington D.C., dealing a blow to three cities on the leading edge of the push for a much higher minimum wage.

Before Los Angeles put its minimum wage on a path to $15 an hour, the question of how city employers would respond to the simultaneous imposition of a health insurance mandate was simply ignored. An analysis of the wage hike’s labor cost impact by the Institute for Research on Labor and Employment at the University of California, Berkeley, explicitly excluded health insurance — or a mandate penalty. The authors explained: “Health benefits are excluded since … the costs of the benefits will not change if wages are increased.” The Congressional Budget Office came to a different conclusion, finding that the ObamaCare employer mandate would exacerbate the impact of a minimum-wage hike. It estimated that a minimum-wage hike to $10.10 an hour could cost 500,000 jobs.

“(The) additional cost on employers for some low-wage workers who do not currently have employment-based health insurance … further boosts the likelihood that employers’ savings from reducing the size of their workforces would exceed their adjustment costs,” the CBO said.

Labor-Saving Technology

Those adjustment costs might include adding labor-saving technology.

Wendy’s (WEN) CFO Todd Penegor explained in an August earnings call, “We continue to look at initiatives and how we work to offset any impacts of future wage inflation through technology initiatives, whether that’s customer self-order kiosks (or) whether that’s automating more in the back of the house in the restaurant.”

Starbucks (SBUX) and Yum Brands’ (YUM) Taco Bell are among the restaurant chains promoting mobile ordering, which reduces the need for cashiers. McDonald’s (MCD) is about to start testing mobile apps as well.

Sidestepping ObamaCare

The truth about the ObamaCare employer mandate is that it hasn’t been nearly as much of a burden on businesses as feared, so they haven’t had to cut workers’ hours below 30 per week in a dramatic way. But the reason is hardly cause for celebration: Employers have figured out how to dodge liability by offering “affordable” coverage that costs much more than their modest-wage workers are likely to pay.

That’s left millions of modest-wage, full-time workers without affordable coverage options. It’s possible that California’s embrace of a $15 minimum wage will add to their ranks. But the status quo of full-time workers thrown under the bus by ObamaCare may not hold. If the mandate ever becomes something that can’t be easily dodged, minimum-wage employers in California will likely cut work hours in a big way, diluting the promise of a living wage.