The first instinct is to help.

Yet when massive disasters like Colorado’s devastating floods occur, relief efforts can be hindered by well-intentioned individuals who just show up bearing food, clothing or muscle-power.

“Do not go to the scene of a disaster. Please be patient and wait until relief agencies can train you and use your help,” advises a spokesman for HelpColoradoNow.org. “Financial support to the agencies responding to disasters is the most effective way to help as cash allows disaster agencies to purchase exactly what is needed.”

While HelpColoradoNow.org, a partnership between the Colorado Division of Homeland Security and Emergency Management and Colorado Voluntary Organizations Active in Disaster, does not recommend one agency over another, its website does have a list of legitimate groups involved with the flood relief effort.

Still, caution must be exercised.

Representatives from agencies that responded to the Aurora theater shootings and the 2012 wildfires strongly recommend that donors avoid putting money into jars set out in public places and supporting fundraising events staged by groups with which the person is not familiar.

The consensus seems to be that for every good heart there’s a scammer.

Mile High chapter of the American Red Cross and the Salvation Army both accept donations sent by text messsage. For the Red Cross, text REDCROSS to 90999; for the Salvation Army, GIVEHOPEIM to 80888.

HelpColoradoNow.org offers this advice:

• Donate only what is requested by officials and bring items to the official designated collection centers.

• Meal donations may be needed for personnel supporting response efforts, but they must be from a restaurant. No home-cooked food can be accepted. These items may go to waste and in fact get in the way of relief efforts.

• Do not go to the scene of a disaster unannounced. The arrival of unexpected volunteers will interfere with response efforts.

A simple phone call can do the trick. Like the one Andrea Fey of Game Day Merchandising placed to Pastor Mark Orphan at Timberline Church in Fort Collins. The church is an evacuation site where 250 volunteers are assisting 300-plus people displaced by the flood and Fey’s offer of T-shirts, basketball jerseys and soft toys was welcomed. “My van is packed and I’m heading north to make the delivery,” Fey said on Tuesday.

Allied Jewish Federation of Colorado has launched the Colorado Flood Relief Fund, with 100 percent of donations going to flood victims of all faiths. A second fund has been established by the Jewish Federations of North America, and an emergency grant of $50,000 has already gone to families and organizations in Northern Colorado.

In addition, NECHAMA, a Minnesota-based Jewish response-to-disaster organization formed to provide free cleanup of interior and exterior storm debris following large-scale natural disasters, has sent a team to Colorado to assess the damage and develop a plan for action. Priority is given to low-income individuals, those with medical needs, children and the elderly. NECHAMA assistance can be requested by visiting nechama.org/cofloods or by calling 1-763-732-0610.

The Morgridge Family Foundation will be giving $200 a day to flood relief agencies nominated by the public. Nominations can be submitted via the foundation’s Facebook page.

Metro-area television stations will be participating in a fundraising effort from 4 to 10:30 p.m. on Wednesday. The Red Cross is supplying volunteers to work at phone banks at Rocky Mountain PBS during that time and while regular programming will continue, stations will have live updates from the phone bank each hour.

Sonia ImMasche, president of the Junior League of Fort Collins, says the group’s Career Closet is open to flood victims in need of work-appropriate clothing. “We have outfits appropriate for work, plus jeans, slacks, jackets and tops in a variety of sizes,” she says. For details, call 1-970-482-0594 and select Option 1.

On Oct. 19, there will be a benefit at Hope Springs Church, 559 Denver Ave., Loveland, for two families who lost everything in the flood. Fifteen vendors, including Paparazzi Jewelry, Mary Kay and Jamberry Nails, will participate. There will also be a bake sale. Hours are 8 a.m. to 3 p.m. and attendees are asked to donate nonperishable food, clothing and toiletries. Call Diane, 1-970-310-4362.

On Sept. 22, the Alamo Draft House, 7301 S. Santa Fe Drive, Unit 850, in Littleton, will be donating 10 percent of its revenue from 10 a.m. to close to Colorado chapter of the American Red Cross. In addition, patrons are encouraged to bring canned goods to the venue during regular business hours from Sept. 20-22. These items will be donated to Community Food Share in Niwot.

New York jeweler Joan Hornig has created Bridge the Gap, a sterling silver necklace, and donating all proceeds from its sale to flood relief efforts in Colorado. The necklace costs $65 and can be ordered by visiting joanhornig.com/shop-2/bridge-the-gap-necklace

Joanne Davidson: 303-809-1314, jdavidson@denverpost.com or twitter.com/getitwrite