Politics: 'Hope and change' lies remembered

Image Credit:

Published by: Herman Cain on Tuesday May 10th, 2016

Some legacy.

The collective public has a short political memory.

But let there be controversy over which bathroom a person should use based on the sexual identity they were born with, the rights of a bakery not to make a cake against their religious beliefs, or which energy sources are best for mankind, then the liberal media will remind people what they ought to think for years.

Since Hillary does not want "Trump to inherit the legacy of Barack Obama," we have to remind you of some of the Obama legacy – lies, failures and deceptions that might influence your vote for president in November. And remember, we are only trying to save the savable with these reminders. The hopelessly liberal and socialist are not savable.

Since we do not have space or time for all of the “mis-statements, misinterpretations and misquotes" (as the left would have you believe this is), here are some samples, mostly in their own words!

"Selling Obamacare was dependent on the stupidity of the American people." - Jonathan Gruber

"If you like your doctor, you can keep him." - BHO

"Each family will save an average of $2500 on their health insurance." - BHO

"More people will be able to have health insurance with ObamaCare." - BHO

"Affordable, affordable, affordable" - Nancy Pelosi

"This economy is growing again." - BHO

"We have cut the deficit." (But the national debt is still out of control) - BHO

"There is absolutely no politics in the Hillary e-mail investigation." - BHO

"We have ISIS on the run." BHO

Each of these statements can be refuted with the facts, but liberals do not let facts get in the way of their political agenda.

Democrats, liberals and socialists do not want you to remember these lies, and some of them don't want to remember!

As this New York Post article points out, the public has been deliberately played for fools, and the liberal inexperienced reporters in the liberal media have assisted them in their deception. Why did they do it? They did it because they knew they could get away with it, and it was a conscious strategy.

How do we stop it? #NeverHillary.

Otherwise, it will continue unchecked and eventually we will be just another Third World socialist country ... for your children and grandchildren. Just look at what's happened in Cuba and Venezuela the to see what that looks like! It's ugly!

We know what will happen with a Hillary presidency – more of Obama's “legacy”, more lies, more deception and more of the same. We don't know for sure what will happen in a Trump presidency, but we do know it will be a reversal of the direction in which we are now headed, and the stupidity of the American people will not be a necessary condition for political success.

We know what "hope and change" looks like.

Let's try "Make America Great Again".

We will help you remember the lies of yesterday, today's truths, and tomorrow's promises – kept or broken.

Get your copy of Herman Cain’s new book, The Right Problems, here!