"We're going to take care of ..."

Advertisement - story continues below

On the day he was declared “the presumptive Republican nominee,” presidential candidate Donald Trump looked past the hard fighting ahead to reach the White House and talked about what he would do on Day One when he gets there.

“First thing is knock out some of the executive orders done by our president,” Trump told George Stephanopoulos Wednesday on ABC’s Good Morning America.

“One, on (the) border where people can pour into (the) country like Swiss cheese. I would knock out Obamacare. Take care of our vets and military,” said Trump.

Advertisement – story continues below

Trump proclaimed that the Affordable Care Act would be “dead by 2017.”

“The people are not signing up for it. It’s a disaster,” he said.

Trump also repeated the promise he made since he started his campaign that he would do more for veterans.

Advertisement – story continues below

“Our veterans have been absolutely treated horribly and we’re going to take care of our vets,” he said.

Trump’s Tuesday night victory in Nevada, and the margin of that win, have increased his stature as the likely GOP candidate.

“Donald Trump is now the presumptive Republican nominee,” wrote Niall Stanage of The Hill. “Yes, there is a long way to go. But if a more conventional candidate than Trump had won three of the first four contests by such emphatic margins, there would be broad consensus that they were on their way to becoming the party’s standard-bearer.”

“There is only a week to go before Super Tuesday, when Republicans in 11 states vote. It is difficult to imagine what could happen at this stage to blunt Trump’s momentum,” he added.

Advertisement – story continues below

“If somebody drops out, I’m going to get a lot of votes,” Trump said on Fox and Friends. “As an example, if Ted Cruz dropped out, I’d get a lot of those votes. If any one of ‘em drop out, I would get a lot of those votes.”

“I watch these pundits — I’ve been watching them for a year — but I’ve been watching these pundits … they just add up numbers,” Trump said. “They forget that when somebody drops out I get a lot of those votes .”

Trump said the experts have been saying for months that he has hit his peak.

“I started at 12 [percent] and I reached my ceiling. I went to 16 [percent], they said, ‘That is a ceiling — that’s the most he’s going to get,’ ” he said. “And then the national polls are even higher. You know, the national polls I’m at 44 [percent]. And that’s with five people. I mean, that’s a lot of people.”

h/t: CNN