The Medical University of South Carolina and BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina have been negotiating a deal that would allow patients formerly covered by Consumers’ Choice Health Plan to continue receiving services at MUSC next year. File/Grace Beahm/staff

As last-minute negotiations between Medical University Hospital and South Carolina’s largest private health insurance company have seemingly stalled, Nikki Colwell doesn’t know where she’ll turn for treatment for her cystic fibrosis come Friday.

The 27-year-old Columbia woman currently receives all her health care through a specialty clinic at MUSC, but her new BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina plan, which kicks in on Jan. 1, won’t cover any services at the Charleston hospital.

Colwell, who is insured by Consumers’ Choice Health Plan through Thursday, was hopeful that her new insurance provider would work out some sort of agreement with MUSC that would allow her to continue treatment there. Consumers’ Choice Health Plan announced in October that it will close this week and no longer offer health insurance coverage in South Carolina.

Eleven other health insurance cooperatives set up under the Affordable Care Act also failed this year.

“It’s very, very stressful,” Colwell said. “It doesn’t look good and it’s the end of the year.”

Some 67,000 South Carolinians are covered by Consumers’ Choice Health Plan, and 4,500 of them receive health care services at MUSC. Many of these patients have been diagnosed with serious conditions, including cancer, cirrhosis and — like Colwell — cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease that generates thick mucus in her lungs, making it difficult to breathe.

In 2014 and 2015, Consumers’ Choice was the only insurance plan on HealthCare.gov that covered services at MUSC. Now, Colwell can’t find a single policy that will.

That’s a problem other patients are facing, too. MUSC is the only hospital in South Carolina that even offers some of these specialty health care services.

MUSC spokeswoman Heather Woolwine said Tuesday that BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina recently made the hospital an offer to cover specialty care and emergency care for patients formerly covered by Consumers’ Choice. She said MUSC agreed to the insurance company’s terms, but the deal hasn’t been signed by either party and the negotiations may still fall through.

“We have since followed up with them several times to finalize that agreement,” Woolwine said in a prepared statement. “We were most recently told they would no longer do single-case agreements (which they had started doing) because it was ‘getting out of hand.’ At this time, we are unsure if BCBS has any plans to make provisions for patients needing specialty care only available at MUSC for 2016.”

Patti Embry-Tautenhan, a spokeswoman for BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina, responded in a prepared statement:

“The exit of Consumers’ Choice Health Plan is unquestionably creating disruption in the marketplace. Nevertheless, its departure does not change our provider network. While MUSC is not in the exchange network, we do have a well-established provider network in whom we have great confidence and believe more than adequately meets the needs of members. Moreover, it is also important to note that emergency care services have always been covered regardless of network status.”

These negotiations only affect BlueCross BlueShield patients who have purchased coverage through the federal health insurance marketplace or a individual plan purchased directly from the insurance company. For example, beneficiaries covered by BlueCross BlueShield through their employer may continue to use MUSC if the hospital is included in that network.

Dr. Patrick Flume treats 170 adult cystic fibrosis patients at the specialty clinic at MUSC. He estimates that 10 of them are covered by Consumers’ Choice until the end of the year. He said he’s worried what will happen in January.

“They will end up in the hospital,” Flume said.

Other South Carolina hospitals only specialize in pediatric cystic fibrosis patients, he said.

“These insurance companies need to recognize this is a service (the patients) can’t get anywhere else.”

Flume, who treats Colwell, told her not to stress about all this too much — stress can make her condition worse — but she said she’s having trouble thinking about anything else.

Colwell and her twin sister already attempted to find help for their cystic fibrosis symptoms closer to home, without much success.

“We both had infections in our lungs, but they couldn’t be identified,” she said. “Nobody in Columbia could tell us what was wrong with us. We spent over a year wasting our money on all these different doctors.”

Colwell has an appointment set up at MUSC in January. She may need to cancel it.

“I can’t go because I can’t afford to go there out of pocket,” she said. “I don’t really know what’s going to happen.”

Reach Lauren Sausser at 843-937-5598.