Friendly Fire:Hillary Clinton

Posted by Emma Cotton, Editor-in-Chief on May 5, 2016. Filed under Opinion.

Vote Hillary Clinton

By Brianna Spieldenner, Opinion Editor

As the primary season comes to an end, both Democratic candidates seem neck to neck in the fight for the nomination. However, liberal college students everywhere seem to be leaning more towards Sanders instead of Clinton.

Clinton has just as much chance, perhaps even more, of being in the White House next year as anyone else. Sure, Clinton has some dirt behind her, but that is not uncommon at all for presidential candidates.

What’s more important is her plans for the future of America. According to Clinton’s official website, she plans to expand the Affordable Care Act. Her active passions include being a champion of families and children, college campus sexual assault prevention, public education, affordable college, and human rights, particularly for women, the LGBT community and immigrants.

Clinton also aims to make America “the clean energy superpower of the 21st century” by installing 500 million solar panels to power all houses in America, as well as lower waste and oil consumption by a third. Of all the candidates, she takes the strongest stance against guns.

She has done more than enough to prove that she is a strong candidate, including her past work as Secretary of State, First Lady and Senator, among other accomplishments. While her opponents claim that she fluctuates her positions, her stance on human rights has been the same since 1995, where she stated in a famous speech that “Human rights are women’s rights, and women’s rights are human rights.”

Clinton is clearly progressive due to her platform, but she also appeals to some moderate conservatives as well, and sometimes left-wing Democrats forget that these voters have a voice in this country, too. This would undoubtedly help her influence change in Congress, something that Obama was often criticized for lacking.

She is the only candidate who has a realistic plan for the next few years, and the means to act upon it. If we want actual change to happen, she is

Don’t Vote Hillary Clinton

By Sam York, Contributing Writer

Many people are wary of Clinton’s true viability in a general election matchup. Up to 60 percent of voters view her unfavorably, according to the Real Clear Politics polling averages.

Clinton often touts her impressive record. She has served as New York Senator and Secretary of State, as well as First Lady of both Arkansas and the nation. However, her decisions in these positions raise quite a few liberal eyebrows.

Clinton’s idealistic challenger in the Democratic Primary, Bernie Sanders, consistently points out that her opinion is swayed by donor money. This is a valid criticism. In an interview from 2004, current Massachusetts Senator Elizabeth Warren pointed out that Clinton changed her opinion on the “Bankruptcy Bill” after raking in millions from corporate donors. Additionally, she has accepted an average of $214,000 for private speeches to large financial institutions on Wall Street, such as Bank of America and Goldman Sachs.

Meanwhile, her Super PAC has raised tens of millions from industries such as Big Pharma and the fossil fuel industry, according to opensecrets.org.

Her “yes” vote on the war in Iraq has become one of the biggest stories of the campaign season.

These facts make a progressive like myself hesitant to vote for Clinton. Hillary Clinton doesn’t understand that my vote has to be earned. I won’t blindly vote for her, just because she is a Democrat.

At the end of the day, it’s better for progressives to keep the flames of the revolution alight than to cave in to the demands of the political establishment.