COLORADO SPRINGS — Republican John Suthers has provided legal advice to two Democratic governors and has overseen thousands of convicts, but his toughest job yet might be the next one he wants on his résumé: Suthers is running for mayor of Colorado Springs, a city as beautiful as it is dysfunctional.

“The fact is,” Suthers said at his kickoff this month, “we have a local political environment that has not been conducive to community and economic development.”

The City Council’s fights with the current mayor, Steve Bach, over the budget and other issues have been legendary. Bach is not running for re-election.

“This has been the most difficult two years of my political career,” said City Council president Keith King, a former state lawmaker. “I had more opportunity to collaborate with the Democrats at the General Assembly than with the mayor here in Colorado Springs — and we’re all Republicans.”

Colorado Springs is home to a legion of conservative voters who believe in limited government, especially when it comes to local taxes, but are ardent supporters of its five military installations. The recession that hit in 2008 hurt cities nationwide but was especially felt in tax-averse Colorado Springs. More than a third of its street lights went dark, and water cutbacks meant dead grass in parks.

“We’ve allowed our public infrastructure — our roads, bridges and storm drainage systems — to deteriorate,” Suthers said to a couple hundred supporters and one die-hard enemy who gathered at Ivywild School for his kickoff.

“I hope you all came because you agree on one thing, that it’s time to get Colorado Springs moving again.”

No. 1 in fundraising

Others who have formally announced for the $96,000-a-year job are former Mayor Mary Lou Makepeace, El Paso County Commissioner Amy Lathen, and Joel Miller, who resigned his council seat to campaign for the post.

Two other hopefuls have filed paperwork with the city clerk or expressed an interest in running but have not formally announced. They are Lawrence Martinez of El Pomar’s Emerging Leaders Development Program and Justine Herring, who has been arrested twice this month. Police said Herring waved an AR-15 rifle at a man and claimed to be a federal law enforcement officer during an incident at Memorial Park. A week later, she was arrested after police responded to a domestic incident.

The winner of the April 7 nonpartisan election takes office April 21 unless no candidate receives a majority of votes. In that case, there would be a runoff May 19, with the winner taking over June 2.

City election records show that Suthers so far has raised more than $117,000, easily outpacing his mayoral rivals; Lathen is second with more than $39,000.

With a population of almost 458,000, Colorado Springs is the second-largest city in the state. Community leaders are confounded that growth has lagged in a city that offers stunning views and tourists sites, including the Garden of the Gods.

Bach, a commercial real estate broker, was elected mayor in 2011, a year after voters approved a strong-mayor form of government. He said he hopes his successor has better luck dealing with the City Council and a vague city charter that has been open to interpretation.

“People ask me what I want my legacy to be,” Bach said. “I say, ‘Legacy? I hope I live through this.’ This has been tumultuous. It has been very challenging. I don’t want to have my personality or the perceived conflict to be in the way. It’s time for someone to bring in fresh ideas and fresh energy and take the city forward.”

Still, Bach said the city made many gains, much with the council’s help. He just released an eight-page document touting those achievements.

Tom Neppl, the immediate past chairman of the Colorado Springs Regional Business Alliance, said the dysfunction between council members and the mayor has been a “sad situation.”

“I’m a strong advocate for collaboration, and it is something that is sorely missing,” Neppl said when he introduced Suthers at the campaign event. “It’s time for someone to come in and hit the reset button.”

That someone, he believes, is Suthers, 63, who was raised in Colorado Springs, met and married his wife, Janet, there and raised a family.

Suthers served as El Paso County district attorney, ran the state prison system under former Gov. Bill Owens and was appointed U.S. attorney by President George W. Bush. He most recently stepped down as Colorado’s attorney general Jan. 13 because of term limits.

At a reception for the outgoing AG last month, former Govs. Owens, a Republican, and Bill Ritter, a Democrat, and the current governor, Democrat John Hickenlooper, heaped praise on Suthers. They talked about his character and his commitment to Colorado.

Suthers, who made only $80,000 a year as attorney general, said about 20 law firms initially reached out to him about his plans after he left the state. That dwindled to about six firms when Suthers said he wanted to work for a firm that had a regional office in Colorado Springs.

The talks ended after Suthers decided he wanted to do another stint in public service.

Bruce a vocal opponent

Suthers’ biggest critic might be Douglas Bruce, the prickly author of the voter-approved 1992 Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights that controls government spending and taxes. Many believe his censure for kicking a news photographer on opening day of the 2008 session was the beginning of a slow political slide downward. The Colorado Springs Republican lost his House primary election that August.

In 2011, Bruce was convicted of attempting to influence a public servant, filing a false return and tax evasion, and he was later sentenced to 180 days in the Denver County jail. Suthers’ office prosecuted the case.

How much influence Bruce still holds in Colorado Springs is open to debate. Some Republicans say none, pointing to his ninth-place showing in a 14-candidate field for City Council in 2011. Others say enough to make a difference in a close race.

At the campaign event, Bruce handed out “Unwanted” fliers with an unflattering Suthers photograph and reams of reasons why he thought Suthers was wrong for the office, including Bruce’s convictions, which are on appeal.

Former state Rep. Larry Liston, R-Colorado Springs, was appalled.

“I said, ‘Doug, how uncouth of you to do this,’ ” Liston said. “He goes, ‘Remember, uncouth rhymes with truth.’ I said, ‘No wonder you’re so unpopular.’ ”

Bruce declined to comment on their encounter.

But others at Suthers’ campaign kickoff were thrilled he’s in the race. Mike Farichy, who has lived in Colorado Springs for 58 of his 62 years, said if anyone can make a convincing argument to voters to do something to repair roads and other infrastructure, it’s Suthers.

“John Suthers,” he said, “is a collaborator.”

Lynn Bartels: 303-954-5327, lbartels@denverpost.com or twitter.com/lynn_bartels