Environmentalists picketed outside of Island Beach State Park on Sunday in a fight to have material they say originated from superstorm Sandy-damaged homes removed from Roxbury-based landfill.

Protesters gather Sunday at Island Beach State Park to demand Gov. Christ Christie and the state Department of Environmental Protection remove material from a Roxbury landfill that they say originated in superstorm Sandy-damaged homes. The DEP disputes the origin of the material. (Staff contributor Bonnie Delaney)

A dozen environmentalists and northern New Jersey residents picketed outside of Island Beach State Park on Sunday in a fight to have material they say originated from superstorm Sandy-damaged homes removed from a Roxbury-based landfill.

Their signs demanded action on the part of Gov. Chris Christie and the state Department of Environmental Protection, calling for the removal of material from the former Fenimore landfill in Roxbury, Morris County.

But Larry Ragonese, a spokesman for the state Department of Environmental Protection, said the material is not connected to clean-up from Sandy.

“We did not direct Sandy material to go up there,” Ragonese said.

Both sides agree that the Fenimore landfill is emitting hydrogen sulfide gas, which results from the breakdown of gypsum board used to build walls in homes.

Hydrogen sulfide is flammable and smells of rotten eggs. It is a byproduct of natural processes in salt marshes, swamps and sulfur springs as well as industrial processes like paper mills and solid waste landfills, according to a fact sheet on the Fenimore landfill released by the state Department of Health.

At 30 parts per billion, hydrogen sulfide causes irritation to the eyes, nose and throat and can trigger breathing problems in people with sensitive airways, according to the department. At 500,000 parts per billion, the gas causes problems with thinking, headaches, poor motor function and sometimes unconsciousness.

Neighborhoods closest to the Roxbury landfill were exposed to as much as 160 parts per billion, and concentrations at the landfill rose to 7,000 parts per billion, according to the Department of Health.

“I have to wear a gas mask in my house,” said Marion Emery, 36, of Roxbury, who suffers from severe asthma. “The only thing that helps me is being in my room with an air purifier.”

Other protestors who gathered on the barrier island Sunday complained of foul odors that could be smelled for miles, and coughing fits while outside.

Bill Morrocco, vice president of REACT, or the Roxbury Environmental Action Coalition, said 400,000 cubic yards of decomposing material was dumped on the Roxbury landfill when a new owner needed to level the site to construct a solar farm. As the material decays and stench fills the community, protesters said children are prevented from playing outside and residents are forced to keep their windows closed.

“It’s depressing,” said Ellen Marshalek, 65, of Roxbury, who joined the Island Beach State Park protest. “I’m worried about losing the value of my home.

Ragonese, of the DEP, said the owner of the landfill failed to property seal the landfill, failed to follow an agreement with the DEP, and ended up in a lengthy court battle with the state department. The owner also placed material on the site without DEP approval, he said.

The DEP is in the process of capping the landfill, which will keep water off the decomposing material and eventually halt the release of hydrogen sulfide, Ragonese said. The capping process should be complete by the end of the year, he said.

In the meantime, REACT and its supporters have worked to gain attention from Christie with protests across the state. They chose Island Beach State Park on Sunday to draw his attention from the governor’s mansion there.

“We’re not going away,” said Morrocco. “He destroyed our community… The material needs to go.”

Ragonese said no matter what, the landfill will not be dug up.

“It would be completely irresponsible to excavate that landfill,” he said. “If we dug into the landfill …we would unleash a very high level of H2S (hydrogen sulfide) gas throughout the community.”

Such a release would endanger not just the Roxbury neighbors, but surrounding towns, he said.

“It’s just not on the table at all,” he said.

Amanda Oglesby: 732-557-5701; aoglesby@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/ocean-county/2014/05/25/protesters-picket-island-beach-roxbury-landfill/9573027/