PHOTO COURTESY BILL KOPLITZ Kelvin Cochran





Two local pastors, Pastor Tamarkus T. Cook of the St. Smyrna Baptist Church in Newnan and Pastor Mark Anthony of Trinity Baptist Church in Sharpsburg, have teamed together to host a joint community service for the men of Coweta County this weekend.



“I have been spending some time with Pastor Cook and one of the things I’ve really desired is to have a unified approach to ministry in our city that erases racial and denominational lines that divide us,” said Anthony. “Pastor Cook and myself have really thought of ways we could work together to minister to our community and to truly show we’re one in Christ and to show we’re not competing and we value the image of Christ in one another. I think there are some issues with the church being divided. I truly wanted to do something that will bring people together and show them regardless of political, ethnic, domination, anything that would seek to divide, even in our difference we can work together.”

Anthony said Kelvin Cochran, the former city of Atlanta fire chief, will be the guest speaker at both the Friday and Saturday services. Cochran was fired in January 2015 after he published a book that discussed his Christian faith and promoted biblical marriage. Cochran was also a speaker at the First Baptist Church in Newnan just before his termination.

“We are really looking to have a multi-generational, multi-ethnic gathering,” said Anthony. “He (Cochran) had spoken at a friend of mine’s church. When I spoke with him, we seemed to connect. He’s had opportunities to minister in diverse communities and has done it in a effective way. I think he is the right person to speak to the men of Coweta County.”

Anthony added that the event is free and open to all men in the surrounding areas. The Friday service will be held at Trinity Church located at 8817 Highway 54 W, Sharpsburg. A barbecue will be held from 6 until 7 p.m. and the service will be from 7 until 8:30 p.m. Breakfast will be provided at St. Smyrna Baptist Church, located at 68 Heery Road from 9 until 10 a.m. with the service being held from 10 until 11:30 a.m.

“My prayer is this will become an annual event,” said Anthony. “We’re launching something that will start with our two churches. We’re really hoping it will be a broad representation.”