Mission Health System is expanding in Haywood County. (Photo: Special to the Citizen-Times)

ASHEVILLE - Mission Health System is expanding in Haywood County with a medical office building that will offer more primary care, specialty care, imaging and laboratory services.

It will also offer tele-medicine that Mission says could save patients at trip to Asheville for even complex care.

The 30,000 square-foot building will be on 23 acres on Hospital Drive, adjacent to the not-for-profit company's existing out-patient center.

It will be down the street from Haywood Regional Hospital, which was recently purchased by for-profit Duke LifePoint. The two companies are competitors in Western North Carolina. Duke LifePoint owns two other hospitals in the region.

The new center will be Mission Health's fourth My Care Plus location and the first in Haywood County.

The company says it is responding to a study of primary care in the region that found a need for more options in Haywood County. The company says residents there have a strong preference for Mission.

The project will create short-term jobs in construction and long-term medical jobs, the company said.

Dr. Ron Paulus, Mission's CEO, said the new center is part of the company's plan to improve the health of the region.

Health systems are increasingly looking to manage the health of big populations under Obamacare, which rewards them for cost reductions and better outcomes instead of the old fee-for-service model. That means more primary care options, in some places, are needed to prevent patients from ending up in the hospital where care is more expensive.

WNC does not have enough primary care doctors right now.

"The nearly 60,000 residents of Haywood County already understand Mission's unrelenting commitment to quality and our focus on local access, but we know that not all patients who desire Mission care can access it easily there," Paulus said in a written statement. "Our new, state-of-the-art facility will be readily accessible and build upon strong traditional clinical care with an added focus on health and wellness. The site will include dedicated physicians and clinical staff, as well as, significant telemedicine capabilities that will help avoid the need to travel to Asheville for even some of the most complex care."

Dr. David Mulholland, who has led Mission's existing outpatient center in Haywood County for years, will be moving in to the new center.

"It's wonderful to see the next stage of evolution for primary and specialty care in Haywood County with this announcement," he said in the company's statement. "Mission Health has a proven winner with its My Care Plus outpatient care model, and I'm delighted that expanded services will soon be available in a convenient location right here in Haywood."

The expansion comes as Mission is cutting $42 million in expenses heading into its next fiscal year and aiming to grow revenue by $10 million.

The company is reorganizing and could end up laying off workers. It has 10,000 employees and six hospitals across the region with annual gross revenue of $1.5 billion.

Paulus said Mission is making the investment in Haywood, amid the reorganization, because health care is moving away from the hospital and toward ambulatory and home health settings.

In Haywood, he said, there is a deficit of at least seven primary care providers. That means about 14,000 people do not have access to basic health care. In the last year, 9,000 people have traveled to Mission Hospital. He also said many of the company's employees live in Haywood County.

The new center, he said, will help people avoid trips to the hospital. Treating patients in the hospital requires more time, caregivers and money than treating them in an out-patient setting. Also, people are often sicker when they get to the hospital and could have been treated earlier, and at lower costs, if they had regular access to a primary care doctor.

The company's goal is to help populations become more healthy instead of providing specific care services and procedures.

"That means that we are reallocating the way that we strategically invest over time," Paulus said.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1oAZdnC