TRENTON — A new economic incentive program signed into law last week may be the spark that will take some long-awaited city projects off the back burner, according to area developers.

“Everything we have been doing has been contingent on the passage of that,” said David Henderson, whose company, HHG, is hoping to turn the vacant former Roebling Steel factory buildings off Route 129 and Hamilton Avenue into a hip mix of loft apartments and shops.

The Economic Opportunity Act of 2013, which was signed by Gov. Chris Christie on Wednesday, gives special incentives for development and job creation in Trenton.

“It would not have been economically feasible to do the project we envisioned without these incentives,” Henderson said.

The Trenton planning board gave approval to the first phase of the $58 million project called Wirerope Lofts, which would include 190 loft apartments and 27,000 square feet of retail and restaurant space.

Other developers also hailed the new incentives.

Woodrose Properties, the Lambertville-based real estate company that recently tore down the shuttered Pete Lorenzo’s Cafe, will apply for the incentives to help fund the building of a mixed-use, 50-apartment building on the South Clinton Avenue site, company spokesman Sean Jackson said.

“We couldn’t proceed without it,” said Jackson of the company, in which former Sen. Robert Torricelli is a partner.

“The incentives are critical because the cost of construction is so high and the market is so soft here,” Jackson said.

The new law revised existing incentive programs for redevelopment and job creation in New Jersey into two new programs, said Tim Lizura, president and chief operating officer of the Economic Development Authority, which will oversee the implementation and award of the incentives to individual projects.

“There are five existing programs that are focused on economic development,” Lizura said. The two new programs take “the best DNA from all of them,” he said.

Boosting growth and jobs

The Economic Redevelopment and Growth Grant Program is focused on investing in redevelopment, while Grow NJ is a job creation program.

“There certainly can be overlap and we expect there to be overlap,” Lizura said.

The Grow NJ program awards job creators or companies that keep full-time jobs in the state with tax credits, depending on the amount and types of jobs. Eligible companies can receive more tax credits if they locate the businesses within the poorest cities in the state, such as Trenton, Paterson, Passaic and Camden, Lizura said.

Lizura said the biggest change in the Grow NJ program is that it lowers the threshold number of jobs that need to be created or kept in state to be eligible for the tax credits, from 100 to 35 new jobs or 50 retained jobs.

“When we look at trying to attract business to the city, I believe this bill will be very compelling to investors,” Lizura said.

The redevelopment program offers incentive grants and tax credits. Projects in the state’s poorest areas, including Trenton, and those areas affected by Hurricane Sandy are eligible for a greater portion of the total project cost to be covered by the incentives.



Lizura said the law also changes the threshold and scope, making smaller projects eligible to receive the incentives.

“It is a much lower investment threshold than we have today,” he said. “If you are not investing in your community, communities will suffer and deteriorate. Whenever we can get private investment in our targeted communities, where we are looking to grow, it is good.”

A boon for poor cities

Tim Henkel, senior vice president at Pennrose Properties, said the new law will help to spur redevelopment throughout the state.

Henkel, whose company is behind the redevelopment of Rush Crossings, an apartment complex on the former site of the Miller Homes public housing towers, said he is excited about the possibilities for new development and says he hopes it means new neighbors for those living at Rush Crossings.

“It will close, I think, a lot of financing gaps,” said Herbert Brown, executive director of the Trenton Housing Authority. “Tax credits are the lifeblood of a project. You cannot build these projects without them.”

Projects the size of the one Woodrose is looking to build near the Trenton Train Station were much too small to qualify in years past, when the incentives were aimed at facilitating the development of high-rise buildings, Jackson has said previously.

“It is all about the economics,” he said, “In order for a project to succeed and to be finance-able you needed a state program that requires only a modest-size building. Trenton is not ready, yet, for skyscrapers.”

Developer Roland Pott said that when you have a smaller project, finding financing is often more challenging because the development costs end up being a larger portion of the overall project cost than with larger projects.

“I think the legislation will create an opportunity for developers to bring some new energy into the city and make projects happen that will bring some new leadership and new inspiration,” Pott said.

Thinking small

Area legislators said this smaller development is more typical of what is proposed for Trenton, so they hope it will spur the revitalization.

“It will be for those smaller projects that need extra help, that you would typically find in our community,” said Assemblywoman Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-Ewing), one of the bill’s sponsors.

State Sen. Shirley Turner (D-Lawrence), Assemblyman Reed Gusciora (D-Trenton) and Watson Coleman all said they are disappointed that the bill requires Trenton projects that receive the grants and tax credits to include some affordable housing.

“We need to be attracting more market-rate housing,” Watson Coleman said. “I had hoped that there would be a municipal option, that under certain circumstances they could waive that requirement.”

“Trenton has always had more than its fair share of affordable housing,” Gusciora said.

Henderson said HHG is looking create market-rate housing that appeals to Millennials, the generation now in their 20s and early 30s, who are looking to move to cities.

“To meet the quality that the Millennials expect, we have to build to a much higher standard,” Henderson said. “The going rates would never support the amount of investment that we are going to have to do here to make it work, that is why we need to take advantage of these incentives.”

Lizura said the EDA still has to publish the rules and regulations for the new incentive program and hopes to approve their first projects by the end of the year.



Contact Jenna Pizzi at jpizzi@njtimes.com or (609) 989-5717.

• Like Times of Trenton on Facebook

• Follow @TimesofTrenton on Twitter