LONDON, Feb. 3, 2016 /PRNewswire/ -- Population health management is a process of aggregating patient data, analyzing the data, and taking measures to improve the quality of care and curtailing healthcare costs. Population health management solutions are used by healthcare providers and management of the healthcare delivery system to improve the efficacy of hospitals clinically as well as financially.



The population health management market is driven by the regulatory mandates laid by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The act aims to lower the number of uninsured people in the U.S. to reduce the cost of healthcare for the government as well as individuals. The act has made it mandatory for tax-exempted hospitals to assess community health needs every three years and adopt implementation strategies to address these needs. In addition, the ACA had allocated USD 15 billion over a period of ten years to the Prevention and Public Health Investment Fund in 2010. This amount was subsequently reduced in 2012 to offset a scheduled cut to Medicare physician payments. However, the federal government is investing in this fund. The government invested a collective amount of USD 5.05 billion from 2010 to 2015(Source: United States Department of Health & Human Services). This funding is directed towards enhancing health outcomes and improving health care quality. Furthermore, government initiatives such as the Pay-for-Performance (P4P) Incentive program propel the growth of the HCIT market in the U.S. By aligning financial rewards with improved outcomes for healthcare providers, this program helps overcome the limitations of the current reimbursement system. Due to this, healthcare providers are more likely to adopt HCIT solutions such as PHM tools to get rewards and financial incentives.



In 2015, the software segment is expected to account for the largest share of the global population health management market, by component, and is expected to grow at the fastest CAGR from 2015 to 2020. The high growth rate of the software segment can be attributed to the increasing adoption of population health management solutions mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA).



In 2015, North America is expected to account for the largest share of the global population health management market, followed by Europe, Asia, and the Rest of the World (RoW). North America is also expected to be the fastest growing regional segment from 2015 to 2020. North America's large share and high growth is attributed to a number of factors such as regulatory mandates set up under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), implementation of the Hospital Readmissions Reduction Program (HRRP), and rising geriatric population are driving the growth of the North American population health management market.



The market witnesses high competitive intensity, as there are several firms with similar product offerings. These companies adopt various strategies (agreements, partnerships, joint ventures, collaborations, geographic expansions, new product launches, and acquisitions) to increase their market shares and establish a strong foothold in the global market.



Reasons to Buy the Report:

The report will enrich both established firms as well as new entrants/smaller firms to gauge the pulse of the market, which in turn helps the firms to garner a greater market share. Firms purchasing the report could use any one or a combination of the below-mentioned five strategies (market penetration, product development/innovation, market development, market diversification, and competitive assessment) for strengthening their market shares.



The report provides insights on the following pointers:

- Market Penetration: Comprehensive information on the product portfolios of top players in the population health management market. The report analyzes the population health management market, by product and by application

- Product Development/Innovation: Detailed insights on upcoming technologies, research and development activities, and new product launches in the population health management market

- Market Development: Comprehensive information about the lucrative emerging markets. The report analyzes the markets for various population health management across regions

- Market Diversification: Exhaustive information about new products, untapped regions, recent developments, and investments in the population health management market

- Competitive Assessment: In-depth assessment of market shares, strategies, products, distribution networks, and manufacturing capabilities of the leading players in the population health management market



Download the full report: https://www.reportbuyer.com/product/3587959/



About Reportbuyer

Reportbuyer is a leading industry intelligence solution that provides all market research reports from top publishers

http://www.reportbuyer.com



For more information:

Sarah Smith

Research Advisor at Reportbuyer.com

Email: query@reportbuyer.com

Tel: +44 208 816 85 48

Website: www.reportbuyer.com

SOURCE ReportBuyer