"Bacon/Moore: Flesh and Bone," the world-class exhibition at the Ashmolean Museum in Oxford, isn't the first time the two geniuses of 20th-century British art have been shown together. For commercial reasons (they shared the same dealer), Henry Moore (1898-1986), the sculptor who made some great drawings, and Francis Bacon (1909-92), the painter who is supposed to have asked him for sculpture lessons, were both included in several mixed shows in their lifetimes.

ENLARGE Francis Bacon 'Second Version of Triptych 1944' (1988) The Estate of Francis Bacon. All rights resevered. Lent by Tate, London

In this installation of about 30 important sculptures and the same number of major paintings, superbly curated by Richard Calvocoressi and Martin Harrison, we can see some formal affinities—the echoed angle of an elbow here, a curve there—but there is also a shared outlook. Strange, because the men could not have been more different: Moore, the happily married establishment insider, a humanist heaped with honors and trusteeships; Bacon, gaudily gay though homosexual acts were criminal, a post-humanist outsider who reveled in not belonging, embracing nihilism.

ENLARGE Henry Moore 'Animal Head' (1951) The Henry Moore Foundation

They had something deep in common, though. Having lived through two world wars, both were figurative artists without religious belief who nevertheless embraced Christian themes, especially the crucifixion, and honored the suffering and common humanity of the survivors of grim atrocity. Each was influenced by Michelangelo and Rodin, with generous examples included in this stunning show. In the spectacular middle of the display's three rooms are three colossal columnar Moores from 1955-56, with the 1988 Second Version of Bacon's 1944 "Triptych."

Moore is preoccupied by volume and mass, and in his work the energy seems to be pushing outward, like bones pressing against flesh and muscle. In Bacon's work, the energy flows the other way—flesh always seems subjected to violent external pressure. Even so, there is a sculptural aspect to his painting: The bodies are contorted, squeezed and awkwardly positioned, yet always correctly proportioned.

The artists' contrast was best captured by Myfanwy Piper (in a 1963 review quoted by Mr. Calvocoressi in the catalog): "Moore 'never forgets the solidity of flesh upon the bone, the strength of the bone beneath the flesh' while Bacon 'never forgets that flesh is meat.' "

Until Jan. 5

ashmolean.org