Buy Photo The annual Tutu 2.2 walk/ run that will benefit the Boys and Girls Clubs of Monmouth County was held along the Asbury Park Boardwalk and finished up along Lake Ave in Asbury Park on Sunday March 22,2015 (Photo: Mark R. Sullivan/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

Nearly everyone in the crowd of 400 runners gathered on Asbury Park's boardwalk wore a tutu: women, children, men and even dogs.

Doug Schairer, 42, of Point Pleasant could not remember if Sunday was his first time wearing a tutu — some of his college memories are fuzzy — but he donned a green tulle skirt over his jogging pants for a 2.2-mile run through Asbury Park to help raise money for the Boys and Girls Clubs of Monmouth County.

His wife Tara Lally, wearing a pink tutu, and sister-in-law Dana Huyler, in rainbow-colored tulle, made a pact to run one race a month.

"I've said no to everyone," said Schairer, "but this one seemed fun."

Shortly after 9 a.m., the racers set off in their vibrant tutus. Some, like Maureen Swigon of Point Pleasant and Jody Abken of Brick, wore butterfly wings, colorful knee socks and decorative headbands to match their skirts.

"We like to get dressed up and do fun runs," 54-year-old Swigon said inside Asbury's Festhalle & Biergarten, where runners gathers before and after the race.

Swigon, a second-grade teacher in Belmar, said she came out to support the Boys and Girls Clubs and the children the group serves.

The race helped raise money for the 675 Monmouth County children and teenagers who participate in the Boys and Girls Clubs. The clubs, based in Asbury Park and Red Bank, provide after-school and evening activities primarily to children from low-income, single-parent, working families who are unsupervised in the afternoons, said Mari McMahon, director of operations at the Monmouth County clubs.

Buy Photo The annual Tutu 2.2 walk/ run that will benefit the Boys and Girls Clubs of Monmouth County was held along the Asbury Park Boardwalk and finished up along Lake Ave in Asbury Park on Sunday March 22,2015 (Photo: Mark R. Sullivan/Staff Photographer)

Lessons to fix Asbury Park schools

"We know it's a good cause," said Sean Tonne, a 35-year-old physical education teacher at Keansburg High School who wore pink and green tutus for the race. "They (the Boys and Girls Clubs) help out a lot of the kids in the area."

The Boys and Girls Clubs depend on tens of thousands of dollars in donations each year to provide children and teenagers between the ages of 5 and 19 with childcare, after-school programs, tutoring, mentoring, dinner, recreation, college preparation and social supports, said the clubs' leadership.

"It costs us, as a club, $1,300 (per child) to fund a year of after-school programming. We charged the kids $20," said Douglas Eagles, executive director of the Boys and Girls Clubs of Monmouth County. "Events like this help ensure that more kids can come to the club on a regular basis."

Karen Charles, a member of Jersey Shore Running Club and co-founder of RunCollege who helped organize the race, said the group wanted to give back to the Boys and Girls Clubs. Between encouraging cheers to runners at the finish line, she said the tutus help draw attention to the cause.

"It's just something a little different," she said. "I don't think they get as noticed" as some of the larger charity runs.

Eagles said the clubs invest in children who have no safe place to go after school.

"We have a whole array of programs that wrap around these kids that we hope will empower them to overcome the challenges they face on a day to day basis," he said.

Fighting hunger so kids can thrive

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1HlrHqQ