You could say that longtime Redding resident Steve Montano is the type of businessman who likes a challenge.

Mr. Montano, 51, recently left a long career as information services director at Cantor Fitzgerald to open the Fairfield County franchise of Homewatch CareGivers, a nationally known home care agency.

The company provides services in bathing, dressing, grooming and toileting, housekeeping and laundry, meals, errands and transportation, taking medications on schedule, social engagement including arts and crafts and cards, safety precautions, quality oversight, routine exercising, sleeping patterns, and care communication.

Colorado-based Homewatch CareGivers is counting on Mr. Montano to be the company’s face in southern Connecticut.

“Yes, there is a great deal of competition,” Mr. Montano said of the home care industry, which is one of the growing health care-related industries in the state, with the aging population driving it.

There are a lot of companies out there, Mr. Montano said, but he believes he has an advantage because most of them are mom-and-pops and he is with a company that has known the business well for many years.

“The reason I got involved with Homewatch is I knew someone who knew the industry. The most important thing is helping people, to run the business the right way, and treat the employees well,” Mr. Montano said.

He met with the company last December, learning about its 129 franchises and 34 years in business. “It’s a solid company,” Mr. Montano said.

The search for terrific employees continues. “One of the benefits for employees is they have access to an online university where they can take continuing education courses, at the expense of Homewatch.”

He has several clients so far. Both hire his services via payment through long-term health care insurance, a type of specialty insurance that is typically offered only to seniors. He assists elderly family members who need help around the house, as well as spouses in need of assistance after major medical procedures.

The object is to promote the loved one’s physical and emotional well-being, with an understanding that everybody’s daily needs are different, Mr. Montano said. That’s why he said he offers every client a no-obligation evaluation and customized home care plan.

The office is at 30 Oakwood Avenue in Norwalk. The phone number is 203-900-8020. He’s soon to join the Greater Norwalk Chamber of Commerce. There, President Edward J. Musante Jr. said there are several companies that provide companions and homemakers to elderly and housebound clients.

However, the demand for such businesses will grow stronger as the baby boomers, now in their 50s and 60s, move into their elderly years, Mr. Musante said.

“Another factor is that the availability of financial assistance has grown now that long-term care insurance has become available and affordable to more and more people,” Mr. Musante said.

Mr. Montano has lived in Redding 20 years. He lives here with his wife, Michele, and daughters, Alyssa and Julie. In the past, he has operated video stores. He is a survivor of the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks that killed 658 employees of the company he worked for, among several thousand that day.

He worked at the World Trade Center one day a month, but was based in Darien most of the time. That day he was in Darien. “I knew about 200 of them. I called maybe 50 of them friends of mine,” he said. “Unfortunately, they were all in the building that day.”

The experience of 9/11 affected him deeply. Now he’s entering the private business world to make a contribution.

“Now, after having such a wonderful, blessed and diverse life and career, I want to give back.” Mr. Montano said in a letter to friends. “Homewatch CareGivers seemed like the perfect vehicle to accomplish this goal. The company strives to go above and beyond to make a difference in the lives of not only our customers but the caregivers who work with them as well. We work hard to pair client and caregiver so that everyone benefits. Clients can expect a superb level of customized service in the comfort and privacy of their own homes.”

He hopes it becomes a family business.

“I want to build a business that can someday become a family business. My wife and I have two wonderful daughters, and my hope is to have them join me in the business. Family is extremely important to me, and I understand the difficulties of dealing with aging parents. Both my parents and as well as both of my in-laws have each suffered from either cancer or Alzheimer’s disease while living in my home. Understanding their unique needs and providing care with the dignity they deserved became a focus for me,” Mr. Montano said in his letter.

To succeed, he knows he’ll need word-of-mouth referrals, as existing customers help bring in new ones.

He knows his timing may be perfect. The National Affordable Care Act may be working in his favor.

“Home care has become a big thing these days because the Affordable Care Act has placed more of a push on aging at home, instead of in a facility,” Mr. Montano said.