State officials say 10 insurance carriers have submitted a total of 504 plans for approval to be sold on the health insurance exchange for 2015.

Both figures were up from last year, the first for the Illinois Health Insurance Marketplace, which is being operated in partnership with the federal government. In 2014, eight carriers offered 165 plans on the exchange.

The 10 issuers represent eight insurance companies, as companies can sell plans under subsidiaries. Insurers had a two-week window to submit plans to the state Department of Insurance for review. The deadline was June 10. The department will recommend to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services whether the federal agency should certify the plans. Open enrollment for 2015 starts on Nov. 15, and carriers can opt to withdraw plans before then.

“The significant increase in the number of carriers and the number of plans they are offering represents good news for Illinois health care consumers,” said Jennifer Koehler, executive director of Get Covered Illinois, in a statement. “The strong interest in the Marketplace demonstrates that the Affordable Care Act is working as intended to encourage competition in the health insurance market. It means consumers will have even more good options to choose from next year.”

About 217,000 people signed up for plans on the health exchange in 2014. Roughly 92 percent selected plans from the state's largest insurer, Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois.



The plans to be offered for 2015 include 306 individual plans and 198 plans for small groups. Last year the exchange offered 120 individual and 45 small group plans.

The state did not say which carriers submitted plans. But a spokeswoman for Health Care Service Corp., the parent company of Chicago-based Blue Cross, and a spokeswoman for Chicago-based start-up Land of Lincoln Health Inc. Co-op said the carriers have submitted plans. Downstate Urbana-based Health Alliance Medical Plans Inc. has indicated that it would sell on the exchange in 2015.

Hartford, Conn.-based Aetna Inc. and its subsidiary, Coventry Health Care both participated in 2014, and have said they intend to maintain the same footprint across 17 states.

A spokeswoman for Humana Inc. said the Louisville, Kentucky-based insurer has not announced decisions on exchange participation in 2015.

A spokesman for UnitedHealthcare of Illinois Inc., a subsidiary of Minneapolis-based UnitedHealth Group that did not participate in the exchange in 2014, said the carrier has submitted an application to sell plans in 2015.