Topics: AlterNet, ebola, Kent State, Swastikas, Urban Outfitters, Life News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

The marketplace is rife with unreliable products and others that don’t live up to their hype. But apart from rip-offs, there are just terrible, tasteless products that should never have been made in the first place, let alone marketed and sold. They appeal to humanity’s dark side, prey on our paranoia, or make light of genuine human tragedy. Others are merely awkward. Here are 10 of the worst products we found for sale this year.

1. Bloody Kent State sweatshirt. Urban Outfitters feigned innocence after it faced public backlash in September for selling a “vintage” Kent State University sweatshirt that looked liked it was soaked and spattered with blood. The sweatshirt, which sold for $129, invoked memories of the massacre of four college students protesting the Vietnam War by Ohio National Guardsmen in May 1970. After the item was reported on by the media, Urban Outfitters removed the sweatshirt from its stores and website.

Offending the public is nothing new for Urban Outfitters. Among its most tasteless products over the past several years was a women’s cropped shirt with the word “depression” repeated on it; a women’s shirt worn by a very thin model in ad photos that said “Eat Less” in large script letters; and a T-shirt that read “Jesus, I’m drunk,” depicting Jesus Christ holding a foaming mug of beer.

2. Ebola suits. During the nation’s collective Ebola freakout this autumn, several companies smelled money and began to sell protective suits on Amazon.com, pandering to public fears. Popular suits included the Lakeland Interceptor Vapor Suit and Dupont Encapsulated Level A Suit. To be fair, these hazmat suits serve a legitimate purpose, protecting workers from chemical and environmental hazards, but retailers were selling them for more than twice the price they typically retail for and buyers were scooping them up because, hey Ebola!

3. Not See Kola. The producers of a water-clear soda evidently thought it might be a fun play on words to christen its beverage with a joke name that is pronounced “Nazi.” Worse, they took it a step further and used Teutonic imagery, including an image resembling the Parteiadler, a version of the German Imperial Eagle that was the symbol of the Nazi Party, and labeling playing off popular 1930s German fonts. The soda, which supposedly tastes like Crystal Pepsi, has been on the market for a few years, and can be found on Amazon.com.

4. Fake pregnancy tests. Several websites, including those that market through Amazon, sell fake pregnancy tests that always show a positive result. If you think this is just for pranks, think again: the package of one of these products says, “Great For: Marriage! Extortion! Laughs!” Even worse, pregnant women are selling their own positive tests to other women, often over Craigslist. A woman in Texas told CBS News she talked a woman into buying two of her tests. “She wanted to trick him into thinking she was pregnant, so he would drop everything so I gave her two tests,” she said.

5. Swastika Hanukkah wrapping paper. The pattern on a roll of blue and silver Hanukkah paper looked somewhat odd to a California Walgreens customer earlier in the month. Cheryl Shapiro noticed maze-like blue lines converged into a swastika, which was repeated along the foil wrap. Shapiro said she put her foot down and demanded the store’s management remove the paper from the shelves. They complied, though it appears the wrapping paper has turned up in at least one other Walgreens store. Walgreens told an NBC affiliate in California that it is looking into the matter. Hallmark Cards, which produced the wrapping paper, has pulled the item from distribution.

6. iPhone stun gun case. A company called Yellow Jacket has turned the innocent iPhone into a self-protection device, and possibly even a weapon. The company is selling a protective case for iPhone 4 and 5 models that doubles as a 650K Volt stun gun. The creator of the case claims he came up with the idea after being robbed at gunpoint. He says since people always have their cellphones on them, it made perfect sense to combine an iPhone case and a stun gun, creating a valuable weapon to fight off an assailant. The cases, which sell for between $60-$150 can produce 950,000 volts and 1.3 milliamps, enough to stun an attacker, if you can get close enough (the stun gun doesn’t shoot wired, dart-like electrodes; it creates an electric arc between two electrodes on the device).