Sisters of Mercy Urgent Care CEO Tim Johnston with Sister Maria Goretti and staff member Lindsey Moore. (Photo: Special to the Citizen-Times)

Western North Carolinians, like people everywhere, want convenient and timely health care.

They appear to be getting their wish addressed, as a growing trend emerges with urgent care centers.

The region’s urgent care industry has seen appreciable growth recently, with four new centers opening in the past few years alone.

Sisters of Mercy, for example, has four centers in the Asheville area — the last opened in 2010 — and it has plans to add another within two years, CEO Tim Johnston said.

“There is a demand on the part of consumers for convenient, quick, easy access to health care when they want it,” he said. “It provides another way to access care for people who don’t need ongoing care of chronic conditions.”

Urgent care centers provide walk-in medical care during traditional doctors’ hours as well as on weekends and evenings. Typically, they treat minor conditions such as colds and flu, sprains and cuts.

Around the country, there are about 6,400 urgent care centers, each of which sees on average 342 patients a week, according to the Urgent Care Association of America.

They’re on the rise. Between 2008 and 2010, these centers grew at a rate of about 300 a year nationwide, according to the group. And that growth rate doubled in 2011.

At least 183 urgent care centers operate in North Carolina, the association reports. While they’re usually staffed by doctors, about half also have physician assistants and nurse practitioners.

And they’re popping up because people want more convenient hours for medical care.

Community access

“Being able to get to a physician or someone who can help you with something that is not an emergency, but needs to be dealt with sooner rather than later outside your regular working hours is really important to people,” said Alwyn Cassil, an independent health policy consultant with Policy Translation in Silver Spring, Maryland.

“It’s putting access into the community where people actually can get to it in a more convenient way,” she said. “They don’t have to take a whole day off to go to the doctor.”

Dr. Ateev Mehrotra, a policy analyst at the nonprofit RAND Corp. who has researched urgent care centers, said it’s the result of a societal shift.

“What you expect from a bank or grocery store is 24/7 and people are expecting that ... from health care,” he said. “What might have been acceptable for your grandmother — that the doctor will see you in a couple of days — people don’t accept that any more.”

Reuel Heyden, director of communications for FastMed Urgent Care, which has opened three centers in the Asheville-Hendersonville area in the past two years, one as recently as four months ago in Candler, said there’s definitely a demand.

“Since 2011,” he said, “we’ve grown exponentially — over 350 percent.”

Pardee Hospital opened Pardee Urgent Care at the Mission-Pardee Health Campus about 18 months ago in Fletcher on the county line between Buncombe and Henderson counties, spokesman Adam Fisher said.

“The Fletcher area has been one that shows growth and there are a lot of families moving in,” he said. “We recognized the need for an urgent care in that area.”

Pardee has another urgent care center in Hendersonville that’s been open for several years. Both are extremely busy, Fisher said.

Doctor shortage

The lack of primary care doctors also is fostering the growth. Nationally, a new report from the Association of American Medical Colleges projects a shortage of between 46,000 and 90,000 doctors in the next decade, including 12,500 to 31,100 primary care physicians.

“There is certainly a documented need for primary care physicians nationwide,” Johnston said, “and a significant and growing shortage.”

Mehrotra said the Affordable Care Act also has affected the provider side, because more insured people are seeking a primary care doctor.

“The biggest complaint I hear is it’s hard to get in to see your doctor,” he said. “And now more people want care more quickly and need an alternative.”

A 2013 study by the Center for Studying Health System Change showed that while urgent care centers don’t increase the number of providers, they may improve access because they offer more convenient hours.

Insurers are generally supportive of urgent care as a way to keep people out of far more expensive ERs, Cassil said. It’s generally less expensive than ERs for patients, as well, because the copay is lower.

Some hospitals also open urgent care centers to keep people out of the ER for minor conditions that can be handled in a less-expensive setting.

“It does help alleviate the demand on our emergency room, so it’s not as overwhelmed,” Pardee’s Fisher said. “Urgent care is designed to be another avenue for patient access.”

Cassil, however, said there is some question as to how hard hospitals try to keep people out of the ER, because it’s a source of profits from insured patients. But for those that take on some of the financial risk for patient outcomes — called accountable care organizations — it makes economic sense to find less expensive ways of providing care.

The wait is also typically much shorter than at ERs.

“It’s based largely on a cost-effective alternative to expensive and long delays in hospital ERs that has continued to get worse over the last couple of decades,” Johnston said.

Cassil said that while there is optimism that urgent care centers can improve people’s care experience and reduce costs, there is no clear evidence yet that shows a savings.

One RAND Corp. study, however, concluded that about 17 percent of all ER visits could be handled at retail medical clinics or urgent care centers, saving an estimated $4.4 billion a year in health care costs.

Blurred lines

While urgent care centers traditionally have been operated by physician groups and hospitals, an increasing number today are run by for-profit chains and even insurers, said Mehrotra, noting there has been rapid growth in retail clinics, such as CVS’s MinuteClinics, and virtual, or E-visits, as well.

Humana, for example, owns Concentra, a chain of 300 urgent care centers nationwide.

“Insurance companies used to be all about insurance, they didn’t deliver care, but we’re seeing a blurring of those lines,” Mehrotra said. “They view it as the world is changing and they need to get into delivering care. And they are hoping fewer people go to the emergency department.”

Urgent care centers also are increasingly funded by venture capital money, Mehrotra said.

“That’s something we haven’t seen in health care,” he said. “They are profitable.”

“As a business model, it’s growing so well it leads you to believe there is certainly a demand there,” said Cassil. “Although in health care we are very good at creating more capacity than we need sometimes.”

Around the country, she said, hospitals also are setting up urgent care centers as a way to get new patients.

So are there downsides to more urgent care centers in the health care landscape?

Some worry that going to an urgent care center could undermine a patient’s relationship with a primary care doctor, who also manages other aspects of care, such as reminders for screening tests, Mehrotra said.

But people who use urgent care centers still go to their primary care providers, just less often, he said. And many people say they see a nurse practitioner these days instead of their doctor anyway.

Cassil said that becomes less of a problem as more practices adopt electronic medical records so information can be shared.

Another concern is that since patients are paying more for their health care out of pocket, and urgent care centers can cost 30 percent to 40 percent more than a doctor’s office, patients may wind up spending more, Mehrotra said.

Future growth

The nonprofit Sisters of Mercy, which has been in the region for 115 years, has been running urgent care centers for 30 years — three in the Greater Asheville Area and one in Brevard, Johnston said.

All have been relocated to newer, larger facilities in the past six years.

They’ve grown at a rate of about 2 percent to 3 percent a year despite other urgent cares and retail clinics opening up in the region, Johnston said.

The organization has been looking for about a year at adding another center in Eastern Buncombe County, he said. While no final location has been determined, he said he expects it will be up and running within two years.

Fisher said he’s not aware of any plans for nonprofit Pardee to open any more.

Heyden said that when deciding to open a new urgent care, FastMed — a privately owned company in which BlueCross has a minority share in Western North Carolina — considers drive time, population density, the age of primary care physicians in the area and other factors.

Primary care doctors, who may not be taking new patients and not have extended hours, don’t typically view FastMed as competition, he said, but as a support to local doctors in a symbiotic relationship.

Though the company has looked at communities further west for expansion, nothing is confirmed at this time, Heyden said. Most expansion is concentrated in the Eastern part of the state.

Read or Share this story: http://avlne.ws/1MNA6qI