When he first ran for the 4th Congressional District seat in 2008, The Courant believed Rep. Jim Himes' background in international banking would serve the country well. It has.

Mr. Himes helped draft the Dodd-Frank bill and other legislation to reform Wall Street, protect consumers and prevent the excesses that led to the Great Recession. He understands the value of the Export-Import Bank in expanding manufacturing jobs in the state. Mr. Himes, 48, is seeking a fourth term and The Courant endorses him.

Why Mr. Himes?

The 4th District, with wealthy exurbs and urban centers, has often produced independent-minded representatives, such as Lowell P. Weicker Jr. and Christopher Shays. Mr. Himes is no exception. He was one of only 38 Democratic and Republican members who voted for the first legislative iteration of the Simpson-Bowles fiscal reform plan, and he has not been shy about fixing parts of the Dodd-Frank bill he thought went too far.

Mr. Himes, of Cos Cob, is a thoughtful moderate who works to get the country's fiscal house in order — he was named a "Fiscal Hero" earlier this year by the Campaign to Fix the Debt — while advocating sensible and needed investment in infrastructure, education and scientific research.

He supported the U.S.A. Freedom Act, which ends the National Security Agency's bulk collection of Americans' telephone call records in favor of more targeted collection of information, which he believes strikes a better balance between security and privacy.

Why Not Mr. Debicella?

Mr. Himes' opponent, as in 2010, is businessman and former two-term Republican state Sen. Dan Debicella of Shelton, a worthy opponent (both candidates hold degrees from Harvard).

Though Mr. Debicella, 39, declined to visit the editorial board this year, he appears less of a doctrinaire conservative in 2014 than he did in 2010, at least in some areas. He supports the Senate's immigration reform bill, for example. But he would abolish the Affordable Care Act and replace it with a "market-based solution." He has reportedly shifted to now being pro-stem cell research, but still opposes requiring Catholic hospitals to provide emergency contraception and abortions.

Mr. Debicella left a job at Bridgewater Associates, the large investment firm, to make a second run for the 4th District seat he lost by 6 percentage points to Mr. Himes in 2010. But he has been out of government since then, while Mr. Himes has been solidifying his position.

Mr. Debicella brings a message of fiscal responsibility — he would reduce government spending 1 percent a year until the deficit is gone. But Mr. Himes has long been on the same page; witness his early support for the Simpson-Bowles plan to bring spending and revenue into alignment.

Both candidates agree that the southwestern Connecticut district is being dragged down by traffic congestion and needs a stronger transportation system. Mr. Debicella would alleviate traffic by focusing on the choke points on the Merritt and I-95 caused by under-engineered entrances and exits. That happens to be Gov. Dannel Malloy's plan, and at least one project is already underway.

Mr. Debicella offers no compelling reason to unseat Mr. Himes, who has done more than enough good work to merit another term.

Mr. Debicella is cross-endorsed by the Independent Party. Mr. Himes is cross-endorsed by the Working Families Party.