Area sophomores win state wresting titles in district matchups

DENVER -- The matches had been wrestled before, many times over.

They didn't really need a trip south on I-25 to do this, having met up in Berthoud and Loveland and other parts around Northern Colorado.

Just not like this. Not on a Saturday night in front of a loud, anxious crowd at the Pepsi Center, lights shining, roars, moans and groans coming from every bend in the arena and seemingly from the rafters.

Advertisement

Jimmy Fate and Ben Hewson had shaken hands before to start a match, but not after marching in with the best and brightest the state had to offer in the sport of wrestling. Parker Simington and Matt Combs had exchanged compliments after matches, just not with so many people watching, coaches dressed in suits instead of team colors.

Doing it in the final match of the 4A Colorado State Wrestling Championships definitely makes a difference.

Parker Simington celebrates his 145-pound championship Saturday night in the 4A State Wrestling Championships, earned with a 7-1 decision over Mountain View's Matt Combs. It is the second straight year the Eagles have had a wrestler win a state title. (DAVID R JENNINGS)

They had a shared past, to be sure. For Fate and Hewson, it was the fourth match of the long season, the third for Simington and Combs.

Doomed to let history repeat itself? Not at all. In fact, Fate and Simington were more than happy to let things stay as they were. So with as much as was different for them Saturday, the results stayed the same -- Fate beat Hewson and Simington beat Combs.

It was that past that made things seem normal for all of them, but for the two victors, the spoils bring on a brand new future, that of state champions.

It feels awesome," Simington said, giving Thompson Valley a state champion for the second straight year. "I'm only a sophomore. Coming into this year, this was my goal. Just achieving it is so surreal. It just hasn't hit me yet."

Berthoud's Jimmy Fate has his hand raised by referee Scott Tarbox after the sophomore won the 4A 138-pound title Saturday night at the Pepsi Center in Denver. (DAVID R JENNINGS)

Up first was Fate at 138 pounds, and as has happened in past meetings, he set the tone early. He had the first takedown, built up a 3-0 lead and never really gave Hewson an opening in posting a 5-1 victory to cap a 50-2 season.

You never would have known that all the success he's had with Hewson actually made him a touch uneasy. But when the match finally started, he put that behind him. He also decided a cautious approach -- as he felt he had taken with Hewson the past two meetings -- wouldn't work again.

"The last couple of times I wrestled him, I don't want to say I wrestled not to lose, but not as aggressive as I would have liked," Fate said. "This time I wrestled pretty aggressive, and it helped me come out on top. The last match of the year, nothing you can really lose -- a lot you can really lose, but nothing at the same time. I felt I had to lay it all out there."

Thompson Valley's Ben Hewson tries to control Berthoud's Jimmy Fate during their 138-pound match during the 4A State Wrestling Championships on Saturday at the Pepsi Center. Fate earned a 5-1 decision, his fourth win over Hewson this season. (DAVID R JENNINGS)

In a rarity, Fate only had to wrestle three matches, because his quarterfinal foe didn't make weight. In the semis, he also felt he wasn't sharp, but some words from his dad, Jim, gave him a spark.

"Both of my coaches let me know that I better not walk off the mat regretting anything," Fate said. "After my semifinals match, I ran up to my dad and said, 'I could have wrestled that kid a lot better.' The first thing he said to me was 'don't let yourself say that after your finals match.'"

Hewson was pretty much in the same frame of mind. The junior (42-12) felt he gave it his all, but it just didn't pan out.

Taking second was a much better exit to the tournament than his first trip last year, when he was rolled off Mat 1 on a stretcher, his family and friends looking on in a bit of a panic.

Thompson Valley's Parker Simington kept Mountain View's Matt Combs at bay in their 145-pound match of the 4A State Wrestling Championships on Saturday at the Pepsi Center, beating his crosstown foe for the third time with a 7-1 decision. (DAVID R JENNINGS)

"I'm not being wheeled out this year, which is cool," Hewson said. "I wrestled the way I wanted to this weekend. I gave it my all. Can't complain. I'll just go into practice next week and start on next year. That one is going to burn for awhile. My goal is to be the best in the state, so whatever it takes."

In the very next match at 145, that's what Combs was trying to do in the third period. He was already down 5-0 and was put in a position to where he had to try anything and everything. Simington (45-3) said he came close, but he was waiting, and it all resulted in a 7-1 victory.

"I got the takedown early on and was tough on top, got myself out to a good start, then got an escape. I just kind of controlled the match," Simington said. "He definitely put me in a couple of spots that were kind of sketchy, but I was able to hold on. I'm very happy with that."

It wasn't the 15-0 victory like it was in the regional final, but he also knew what Combs had done since then. The Mountain View senior had taken out two state placers and a No. 1 seed to get to the finals, so Simington took that into account as well as his previous two victories.

In the end, he walked the line between being confident, seeming cautious and going about his business the right way."I definitely knew I had to be 100 percent to beat him," Simington said. "I knew I couldn't overlook him."

Combs was in a tough spot of being proud of what he had done but falling short of a goal as a senior. A 44-7 season is good, but it just didn't have the capper he sought.

"It's definitely a tough loss," he said. "I mean, I'm proud of my performance, but it wasn't the ultimate goal I had in mind. I mean, I can't say I slacked off that last match. I tried hard."

And now Simington and Fate both know they'll have to try harder, because they figure the next state title will be harder to corral than the first.

But they'll definitely give it a try. Two more times, in fact.

"That's the goal for sure," Simington said. "You can't settle at one if you have two more shots."

Cris Tiller can be reached at 669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or on Twitter @cristiller.

STATE WRESTLING TOURNAMENT

At Pepsi Center, Denver

Results

138 -- Jimmy Fate, Berthoud, d. Ben Hewson, Thompson Valley, 5-1; 145 -- 145 -- Parker Simington, Thompson Valley, d. Matt Combs, Mountain View, 7-0.