On many ballot measures, the arguments for and against are close calls. But not in the case of measures 1A in Denver and Adams County.

Voters in those counties without question should approve 1A to allow economic development to flourish in and around Denver International Airport.

A successful vote would amend the 1988 intergovernmental agreement between the two counties that was written when Denver annexed the land for the airport. Back then, the arrangement made sense. Adams County didn’t want to give up 50 square miles of land for DIA and watch Denver fill it with businesses and reap the revenue.

The original deal forbade Denver from allowing businesses unrelated to airport functions. Those restrictions now are an impediment to progress. DIA has grown beyond expectations and the airport is a huge economic engine for the region.

As the world becomes more connected, industry often needs a global reach to be successful. Businesses should be allowed to locate in and around one of the world’s busiest airports.

The vote would allow new types of development on DIA land, such as retail space, manufacturing and offices that aren’t directly related to airport uses. If not for this deal, these businesses might not locate to Colorado.

The agreement still would restrict residential development, which is smart because that is what caused many problems for Stapleton International Airport.

Proponents say the measures could generate an estimated 12,000 new jobs.

If approved, Adams County would get $10 million from Denver and the two counties would equally split the tax revenues, with Adams sharing its money between cities in the county. And an airport authority would be created to handle decisions on marketing, economic development and planning.

It is an impressive arrangement considering the rancor that had festered between the two counties throughout the history of DIA’s development.

Just two years ago, Adams County astoundingly demanded Denver return the land for DIA, saying Denver was intent on violating terms of the IGA.

Thankfully, cooler heads prevailed after the counties entered into mediation.

The deal in front of Denver and Adams County voters this election is a straightforward and reasonable détente. It will be good for everyone, benefiting the entire metro region in addition to the counties that will decide its fate.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.