In Developing a Data Warehouse for the Healthcare Enterprise: Lessons from the Trenches, ($65, Healthcare Information and Management Systems Society), a number of authors share their hands-on experiences of implementing a data warehouse project in the U.S. and abroad. Healthcare Finance News, a publication owned by HIMSS, spoke to Hamad Al-Daig, one of the book’s authors, about the book.

Q: Please give us a brief description of your book, and share with us what you think is its most important take away for readers.

[See also: Reading List: 'The Healthcare Information Technology Planning Fieldbook']

A: The second edition of the book, Developing a Data Warehouse for the Healthcare Enterprise: Lessons from the Trenches, is a practical, experienced-based in-depth view of a data warehouse development project from inception through implementation and highlights post-implementation experiences at healthcare institutions. This latest edition of the book is also enriched by the addition of USA perspective on data warehouse in large healthcare systems.

Readers of the book will get first-hand information and lessons learned during the data warehouse implementation, including post-implementation experiences. For readers to have (the most) comprehensive information available at their disposal, the book includes a sample RFP, data warehouse implementation project plan, information analysis template, Key Performance Indicators (KPI) format, key database parameters, physical architecture and a list of departmental KPI.

Q: How much of an investment is needed for a data warehouse implementation and is that investment worth it?

A: The initial investment on data warehouse implementation at (King Faisal Specialist Hospital and Research Center in Riyadh, Saudi Arabia) was approximately $2 million dollars. Implementation of a comprehensive data warehouse project may cost more now than what our hospital had spent. But it will be well worth the spending because of the tremendous benefits it can offer for management of any healthcare institution in their decision-making arena.

[See also: Reading List: Steven Dinkin, 'The Exchange Strategy for Managing Conflict in Health Care']

Q: What are the biggest financial challenges when it comes to implementing and maintaining a data warehouse?

A: The biggest financial challenge comes from management’s view and financial support towards implementing a data warehouse. Management in most healthcare institutions gives priorities toward implementing operational systems, where payback and tangible benefits are easily quantifiable. Thus, getting the proper support and attention of management for improved decision making through data warehouse is still a challenge in many healthcare institutions.

Q: Is there something about your book that I haven't asked that you would like to add that you think is important for readers to know?

A: The unique feature of the book is the way it addresses horizontal views across the healthcare institution in order to facilitate fact based decision-making through the implementation of data warehouse. Perhaps, one other fact I would add is that the book is written by professionals who have long hands-on experiences in the healthcare information technology and informatics fields, from both the verticals and horizontals prospective.