Cedars–Sinai, the UCLA Health System and Select Medical have formed a partnership to open a 138-bed acute inpatient rehabilitation hospital in Century City, officials announced Tuesday.

The new facility will be housed inside what was once the Century City Doctors Hospital, which closed its doors in 2008 because of financial troubles. The new rehabilitation hospital is expected to open in 2015, officials said.

Both Cedars–Sinai and UCLA Health System provide their own acute inpatient rehabilitation services at their facilities, but both often reach capacity. The new inpatient rehabilitation center will not only serve those residents but also will treat complex rehabilitation cases from around the nation, including those with spinal cord injuries, brain injuries, strokes, amputations, neurological disorders, and musculoskeletal and orthopedic conditions.

“As one of the most highly respected academic medical centers and health systems in the world, UCLA is delighted to join forces and share expertise with Cedars–Sinai and Select Medical, a pre-eminent provider of post–acute care in the United States,” Dr. David T. Feinberg, president of UCLA Health System, said in a statement.

“The addition of this rehabilitation facility will be of extraordinary benefit to the people of Los Angeles.”

Thomas M. Priselac, president and CEO of Cedars–Sinai Health System, agreed, adding that the project symbolizes Cedars-Sinai’s mission.

“Meeting the health needs of the community, state and nation often requires a new type of partnership, and we look forward to working with UCLA Health System and Select Medical to create a highly advanced, comprehensive rehabilitation center for patients,” Priselac said.

The new facility will be operated by Select Medical, a provider of long-term acute care services with hospital and outpatient locations in 44 states.

“UCLA Health System and Cedars–Sinai are two pillars in medicine, and we are honored to work with them,” said David S. Chernow, president of Select Medical.

Such partnerships will likely become common as the Affordable Care Act moves forward, said Jennifer Bayer, spokeswoman for the Hospital Association of Southern California.

Earlier this year, City of Hope and Providence Health & Services, Southern California, announced their intent to pursue a partnership to expand cancer research and treatments to communities served by Providence, for example.

One provision under the Affordable Care Act, for example, is for hospitals to reduce readmission rates, or face penalties from Medicaid.

Advertisement

“I think this (UCLA-Cedars-Sinai partnership) in particular is very unique because they are taking over a former hospital, so this will have an impact on jobs and patient services,” Bayer said. “I think the greatest thing is there are new beds and these beds are in demand.”