People trying to sign up for Obamacare are dealing with a frustrating problem, and for North Carolina families, it's an even bigger issue.The so-called "family glitch" is locking out millions of people from the Affordable Care Act.Few issues are bigger on Chuck Stone's radar right now than the family glitch. Stone advocates for health care issues with the State Employees Association of North Carolina."It's gotten bigger and it adversely impacts the state of North Carolina much worse than many other states," Stone said.The glitch is the prime cause behind some startling numbers: Of the 500,000 employees covered under the state health plan, 73 percent of them can't afford to insure their spouse or children."They're saying 'What do I do? I need health insurance. My spouse or my children have these chronic medical conditions,'" Stone explained.The family glitch is basically a quirk in the system that makes people ineligible for federal health subsidies as long as their spouses can buy affordable insurance through their employers.The government defines affordable as a plan that costs less than 9.5 percent of your income. However, insuring your family can cost nearly three times that.Without the federal subsidies, health care is still out of reach for many low to moderate income Americans. The problem is even bigger in North Carolina.The state health plan is premium free. It's affordable, if you're single, but the basic family plan is $563 a month. That's unaffordable for many. The average state employee earns $42,000 a year. The family glitch means no federal help to pay that bill."That is bad news and the leading cause of bankruptcy in this country is still medical care," Stone said.Making the problem even more pronounced in North Carolina is most local governments and many private employers are following the state's lead by offering limited help to cover dependents.A fix has to come from Washington. Both sides of the aisle agree the family glitch needs a solution. However, there's little appetite for a new battle over Obamacare.Stone is busy reminding employees to keep the pressure on their local lawmakers in Washington. He's also encouraging them to keep applying for the federal subsidies. Even though they might be ineligible, the declined applications create an ever-growing record of the problem.