Brian Sommer provides us with a run down of what he expects to see during this season’s packed set of HR events.

Chicago, where I’m based, has two seasons: winter and everything else. HR technology seems to have two as well: Spring and Fall. The Spring season is made up of a number of HR user conferences and analyst briefings. The Fall is mostly defined by the HR Tech show in Vegas.

This Spring we’ll see a number of events.

SuccessFactors has already had its analyst confab and conference in February. I’d love to report about it but, alas, I wasn’t there. There is a keynote Mike Ettling gave that you can watch here.

On Friday, March 6, Dow Jones reported that Namely closed a second round venture raise for $11 million. Namely’s total funding is, I believe, at $22 million. Namely is a NYC-based HR, payroll, talent management and benefits cloud software firm that is tarting to make a name for itself (sic.)

Ceridian is kicking things off for me with a user conference and analyst event in San Francisco this week. Phil Wainwright gave us his perspective from the European angle. At this week’s event, I intend to better understand:

the economics that will drive more service bureau customers of Ceridian to the Ceridian cloud solution: Dayforce.

how well Dayforce is faring against competing products for net-new customers

how important prospects see having payroll, time tracking and HR applications in one integrated solution

how the Affordable Care Act has changed the importance of having integrated time tracking and payroll

what role RelatedMatters will have in the product line going forward

I’ve got an HR demo with FairSail scheduled for this week, too. FairSail is an HR solution built on the Force.com/Salesforce1 platform. The company has been piling up wins of late especially in the SMB space.

I believe Ultimate Software has the next user conference. Their event is always a good one. The financial numbers almost always are trending up with most every measure up by 20+% year-over-year. That’s a compliment and their track record is likely envied by many competitors. I particularly enjoy discussing three issues with their executive team:

global expansion planned technical architecture enhancements; and, up-market movement.

Ultimate has invited prospective customers to their shindigs and they have been a great source of market intelligence for me. Prospects definitely know what is and isn’t working with competing products.

Infor will be having an analyst event shortly. It has a new HCM Cloud Suite that it announced at last year’s user conference. This year, I’ll be keenly listening for market uptake statistics and net-new customer additions using this solution.

Cornerstone OnDemand is holding its annual user event late this spring. While I’ve done a lot of briefings with CSOD executives over the years, this marks the first time I’ll cover one of their events. It will be the first time I’ve had the experience of mixing with CSOD and Sonar6 customers in one spot. As an aside, Den Howlett is joining this gig.

Skillsoft and SumTotal merged recently. SumTotal has a predominately re-platformed talent management suite and the Accero Payroll solution in its portfolio. Skillsoft brings a significant amount of learning management technology to mix. This event will be the first time to really learn how everything is coming together.

HireVue started out with video interviewing technology but has significantly expanded that functionality with all kinds of smart science based tools. For example, users can detect how stressed interviewees are and possibly determine the jobseeker’s truthfulness or interest in the firm. I suspect we’ll hear a lot more this year as this company certainly enjoys pushing the recruiting envelope.

Updates on these and many more HR vendors will be posted throughout the Spring season. Personally, anything that helps me escape the cold and snow here is something I’d gladly write about.

Image credit: Brian Sommer/Techventive