A snapshot of the Affordable Care Act compliance functionality, part of Paycor's 1st Quarter product update With our first quarter Perform product update, we’re making additional enhancements to our Affordable Care Act (ACA) suite of services to help clients stay compliant for 2016 and beyond.”

HR tech firm Paycor today announced its first quarter (Q1) software improvements for the 30,000 small and medium-sized businesses it serves nationwide. Paycor releases Perform product enhancements and new capabilities each quarter, many of which are developed directly from client feedback. As the SaaS company continues to streamline its all-in-one Perform platform for HR, payroll and timekeeping, it introduces a range of updates to drive organizational efficiency.

“We’re proud to share that nearly all of our clients were print-ready for the original (now delayed) Jan. 31 deadline to provide 1095 forms to employees,” shared Jennifer Langer, senior vice president of Product Management for Paycor. “With our first quarter Perform product update, we’re making additional enhancements to our Affordable Care Act (ACA) suite of services to help clients stay compliant for 2016 and beyond.”

Paycor’s first quarter Perform product release includes:

2016 ACA Tracking and Filing

Clients using Paycor’s industry-leading ACA Connect solution will now be able to receive real-time feedback from the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) regarding the status of their ACA filings. IRS feedback is clearly communicated and guidance is provided so that clients can self-correct their ACA forms as many times as is necessary, while still retaining the history of each change for audit purposes.

Department of Labor (DOL) Reporting

Paycor data indicates that up to 65% of employers may be affected by pending changes to the Fair Labor Standards Act overtime regulations from the Department of Labor. To help employers respond in a cost-neutral way, Paycor built standard reports to help employers, including:



The DOL Employees Affected Report enables employers to receive a list of active employees who may be affected by the proposed Department of Labor overtime updates with just a few clicks.

The DOL Cost Neutral Report provides a list of adjusted hourly rates for salaried employees that can help keep employers cost-neutral based on the proposed Department of Labor overtime updates.

Mobile Career Pages and Mobile Job Applications

Employers using Paycor’s Newton applicant tracking system are now empowered with tools to convert the ever-growing number of mobile job seekers to candidates. The new enhancements are available to employers today, and they include the ability to automatically transform employers’ careers pages and job applications to fully mobile experiences without any support from IT, web developers or need for third-party tools.

Onboarding Enhancements

Paycor’s Onboarding solution helps thousands of companies improve hiring efficiency while creating an engaging first experience with new hires. With the first quarter update, each step in the onboarding process includes improved flexibility, such as the ability to add custom links or new fields.

Modern Performance Management

Perform HR’s new Performance Management solution creates an interactive experience for administrators and employees to complete their reviews. Reviews can be set at any frequency and are actionable, allowing the employee to confirm that the review has occurred and to access it online from anywhere.

About Paycor

People are at the core of Paycor. Serving more than 30,000 small and medium-sized organizations, Paycor is known for delivering amazing client experiences combined with modern and intuitive HR and payroll solutions. Paycor’s personalized support and intelligent technology ensure that key business processes, including timekeeping, reporting, onboarding and recruiting, run smoothly across your business. Paycor is the trusted partner for brokers, bankers and CPAs. Learn how Paycor can advance your business by connecting with us at Paycor.com.

Note to editors: Trademarks and registered trademarks referenced herein remain the property of their respective owners.