By Niki Cervantes

Staff Writer -- At Locanda Del Lago restaurant on the Promenade in Santa Monica, managemnet is increasingly anxious. The Santa Monica City Council is considering a big hike in the minimum wage, from California’s $9-an-hour to $15.37-an-hour or more, and that could have a big impact on the bottom line, according to general manager Megan Heritage. “We can absorb the first year or two,” she said. “But by the third year,” she added, the result would be less certain. Laconda del Lago isn’t the only Santa Monica establishment bracing for the looming wage hike. Recently, some 20 local restaurateurs met to decide how to cope with the proposed higher wage the Council is expected to take up in September, Heritage said. All present were highly concerned, “especially small independent restaurants without a corporation to rely on,” she said. “We need to employ strategies to stay in business.” Some restaurant owners are contemplating adding a service charge to the final check -- as is done in Europe -- instead of relying on tips, a practice that would help offset the higher wages, Heritage said. The check would look bigger, but could actually be less or roughly the same than if a tip were included, she added. The higher minimum wage comes as many California businesses contend with a requirement that they offer health insurance under the Affordable Care Act and a State law that requires three days paid sick leave, Heritage noted. The city’s Chamber of Commerce has not yet taken a position on the proposed wage hike, said Carl Hansen, director of governmental affairs. But he said the chamber realizes that the issue is “complicated” and that both the welfare of employers and employees needs to be taken into consideration. “It’s a delicate balance,” he said. If the wage hike is approved, Santa Monica would be following closely in the footsteps of the City of Los Angeles, which is raising its minimum wage to $15 an hour by 2020. Seattle and San Francisco previously passed measures to hike wages to $15-an-hour over the next several years, as well. And the Los Angeles County Board of Supervisors is having the same discussion for the region’s unincorporated areas. That is also true of West Hollywood. The proposed Santa Monica ordinance would likely expand the $15.37-an-hour paid to Santa Monica City workers, those employed by City contractors and a few others under the City’s existing “living wage” ordinance. Supporters argue that low wage workers can’t afford decent housing and other basic necessities in an increasingly expensive region. Critics counter that the higher minimum can drive businesses to shut down and won’t help workers earn enough to afford living in an expensive city like Santa Monica. Councilmember Sue Himmelrich has little sympathy for the claim that raising the minimum wage would prove too expensive for local businesses. “I am not worried,” she said. “I’ve never been in a Santa Monica restaurant that didn’t have enough customers. I’ve been in restaurants where the lines are out the door. If you can’t make a profit, you’re doing something wrong. “Will (restaurateurs) make a less money? Possibly. But will the people who work for them be living demonstratively better? Absolutely.” Workers, she said, deserve “to be paid a living wage.” The higher minimum wage could have a far-reaching impact on Santa Monica businesses and their workers. Tourism alone is linked to an estimated 13,700 jobs and much of that industry relies on low-wage help. Paying a higher minimum wage is an added cost small businesses cannot afford, Heritage said. It means the entry level employees, like dishwashers, who now make the minimum would get hefty raises. But the financial impact on other employees, like waiters – who can make $60,000 when tips are included -- is less certain, she said. Servers at high-end restaurants are hired for their experience and expertise, and that brings both better basic pay and big tips. Such employees might see a pay cut to offset the higher minimum wage given to entry-level employees, Heritage worried. For more than a decade, setting a living wage have been a contentious issue in Santa Monica. In 2002, the beachside city made headlines when voters narrowly rejected a pioneering law that would have required businesses in the Coastal zone -- mainly hotels and restaurants -- to pay workers a minimum wage. Over the past three years, the City Council has required that new hotels pay workers a minimum wage as part of their development agreements. The City must be mindful of its past struggles with instituting a living wage and work with the business community on its current effort, said Mayor Kevin McKeown. McKeown said he has been careful “to make sure that our next step is conversation” and noted that he made immediate contact with the city’s Chamber when talk of the raising the minimum wage began. “I think all of us in Santa Monica realize that higher minimum wages are coming, and can be administered to make them just and fair,” McKeown said. The City will hold a number of community workshops over the summer on the proposed ordinance, City officials said.