Justice Anthony Kennedy Associated Press

Law Blog rounds up the morning’s legal news:

License plate battle: The Supreme Court grappled with free speech implications of specialty license plates, questioning the extent to which states must allow potentially unpopular or contentious messages on the vehicle tags. [WSJ]

King v. Burwell: Justice Anthony Kennedy told lawmakers that the high court should interpret statutes without worrying about congressional gridlock. He didn’t mention the Affordable Care Act case, but his comments stoked speculation about the fate of Obamacare. [Bloomberg, Slate]

Settlements for sale: Companies are competing to buy the rights to income from people with settlements that pay out over time, despite laws designed to limit such sales. [WSJ]

India freedom of speech: India’s highest court struck down a law that allowed prosecution for online content deemed offensive. [Bloomberg]

Appeals court weighs immigration stay: Governors and attorneys general representing 26 states urged a federal appeals court not to stay U.S. District Judge Andrew Hanen’s ruling against the Obama administration’s immigration moves. [Politico]

Third Amendment case: A recent court decision raises important issues about the scope of the Third Amendment, which forbids the quartering of soldiers in private homes without the owner’s consent. [Washington Post]

DOJ faults Philadelphia police policies: A Justice Department review of police-involved shootings in Philadelphia recommended dozens of changes, after finding serious shortcomings with policies and training. [WSJ]

Indiana religious freedom bill: A controversial bill that could protect business owners who don’t want to provide services for same-sex couples is poised to become law in Indiana. [Indianapolis Star]

NCAA bracket lawsuit: A Texas prize insurer wants to depose Yahoo CEO Marissa Mayer about Warren Buffett’s $1 billion March Madness bracket contest. [THR]

National security concerns topple lawsuit: The U.S. government won the dismissal of a defamation lawsuit against an anti-Iran advocacy group, after claiming that the case could reveal state secrets. [Reuters]