Elder L. Tom Perry shares personal experiences during WWII, a family fights for a cure for Lou Gehrig’s disease and an old teaching idea gets new traction around the country.

On this week’s Deseret News National Edition, Elder L. Tom Perry, a member of the Quorum of the Twelve Apostles of The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, shares personal experiences during World War II, a family fights for a cure for Lou Gehrig’s disease and an old teaching idea gets new traction around the country.

Segment 1

For those who imagine this week's Hobby Lobby decision closed the curtain on high-profile religious liberty cases involving the Affordable Care Act, guess again. Critics of the ruling claim that the majority opinions by Justices Samuel A. Alito Jr. and Anthony Kennedy could pose problems for the more than 50 nonprofits suing the government claiming the Affordable Care Act's contraception mandate also violates their rights under the Religious Freedom Restoration Act. Mark Kellner explains where the debate over religious exemptions heads next.

It's easy to take for granted all the freedoms we have in this country. Sam Penrod visits with World War II veteran and LDS apostle Elder L. Tom Perry about why he believes freedom is not a spectator sport and why we all need to take an active role in protecting it.

Segment 2

A man who's suffering from the heartbreaking illness known as Lou Gehrig's disease launched an Internet radio show this week. He and his wife are using the show to spearhead efforts to open lines of communication among scientists, victims, doctors and the public. They are also resting some of their hopes on a unique database. John Hollenhorst shares their story.

Segment 3

One in 3 kids says they're bullied at school. One in 5 teens will experience depression. More than 3 million children a year are suspended. Schools have a lot to contend with. And just teaching the three R's maybe isn't enough. That's why an old idea is getting new traction around the country. Peter Rosen reports.

The biggest tennis tournament of the year wraps up today. Wimbledon is ready to crown new champions in London — and while it's almost 5,000 miles away from Salt Lake City, it's never too far from the mind of Provo's Brad Pearce. Dave McCann visits with a proud member of the "Last 8 club."

The Deseret News National Edition highlights Deseret News content centered around six areas of editorial emphasis: family, faith in the community, excellence in education, values in media and culture and causes related to helping the poor and financial responsibility. Each week, the program goes in-depth on these topics and brings insights from voices from around the country.

Candice Madsen is a senior producer of special projects for KSL-TV and produces the weekly television program Deseret News Sunday Edition. EMAIL: cmadsen@ksl.com