× What is an APN, and where is my Doctor?

Doctor Kevin Most joined the show this morning to provide the most informative portion of the show. Today we discussed positions in the healthcare field that you might not be aware of, and what situations would warrant you seeing those different people during a medical exam. Doctor Most also gave some tips and warnings about West Nile Virus, and you can read more from the Doctor below.

Have you gone to your doctors office for an appointment and instead of seeing the doctor you saw one of his nurses. Were you confused? Well you are not alone, the role of the Advanced practice nurse is growing and advancing rapidly. Advanced Practice nurses are well educated caregivers that in many situations act as an extension for the physician. Each of these Advanced practice nurses or APN’s as they are called are Registered Nurses who have gone on for additional training to either a masters level or Doctorate level. There is a spectrum of the services that they provide, some will specialize in Obstetrics and do deliveries as a Certified Nurse Midwife, some will specialize in Anesthesia and become a CRNA, or nurse anesthetist, that provide anesthesia , some go on to other specialties.

The most common APN’s people will have provide care to them are CNP or Certified Nurse Practioners, these are the caregivers that you will see in the office or during your hospitalization. They are an important member of the team. They will work in conjunction with a physician. This allows the patient to be seen by the caregiver that they need the most. In other words when you go in for your Blood Pressure check and Cholesterol check, the APN may be the care giver that sees you. They will go over your medication list, your medical history, do a physical exam and educate you. They do the exact thing the doctor would do, and many feel that they will spend more time with you than the doctor will. They will often then consult with the doctor. This just enforces that healthcare now is more of a team effort than a single individual effort.

The APN allows the physician to see more complex patients or new patients. This sharing of services allows for patients to get the appointment they want and the care they need without waiting for a opening in the physician’s schedule. Many will tell you that they really like seeing the APN as they seem to have more time to spend answering questions and giving information than the doctor may have had in the past. This teamwork, now allows for the doctor to spend the right time with the patients that need it. It allows for that doctor who always seemed to be in a hurry to spend more time with complex patients.

We are also seeing a increase inPA’s or Physician Assistants , these individuals have an undergraduate degree in most cases, and then 2-3 years of medical training. Some of these individuals are also used in a similar role as APN’s , however we see more PA’s going into surgical specialities. The PA’s are often used now in the operating room where they assist the surgeon in the Operating room. This allows for a surgeon to have a PA for a second assistant in the Operating room in place of another surgeon, again a way that we will deal with the physician shortage in this country.

We know there is going to be a large shortage of physicians over the next twenty years, APN’s and PA’s will help fill that void while delivering great care. Estimates for the shortage of physicians approach 100,000 doctors by the year 2025. With the increase in patients covered by the Affordable Care Act, we must be able to care for these patients and APN and PA caregivers will help fill that void.

West Nile Virus

We also know the last few weeks have shown us that summer is here with the hot humid weather. Unfortunately that leads to the mosquito borne illnesses that peak at this time. In Illinois we have had 24 counties test positive for West Nile virus, however we have not seen a human case yet this year but expect to soon. West Nile always gets a lot of media attention but lets not scare everyone and make sure we know the facts. The vast majority of patients infected with West Nile have no symptoms or minimal symptoms. One in Five may have fever and a headache for a few days. They may have some muscle aches and feel crummy.

Less than 1 % of infected patients will have severe illness, these will mainly be elderly patients. These patients may be hospitalized for supportive care.

Remember there is no treatment for West Nile and no vaccine. You might ask why, but think about it, would you get and pay for a vaccine for a virus that causes no symptoms for the vast majority of people ? That is the concern of the Vaccine Manufactures

What can you do? Reduce your exposure time outside at prime mosquito time. This includes dusk mainly, and if you need to be out, wear long sleeve shirts and pants. Apply insect repellent with DEET. DEET comes in many concentrations ranging from 4%- 100%. Studies have shown that concentrations over 50% DEET add no additional protection but may cause a rashes more often. Parents should know that DEET should not be used in Infants under the age of 2 months. For those infants, use mosquito netting .