WASHINGTON, November 8, 2014 — Last June, Democratic Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid introduced a bill to repeal the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution. The suggested amendment would make Congress the gatekeepers of acceptable political speech in America. It was so draconian Reid placed a clause in the measure exempting the mainstream media.

The onslaught on free speech, Reid admitted, was planned to silence two men: Charles and David Koch.

The billionaire industrialists were “concealing their massive fundraising efforts because Americans overwhelmingly oppose the purchase of our democracy,” said Reid from the well of the Senate. “A constitutional amendment is what this nation needs to bring sanity back to political campaigns and restore Americans’ confidence in their elected leaders. Let’s put an end to the cult of dark money, which is corrupting our elections.”

The old, discredited and tired Bill of Rights, as written by the nation’s Founders, says “Congress shall make no law” abridging speech. The U.S. Supreme Court’s ruling in Citizens United vs. Federal Election Commission overturned the McCain-Feingold campaign finance regulations as violations of First Amendment free speech.

With Congress no longer controlling the money paying for political speech, that political speech, protected from the prying eyes of a politicized IRS and vindictive left wing pressure groups, began making its way onto America’s airwaves.

The thing that got President Obama and Harry Reid upset were political ads produced by the organization Americans for Prosperity (AFP). According to Sourcewatch.org, AFP paid $56 million “on TV, radio, and digital ads and direct mail, and another $21 million on grassroots efforts from their state chapters.”

One ad in particular got under Obama and Reid’s skin: the one featuring cancer and Obamacare victim Julie Boonstra. “I found this wonderful doctor and a great health care plan,” said Boonstra in the AFP ad. “I was doing fairly well, fighting the cancer, fighting the leukemia. And then I received the letter. My insurance was canceled because of Obamacare. Now the out-of-pocket costs are so high, it’s unaffordable. If I do not receive my medication, I will die.”

So powerful was the ad, the mainstream media began waging a damage-control campaign for the Democratic Party, which entailed attacking the cancer victim, Julie Boonstra.

That failed.

The next step involved demonizing the founders of AFP, the Koch brothers. The charge against them, advanced by Reid and the mainstream media, was that “radical billionaires are attempting to buy our democracy … families who don’t have endless funds to dump into political campaigns are expected to sit on the sidelines and watch,” Reid told POLITICO. “When I say that Americans are watching the Koch brothers trying to influence the November elections, I mean that literally.”

Since the Senate version of Obamacare was passed into law in 2010, 29 Senate Democrats have joined the ranks of America’s unemployed. Last Tuesday, angry voters joined with the brothers Koch in seeing Reid and his fellow liberty-crushing Democrats as the focus of evil in modern America.

“In a truly free society,” wrote Charles Koch in the Wall Street Journal, “any business that disrespects its customers will fail, and deserves to do so. The same should be true of any government that disrespects its citizens. The central belief and fatal conceit of the current administration is that you are incapable of running your own life, but those in power are capable of running it for you. This is the essence of big government and collectivism.”

The day after Democratic Party shellacking 2.0, the New York Times lead editorial said the Republican controlled Congress “will repeal health care reform. They will roll back new regulations on banks and Wall Street. They will stop the Obama administration’s plans to curb coal emissions and reform immigration and invest in education.”

From their lips to God’s ears. Thank you Charles and David Koch.