Just as one sweeping gesture of the Democrats made free contraceptives the new morality, now we have government controlled health insurance as the solution to the hippie dilemma of how people capable of working for a living can survive without having a job. Pelosi assures us that through ObamaCare, we are now free to not work and have all of our needs provided for. In one frenzied day of unconstitutional law-making in 2010, not working became the new morality because we are all supposedly being held captive to our jobs because of health insurance.

Now Nancy Pelosi is showing us that the hippie movement has reached its crowning achievement, being institutionalized in the legislation known as ObamaCare.

We saw the high point of the anti-war movement of the 1960s being institutionalized when John Kerry became Secretary of State in 2013. Falling short of becoming the second anti-war President, Kerry took the next best thing, becoming Secretary of State. There couldn’t be a better choice if we wanted someone who could be the American spokesman for appeasing our enemies, opposing our greatest ally Israel and declaring the end of American influence around the world.

Nancy Pelosi and Harry Reid don’t have an original thought. One wonders if all of their staff members are Marxists and former hippies, feeding them their daily propaganda points. The latest transformational concept we’re supposed to pick up and run with is that work is bad and ObamaCare frees us from it.

In response to a report released February 4 by the Congressional Budget Office (CBO), which estimated 2.5 million people leaving the workforce by 2024 due to ObamaCare, Pelosi explained they would be dropping out because “they are following their aspirations to be a writer; to be self-employed; to start a business. This is the entrepreneurial piece. So it’s not going to cost jobs. It’s going to shift how people make a living and reach their aspirations.”

And of course absolutely anyone who “aspires” to be unemployed could just drop out of the workforce as well and still be insured. While there are already laws and regulations in place which help you keep your insurance when you change jobs, ObamaCare now makes it possible that hippies and other able-bodied people who “drop out” to pursue whatever their heart desires, will still have health insurance.

Finally, after 50 years, the hippie lifestyle has been institutionalized!

It would seem that Pelosi thinks ObamaCare has brought us to the end of what the Marxists call class struggle and we are now in the ultimate state of communism as envisioned by Karl Marx in this 1845 description:

“...in communist society, where nobody has one exclusive sphere of activity but each can become accomplished in any branch he wishes, society regulates the general production and thus makes it possible for me to do one thing today and another tomorrow, to hunt in the morning, fish in the afternoon, rear cattle in the evening, criticise after dinner, just as I have a mind, without ever becoming hunter, fisherman, herdsman or critic.”

Of course, while Marx said it would take a totalitarian “dictatorship of the proletariat” to lead us into this utopia, Pelosi tells us that government-run health insurance has done the same thing.

After the un-Affordable Care Act was passed in 2010 (so, as Pelosi had said, we could find out what was in it), she explained it this way:

“We see it as an entrepreneurial bill, a bill that says to someone, if you want to be creative and be a musician or whatever, you can leave your work, focus on your talent, your skill, your passion, your aspirations because you will have health care.”

There it is. You’re now free to become an artist, an author, a fisherman, or, dare we say, a hippie, and somehow all your needs will be met - all because you have signed up for ObamaCare.