Mike Lucas for Dow Jones

Top story in this morning’s LBO Wire: After working its investment in Gilchrist & Soames into a lather, Swander Pace Capital has sold the supplier of shampoos and soaps to Guest Supply, a division of Sysco Lillian Rizzo reports that under Swander’s ownership, Gilchrist, which supplies toiletries to the hospitality industry, increased sales to about $60 million from $40 million at the time of the firm’s initial investment.

A story available exclusively for LBO Wire subscribers: N + 1 Private Equity has failed to close a restructuring deal that would have allowed investors to cash out of its funds early and provide additional capital for a new fund, Yolanda Bobeldijk reports for sister publication Private Equity News.

(LBO Wire is a daily newsletter with comprehensive analysis of all the investments, deals, fundraisings and personnel moves involving private equity firms. For a two-week trial, visit our homepage http://pevc.dowjones.com, scroll to the bottom and click “try for free.”)

Elsewhere on the Web:

It is difficult to imagine many scenarios in which Sens. Elizabeth Warren and Al Franken are in agreement with Republican presidential hopefuls Donald Trump and Jeb Bush, but eliminating the favorable tax treatment of private equity and hedge fund managers appears to be one area gaining rare bipartisan support.

The Wall Street Journal’s John McKinnon reports that a group of senators including Ms. Warren and Mr. Franken is urging the Treasury Department to crack down on the tax break which allows investment managers to treat the most substantial portion of their income—carried interest—as capital gains.

Unsurprisingly, Blackstone Group Chief Executive Stephen Schwarzman, one of the biggest beneficiaries from the current taxation of carried interest, describes Mr. Bush’s proposal to eliminate the deduction on private equity profits as “a radical thing to do” and opposes the move, Fortune reports.

Meanwhile, as the threat to carried interest looms, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts & Co. is moving forward with plans to exit one of its biggest investments. Telis Demos reports that credit-card processor First Data Corp. is planning to raise $3 billion in an IPO set to kick off this week, in what would be the largest U.S. listing of the year.

First Eagle Investment Management, an investment adviser backed by Blackstone Group and Corsair Capital, along with its distributor FEF Distributors, will pay $40 million to settle charges that they improperly used mutual fund assets, Yuka Hayashi reports for the Journal. In a public statement, First Eagle said it promptly acted to remedy the issue and immediately offered to return the money paid from the funds’ assets.

TPG Capital is among a group of investors including Walt Disney and Sky PLC putting up $65 million to fund Silicon Valley virtual-reality startup Jaunt, Jack Nicas writes over at Digits.

Fortress Investment Group is liquidating part of its hedge-fund arm, the Journal’s Rob Copeland reports.

Chris Witkowsky over at PE Hub has the scoop on the launch of a “mini Apollo Global Management” founded by Stan Parker and Jordan Zaken, former senior partners of the investment giant.

Write to Hillary Canada at hillary.canada@wsj.com

Dear Readers-

I joined the private equity team here at Dow Jones & Co. on April 2, 2007, the very day KKR announced its $29 billion offer for First Data.

So it feels as though there is a certain symmetry that just as KKR prepares to finally exit that investment, I am embarking on my own exit for another post here at The Wall Street Journal.

It has been beyond fascinating to watch changes unfold in the industry over the past eight and a half years. When I joined, Dodd and Frank were just congressmen, Blackstone was still a private company and the largest buyout offer in history—which would subsequently turn into the biggest busted deal in history—for Canadian telecommunications operator BCE Inc. was just months from being signed.

From partner disputes to the seven-hour flip of a mining parts maker and the alleged biblical roots of carried interest, this beat has been anything but dull. I am so thankful to the folks I have spoken with over the years who took time out of their lives to explain the strange mechanics—like European waterfalls, management fee offsets and claw backs—of this secretive industry. It is my sincere hope that I can still contribute to this blog from time to time, but for now, I am signing off.

-H.