Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions today announced that it has enhanced its integrated services for biopharmaceutical manufacturers by completing the acquisition of privately held Sonexus Health, a Dallas-based company that offers a broad range of patient access and specialty commercialization services.

The high-touch, increasingly high-cost nature of specialty, orphan and ultra-orphan drugs can often lead to administrative challenges for physicians who prescribe these medications and for patients who need to access, adhere to and pay for them. Manufacturers need these medications to be safely distributed with limited barriers to access, and payors need to ensure they are used appropriately. The acquisition of Sonexus Health enables Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions to help its clients address these key challenges.

“The addition of Sonexus Health to our portfolio brings us even closer to the patient, by enabling us to provide a next generation solution to help clients ensure that patients who need specialty medications can get faster access to them, and the right services to improve clinical outcomes,” said Scott Howell, M.D., senior vice president of Clinical Affairs for Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions. “Our combined core competencies further strengthen our efforts to help payors, physician practices and biopharmaceutical manufacturers navigate the growing complexity of specialty care.”

Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions clients will now have access to Sonexus Health’s patient services ‘hub,’ which serves as a patient and physician practice support center that:

Reduces administrative burdens by working with patients, physician offices and insurance companies to facilitate treatment coverage and coordinate the medication reimbursement process;

Improves patient access by identifying appropriate copay assistance and free-drug programs that can make specialty medications more affordable; and by delivering medications – based on manufacturer guidelines – with unmatched efficiency and supply chain integrity; and

Helps improve patient outcomes by delivering disease education and medication compliance programs.

In addition, Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions clients will have access to expanded third-party logistics services, enabling them to send higher volumes of smaller parcel shipments directly to physician offices, clinics and hospitals.

“Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions shares our commitment to improving the quality and efficiency of specialty care by providing patient-centered solutions and actionable insight that specialty manufacturers need and expect,” said Mike Mullen, president of Sonexus Health. “We are excited to join the Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions team and to leverage their strength and scale to continue expanding our comprehensive services to an even broader number of clients.”

The base of Sonexus Health’s operations will remain in Dallas, and customers will continue to be served in the same service model currently offered.

About Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions

Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions provides regulatory, clinical, reimbursement, technology and distribution services to help health care professionals, payors and pharmaceutical and biotech companies improve the quality and cost-effectiveness of caring for patients who are managing complex diseases. Cardinal Health Specialty Solutions partners with customers to alleviate day-to-day administrative burdens, optimize business functions and to implement new innovations that move their businesses forward. To learn more, visit www.cardinalhealth.com/specialtysolutions.

About Cardinal Health

Headquartered in Dublin, Ohio, Cardinal Health, Inc. (NYSE: CAH) is a $101 billion health care services company that improves the cost-effectiveness of health care. As the business behind health care, Cardinal Health helps pharmacies, hospitals, ambulatory surgery centers and physician offices focus on patient care while reducing costs, enhancing efficiency and improving quality. Cardinal Health is an essential link in the health care supply chain, providing pharmaceuticals and medical products to more than 60,000 locations each day. The company is also a leading manufacturer of medical and surgical products, including gloves, surgical apparel and fluid management products. In addition, the company supports the growing diagnostic industry by supplying medical products to clinical laboratories and operating the nation's largest network of radiopharmacies that dispense products to aid in the early diagnosis and treatment of disease. Ranked #19 on the Fortune 500, Cardinal Health employs more than 30,000 people worldwide. More information about the company may be found at cardinalhealth.com and @CardinalHealth on Twitter.