Ordinarily, the fact that the Treasury Department this morning sold its stake in something called “Ally” would hardly generate headlines, but Ally Financial is probably better known by its former name: General Motors Acceptance Corp (GMAC).

Yes, today’s news means something rather important: the Troubled Asset Relief Program is now officially over , as is the rescue of the American auto industry.

The Obama administration declared a profitable end to the Wall Street and auto bailouts on Friday, saying a final sale of stock from what was once General Motors’ finance arm had closed a turbulent six-year chapter of the financial crisis. Treasury Secretary Jacob J. Lew said that while profit was not the motive to bail out Detroit and Wall Street, “it is important to note we recovered more than we disbursed.”

According to Lew, the total profit for American taxpayers on TARP investments stands at $15.35 billion.

The NYT report added, “Less than $1 billion in taxpayer funds remain scattered in about 35 community banks around the country, but with the sale on Thursday of the government’s last 54.9 million shares of Ally Financial … the Treasury declared the bailouts done.”

To be sure, as a matter of politics and public opinion, TARP probably is about as popular as it was when George W. Bush signed the program into law in late 2008 – which is to say, not popular at all. The word “bailout” has taken on a sinister and menacing meaning in our discourse, to the point that it’s effectively supposed to shut down debate on any idea that earns the label.

But there’s still room for a credible debate about whether the program worked.

When it comes to assessing President Obama’s rescue of the auto industry, there’s little doubt that the effort was a striking success, predictions to the contrary notwithstanding. As we’ve discussed several times, among Republicans in 2009, failure was a foregone conclusion – government intervention in the marketplace always fails, they said, and Obama big-government solution to the auto industry’s crisis simply couldn’t work.