All the governor’s men & women

Edison, N.J.: It’s hard to believe that anyone in Gov. Christie’s administration is allowed to stub a toe without his knowledge or permission. Okay, so the big man fired Bridget Kelly. You can be sure that she will be well-compensated for taking the hit. It is reassuring that this disgraceful act has caught the attention of federal investigators. Christie’s arrogance, vindictiveness and total lack of decency are deplorable. Carole Canace

Brooklyn: Christie needs to have his people arrested — or he’ll look even weaker than Obama to the rest of the world. Lisa DeSantis

Pearl River, N.Y.: I’m glad to see you lambasted Gov. Christie over the George Washington Bridge thing, just as you did with President Obama over Fast and Furious, Benghazi, the IRS, the NSA, etc. I guess it’s difficult to be fair and balanced. By the way, I’m no fan of Christie. Thomas McNaughton

Power corrupts

Lodi, N.J.: It is scary to think of Conehead Christie sitting in the Oval Office with full Presidential powers at his disposal. He and his cronies might make Nixon and his thugs look like choir boys. Paul Morais

Wanna bet?

Brooklyn: So now Chris Christie, a Republican, is being raked over the coals by the tabloid the Daily News has become. I know you won’t have the balls to print this letter. My father worked as pressman for over 35 years at the Brooklyn plant on Dean and Pacific Sts. He always said he never wanted to retire. He would puke if he saw what his beloved News has turned into. Hillary Clinton got away with murder in Benghazi, but I’m sure The News will endorse her in 2016 even though it endorsed the community organizer against her last time around. J. Christopher Stevens, Sean Smith, Glen Doherty, Tyrone Woods: Do these names mean anything to you clowns at the editorial desk at the New York Daily Worker — oops, I mean News? Hillary has their blood on her hands and you’re worried about a traffic tie-up? Cathleen Sheehan-Wilson

Stop the horror

Bronx: Dear God, please protect all the innocent and helpless children who are being abused and mistreated. Please allow neighbors and families to see the signs and give them the strength to do something about them. Also, please allow guardians to see the sadness they are causing. RIP, little Myls Dobson. Christina Figueroa

Godspeed

Bronx: Thank you, Carolyn McCarthy, for all you stand for and tried to do. May God bless you and your family. Albert M. Gabriel

Stop and think

Piscataway, N.J.: City Councilman Jumaane Williams and Public Advocate Letita James joined murder victims’ families at City Hall because they want the NYPD to focus on outer-borough homicides. These are two of the biggest complainers about stop and frisk. Perhaps if they allowed the police to do their jobs without crying racism, many of these victims would still be alive. Vincent Piano

Obamacaregate

Holmdel, N.J.: Obamacare qualifies applicants based solely on reported income; personal assets are not factored in. What this basically means is that those below 65 and retired, semi-retired — or those who claim little or no income — can leave their million-dollar mansions and drive to the nearest government-funded (i.e., middle-class-taxpayer and senior, Medicare recipient-funded) doctor, dentist, pharmacy in their Rolls Royce and receive free care. Why isn’t the Daily News investigating this — instead of focusing its energies on exposing a bridge scandal? Denise Miller

O brother, where art thou?

Stony Point, N.Y.: It’s amazing how you can cover pages of talentless celebrities, yet you did not print one line on the passing of Phil Everly. He, along with his brother Phil, were the icons of rock and roll. Without their harmonies, the Beatles and Simon and Garfunkel would not have had the success that they achieved. So many tried to imitate them but could not come close. Shame on you for not even mentioning the loss of this great American singer. Lois Baruch

Easy does it

Manhattan: As nutritionist, I was very pleased to see your coverage of teacher John Cisna’s weight loss and associated health benefits (“‘Super Size Me’ idea leads to big weight loss for Iowa man,” NYDailyNews.com, Jan. 4), including lower cholesterol, after eating a McDonald’s diet for 90 days. Cisna’s experiment shows that all types of food can fit into one’s diet when eaten in moderate portions and balanced with exercise. So if you like chocolate, pizza or even Big Macs, it can all fit in moderation. This philosophy of moderation — not elimination — is what I have been teaching my clients for years. It has helped most of them achieve lasting weight loss. Jessica Fishman Levinson

Killing is killing

Brooklyn: It is a shame what happened to Menacham Stark. However, some have claimed that coverage of the murder has been anti-Semitic. Meanwhile, Stark’s brother-in-law, Moses Strulowitz is quoted as saying the killing looked like a Mafia job. That, Moses, is anti-Italian. Mary Ellen Becht

A mark against her

Woodhaven: How can our new City Council Speaker Melissa Mark-Viverito possibly forget a sum that is probably more than half the amount of her salary? How does anybody forget that much, especially someone so intelligent and accomplished, unless she is so rich this money is just a drop in the bucket to her? Leonard Rothstein

Weed the people

Brooklyn: While I commend Gov. Cuomo for his efforts to legalize medical marijuana in New York, I don’t think he goes far enough. Everyone who needs it should have access to pot, not just those who can get past the hurdle of a committee to decide who gets it or not. We could be raising millions in revenue by taxing it like cigarettes and alcohol, both of which it’s no worse than! Since our legislature has proven itself incapable of making a decision, why not put it on the ballot and let the people decide? Isn’t that what democracy is all about? Tom Ghaney

A plea to Con Ed

Bellerose, L.I.: To Con Edison: For 18 years, I had a gas and electric meter outside of my house. Two years ago, it was replaced with just an electric meter outside. The gas meter is now in my basement. But the meter man who comes the 9th of the month is afraid of my dog (who I put in my bedroom when he is supposed to come). So the gas meter in the basement doesn’t get read — and Con Ed sends me estimated bills instead: $900 for two years of gas. I want the meter put back on the outside of my house but Con Ed says I need a doctor’s letter. I’m 82 years old and I can’t get downstairs to the basement use a walker. I thought Con Ed helps seniors, not hurts them. Jenny Constantino

What a worm

Ridgewood: Since Dennis Rodman sang “Happy Birthday” to North Korea’s dictator Kim Jong Un last week, I wonder if he would he do the same if Hitler were alive today? Francheisko Perez

Totally spent

Dumont, N.J.: Republican Sen. Rand Paul says that he’s for extending unemployment benefits as long as we can find a way to pay for them. Whoa! Wait a minute! What a crazy Tea Party extremist! Let’s extend unemployment benefits forever, without the money to pay for it. While we’re at it, let’s create a $3 trillion health-care system with money we don’t have. Let’s wage wars with money we don’t have. Let’s start spending billions of dollars for new pre-k schooling programs with money that we don’t have. Gotta go now. I’m becoming a liberal. I’m going to go out and buy a Ferrari that I can’t afford. John Scott

Tip of the iceberg

Brooklyn: The ever-present tip cup has gotten completely out of control. Waiters and waitresses are entitled to and deserve tips because they are not paid the hourly minimum wage and they serve you throughout your meal. But nowadays, I am expected to tip virtually everywhere: the supermarket cashier, Dunkin Donuts, bagel store. I don’t understand this concept. I am served over a counter and get my stuff to go and someone I have interacted with for at best a few minutes expects me to leave a tip. Why? Jamie C. Connor