There was a special delivery for one metro family as a father delivers his son. They were just released from the hospital Friday.

Hand in hand. A bond unlike any other. Hands that not only hold four day Macario Doshier, they literally brought him into this world.

“It was like adrenaline was just rushing through me,” Bryson Doshier said. “I was shocked it was even happening at first.”

Doshier wasn't home when his wife Elizabeth went into labor. Little Macario wasn't supposed to make his debut until another three weeks.

“He just kind of decided to come early,” Elizabeth said.

Elizabeth wasn't really sure if her contractions were real, and called Bryson who was at work. He rushed home and just in time.

“I had just put my son down for bed, and then the contractions just started piling one right onto another,” she said.

“I come running in and get her moved down to the floor after that, and that’s when her water broke,” Bryson said.

Bryson has paramedic training, but never fathomed he'd deliver his own child. He called 911, and EMSA walked him through one life's most precious miracles.

“Can you see any part of the baby now?”

“No.”

“I want you to listen carefully and do exactly as I say. I want you to lay her on her back in the center of the bed or the floor.”

With the couples 17 month old son with a friend in another room and help on the way, little Macario was born right in the middle of the living room floor.

“I want you to get some dry towels and a blanket.”

Moments later...

“The baby is coming out.”

“Do not pull on the baby.”

“Can you see any part of the baby, yet?”

“Yes. The whole baby is out.”

“I can hear him. You’re doing a good job.”

Held by his father's hands for the first time and now soothed by a familiar voice little Macario heard long before his unexpected arrival.

“I’m proud and astonished,” Elizabeth said.

Elizabeth too, was delivered by her father at home. Her mother is an EMSA dispatcher, and if Bryson had called just a couple of minutes sooner, grandma would have been the one walking Bryson through the delivery.