Karin Rettger, President of Glen Ellyn-based Principal Resource Group, has recently been named to the Top Women Advisors 2015 list by the National Association of Plan Advisors (NAPA).

NAPA received nearly 450 nominations. NAPA is an affiliate organization of the American Retirement Association. Rettger is dedicated to maintaining ethical standards, and providing high quality professional advice to help her clients succeed.

"It was a thrilling moment when I read the email notifying me," Rettger says. "It is such an honor to be named as one of NAPA's Top Women Advisors."

Rettger, 56, has been in the industry since she was 16 years old and worked part time at a financial office in Elmhurst. That decision would change the trajectory of her life, sending her on a path to earn her undergraduate degree in finance from Elmhurst College and her MBA from the University of Wisconsin-Madison.

In an industry where only 10 percent of advisors are women, her career decision is one she has never regretted.

"This is one of the best careers for women because the flexibility of the job fits so well into being a mom," Rettger says. "There is a lot of opportunity for growth and you can make this career what you want it to be. There isn't a glass ceiling to break when you are working for yourself."

Last year, Rettger was also recognized as co-author of "Doing More with Less" - a 21st century guide to help companies successfully navigate the Affordable Care Act, and to manage and control their health and retirement plan costs

"As I reflect back on my career, I realized the way in which I help others is through the advice I give," she says. "Many people have related to me their retirement would not have been as enjoyable without my help. It is most meaningful to me to know that I have a positive impact on others."

For more information, go to http://www.napa-net.org. For more information on Principal Resource Group, go to www.prgresource.com.

About Principal Resource Group

Principal Resource Group represents small to large employers in designing and negotiating the plans they offer employees - from Health Insurance to 401(k) Plans. Our advice includes solutions and cost reduction strategies around compliance with the Affordable Care Act (Obama Care).



This item was posted by a community contributor. To read more about community contributors, click here.