Bernie Sanders, shown at a rally at Cleveland State University on Monday, has yet to release a detailed health care plan this election cycle — but Hillary Clinton has taken to criticizing a 2013 plan he sponsored in the Senate. Associated Press

For months, Democratic presidential contenders Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders warily circled one another, contrasting their policy ideas in mostly gentle terms that emphasized their own positive messages.

No more.

On Tuesday, Mrs. Clinton unloaded on Mr. Sanders, charging that he wants to raise taxes on the middle class to pay for his single-payer health care plan, whereby the government would replace private insurance companies and pay for almost all health care costs.

“I don’t see how you can be serious about raising working and middle class families’ incomes if you also want to slap new taxes on them—no matter what the taxes will pay for,” Mrs. Clinton said at a campaign stop in Dallas on Tuesday. She said she was the “only one” in the Democratic debate “who will commit to raising your wages and not your taxes.”

Ahead of that, her campaign’s press secretary Brian Fallon hit Mr. Sanders by name, saying that a 2013 version of his health care plan would amount to a tax increase of 9% on middle-class families. “Simple math dictates he’ll need to tax workers even more to pay for the rest of his at least $18-20 trillion agenda,” he said. (To be clear, some $15 trillion of that total is for health care, and all those numbers are over 10 years.)

By day’s end, the Sanders campaign had unloaded with a statement of its own, calling the Clinton charge a “false attack.” Spokesman Michael Briggs argued that the Clinton attacks are really aimed at trying to divert attention from her connections to Wall Street, which she was forced to defend in Saturday’s debate.

“In an attempt to divert the public’s gaze from Wall Street coziness, the Clinton campaign has launched a false attack on universal health care,” Mr. Briggs said.

In truth, both the Clinton and the Sanders statements both include misleading charges.

The Clinton statement said Mr. Sanders included a 9% tax on middle class workers in his 2013 plan. In fact, the plan included a 2.2% tax on workers and a 6.7% tax on wages paid by employers, so the total is only 9% if one assumes the entire tax is passed onto workers. And the Clinton campaign ignores the fact that under single-payer health care, employers would no longer have to provide coverage to their workers.

Meantime, the Sanders statement pulls a bunch of quotes from Mrs. Clinton from 2007 and 2008 that suggest she supported a single-payer plan because she advocates for “universal health care.” In fact, she was proposing a plan that is very similar to what became the Affordable Care Act, which offers subsidies and makes it easier to buy coverage but does not have the government provide it to everyone.

Further, Mr. Briggs notes that Mr. Sanders has not put forward an updated health plan but doesn’t explain why not given that this is a proposal he talks about all the time. Aides had said over the summer that the plan might be released within weeks, but that never happened.

Sanders strategist Tad Devine said Tuesday that Mr. Sanders may never put forward a detailed plan. “He may just say, `It’s Medicare for all,’” he said, and then point to existing proposals as possible models. “I don’t think we want to have 14 plans (on various subjects) between now and Feb. 1” when the first votes are cast.

MORE:

Hillary Clinton Faces Foreign-Policy Challenges

Sanders Vies for Union Favor

Ryan Warns of Budget, Guantanamo Bay Confrontations With White House