Being compliant with the Affordable Care Act’s reporting requirements for long-term care facilities is critical for many of our customers, and we are proud to be able to provide them with powerful tools to help ensure compliance.

NOVAtime Technology, Inc. (http://www.novatime.com), a leading provider of enterprise Time and Attendance / Workforce Management solutions, announced today that it will release in May of this year features to support the reporting requirements of the Payroll-Based Journal (PBJ) of the Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS). The features are designed to allow long-term care facilities to electronically submit direct care staffing information to CMS in order to comply with section 6106 of the Affordable Care Act.

Beginning July 1, 2016, the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services will require that nursing homes around the country electronically submit information on their staffing levels, with the ultimate aim of improving patient care in nursing homes around America. NOVAtime’s Payroll-Based Journal features will allow nursing homes to submit summarized direct care hours worked, employee hire and termination dates, as well as census information and other data required by the CMS, using that agency’s PBJ system.

According to Brian Meharry, Vice President of Business Development, “Being compliant with the Affordable Care Act’s reporting requirements for long-term care facilities is critical for many of our customers, and we are proud to be able to provide them with powerful tools to help ensure compliance.”

About NOVAtime

With corporate offices located in Diamond Bar, California, NOVAtime is the leader in integrating Time and Attendance Management with Human Resource and Payroll systems. Since its founding in 1999, over 16,000 organizations have benefitted, and continue to benefit, from NOVAtime’s solutions. Known for its scalable and leading-edge software and hardware technology, many of the best managed companies in the world have chosen NOVAtime as their preferred Time and Attendance / Workforce Management solution provider.