MANHATTAN — A 26-foot tower erected at Kansas State University’s Konza Prairie Biological Station southwest of Manhattan is part of a National Science Foundation project that is one of the most extensive and long-term initiatives in the organization’s history.

Sensors will be installed on the permanent tower in the coming months, and collection of provisional data on the causes and consequences of climate change, land use change and invasive species will begin in the spring.

The tower is part of the $430 million, NSF-funded National Ecological Observatory Network, or NEON, that will be officially launched in 2017 and span a 30-year period. The project will monitor 106 sites across the United States and Puerto Rico and provide the data at no cost to researchers, educators and the public via its website.

“We’re now in the construction phase of the observatory,” said Jennifer Smith, manager of NEON’s Prairie Peninsula, an eco-climatic region encompassing portions of Kansas, Nebraska, South Dakota, Minnesota, Iowa, Missouri, Illinois, Wisconsin, Indiana, Ohio and Kentucky.

Smith said two additional towers are being built in the region: another 26-foot tower at the Konza Prairie Biological Station and a 126-foot tower at The University of Kansas biological field station near Lawrence. Each tower will be in place five to 10 years and then a decision will be made to move the tower or keep it in the same spot.

NEON scientists divided the country into 20 eco-climatic domains based on their distinct vegetation, climates, agricultural land use, small mammals, insects, soils and other factors. The Prairie Peninsula is known as Domain 6.

“NEON sites in Kansas are unique, providing data on both stable tallgrass prairie and prairie as it transitions into eastern deciduous forest,” said Smith, who arrived in Manhattan in August after finishing her doctorate degree at the University of Montana, where she did research on spider communities in the intermountain grasslands.

In addition to being installed on the towers, sensors will be placed in the soil. An airplane equipped with a remote sensing platform will fly over the sites each year to collect aerial data.

Smith said the NEON office in Manhattan is expected to employ six full-time ecologists and up to 20 seasonal field technicians. The seasonal crews will collect samples at the monitoring sites, including information on small mammals, beetles, mosquitoes. ticks, plants and soil.

Special attention will be given to species and disease prevalence, such as the spread of hantavirus by deer mice and the transmission of West Nile virus by mosquitoes.

“All NEON’s data will go through extensive quality assessment as soon as it’s collected and will be made available quickly to the public,” said Ed Martinko, director of the Kansas Biological Survey, which manages the KU field site. “There’s never been an opportunity like this for scientists, teachers and people everywhere.”