FORT COLLINS — Colorado State’s incumbent All-America receiver, Rashard Higgins, had only three catches for 42 yards and no touchdowns Saturday night in the 41-10 loss to Boise State.

With Nick Stevens and Coleman Key both playing quarterback, the common thread was not getting the ball to the Rams’ big-play threat much, regardless of the reasons.

“It’s very frustrating,” Higgins said. “I just feel when the ball’s in my hands, I can do a lot of things. … At the end of the day, I can only do my job.”

Higgins said of the Stevens-Key-Stevens rotation: “That’s not for me to worry about. That’s Coach Bobo’s idea. For him to put in a different quarterback, that’s on him. We have the timing down with both quarterbacks, so it really doesn’t make a big difference.”

Higgins said the season isn’t lost for the 2-4 Rams.

“We have to execute,” he said. “We have to watch more film. I’m frustrated myself. I’ve never been part of a losing team back to back. I’m always used to winning. I have to pick my head up and encourage these guys to come on, let’s do this, it’s not over, we have a lot of ball left to play.”

Traffic snarl. Fans driving from Denver to Hughes Stadium early Saturday afternoon for the 5 p.m. game encountered overhead message boards advising that Interstate 25 was closed ahead because of an accident.

It turned out that the accident happened at 12:03 p.m., near Mead at mile marker 243 and Colorado 66, and the Colorado Department of Transportation said the northbound side of the freeway was closed until about 1:30 p.m.

Heeding the message boards, many travelers planning to get to the game early for pregame tailgating or for other reasons left the freeway at the Colorado 52 or 119 exits, headed west to Longmont and then came up U.S. 287 to Fort Collins.

Others got caught in the long backup south of the accident.

No details about the accident were available.

No full house. Announced attendance was 26,117, a little more than 6,000 short of a sellout. CSU is averaging 27,729 through three home games. Terry Frei, The Denver Post