Free admission for dads on Father’s Day, a contest to name the “Big Bugs” and a movie are among the family-oriented activities throughout June at the Louisville Zoo, with many of the events sponsored by Ford Motor Co.

The schedule includes:

• Friday movie “Despicable Me 2.” Activities begin at 6 p.m., with movie starting at sundown in the Oasis Field. Movie nights throughout the summer are free to zoo members.

There is a special admission to the zoo of $5 after 5 p.m. for non-members that covers pre-movie activities, games and zoo exhibits open until dusk. People can bring blankets and lawn chairs, and concessions wil be available for purchase.

• Sunday, Fathers Day. Free general admission for dads all day.

• June 21, Giraffe Day. Celebrate World Giraffe Day with keeper talks at giraffe feedings at 11:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. Keepers will tell giraffe facts and have an information table on the animals near the giraffe house.

• Also on June 21 will be the WAKY Rock 'N' Roll Reunion Concert at 1 p.m. in the Oasis Field. It is free, with regular zoo admission.

At least seven bands and groups will perform songs from the 1960s and 70s at the concert. Guests may bring lawn chairs and blankets for seating. No alcoholic beverages or glass bottles permitted, but concessions will be available.

Limited VIP tickets are available for $35.

The zoo has switched to extended summer twilight hours in June and July, a schedule intended to allow families to spend more time at the zoo during the cooler part of the day.

The zoo will be open on Tursday, Friday and Saturday evenings in June and July until 7 p.m. and visitors can stay until 8 p.m.

Meanwhile, zoo officials have announced a contest to name the “Big Bugs” currently stationed around the grounds. The zoo is sponsoring a Facebook contest to provide names for the 13 gigantic animatronic bugs that will be at the zoo through Sept. 28. The bugs are being presented by Ford Motor Co.

Winners will be announced later and will receive two general admission tickets to the zoo, or Louisville Zoo members who win will receive two free, one-day ride bracelets.

The bug exhibits are free with zoo admission. The bugs are: black ants, a firefly, a beetle, ladybug, scorpion, beetle, spider, grasshopper, bumble bee, moth, blue-eyed darner, mantis and tarantula.

Go to LouisvilleZoo.org for details on the bug contest.

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1prreLS