This column is called “The Pros and Cons of Taking Your Summer Vacation.”

Just kidding. From a healthy lifestyle POV, there are no cons when it comes to taking a vacation. It’s all positive, nothing negative. Sure, there can be bears in the campsite, delayed flights, tension over air conditioning controls, but really, the only thing that spoils a vacation is not taking it.

Vacation Deficit Disorder — an actual diagnosis! — happens when, over time, too much work and not enough relaxation pushes your body into burn-out mode. You’re stressed; you’re not getting enough sleep; you’re vulnerable.

And sometimes your body finds an illness just to slow you down.

Taking time for rest and relaxation is mandatory if you want to live your best life. Adults and kids both benefit hugely from unstructured time off to renew, to reset. And yet, Americans are notoriously bad at taking all their vacation time. Or any of it.

It’s the economy, stupid. I hear that a lot. People fortunate enough to have jobs are afraid to lose them. You imagine that if you dare take the vacation time you’ve earned, you’ll lose your promotion, your clients, your job — a parade of horrible imaginings — and all because you started to think about going to fantasy baseball camp for a week in August.

Stop and notice what your mind is doing. Left alone, it often attaches to the negative. But — in your life, in your big picture — that kind of negative thinking will get you nowhere you want to go.

Instead, try this little refocusing exercise from the world of positive psychology. Sit quietly, take a few deep breaths, and make a conscious effort to imagine yourself on your best vacation ever. Best vacation ever! What are you doing? Who are you with? How do you feel? When you open your eyes, let go of your fear and make it happen. Congratulate yourself for knowing that vacations are necessary, restorative, and the opposite of selfish.

If you come out of your visualization fearful and stuck, that’s OK, too, but understand this: Something is going on in your life under the banner of self-destructive behaviors that you might want to look at.

Here are a three more thoughts to share from my well-worn watermelon stained Take Your Vacation file:

Mini-breaks count. Downtime doesn’t have to be spent in exotic or expensive locations. If you have limited funds and time, accept your situation and focus on fun adventures in your own hometown. Local bike trails? The afternoon at a museum? It’s your choice.

We move too fast. Vacations are great times to decompress, to move more slowly, to go more deeply. It just takes a little planning. Purposely choose activities that slow you down. Take 30 minutes to eat a perfectly ripe peach. Spend an hour with a favorite book. Fishing certainly puts you into an altered state. We all know we rush around too much. Slow down and see what lovely things unfold.

Challenge yourself. The best vacations move you toward Flow, that pleasurable state of being when time stands still, and you’re lost in the moment, and all your cares and worries are forgotten. To get into Flow, you need a certain amount of challenge. Not too much, not too little. That’s why adventure travel is so transformative. It combines challenge, focus and fun and if you stick with it, you experience that anxiety-reducing state of effortless effort.

Effortless effort! Yes. When you start spending your vacation days in the state of Flow, you’ll think back on your Vacation Deficit Disorder and scream “Whaa-a-a-at was I thinking?”

Marilynn Preston is a fitness expert, personal trainer and speaker on healthy lifestyle issues. She has a website, marilynnpreston.com, and welcomes reader questions, which can be sent to MyEnergyExpress@aol.com.