Published: Friday, 2/13/2015 - Updated: 1 year ago



As health insurance deadline nears, no rush in sign-ups Enrollment through healthcare.gov to end Sunday



THE BLADE/LORI KING Enlarge | Buy This Image Anthony Mann re-enrolls for Medicaid with Health Care navigator Andrea Vasquez at Mercy St. Vincent Hospital in Toledo.

The enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act health insurance marketplace is coming to a close Sunday, but the navigators helping people to sign up for coverage in northwest Ohio said thus far there has been no rush of people clamoring for assistance.

Uninsured residents who do not sign up for health insurance by the deadline will not have access to the tax credits and subsidies offered by the federal government to offset the cost until the next enrollment period begins in the fall. They also could face tax penalties of $325 per adult or 2 percent of taxable income, whichever is greater.

There was a small surge of interest at the end of December as some wanted to make sure their health coverage would begin on Jan. 1. But January and February have been very slow, said Julie Grasson, assistant director of Toledo/​Lucas County CareNet, the agency that is managing navigator services for 19 northwest Ohio counties.

“I know that the weather has certainly taken its toll for the last two weeks — the level twos and level threes. When it’s at level three, we are not out [working] at all,” Ms. Grasson said.

So far during this second enrollment period, the navigators have helped more than a thousand people and enrolled more than 600 in either private health plans or Medicaid across the region, she said.

During the first enrollment period between October, 2013 and April, 2014, the number of people seeking help was greater because the program was new and received a great deal of media attention due the problems and glitches associated with the healthcare.gov website, she said.

Also, health experts also were busy once people realized that the Medicaid expansion in Ohio provided free insurance for a larger group of low-income residents.

“Once the word got out [about Medicaid expansion], especially here in Lucas, people were like at the door saying help me, help me,” Ms. Grasson said.

According to Get Covered America, a national advocacy group, nearly 92 percent of those eligible for Medicaid insurance in Lucas County had enrolled as of Jan. 31. By contrast, only about 23 percent of those eligible to get tax credits and subsidies for health insurance in the marketplace exchange have signed up in Lucas County. There are still more than 23,000 Lucas County residents without health insurance and more than 1.2 million in the state of Ohio.

The website issues that dogged the navigators and those trying to enroll last year have not surfaced this year, Ms. Grasson said.

“It is so smooth and I so don’t want to jinx it with it being days before the end because I know last year, the last two days the system just couldn’t handle the rush. But so much of it is streamlined,” she said.

If people bring all the necessary paperwork to meet with a navigator, it can take less than an hour to complete the application and begin looking at the different plans offered in the exchange. The information needed to sign up includes: date of birth, social security number, and annual income information for everyone in the household, she said.

Anyone earning up to 400 percent of the poverty line — up to $45,960 for an individual and $94,200 for a family of four — is eligible for a subsidy. According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 84 percent of Ohio residents that have selected a plan are receiving financial assistance.

There are those, however, who do not qualify for subsidies or tax credits.

“Out in Fulton County, I met with a couple last week. He’s a farmer so they are self-employed, but their annual income was roughly $80,000 for the two of them and for a household of two that was over the 400 percent of poverty line, so they didn’t qualify for tax credits,” she said.

Ms. Grasson said she helped the couple find an insurance broker in their area who could assist them in finding a private insurance plan.

She said navigators will be available through Sunday. Appointments can be made by calling 211 in Lucas County or 800-648-1176 if calling from other northwest Ohio counties. Walk-ins are also welcome at scheduled events, she said.

“I would warn people not to wait until Sunday to start their application or seek assistance. I just know based off of last year, the last two days the system had a hard time handling the traffic load,” Ms. Grasson said.

Contact Marlene Harris-Taylor at mtaylor@theblade.com or 419-724-6091.