Mental Health Partners, a nonprofit provider of mental health and wellness services, wants to break down barriers and stigma surrounding mental illness and expand its services for its thousands of clients.

Administrators believe a newly renovated 30,000-square-foot wellness center at 1000 Alpine Ave. in Boulder showcases that mission.

"This new space allows us to bring a bunch of really good programs together," said Rachel Lee, director of special projects. "The design facilitates working together."

The staff moved into the building in late August, and client services began operations in early September. On Thursday, Mental Health Partners will host a grand opening celebration at the new center.

The event will also start off the first major fundraising initiative in the organization's 52-year history. The campaign, named "Campaign for Community Well-Being," aims to raise $3 million by 2018 to serve an additional 3,000 clients.

The organization has already secured $1.6 million since July 2013 for the fundraising drive.

"While raising some money for facilities is part of the objective here, what we're more interested in is raising money to expand programs and enhance programs," said chief philanthropy officer Bill Myers.

Myers said the opening of the organization's new facility provides an opportune time to announce the campaign.

Job training

Advertisement

The new building will serve adult patients and provide space for about 100 staff members. It includes a two-story lobby featuring brightly colored walls and a fireplace on each level, ample seating in a community area that doubles as a dining room, meeting spaces of various sizes, a suite offering medical services for clients and an outdoor patio and garden.

A new commercial kitchen and office services unit will offer vocational training opportunities for clients.

Theodor Mockbaa, a Mental Health Partners client, helps in the kitchen at the organization's new facility in Boulder on Thursday. (Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera)

"The food industry is one of the biggest entry-level jobs that people can find work in, and also office services, as well," said Toni Moon, clinical director of wellness education and employment development.

Providing clients with vocational training is a significant part of the organization's wellness services.

There are four trainee positions available in the kitchen, training under the chefs, and one person will be employed to work in the kitchen alongside Mental Health Partners' paid kitchen staff.

The trainees will help with food prep and cooking and will attend field trips in the area to visit other kitchens and learn from other chefs. Staff members hope area chefs will also come into the wellness center kitchen to teach skills.

Community and corporate help

Mental Health Partners plans to expands its services for clients by getting community members involved in wellness programs.

"We do a foundation of learning and exposure to work in a safe environment," Moon said. "But we're really going to rely on the community participation and volunteerism to make that a really rich experience for our clients."

The Boulder Valley Rotary Club is an example of that kind of partnership. It provided the funding for Mental Health Partners to hire the first temporary kitchen assistant and office clerk positions, and members of the Rotary Club will lead computer and GED tutorials.

The new Chinook office services unit was made possible by a gift from Canon. The multinational camera and imaging company provided the money to purchase the 13 computers available for clients' use and training.

Clients are taught to use major office programs, working with standard equipment such as scanners and fax machines, and those with higher skills and interest can learn to work with video cameras, editing software and more Internet-based programs.

"It again creates the experience of work for people," Moon said. "This is a job in the community. People can work at Kinko's, or Staples, Office Depot."

Partner organizations

The new space also allows Mental Health Partners to work with partner organizations to broaden their health care services.

The wellness center's medical staff is one psychiatrist and two nurses, but they will not be the only ones seeing patients in the medical suite. Clinica Family Health Services, which provides health care to low-income and uninsured residents, will have a primary care physician there a few days a week starting in December.

Dental services are now being offered by a hygienist from Dental Aid, which provides dental care to the same community.

Clinica Family Health Services and Mental Health Partners have been working together since 2005, when the two organizations initiated an integrated behavioral health program in Lafayette and Boulder, said Susan Wortman, development director at Clinica.

More than 2,300 clinic patients benefited from the partnership in 2013, through more than 5,700 appointments.

Isabel McDevitt, executive director of Boulder-based Bridge House, a social service agency and shelter for the homeless, said the new wellness center is a one-stop shop of services for clients.

At intake for Bridge House services, 51 percent of people report mental health challenges.

"That number is self-reported, so it could potentially be underreported," McDevitt said. "We see a great opportunity to refer people to the wellness center."

Need for expansion

Bringing together partners and consolidating services to create "synergy for clients" was a major factor in building the wellness center, Lee said. The demand for more space was the other reason.

The nonprofit's location at 1333 Iris Ave. was not conducive for growth since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act, Lee said. More clients are receiving Medicaid benefits or getting private insurance, which offers a new population to serve.

The Iris Avenue building will continue to house administrative office employees who have not moved to the new building, outpatient services and programs for youth patients.

A projected standard annual growth of 8 to 10 percent and an upcoming integration with Boulder County's Addiction Recovery Center in January are expected to provide an increase in clients. Mental Health Partners served more than 18,000 people in 2013.

Expanding its programs to reach more people and create opportunities for wellness beyond recovery is what the organization hopes to achieve with the new facility.

"The vivaciousness of the coloring, when you walk in the door, the fact that there are huge windows, that staff are visible and accessible and that clients are mingling together is (to show) that people with mental illness should not be hidden behind closed doors," Moon said.