Health Insurers Propose Rate Increases For 2015 Coverage

Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield in Connecticut and ConnectiCare are asking for increases. HealthyCT is asking for a price decrease.

Insurance companies selling health plans next fall for coverage in 2015 are asking state regulators to approve prices that reflect medical-cost inflation, and, in some cases, federal mandates, and expensive drugs to treat Hepatitis C.

Summaries of the proposed rate increases were posted this week on the Connecticut Insurance Department's website. Insurers were required to file 2015 rates by May 31 for review by the department, which could approve, modify or deny them. The insurance plans will be available next fall to customers who buy insurance either on, or off, a public exchange, Access Health CT, which was created by the Affordable Care Act, often called Obamacare.

One major theme in the rate requests is that all insurers expect a continued rise in "trend" — the rising cost in medical services and the increasing demand for those services.

Anthem, the state's largest health insurer, and ConnectiCare both say their higher prices also reflect taxes, fees and requirements of the Affordable Care Act. Additionally, Anthem said prices reflect expensive pharmaceuticals to treat Hepatitis C, including Sovaldi by Gilead Sciences Inc. Sovaldi was approved for use in December by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration.

New this year, UnitedHealthcare will sell individual health plans on the exchange. Last year for 2014 coverage, UnitedHealthcare only sold small-group plans on the exchange.

Here is a summary of rate requests submitted this week:

— HealthyCT Inc., is asking for rate decrease averaging 8.9 percent on individual health plans sold on and off the exchange for coverage beginning Jan. 1. The lower rate would affect 7,248 policyholders. HealthyCT is too new to the market to have claims experience on which it can base its 2015 rates. It used the consulting firm Milliman to develop rates using various data sources and models. HealthyCT anticipates a 5.2 percent increase in the cost of medical services and demand for those services, but that will be offset by other adjustments that lower the rates. For example, HealthyCT is spreading the cost of administrative expenses and fees over a three-year period instead of one policy year.

— Anthem Health Plans, Inc., a part of Anthem Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Connecticut, is asking for a rate hike averaging 12.5 percent on individual health plans sold on and off the exchange. The new rates would affect 66,200 policyholders. Anthem attributed the rate hikes in part to federal mandates from the Affordable Care Act, such as "guaranteed issue," which is a requirement that insurers offer plans regardless of a person's health condition. Additionally, Anthem said its new rates reflect taxes and fees.

— ConnectiCare Benefits Inc. of Farmington is asking for a rate increase of 11.8 percent on individual health plans sold on the exchange. The increase would affect 27,500 policyholders. ConnectiCare expects a 10.7 percent increase resulting from medical costs and utilization of medical services. The company also expects a $14.68 per-customer, per-month charge related to fees associated with the Affordable Care Act. The fees include Patient Centered Outcomes Research Fee, Transitional Reinsurance Program, Health Insurer Fee and the Risk Adjustment Program. ConnectiCare based its rates on the claims experience of health plans it sold off the exchange in Connecticut because there isn't enough claim history for 2014 alone, the first year of the exchange.