Hundreds try their luck, learn a hobby at annual fishing derby

Three-year-old Natalie Pratt smiled as her grandfather, Don Goldman, reeled in a wriggling trout Saturday.

The fish pulled off the hook right before Goldman was able to get ahold of it and splashed back into the pond. Goldman cast the line again, handed the pole to Natalie and coached her on how to reel in the line. Soon enough, they caught a palm-sized bluegill. Goldman held the fish and Natalie hesitantly reached out her pointer finger to touch it.

"I want to keep him," she said.

Goldman explained that they had to return the fish because it was so little, but they could have kept the fish had it been a trout. Natalie and her grandfather joined hundreds at the Loveland Police Fishing Derby, an annual fishing day for children 15 and younger at the North Lake Park Duck Pond.

The Loveland Police Department partnered with the Loveland Fishing Club to host the event. Members of the Loveland Fishing Club helped to gather fishing poles, tackle boxes and life preservers as door prizes for the event. They also provided advice for families fishing during the event and helped to secure sponsors for the event, which was free.

Natalie and her grandfather were among a number of attendees who borrowed fishing equipment from the Loveland Fishing Club members, who provided equipment for families that did not have their own.

After children caught trout, members of Colorado Youth Outdoors then cleaned the fish and fried or bagged them to send home for families to cook.

Advertisement

"Before they got involved, we would find a lot of fish in the trash," said Tom Miller, a volunteer with both the Loveland Fishing Club and Colorado Youth Outdoors. "So, now the fish are being eaten, rather than being thrown away."

The volunteers cleaning the fish demonstrated for families how to do it. Miller said the derby is important because the families spend time together and learn skills, rather than watching TV.

Kai Batie, 8, and Evyn Batie, 14, approached the cleaning station with two trout each. They watched as their fish were cut open, gutted and cleaned. They put the cleaned fish into a plastic bag to take home for dinner. Evyn said they came to the event for a fun time with their dad, Robert.

Kai looked at the gutted fish and wrinkled his nose. He said he only wants to touch fish when they're dead and he's glad volunteers cut and clean the fish because he wouldn't want to. He said he enjoyed the day fishing with his sister and dad, though.

"It's really fun because you get to spend time with your family and learn more about patience," Kai said.

Colorado Parks and Wildlife authorities also provided a first-time fishing clinic to teach children about fish identification, safe handling, knot tying, rules and regulations, equipment and casting. Children who participated in the clinic received a free fishing pole.

Clayton Brossart, the Loveland district wildlife manager for CPW, said the clinic allows him to teach children the basics of fishing, as well as ethics, responsibility and safe handling of fish. He said his agency stocks the pond several times a year, including specifically for this event. Around 1,000 rainbow trout were put into the pond for the derby. He said the trout that weren't caught during the event will likely be caught by adults within a week or two.

The Kiwanis Clubs of Loveland served food at the derby as well. The Colorado Fraternal Order of Police provided free child identification cards for children attending the event.

Casey Prather, the fishing manager at the Loveland Jax store, brought 1,500 worms that he cut into sections and put in small cups for the families to use. He said the store's management also donated items for door prizes.

Crime prevention officer Dave Sloat said this event allows the police department to get involved with the community. He loves fishing and said it's a great hobby for kids to get excited about.

"(The community) can see us in a good way," Sloat said. "For the kids, this is a way for us to get them out into the outdoors and show them a hobby that they can take with them forever if they like it."

Members of the Loveland Fishing Club and co-chairmen for the event, Keith Gentry and Larry Carlson, said it was a banner year for the derby. This year is their their third year as co-chairmen, and they both said fishing can be for life.

"Part of our philosophy is to teach lifelong activities, and you can fish forever," Gentry said. "When we introduce kids to the idea of fishing, then a lot of them will pick it up and stay with it."

Allen Mundorff, an avid fisherman, said he hoped he could instill a love of fishing in his son Parker Mundorff, 6. Allen and his wife, Kelly Mundorff, brought their son to the event to give him some fishing experience.

Although Parker had fished previously with his family, the derby was his first time practicing casting.

"Guess what?" Parker said. "I've done three really long casts. They were, like, 11 yards long."

He continued to cast his line again and again, but he didn't catch any fish. He said casting is his favorite part of fishing, though.

"My bobber went flying a long way," he said.

After spending more than an hour casting without reeling in a fish, Parker finally had a strong tug on his line and pulled in a bluegill.

"My first fish," he said with a grin. "I caught my first fish."​

Contact Staff Writer Cassa Niedringhaus at 970-635-3691 or news@reporter-herald.com