Whether you get your prescription drugs through your employer’s health plan or through a Medicare Part D plan, there are ways you can save on your medications.

Keep an eye out for new generic drugs. The patents for several popular brand-name drugs — Celebrex, Copaxone, Nexium, Actonel and Exforge — are scheduled to expire soon. You can already get generics for Cymbalta, Maxalt, Maxalt MPT, Micardis, Micardis HCT, Twynsta and Xeloda, whose patents recently expired.

Pay for generics yourself. Some stores charge as little as $4 for a 30-day supply of some drugs or $10 for a 90-day supply, while some insurance companies charge a $10 co-payment for a 30-day supply.

Find “therapeutic alternatives.” Some brand-name drugs don’t have a generic equivalent but may have a therapeutic alternative — a medicine in the same class of drugs that varies a little chemically. For example, Diovan is a blood-pressure medication with no direct generic substitute. In one popular prescription-drug plan, the monthly cost for a 30-day supply of 80-mg tablets is $149.66. But you could spend just $1 per month for a comparable dose of losartan potassium, $2 per month for irbesartan or $20 for a monthly supply of Benicar. Check with your doctor about any drug that isn't a direct generic substitution.

Order your drugs through the mail. Mail-order pharmacies may provide a three-month supply of drugs for the same price as a one- or two-month supply at a local pharmacy. Some insurance plans require you to use mail order for maintenance drugs.

Split your pills. Ask your doctor if you can save money by cutting your pills. Your physician will have to write a new prescription for twice the strength and half the quantity, noting your intent to split the tablets.

Get help from special drug programs. Go to the National Council on Aging’s Benefits Checkup site (benefitscheckup.org) and anonymously input basic information about your income, assets, medical conditions and drugs. You’ll see whether you qualify for any special programs, such as drug manufacturers’ patient-assistance programs for low-income patients.

Kimberly Lankford,

Kiplinger's Personal Finance