Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston is the best hospital in the country, according to the latest rankings released by U.S. News & World Report.

The Boston hospital, ranked number two last year, regained the top spot on the Honor Roll, a ranking of hospitals with top scores in at least six specialties, in the publication's 26th edition of its Best Hospitals rankings.

The Mayo Clinic in Rochester, Minnesota, was ranked number two, and Johns Hopkins Hospital in Baltimore and UCLA Medical Center in Los Angeles were tied for third.

The publication also listed 15 hospitals on its "honor roll," indicating a ranking at or near the top in six or more specialties. The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center in Houston was the top-ranked cancer center, while the Cleveland Clinic earned the top spot for cardiology and heart surgery, and the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York was the top-ranked facility for orthopedics.

U.S. News designed the rankings to help patients with life-threatening or rare conditions find hospitals that excel in treating the most difficult cases, according to the publication. Best Hospitals has information on nearly 5,000 medical centers in the country. Among the care-related indicators it considers to determine rankings, Best Hospitals measures patient volume, risk-adjusted survival rates and adequacy of nurse staffing.

Earlier this year, U.S. News released a new evaluation that rated hospitals on how well they handle five common medical conditions and procedures.

The other hospitals that made this year's top hospitals list include:

Cleveland Clinic

Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston

New York-Presbyterian University Hospital of Columbia and Cornell, New York

UCSF Medical Center, San Francisco

Hospitals of the University of Pennsylvania-Penn Presbyterian, Philadelphia

Barnes-Jewish Hospital/Washington University, St. Louis

To learn more:

- read U.S. News' announcement

- check out the listings

- see a guide of terms used in the rankings

Related Articles:

U.S. News releases 2014-15 Best Hospitals rankings

U.S. News to overhaul its measures for annual Best Regional Hospital rankings

U.S. News ranks this year's best children's hospitals

New ratings evaluate hospitals' delivery of 'common care'