It was apparent from the start that the Affordable Care Act did a lot for access but far too little about high costs of health care in America.

Since the United States spends far more than any nation on health care, then it stands to reason that costs can be reduced without major impacts on quality.

In fact, more efficiency often leads to better outcomes for patients.

To truly address costs would mean taking actions that neither Republicans nor Democrats would entirely support.

But the failure to properly address costs is coming home to roost.

VAST RANGE OF PRICES

New reports show that there are wide ranges in prices for common procedures that have no link to quality.

For instance, the spread in prices in the Jacksonville area for a mammogram range from $15 to $161, according to a story by Kaiser Health News.

In the Dallas-Fort Worth area, the spread ranges from $50 to $1,045.

This data comes from Castlight Health, a company that helps businesses analyze health care prices.

A researcher from Castlight was quoted as saying the “shocking” data shows how broken the health care system is.

Consumers are left in the dark.

The data too often is difficult even for journalists to find.

Consumers often are going to defer to their physicians on a procedure, and the physician may not even be considering price.

Or the consumer may be relying on an insurance company as a skilled third party mediator.

Castlight also produced an affordability index for metros. In affordable cities, wage growth and health care costs are in balance.

Jacksonville, for instance, scores slightly below average on affordability. Omaha and Birmingham, Ala., score much better than average.

So what’s going on? How can more cities improve their results?

We need more answers to these questions if costs are going to be reduced.

SOCIAL SECURITY AND MEDICARE

Meanwhile, a group of senior citizens will be receiving no increases in Social Security benefits and big increases in Medicare premiums.

The premium increases were called “unprecedented” by an expert in The Wall Street Journal.

Due to rapidly falling gas prices, there will be no cost-of-living increase for Social Security recipients.

This has happened just twice previously since 1975 (2010 and 2011), reports The New York Times.

Most Medicare recipients will be held harmless against premium increases because those payments are linked to Social Security payments.

But for about a third of Medicare recipients, premiums could increase by up to 50 percent.

As for that Social Security COLA, seniors say that gas prices don’t affect them that much. Once retired, there is less need to drive.

In fact, prescription drug prices represent one of the major uncontrolled costs for seniors.

The broad consumer price index used to calculate the Social Security COLA includes food, housing, clothing, transportation, energy, transportation, medical care, recreation and education.

Seniors argue that this does not accurately represent their expenses. The federal government has been experimenting with another price index for seniors, but even if this one were used, it wouldn’t make much difference for next year.

About 60 million retirees, disabled workers, spouses and children receive Social Security benefits. The average monthly benefit is $1,224.

CHECK MEDICARE COVERAGE

However, now is the time for seniors to do something about their medical costs. It’s open enrollment time for Medicare Part D, the prescription drug plan, and private Medicare Advantage plans.

Seniors should review their plans to ensure that their prescription drugs are still covered — and that their deductibles have not gone up.

In addition, this is a good time to shop for better prices.

Consumers in Medicare Part D plans face an average 13 percent increase in premiums, reports Kaiser Family Foundation.

In metro areas like Jacksonville, there often are many different kinds of prescription drug plans.

The average client nationally can choose from 26 assorted plans.

The website medicare.gov has lots of helpful information. And consumers may call (800) MEDICARE to have a representative run a search and mail the results. Open enrollment is in effect and ends on Dec. 7.

DEALING WITH COSTS

Many seniors resent the reference to Social Security and Medicare as “entitlements” since they paid into these funds during their working lives.

But both programs were always set up as generational transfers from workers to retirees.

This was fine until the numbers of children declined. Now there are many more retirees than workers.

While there are trust funds in both Social Security and Medicare, they are not sufficient to pay all benefits. And if nothing is changed, there will have to big cuts in benefits.

One solution is to use a progressive system that asks the more fortunate to take benefit cuts and payroll tax increases for Social Security.

In a thought-provoking piece for the Brookings Institution, economist Douglas Elmendorf wrote that it would be unfair to raise the retirement age for low-income workers.

“We should protect people of modest means by imposing most of the burden of changes on those who are more affluent,” Elmendorf wrote.

There is no free lunch.

But that’s a reality that America’s health care system has ignored for too long.