The wet weather last week offered a preview of the rainy summer to come — and the challenges Florida faces in stopping the spread of the mosquito-borne Zika virus.

Prevention is key, with homeowners bearing responsibility to clear their properties of standing water where mosquitoes breed. Another kind of prevention — preventing unintended pregnancies — would help avoid the severe birth defects linked to the virus.

Nearly 60 percent of pregnancies in Florida are unintended, according to 2010 figures from the Guttmacher Institute. A lack of access to birth control or knowledge on its effective use can lead to these pregnancies.

The spread of the Zika virus in Latin America increased demand for abortions in countries where they're illegal or hard to obtain. If abortion opponents want to prevent a similar scenario in the U.S., where abortion is legal, preventing unintended pregnancies would be a good way to do it.

Southern states such as Florida and Texas, where Zika is most likely to spread, are also places where lawmakers have made it harder to get abortions. The Florida Legislature in recent years has passed a 24-hour waiting period for abortions and new requirements on physicians in abortion clinics, measures that are facing legal challenges.

The latter law also bars organizations associated with abortion clinics from getting government funding for other reproductive health services. By stopping Planned Parenthood from providing contraception and education efforts, the measure might have the unintended result of causing more abortions.

Abortion rights supporters and opponents alike should want to prevent the unwanted pregnancies that can lead to abortions. Yet liberals and conservatives holding these positions are often at odds, as shown by a U.S. Supreme Court case challenging the Affordable Care Act's contraceptive-coverage requirement.

Last week, a short-handed court sent the case back for a possible compromise. The decision leaves it up to the Obama administration and religious objectors to work out an arrangement that lets women receive cost-free birth control without infringing on the religious rights of their church-based employers.

Justice Antonin Scalia's death in February and the refusal of congressional Republicans to hold hearings on his successor caused a 4-4 split on the court that lead to the unusual decision.

While the Catholic Church and other churches oppose artificial contraception, they must weigh these beliefs against their opposition to abortion. Pope Francis made such a calculation when asked by a reporter in February about the Zika virus leading to abortions. The pope suggested contraception was morally preferable in fighting the virus.

Of course, preventing Zika's spread in the first place is the best way to avoid birth defects and other health problems connected to the virus. Mosquito-control efforts on the local level require the help of homeowners, while the federal government needs to properly fund prevention efforts as well as vaccine research.

It is inexcusable that congressional Republicans have for months blocked a $1.9 billion appropriation requested by President Obama for Zika programs. Hopefully a compromise is reached this week.

Florida leads the nation with more than 120 travel-related Zika cases and counting. If the virus starts being spread by mosquitoes, we face a greater threat of the health consequences than any other state.

Our state's Republicans and Democrats are showing they can work together when faced with such a challenge. If only they would take the same approach to preventing unintended pregnancies.