SHARE Tony Spezia, Covenant Health CEO

By Kristi L. Nelson of the Knoxville News Sentinel

He'll no longer be at the helm of Covenant Health, but he'll still have a hand in its success.

Anthony "Tony" Spezia announced today that he'll step out of the role of Covenant president and CEO March 31, and into a new role as CEO emeritus.

Jim VanderSteeg, the current executive vice president of operations, will assume the role of president and CEO of the health system effective April 1.

Spezia said that in his new role, he'll focus on special projects, working on public policy, strategy and expansion for the health system, without having to "manage people or do budgets."

"There's a leadership team and a board that's responsible, so I'll be doing it for them" to implement, Spezia said.

It's hard to imagine Spezia would step away completely from the health system he's helmed since 2000, taking over in the midst of some turmoil at Covenant, when several key executives, including then-President and CEO Alan Guy abruptly resigned, around the same time most of the health system's facilities changed leadership.

Spezia had been promoted to executive vice president a little more than a year before he became CEO, having joined Covenant in 1996 as senior vice president of managed care after leadership positions at Cariten Health and Peninsula, the behavioral health facility that's now part of Covenant.

His background was in business, but not the health-care world. A St. Louis native, Spezia spent a decade there with Arthur Andersen & Co. before becoming executive vice president and chief financial officer for Industrial Fuels Corp. and Costain Coal Inc. in Detroit, Mich.

It was his business experience, Spezia said, that led him to try to "stabilize" the sprawling health system during a time of turmoil in the health-care industry, laying the groundwork for eventual expansion.

"Jim (VanderSteeg) said one of the reasons Covenant is successful is that we've had some great strategies, but we've never made a bad decision that hurt us," Spezia said. "It's not always just what do you, sometimes it's what you don't do. That's not to say we haven't made mistakes ? but the big things we've done have worked out."

In Spezia's tenure, Covenant has seen "significant expansion" to become a company with nine acute-care hospitals, nearly 1,500 affiliated physicians and about 10,000 employees, said Debby Saraceni, vice president of marketing and physician services. It also includes multiple outpatient services, clinics and speciality providers; behavioral health; home care; and community wellness programs.

Spezia oversaw a $94 million renovation and expansion of Parkwest Medical Center; a $150 million upgrade of Fort Sanders Regional Medical Center; construction of the $25 million, 75,000 square-foot Fort Sanders Loudoun Medical Center in Lenoir City, and the $50 million Roane Medical Center; a $100 million investment to improve and expand the Morristown-Hamblem Healthcare System, with which it merged in 2010; and Sevier County's $110 million Le Conte Medical Center hospital campus, which includes a cancer center and center for women's services.

Meanwhile, the company grew cash and investments by more than $700 million and reduced the amount of interest it pays to less than 1 percent of revenue.

Spezia said such investment in the community was part of a strategy looking at long-term growth ? sometimes five or 10 years away. For example, the old Fort Sanders Sevier Medical Center that Le Conte replaced was profitable, he said, while the new hospital operated at a loss for its first few years. But then, he said, it drew Sevier County patients and tourists who otherwise would have traveled to Knoxville for medical care, and now is more profitable than ever.

Spezia also guided Covenant through challenges including multiple cuts to TennCare/Medicaid, Medicare changes, the closure of other Knoxville hospital systems, entry of a for-profit hospital into the market, and changes brought about by the Affordable Care Act.

He said he was proudest of making the hospital system cohesive, with the same quality of care in its community hospitals as in its metropolitan ones, and combining growth with stability to help retain good doctors and staff, and inspire confidence in patients.

"We are very disciplined in the way we add to our benefits," Spezia said. "We don't try to reduce our costs on the backs of our employees. We've never had a takeaway of benefits ? we don't put anything in unless its sustainable."

While Spezia didn't initially envision a career in health care, he said he's found it "a privilege."

"It's presented me with an opportunity to touch people's lives, and to impact communities," he said. "When a family is accessing health care, there is nothing more important in their life at that point. So how we do that is critically important to everybody that lives here. ?

"It impacts the whole region."