International piano prodigy students Jerry Chen, age 15, Jason Chiang, age 16 and Jenny Luo, age 17, will perform in concert this Sunday at the Stanley Hotel. The performance begins at 2 p.m. in the Stanley Concert Hall.

Each student has been named multiple "national and international first place winners in world competitions, and has just returned from a triumphant competition and concert tour in Brazil.

Chen has studied with Julia Amada Kruger for the past 5 1/2 years. Although only involved in the studio for a short time, he has successfully competed across the United States in various national/international piano competitions and has received multiple placements at all competitions. In the summer of 2012, Chen was accepted to compete in the IBLA International Competition (Sicily, Italy) against students from over 38 countries. Performing two solo programs, he was awarded both the title of "Distinguished Musician" as well as the coveted title of "Young Talent." Although only a sophomore in high school, Chen has recently been invited to perform solo concerts in Moscow, Russia at the famed Scriabin Auditorium as well as in Shanghai (China), Wu Hai (Mongolia) and Buenos Aires (Argentina).

Advertisement

Chiang has studied with Kruger for the past 7 years. During this time Chiang competed across the United States and Europe in various national/international piano competitions and has received the following awards: 10 first place wins, three second place wins, and three third place wins. Chiang was accepted to study at the "Resonant Thoughts" International Performance Festival (Italy) and performed over nine concerts in northern Italy. At this festival, Chiang competed in the first Valdisotto International Piano Competition against students from Russia and Europe (ages 9-24) and was awarded "Second Place International Winner,"received a scholarship and performed a professional concert in northern Italy (Bormio) in July of 2011. While in Italy, Chiang competed against students from the US, France, Russia and Italy in an international competition, receiving "Third Place International Winner" status.

Luo has studied with Kruger for the past 9 1/2 years. Luo has successfully received multiple placements at all competitions (first place awards - 18; second place awards - 11; competed across the United States in various national/international piano competitions and has third place awards - 2; fourth place awards - 4). Luo was also a first place international winner in the Buono/Bradshaw International Piano Competition (NYC) in 2006 and received a performance in Carnegie Hall! In 2011, she was named a multiple "International First Place Winner" in the United States International Duo Competition in 2005, 2006, 2007, 2009, 2010, 2011, 2012, and 2013. In 2009, 2011, 2012 and 2013 she was among only 32 international students chosen to study at the "Resonant Thoughts" International Piano Performance Festival in Italy. In 2011, she competed against students from the US, Russia, Italy, France and China and won "First Place" in the Valdisotto International Piano Competition. Another incredible honor was that she was one of 6 students from the United States chosen by the governing officials in Shanghai, China to present a concert in Shanghai. The concert was performed in February, 2010. She is also one of only 3 students who presented two concerts in Sao Paolo, Brazil in November, 2013. She has also received a personal invitation to perform at the famed Scriabin Auditorium in Moscow, Russia in 2014 and will return to Italy the summer of 2014 to perform again in solo concert.

Upcoming concert

Something new and something different for March 9. Love Tango? Then you will love Trio Cordilleras. Beth Kipper, violin, Thomas Heinrich, cello and Alejandro Cremaschi on piano. Argentine music at it's best. You will love this new group.

For more information, contact our business office at 970-586-9519 or visit estesparkmusicfestival.org. To receive weekly updates of concerts and upcoming events, please send an email to epmfinfo2@yahoo.com. Subscription packages are available at the door on the day of the concert or Hobert Office Services, 1140 Manford Ave, Estes Park.