Vice President Joe Biden could be the next big-name candidate to enter the 2016 presidential race.

Biden met with Massachusetts Sen. Elizabeth Warren Saturday — a move that many interpreted as another sign of an impending presidential run.

Other Democrats, including California Gov. Jerry Brown, say they believe Biden should give "very serious consideration" to a presidential run. There's even a super PAC that's raising money in support of a future Biden run.

See also: Biden mulling 2016 presidential run, report says

Biden, a former Delaware senator, is likely to make a decision on whether or not to enter the presidential race by September. "I don’t think he’d be one of those candidates to get in to make a point. He would get in to win," says Greg Lebel, an assistant professor of political management at George Washington University.

If Biden were to jump into the presidential race, he would face an uphill slog to win his party's nomination, particularly as the Clinton campaign has a robust field operation and has already raised millions of dollars.

But that doesn't matter. We think this race needs a dose of Biden, and here's why:

He's in a presidential bromance

Biden and President Barack Obama have one of the most well-documented bromances in the history of bromances. They work out together. They lunch weekly together. They eat Shake Shack after they work out. They even take selfies.

But despite the bromance, it's unclear whether President Obama would be on Team Biden. Obama's administration has strong ties with former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton and it will certainly be a difficult situation to navigate if Biden and Clinton go head to head.

Asked about a potential Biden 2016 campaign, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest didn't say whether President Obama would be on board.

He's an expert at making finger guns

Everyone knows that Biden makes some pretty amazing faces, but did you know that he is also one of the foremost experts in making finger guns?

Image: MADALYN RUGGIERO/Associated Press

Biden's finger guns show us that he can lead the free world and have swag.

He knows how to use hashtags

Biden posted this #TBT in 2014 as part of a campaign to let young people know that they should consider getting health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act. Using the power of a short-sleeved button down and vintage shot (#nofilter) and social media, Biden made it clear to young people that health insurance matters.

Short sleeve button-downs are coming back but health care has always been in style. #Bornin88? Then #GetCovered. #TBT pic.twitter.com/XeMmUPC2Go — Vice President Biden (@VP) July 31, 2014

He skipped nerd prom, because he knows where the real fun is

Instead of going to the White House Correspondents dinner, Biden and 'Veep' Selina Meyers aka Julia Louis-Dreyfus ran around Washington D.C. in a yellow Corvette, ate ice cream and wrecked some havoc at the Washington Post. They even got matching tattoos.

He's a family man

Finger guns and flashy sports cars aside aside, Biden is considering the run because of a conversation he had with his son, Beau Biden.

As Maureen Dowd reported in the New York Times, Beau had strongly advocated for the idea in one of the last conversations between the two:

“Dad, I know you don’t give a damn about money,” Beau told him, dismissing the idea that his father would take some sort of cushy job after the vice presidency to cash in. Beau was losing his nouns and the right side of his face was partially paralyzed. But he had a mission: He tried to make his father promise to run, arguing that the White House should not revert to the Clintons and that the country would be better off with Biden values.

Biden speaks frequently about what family means to him. In a moving speech at Yale University's commencement, Biden talked about how his extended family supported him when he lost his first wife and his daughter in a car crash and how he found redemption by focusing on his sons. Back then, he was a newly elected senator. Biden would commute for four hours a day — between Delaware and Washington — in order to spend time with his family.

As Biden puts it, his definition of success is when his children "turn out better" than him.

Beau Biden died of brain cancer shortly after Biden gave this speech.