The good Republican news is that there looks to be no disruption imminent in the GOP House even after President Obama’s controversial remarks on immigration.

Instead, the mood in the GOP House, currently on Thanksgiving break, is said to continue in the spirit of a favorite greeting by President Theodore Roosevelt a century past, “Dee-lighted!”

At the Republican closed-door meeting to elect House leadership for the 114th Congress, exactly one week before Obama’s immigration announcement, the gathering was energetic, voluble, cheerful and optimistic. Speaker John Boehner is said to have led the proceedings with patience and confidence.

This was in profound contrast with one year ago, when Boehner and his senior leadership, Majority Leader Eric Cantor and Majority Whip Kevin McCarthy, were battered by the GOP revolt over the launch of the Affordable Care Act.

Defying Boehner at that time, about four dozen House members met feverishly in a Texas-menu restaurant, Tortilla Coast, on Capitol Hill with Senator Ted Cruz of Texas to plot a strategy of defunding Obamacare. The futile gambit, launched by Cruz’s prankish speechifying in the Senate, led quickly to a sixteen-day-long, partial government shutdown and an opinion poll nightmare for the Republicans.

Boehner was disheartened by the disorder; there was a credible report that he would complete his term in the 113th Congress and retire.

Fate intervened. Cantor was defeated by a contrarian candidate in the primaries and resigned soon after. When the popular McCarthy was elected to Majority Leader, the caucus stabilized as it labored on the campaign trail.

The reward was a bell-ringing victory of at least 14 additional seats for the largest GOP majority since the Roaring ’Twenties. The same Tea Party-inspired members who had followed Cruz onto the rocks in the fall of 2013 were suddenly transformed into passionate members of a disciplined majority looking ahead to the new year.

President Obama’s controversial announcement on immigration on Thursday, November 20, was immediately understood as a test of the new Republican comity. Would the melodrama of confrontation and shutdown begin again?

The surprise is that peace is holding in the House despite unhappiness with what is regarded as Obama’s provocations.

Tortilla Coast is empty of conspirators. Cruz’s theatricality remains robust, but last year’s angry antics have been replaced by a droll performance of a two-thousand-year-old jeremiad by the Roman upstart Cicero.

The Tea Party-flavored poison of 2013 has been replaced by sour complaints by the usual outraged and irreconcilable. Minnesota’s retiring Representative Michelle Bachman and Iowa’s Steve King travelled to the Rio Grande to announce a protest on the Capitol steps on December 3 that looks too much like an Obamacare rerun to inspire a following beyond those who wear unusual hats.

In the new 114th Congress, starting January 3, 2015, Boehner and McCarthy, in league with Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, will lead a legislative juggernaut that begins to resemble what the Republican Party enjoyed a century ago.

Back then, Speaker Joseph Cannon of Illinois and Senate Finance Chair Nelson Aldrich of Rhode Island moved controversial legislation on commerce, tariffs, finance, food and drugs, during the heyday of the Roosevelt administration, 1901-1909, and into the troubled President William Taft years, 1909-1913.

Back then, Senator Bob LaFollette of Wisconsin, the flashy Cruz of his day, rallied Republican “progressives,” the excited Tea Party of its day, into a force that, in demanding “reform,” weakened the GOP, not unlike what happened over Obamacare last year.

Back then, the Republican failure to resolve party differences on the progressive reforms took away the presidency from “conservative” Bill Taft and handed it to an unknown creation of segregationist bossism, New Jersey Democratic Governor Woodrow Wilson.

Boehner and McConnell aim to get through the lame duck session by moving an omnibus of budget bills before adjournment on December 11. So far, the GOP has avoided the humiliations of 2013 by remaining “Dee-lighted” with the expectations of 2014.

Batchelor is a novelist as well as host of the John Batchelor Show on 77 WABC-AM.