Patricia Sarabia, left, with Blue Bridge Benefits LLC, helps potential customers in November who were interested in the Obamacare sign up through Blue Cross Blue Shield at Compare Foods in Winston-Salem, N.C. Gerry Broome/AP

The rate of Americans without health insurance dropped again in the fourth quarter of 2014, marking a 4.2 percent decrease since the Affordable Care Act was enacted a year ago, according to a Gallup poll released Wednesday.

The rate of uninsured U.S. adults dropped from 13.4 percent in the third quarter to 12.9 percent in the fourth quarter. This is the lowest rate since Gallup started recording daily measurements in 2008—and data suggest these numbers will continue to plummet, the report said.



[READ: Obamacare Extortion Felt By Small Business Owners ]

Since the Affordable Care Act—which expanded Medicaid to more people and provides nationwide coverage based on a sliding scale—was implemented a year ago, the uninsured rate has decreased the most significantly for blacks and low-income Americans earning less than $36,000 a year. The rates dropped about 7 points for both groups during the past year.

The Hispanic population, however, is still struggling with a lack of health insurance, with a 32.4 percent uninsured rate, the release said.

The group that saw the greatest surge in health care, 18-to 25-year-olds,, dropped to 17.4 percent. The age group with the least health insurance is 26-to 34-year-olds.

Still, the rate of adults without insurance under the age of 65 has dropped, as more people are getting coverage through self-funded plans, Medicaid and Medicare, Gallup reported.

Employers, however, remain the most common source of health insurance, with numbers up slightly since the third quarter.

But further polling indicates that the improvements won’t stop here.



[ALSO: Health Care, Economy to Be Top Issues in 2015]



As of Dec. 26, 2014, 6.5 million Americans chose new plans or were automatically re-enrolled into a plan through HealthCare.gov, the Department of Health and Human Services found, according to Gallup.

Additionally, before this year’s open enrollment period—which began Nov.15 and will close on Feb. 15—half of uninsured Americans planned to sign up, Gallup said. More states could also broaden Medicaid to cover more people and fines could increase for the uninsured. A new law requiring businesses with a 100 or more employees to provide health insurance to 70 percent of their employees as of Jan. 1 could have an impact.

On the flip side, those who didn’t sign up for health insurance last year despite the Affordable Care Act might be reluctant to sign up this year and the open enrollment period will be much shorter, Gallup said.