WASHINGTON, January 19, 2015 — In his State of the Union address, President Obama will “propose raising $320 billion over the next 10 years in new taxes targeting wealthy individuals and big financial institutions to pay for new programs designed to help lower- and middle-income families,” said the Washington Post.

That’s frightening when one contemplates the meaning of these words. The President of the United States, Washington’s Republican and Democrat ruling elites, the majority of media outlets that support big government, believe the “middle class” is a state-manufactured institution; that the fuel that preserves and expands it is higher, redistributive taxes.

The reason for the perpetuation of this discredited superstition is that the U.S. economy, under the Bush and Obama administrations, is geared to prop-up the welfare state at the expense of economic growth.

“The U.S. now ranks not first, not second, not third, but 12th among developed nations in terms of business startup activities,” writes Jim Clifton, chairman and CEO of the Gallup polling organization. “We are behind in starting new firms per capita, and this is our single most serious economic problem. Yet it seems like a secret. You never see it mentioned in the media, nor hear from a politician that, for the first time in 35 years, American business deaths now outnumber business births.”

That bears repeating: “For the first time in 35 years, American business deaths now outnumber business births.”

While 400,000 new businesses were created in America last year, 470,000 went belly up. This is what Keynesian economists call a “sluggish recovery.”

Since its collapse in the Soviet Union, and its abandonment by China’s ruling oligarchs, socialist doctrine has been taking it in the shorts. But it has been enjoying something of a Renaissance here in America. The mainstream media has repackaged it as the “new populism.”

When Hillary Clinton campaigned for Massachusetts Democratic gubernatorial candidate Martha Coakley last October, she told supporters, “Don’t let anybody tell you that, you know, it’s corporations and businesses that create jobs.”

When conservatives attacked Hillary for her demonstrably stupid statement, PolitiFact.com rushed to her and the new populism’s rescue.

“Clinton aides later said she meant to… [attack] tax breaks for corporations.” That is clearly not what she said – a blatant PolitiLie.

Hillary was simply positioning herself in relation to her potential presidential primary rival Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who said, “There is nobody in this country that got rich on their own. Nobody. You built a factory out there – good for you. But I want to be clear. You moved goods to market on roads the rest of us paid for. You hired workers the rest of us paid to educate. You were safe in your factory because of police forces and fire forces that the rest of us paid for. You didn’t have to worry that marauding bands would come and seize everything at your factory… Now look. You build a factory and it turned into something terrific or a great idea – God bless! Keep a hunk of it. But part of the underlying social contract is you take a hunk of that and pay forward for the next kid who comes along.”

Obama, Hillary and Warren’s understanding of the “social contract” is identical to 17th century philosopher Thomas Hobbes. In Hobbs’ book Leviathan, we agree to surrender our “right to all things” to an all-powerful sovereign or government (the builders of roads and schools). That’s because the natural state of man, Hobbes believed, was evil and only an all-powerful state could prevent chaos and bloodshed.

It never dawned on Hobbes that giving the state total power could lead to unparalleled chaos, terror and bloodshed.

In his book The Conflict Between Two Worlds (1939), William Montgomery McGovern referred to Hobbes as “the prophet of a system which was to be carried out nearly three centuries later by Mussolini and Hitler.”

Soviet political theorist Nikolai Bukharin, later murdered by Joseph Stalin, said, “The state more and more becomes a direct exploiter, organizing and directing production as a collective capitalist… It is a New Leviathan, before which the fantasy of Thomas Hobbes seems a child’s play.”

The “New Leviathan” went bankrupt and evaporated into the ether on New Year’s Day 1991.

With more than seventeen trillion dollars in debt, with more business failures than successes, with government programs (like Obamacare) confiscating more of the average Americans’ shrinking income, it’s difficult to put a positive spin on the current state of our crumbling union.

“Rightful liberty,” said Thomas Jefferson “is unobstructed action according to our will within limits drawn around us by the equal rights of others. I do not add ‘within the limits of the law’ because law is often but the tyrant’s will, and always so when it violates the rights of the individual.”

You see, America was founded on the ideas of John Locke, whose Natural Rights philosophy is the moral counter to the monstrous totalitarianism espoused by Hobbes.

Locke said, “All mankind… being all equal and independent, no one ought to harm another in his life, health, liberty or possessions.”

Jefferson paraphrased Locke on behalf of individual liberty, turning it into high art:

“We hold these truths to be self-evident, that all men are created equal; that they are endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable rights; that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness; that, to secure these rights, governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the governed.”

Under the “new populism” of Obama, Hillary and Warren (Leviathan), there is diminishing liberty, prosperity and happiness. And our union will continue to crumble until the American people, as Jefferson said, “can prevent the government from wasting the labors of the people under the pretense of taking care of them.”

It’s like Abraham Lincoln said in his 1862 State of the Union address. “We shall nobly save, or meanly lose, the last best hope of earth.”