Act of Congress clears interstate for loggers

A banner draped across the front of a logging truck during a September 2012 protest in Duluth reads "Let us on the freeway for safety." (2012 file / News Tribune)

ELY, Minn. -- When the swamps anywhere within 60 miles of Ely freeze over is when Kuehl's Logging really kicks into high gear.

In a good winter week, Elroy Kuehl and his 10-truck operation can haul upwards of 50 truckloads of freshly cut timber out of those woodlands and to the Verso paper mill in Duluth, Minn., or to Douglas County, where the logs are transferred at a railroad siding onto railcars bound for Wisconsin Rapids.

Until President Barack Obama signed a long-overdue transportation bill into law earlier this month, Kuehl and his friends throughout the logging industry were forced to avoid a stretch of Interstate 35 and instead cut through Duluth by taking state Highway 61 onto London Road before using Superior Street and other alternatives to traverse the city.

"It was nerve-wracking for sure," Kuehl said. "You're in a big truck and you try to leave a little leeway but you get these people who are dodging in front of you."

With constant braking for crossing pedestrians, school and hospital zones and traffic lights, the hike through the city added time and introduced hazards, Kuehl said.

For a dozen years or more Kuehl had been out front in the lobbying effort to get the hulking logging rigs out of downtown Duluth and onto the interstate. He rode in the logging truck caravan protest down Superior Street in 2012 and helped to inform a parade of lawmakers.

"It's just been the chaos of bureaucracy," Kuehl said. "We've had everybody -- even the railroad -- fighting this thing. As if we're going to take their jobs."

Federal regulations restrict interstate highways to an 80,000-pound maximum. But, at peak season, logging trucks run at 99,000 pounds across their six axles on state and county roads.

"That goes back to economics," said Scott Dane, executive director of the Associated Contract Loggers & Truckers of Minnesota located in Gilbert. "With margins so tight and the fuel costs, we can't afford to run light; we've got to maximize our loads. That's why we carry the maximum weight that's allowable."

Area loggers looked around the country and found exceptions and exemptions to be the rule. All four neighboring states allowed for more weight on their portions of interstate. In Maine and Vermont, legislators earlier this decade cut a 20-year deal allowing rigs to carry 100,000 pounds on interstate roads.

So loggers from Isabella and Grand Marais and other points in northern Minnesota asked to lift the restriction across a 24-mile stretch of Interstate 35 from Duluth to state Highway 210 in Carlton.

They had allies in Duluth leadership. Police Chief Gordon Ramsay didn't like the safety risk associated with heavy logging rigs on city streets that grow narrow and claustrophobic in snow-filled winters.

"He was a real asset," Kuehl said.

Mayor Don Ness worried about the affect trucks had on city-maintained infrastructure buried under the roads. With a transformative rebuild of Superior Street looming on the horizon, getting the rigs out of downtown suddenly had a deadline.

"This was a problem in search of a very simple and elegant solution and yet there were layers upon layers of politics at a national level that were getting in the way of that solution being implemented," Ness said.

The marathon fight to get logging rigs out of downtown Duluth spread across three congressional representatives. The late Jim Oberstar, a transportation icon, found it to be a precarious issue and seemed to keep it at arm's length. Chip Cravaack rode in the caravan protest, but the freshman, one-term legislator didn't have the requisite clout to pull it off.

It was Rep. Rick Nolan, D-Crosby, who finally carried the baton across the finish line with support from U.S. Sens. Al Franken and Amy Klobuchar. In doing so, Nolan found an unlikely ally in Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan -- now the Republican Speaker of the House -- to help make it happen.

Behind the scenes

Sitting at a wobbly table in the Fitger's Brewery Complex in downtown Duluth earlier this month, Nolan recounted the dealing that led to the amendment that would allow logging trucks to operate through Duluth on Interstate 35.

As the morning's first coffee brewed at Cookie Temptations, Nolan spoke of handshake agreements and timing that was ripe for the change.

The amendment is part of the five-year, $305 billion transportation bill passed into law with President Obama's signature. Passage of that bill came after several years of delays leading to short-term extensions to fund the nation's infrastructure. Former Speaker of the House John Boehner never allowed the House Transportation Committee to write a bill, Nolan said. But every month the Minnesota Democrat said he would press the committee's ranking member and its chairman -- Peter DeFazio, D-Ore., and Bill Shuster, R-Penn., respectively -- on the need to write the bill.

"'We gotta bring it up,'" Nolan said he would tell them. "'We're not photo ops, here.' I'd been pressing Shuster and he'd been pressing Boehner and he turned it over to Ryan."

Across eight years, transportation funding was extended 34 times, Nolan said, secured with two-, three- and four-month extensions as Boehner operated the House out of his office under the tight fist of closed rule.

But earlier this year, when an embattled Boehner left his speakership and Ryan ascended into the presiding role, Nolan seized his chance.

With yet another extension in the wings and the Highway Trust Fund at risk, Nolan and DeFazio told Ryan they couldn't be counted on to vote for it. Nolan itched for the dialogue and give and take of open rule. The threat got Ryan's attention, Nolan said, and he promised to do everything in his power to convince leadership that the committee should be allowed to write a bill.

"Within that chaos Shuster was able to get a green light from Ryan," Nolan said. "He was true to his word."

The committee came together and sifted through about 200 amendments. Shuster asked Nolan if he would hold off on his amendment to lift weight restrictions around Duluth, because Nolan would have a better chance to appeal to legislators about the safety concerns involved with the issue that way. Shuster said he would support Nolan on the House floor under Ryan's now open rule.

Nolan had known Shuster's dad, Bud Shuster, during his first go-round in the House of Representatives and the now five-term congressman has a good relationship with the son. Nolan offered his amendment on the floor as "a commonsense, bipartisan solution to a very limited but seriously dangerous problem," for truckers and other travelers in "the great seaport of Duluth," while also thanking his colleagues for "opening up and democratizing this process."

The amendment passed.

"Nolan certainly understood the political difficulties on this," Ness said. "But to his great credit he took ownership of this issue and was willing to do the heavy lifting with Republican leadership in the House -- to kind of set aside the broader political issues and to say this is a local problem in need of a local solution and it doesn't need to carry the weight of the broader political dynamic."

Soon, the state's senators were on board, with Klobuchar later saying, "Long-term transportation bills are exactly the place where Congress can help address transportation issues like this, and the passage of this provision is a major victory for the city of Duluth."

The Oberstar factor?

How a transportation issue important to Duluth and the 8th District ever escaped Oberstar's influential reach is a question only his friends can answer now.

"He could have done it with a blink of an eye," said Dane, who expressed great admiration for Oberstar, who died in 2014. "He was being influenced, I think, a lot by the boogeyman efforts of the opposition."

Detractors who fought to keep the interstate limits intact said bigger trucks killed more people. But the loggers weren't asking for bigger trucks, they argued.

Additionally, Oberstar's deep regard for the preservation of roadbeds may have prevented him from going the distance.

"The other thing the Congressman cherished was the asphalt condition," Dane said. "He would do anything and everything to avoid potential impacts."

There were a couple different times Oberstar seemed interested, Kuehl said, "but then he got re-elected and went to work on bike trail or something."

Ness recalled that Oberstar, as chairman of the House Transportation Committee, was making good progress on the issue in 2009, until President Obama's Affordable Care Act hijacked national and congressional attention, leading to another simple extension of the nation's transportation funding.

"We were making good progress," Ness said, "until health care became the focal point."

It's no matter now. As of this month, Kuehl and others are sailing through Duluth on the interstate. It's not just loggers from up north who are benefitting, either. A lot of Wisconsin and Michigan loggers, Kuehl said, are bringing their hard maple across the Bong Bridge and to the Sappi paper mill in Cloquet, avoiding western Duluth streets altogether.

"This is a real shot in the arm for them," he said. "They're benefiting from getting right on the freeway."

For Northland drivers who are looking out for logging rigs along the interstate, there aren't as many as one would expect for this time of year.

"The weather is killing us," Dane said.

Normally, logging crews would have been reaching deep into the Northland's swamps by now. They'd have already prepared sites by driving over makeshift roads, tamping them down with repeated runs that drive the frost deep.

But mild winter conditions have minimized frost and kept the swamps wet. The loggers' association has written the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources expressing concern about members' inability to carry out harvest plans. Those who are operating are doing so under diminished, summer norms. The DNR has said it will review possible permit extension options in the third week of February.

"We're already struggling," Dane said. "But that's another story that's kind of developing."