Preserving an institutional 'structure of trust and respect'

September School senior Alex Knuckey, at left, plays hacky sack with science teacher Rob Donoho during a community class on Friday at Canyon Park in Boulder. ( JEREMY PAPASSO )

A slew of independent schools opened in the country in the 1970s, but most didn't survive long term.

One of the exceptions is Boulder's September School, which is celebrating its 40th anniversary with a party and silent auction on Saturday with alumni, families and past and present teachers and board members.

"A lot of people have just poured their hearts into this school and refused to let it go," said Brus Westby, a longtime September School principal who retired in 2006. "Our message has always been to develop confidence and see every child that comes through as intelligent and creative and very much able to be successful in the world."

September School is the city's oldest independent high school, started as a junior high in 1973 by parents and University of Colorado professors looking for alternatives to traditional public schools.

In 1985, it transitioned from a junior high and high school to a high school only. In the 1990s, when alternative high school choices were limited, the school enrolled 90-plus students with a wait list. As the competition grew, the school reduced its number to 50 to 70 students.

The school, at 19th and Walnut streets, mainly attracts students who are either unhappy or unsuccessful in large, comprehensive high schools. Arts, academics and community service are given equal importance, school officials say. The student-to-teacher ratio is four to one.

John Dunn, September School's head of school, said that, while the school has undergone changes, the foundation that was laid in the '70s remains strong -- "forming relationships and addressing students within a structure of trust and respect."

"It's a culture of contribution and belonging that's just as important as the academics," he said. "We really feel like we reflect the values of the city of Boulder."

Senior Julia Conlin, who lives in Superior, said she tried both public school and an online school, but neither worked out. September School, she said, "gave me a chance to put things in perspective and figure out who I was as an individual and how that fit into my education."

Another senior, Longmont's Veronica Henderson, said the school feels like a second home.

"I don't feel like I'm going to school," she said. "I feel like I'm going to my other family. All my teachers are just so incredible and just really good, honest people."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.