A New King for South L.A.

Martin Luther King Jr. Community Hospital Prepares for Reopening

The new Martin Luther King, Jr. Hospital is set to reopen in late spring for South LA residents. (courtesy MLKCH)

After rebuilding from a long tarnished history, the Martin Luther King, Jr. Community Hospital (MLKCH) is set to reopen this spring for South LA residents and surrounding communities. The hospital officially closed its doors in 2007 when it decided to rebuild and potentially bring on a new agenda.

“Our commitment to passionate care for our patients will be evident in the new hospital,” said Dr. Elaine Batchlor, President and Chief Executive Officer of the hospital. “Each private room has a designed area for families to stay with their loved ones.”

After nine long years, about 1.2 million residents in the surrounding area will gain access to emergency health care again. Areas such as Watts-Willowbrook, Inglewood, Lynwood and Compton will be included in those residents served.

The hospital will work in partnership with the county of Los Angeles, University of California and various healthcare providers to service residents

“The communities that will be served by the new hospital are really ground zero for some of the most challenging problems in healthcare. The first challenge is the high rate of disease in communities of color. Some of the residents in South Los Angeles suffer from some of the worst outcomes from different medical conditions you can name,” said Dr. Batchlor.

A significant shortage of medical physicians and care may be a contribution to these challenges that face minority communities. That is why it’s beneficial to have Dr. Batchlor on board as the CEO. She has over 25 years of healthcare experience, is Board Chair for the Integrated Health Association and is an expert in area of medical leadership and public health administration.

“Based on my many years of experience I’ve developed a sense of optimism. Because of my experiences I know that we can make progress in improving access. I’ve done this work most of my career by challenging goals and identifying the best practices,” she said.

The hospital is spearheading leadership with board members from different ethnic backgrounds to awaken the pillar of hope and health for an underserved area. Many people in the area have to travel outside of the community for inpatient care, so this will alleviate the worries of transportation issues.

The new facility located on E. 120th Street will be licensed for 131 beds and have emergency services, radiology, labor and delivery, general care and critical attention for future patients. Not only will care be given to those with health needs, the hospital will also provide technological support for those in need at the hospital. Rooms will computers and printers will be accessible for hospital patients.

They have also worked with community organizations to provide awareness about health insurance programs. The implementation of the Affordable Health Care act will also assist in the abundance of patient care. “This is an excellent opportunity for the community to gain access to healthcare,” said Batchlor. MLKCH started an intuitive called “Know Your Basics” where health care providers are starting the conversation about health screenings and helping people who participate get involved with health insurance. “This is a really important role that we have to play in creating awareness about access to health care.”

The hospital is now in the hiring process of staff for the new facility. “We are encouraging people to visit our website to get more information about working or volunteering with our hospital,” Batchlor said. For information about jobs and hospital information visit www.mlkcommunityhospital.org