Communities as far north as Nebraska will be warmer than areas of Southwest Florida early on Sunday morning.



That's notable considering December can be a brutally cold month in the central United States.

The forecast low for Omaha, Neb. tonight into early Sunday morning is 50 degrees, four degrees warmer than the anticipated low of 46 degrees in Fort Myers, Fla.

When you consider the average temperatures for both communities this time of year, tonight's forecast looks even more unusual. The seasonal low for Omaha is a bone-chilling 17 degrees, while Fort Myers enjoys an average low of 57 degrees in mid-December.

One of the biggest players in the weather shake up tonight is the position of the polar jet stream.

Jet streams are channels of fast-moving air in the upper levels of the atmosphere that exist between warm and cool air masses. The prevailing winds in jet streams move from west to east, but these rivers of air fluctuate with ridges and troughs to north and south. This permits spells of colder air to sink south while warmer air advances north.

Right now a sizable trough or dip in the jet stream exists in the western U.S. This allows cold air to spill southward keeping lows across much of the western side of the country at or below freezing on Sunday morning.

Over the Great Plains though, the jet stream shoots abruptly northward. The wind flow permits warmer air from areas like the Gulf of Mexico to drift northward, sparking a considerable warm up and push of above-average temperatures.

If you consider the continental U.S., a feature called an omega block pattern can also be detected with the jet stream.

An omega block is the name given to the jet stream pattern that resembles the letter Omega in the Greek alphabet. That often breaks down as a trough of colder air in the western U.S., a ridge of warmer air in the central Plains and a trough of cooler and unsettled weather along the east cost of the country.

Omega block patterns in the jet stream can persist for several days in a row. However, the current setup of the atmosphere is advancing this Omega block pattern eastward.

Given the movement of the jet stream the mass of mild air over the Plains will be expected to continue moving to the east as the colder air over the western U.S. slides back over the central states bringing them cooler and more seasonal conditions for December.



Adding to the temperature disparity between Omaha and Fort Myers is an area of high pressure over the southeastern U.S. This is helping to keep the wind flow on the Florida peninsula light and out of the north, advecting cool and dry air down the state. Add in clear skies over Southwest Florida and you have a recipe capable of producing some chilly overnight low readings.

A gradual warming trend will continue to impact the forecast in Florida for the next several days. By Tuesday night overnight low temperatures are expected to stay warmer, only cooling back into the low and mid 50s.