National news:

A staff member was killed and two students were injured after a student opened fire at a Nevada middle school today. The student shooter was also killed, according to police. (CNN News)

President Obama defended the Affordable Care Act in a speech today and also said "there's no excuse" for the problems that have occurred with the central health care website launched to sign up consumers. (Fox News)

A nightclub shooting on the Las Vegas Strip that left one man dead and two more injured early this morning began after a patron got upset over the club's cover charge, according to police. (Los Angeles Times)

New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie dropped the state's legal challenge to same-sex marriage today, hours after a court ruling went into effect allowing gay couples to wed. (NBC News)

A Missouri mother is fighting a contempt of court charge for breast-feeding her infant son while on jury duty. (ABC News)

Two Utah men have been removed as Boy Scout leaders after they posted a video of themselves purposely toppling an ancient rock formation in a state park. (CBS News)

The U.S. attorney's office in Oregon reports a Portland man has been indicted for aiming a laser pointer at two commercial airliners Oct. 13. (Associated Press)

Detroit Tigers manager Jim Leyland, who led the team to two pennants in eight seasons, announced today he is stepping down as Detroit's manager. (USA Today)

Nearly three-quarters of breast milk samples obtained from an Internet milk-sharing site contained microbes that could make a baby sick. (WebMD News)

International news:

A female suicide bomber believed to be the partner of an Islamist militant set off explosives on a bus in the southern Russian city of Volgograd today, killing at least six people. (BBC News)

Hurricane Raymond, with sustained winds of up to 120 mph, is spinning off of Mexico's Pacific coast, about 125 miles south-southwest of the resort city of Zihuatanejo (Los Angeles Times)

Masked gunmen sprayed a wedding party outside a Cairo church late Sunday night with automatic weapon fire, killing four people, including two young girls, in an attack that raised fears of an insurgency by extremists. (Associated Press)

Australian officials are worried three large wildfires burning in southeastern Australia could merge into one colossal fire and threaten the suburbs of Sydney. (NBC News)

The National Security Agency swept up more than 70 million French telephone records in a 30-day period, according to a newspaper report published today. (Associated Press)

Syria is dealing with the return of polio, a once-eradicated virus, as the World Health Organization is receiving reports of acute flaccid paralysis - a telltale sign of polio -throughout the country. (ABC News)

The high smog season has begun in China as visibility was reduced to 50 yards in some areas and small-particle pollution as much as 40 times higher than an international safety standard in one northern Chinese city. (Associated Press)