The Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, is 381,517 words long, but according to Rep. John Conyers, D-Mich., it's only a "small and modest" bill, CNS News reported Monday.

“It's just unimaginable the actions they would turn to, to get their way on a very small and modest bill – Obamacare. We’re talking about universal health care for everybody – single payer, that’s what the new direction is,” he told Democracy Now, essentially admitting the goal is socialized medicine.

But, CNS News said, Conyers didn't use those adjectives in 2009 when he was questioned about reading the bill.

“I love these members, they get up and say, ‘Read the bill,’” he told the National Press Club. “What good is reading the bill if it’s a thousand pages and you don’t have two days and two lawyers to find out what it means after you read the bill?”

In March 2011, Conyers told a CNS reporter at the National Press Club that Obamacare is a platform for socialized medicine.

Of course," he said when asked if the United States would ultimately adopt a single-payer form of health insurance. "Universal health care--well, every industrial country on the planet already has a universal system of health care.”

Even then, the economics of the law were proving to be a disaster, as Hot Air's Ed Morrissey observed:

"As we have said all along, the entire structure is designed for failure. It’s a Trojan horse for an eventual government takeover of health care in the vacuum of a collapse in health insurance, forced into failure through government regulation. Conyers simply confirms this long-term strategy."

CNS reported the Obama administration has crafted approximately 11,588,500 words of final regulations as a result of the law which is set to take over approximately one-sixth of the nation's economy.

But the question needs to be asked: If, in Conyer's view, the law is so modest, why wouldn't he take the time to read it?

Related:

----------------------------------------------------------------

If you like this article, you can follow Joe on Twitter @jnewby1956, visit and like his Facebook page, or subscribe to receive email updates when a new article is published.

For hard-hitting conservative commentary, please visit Joe's blog, the Conservative Firing Line. You can also find Joe's articles at Right News Now, Tea Party Tribune, Newsbusters, Liberty Unyielding and PolitiCollision.

Be sure to listen to "Grit and Grace" every Thursday from 6-8 p.m. Pacific Time on Blog Talk Radio, where you can hear Joe discuss current events.