When Hobby Lobby President Steve Green told Congress that the Bible was important to him and his family, he didn’t view it as a convenient argument put forth as a political ploy to get out of the ObamaCare provision that employers provide abortifacient forms of birth control. The Bible is his life, and he is serious about it, so much so that he is investing millions into the construction of a monumental museum about the Scriptures, called simply the “Museum of the Bible.”

Planning for the museum has been in the works for some time, as previously reported by The Inquisitr, but the name has only recently been confirmed.

According to The Huffington Post, Green says, “We don’t need more to tell people who and what we are.” The name says it all. The museum is about the Bible: its stories, its history, and its impact on the world.

The Green family began collecting Biblical artifacts and historic Bibles in 2009. According to a video from the Museum of the Bible, that collection has grown to over 40,000 artifacts, including more than 3,000 complete Torah scrolls, some of which survived the Jewish Holocaust under the Nazis, and 12 fragments from the Dead Sea Scrolls. One of those fragments is the earliest surviving fragment from a passage in John 8, dating back to the third century. The collection that the Hobby Lobby President’s family has amassed in just a few short years is believed to be one of the world’s largest private collections of rare Biblical texts and artifacts.

The family has already been sharing their Bible findings with the public in tours that have traveled throughout the world, giving researchers and devotees alike the privilege of seeing first-hand Biblical antiquities that previously only the most connected had access to. Soon, visitors, students, and scholars from all over the planet will have the opportunity to participate in the interactive Museum of the Bible and see their faith come alive.

The Museum of the Bible is intended to be a “high-definition sensory ride,” complete with a replica of ancient Nazareth, Steve Green told the Washington Times.

“From explorations of the Bible’s striking narratives to keen, scholarly engagement with some of the world’s rarest biblical treasures, there will be something at Museum of the Bible to engage everyone.”

The mission statement of the organization, reports the New Republic, is to “bring to life the living word of God, to tell its compelling story of preservation, and to inspire confidence in the absolute authority and reliability of the bible.”

According to Green, the Museum of the Bible is not designed just for believers. “The Bible can speak for itself, explain itself.” Skeptics, critics, and believers alike will be welcome at the facility, which will be set up much like a science museum.

Like the name, the logo for the new Museum of the Bible is very simple. According to Jonathan Ager of C&G Partners, the company that created the logo, “When you are making an identity to reflect a museum about the Bible, it has to be simple and respectful.”

The logo is a simple letter B on its side, for “Bible”; however, it could also be interpreted as the tablets of the Ten Commandments, the curled pages of an open book, or an M for “museum” underlined.

Even the font for the Bible museum is symbolic. The font is the European DIN font, “originally invented to make roadway signs in Europe more visible and safe. It was designed for clarity, to help people find their way.” A writer for The Huffington Post says, “How very Biblical.”

Construction is set to begin soon on the building, which will be in downtown Washington, D.C., four blocks from the U.S. Capitol, and two blocks from the National Mall. The plan is for the opening of the eight-story, 430,000 square foot Museum of the Bible to be in September of 2017.

Hobby Lobby President Steve Green is excited about the museum. He says, “We invite everyone – adults and children, the intellectually curious and most seasoned of scholars alike — to the Museum of the Bible to explore the most important and influential book ever written.”

[images via the Museum of the Bible]