RICHMOND —The Virginia General Assembly approved a last-minute Obamacare fix Monday night, allowing insurance companies to keep current policies past year's end, even if they're not compliant with the Affordable Care Act.

Whether this will change much was a matter of debate. Many cancellation notices have already gone out, the bill doesn't require insurance companies to keep the old policies, and Senate Majority Leader Thomas K. "Tommy" Norment acknowledged it may be too late for many policy holders.

But the bill cleared the House and Senate nearly unanimously after Democrats took the chance to question the chambers' Republican majorities on why they waited so long to act.

The assembly also passed a budget fix Monday, side-stepping a challenge from the Republican Party's right flank, which had a problem with the way the budget has treated transportation funding and a forthcoming increase in the state's gasoline tax.

The legislature also planned to elect new judges Monday night, but House and Senate leaders couldn't agree on a slate of judges for the state's Court of Appeals openings, or the opening from Supreme Court Chief Justice Cynthia Kinser's retirement.

Senate Republicans, Norment said, wanted to interview substantially more candidates for these positions than the House. That may happen before the end of the year, but the General Assembly vote to elect these judges may not come until the legislature reconvenes in January.

The legislature did vote on a number of district and circuit court judgeships, where House and Senate leaders reached agreement.

This was a one-day reconvening of a special legislative session that first convened in March and has been largely dormant since. That session technically continues, a maneuver that blocks Gov. Terry McAuliffe from appointing his own temporary judges.

The Affordable Care Act bill popped up late, despite several efforts on the same issue earlier in the year. Democrats accused Republicans of holding off on the change so they could use policy cancellation news against U.S. Sen. Mark Warner in his recent re-election race. House Democratic Leader David Toscano said some 37 other states had already passed this legislation, and he called Virginia's late entry "a feel-good bill that's really kind of a joke."

The budget amendment followed weeks of back and forth as state leaders tried to close a hole caused by lower-than-predicted tax revenues. At one point they planned to hold back $50 million earmarked for transportation projects, as agreed to during last year's landmark transportation funding deal.

That apparently spooked bond attorneys concerned that the decision might seem like it triggered the plan's kill switch, pulling enough funding to cause the massive deal to fall apart. Del. Bob Marshall, who successfully sued to block a 2007 transportation deal, advanced an argument along these lines.

Budget writers reversed course, putting the $50 million back. But not before Marshall, R-Manassas, blasted them on the House floor, accusing them of budgetary sleight of hand. A similar rumored push in the Senate never materialized, and the budget change passed easily.

Marshall, a conservative stickler for details and a thorn in his party leadership's side, said the amendment approved Monday "neutered" the transportation deal's kill switch, allowing the legislature to shift highway funding in future years and violating the spirit of last year's funding deal.

Speaker of the House William Howell's office said that's not true.

Marshall dared colleagues to eject him from the House Republican Caucus for his stand and pushed for a recorded vote so voters would know where legislators stood.

"Make my day and kick me out, because at this point I don't really care, Mr. Speaker," he said.

The Obamacare bill is another issue the legislature has been back and forth on. Democrats killed a Republican version, which blasted President Barack Obama and the ACA in its language, in March. Republicans killed Gov. Terry McAuliffe's version — sans the language about the president — in April.

Democrats filed the language that finally passed Sept. 18 — the day the legislature reconvened this session for a one-day debate on Medicaid expansion. It didn't go anywhere until Norment picked the effort up and sponsored an identical bill Monday in the Senate. Del. David Yancey, R-Newport News, sponsored a House version.

Both men were approached by Peninsula activists, including a woman who saw her policy canceled and an insurance agent named George Clark.

Clark pushed back Monday against the notion that the fix came too late, saying insurance companies should be able to honor expiring policies. Doug Gray, executive director for the Virginia Association of Health Plans, said late last week that would be "pretty challenging." During a floor speech, Yancey said the bill would "enable 250,000 Virginians to keep their health care coverage."

That number has been widely disputed, though it's clear many people who buy individual policies are facing new costs as they transition to more robust ones required by the ACA. Insurance companies also are shifting costs to enact the law's edicts, such as affordable coverage for people with serious conditions.

In addition to Clark, York County Republican Committee Chairman Shirley Charles and Mary Leedom of Yorktown lobbied for the bill. Leedom said her monthly premium went from $187 a month to $637 a month earlier this year. She couldn't afford it, she said, and has switched to a Christian health care program called Medi-Share that she hasn't yet had to use.

"I hope it works," she said.

Fain can be reached by phone at 757-525-1759.