An Omaha Army sergeant who returned from Iraq paralyzed from the neck down has died.

James Lathan Jr. and his wife of 16 years, Amy Lathan, had a date night Saturday. After dinner and a movie, they turned in and Lathan died in his sleep.

“He was happy. We were laughing and having a great time,” said Amy Lathan. “We went to bed, and only I woke up.”

A former Central High ROTC cadet, Lathan followed in his father's footsteps and joined the Army, serving as a helicopter mechanic. He met his future wife at his first duty stop.

Lathan was injured on July 4, 2004, in Baghdad after being struck by shrapnel at the base of the skull. He earned a Purple Heart.

Lathan wasn't ill at the time of his death, his wife said.

“Even though you're not prepared for death, we knew for the last nine and a half years that something like this could happen at any time,” Amy Lathan said. “We were just thankful for the time we got and continued to have with him.”

She said the injury never broke her husband's spirit: “He never once blamed the government or anybody for his condition. He never once looked back and said, 'I can't believe this happened to me.' ”

The Lathans were involved in their 13-year-old son James Lathan III's Boy Scouts Troop 308 activities and the lives of their three godchildren — Shana, Julien and Anja Moultrie — who live with them.

The couple saved up money and recently sent their son to the National Scout Jamboree in West Virginia. Her husband “was really proud of his son,” Amy Lathan said.

She will remember her husband as someone who was constantly learning and “trying to become better educated.” He served as a trustee for Christ Temple Church, enjoyed checking the stock market and was interested in real estate.

“Anything he wanted to do, he did,” she said.

Lathan was preceded in death by his grandmother Leola Hull. In addition to his wife, son and godchildren, he is survived by his mother, Alisa Frieson; father, James P. Lathan Sr.; brothers, Jonathan and Jason Lathan and Charles Frieson Jr.; sisters, Melissa Giles, Kiesha Wrigley, Sheena Frieson and Tonya Duvall; and grandparents, Calvin Lathan and Bernadine and Phillip Jefferson.

Services are scheduled for 10 a.m. Saturday at Lifegate Church, 15555 West Dodge Road.