Many Texas Democrats, like many national Democrats, fail to realize that they do not stand a chance of getting the vote of those predisposed to vote for Republicans. A few months ago, I wrote the following in an essay:



As the 2014 and 2016 elections approach, it is imperative that Democrats reaffirm what they stand for. It is not enough to simply win—it is important to differentiate. It is important to ensure voters know that when they pull the lever for a Democrat, they are voting for a Democrat who will govern with the tolerant middle-class centric values who will work to implement those policies accordingly. Democrats should embrace the criticisms from activists who are pointing out where the party has failed to live up to its ideals, its tenets and its platform. The embrace would mitigate the rightward creep that makes policies, once anathema to the party, somewhat plausible

Texas voters will begin voting when they believe that there are differences between candidates. They will start voting when they believe there are differences between parties.

Are Texans better off or are they about the same under the Republican government of the last several decades? Do they believe a change is in their best interest?

Those attempting to hold on to power must convince Texans that it gets no better than the current status quo, which is what most Texans have believed for a long time. That has been the reality of many Texans and Americans throughout the country.

For those attempting to get into power, they must convince Texans that the current government is an existential threat to their economic, social, and health well-being. This is not at all difficult, given the realities staring every working-class Texan, every working-class American, in their faces from dawn to dusk.

The question is whether the challengers of the status quo, the challengers of the ingrained corruption, the challengers of the misinformation, the challengers of those who are destroying our education system, the challengers of those who have returned women to the ills and mistreatments of the past, and the challengers of those attempting to restrict your right to vote will do so with the necessary unequivocal passion and fortitude to make one sprint to the voting booth to make a change.

It is not a difficult task if one is unhindered by the status quo. It is not at all difficult if these challengers tell you and prove to you why they will be a better representative for you.

I will repeat the phrase I passionately believe in: political involvement should be a requirement for citizenship. It is not now, but it should be, in our hearts. Learn about your candidate. Vote in your interest, the interest of your state, and the interest of your country.