CHARLOTTE, N.C., Aug. 12, 2015 (GLOBE NEWSWIRE) -- Premier, Inc. (NASDAQ:PINC), a leading healthcare improvement company, today announced that it has acquired Healthcare Insights, LLC for $65 million in cash. Healthcare Insights is a privately-held, integrated financial management software developer that provides hospitals and healthcare systems with budgeting, forecasting, labor productivity and cost analytic capabilities.

"As the healthcare industry becomes more complex, value-driven, and data-dependent, the need for health systems to clearly understand their performance in every arena is a top concern," said Keith J. Figlioli, Premier's senior vice president of health informatics. "It is not enough to have financial, operational and clinical data. Health systems must understand how to translate that information into effective cost containment strategies, as well as superior clinical outcomes."

The industry's increased focus on cost is largely driven by the Affordable Care Act, which reduces overall reimbursement, and increasingly holds providers accountable for the total costs and quality of the care delivered. Coupled with the growing movement to value-based payments such as bundling or shared savings, healthcare providers need solutions that can help them understand cost drivers and opportunities for improvement in detail. Healthcare Insights is expected to enable Premier to offer a more complete solution that delivers additional value by adding budgeting, clinical financial management and productivity analytics to existing cost and quality applications, including the company's enterprise resource planning (ERP) solution.

Thomas Johnston, Healthcare Insights' chief executive officer, said, "This strategic combination will allow us to offer a more complete ERP solution with an end-to-end view of cost management. We expect this to increase our hospitals' and health systems' understanding of their clinical, operational and financial performance, and help them deliver more efficient, higher quality care."

Founded in 2000, Healthcare Insights' current customer base includes over 7,500 users across 200 facilities associated with 94 health systems, 49 of which do not currently have a relationship with Premier. KLAS, a leading research firm that provides ratings for more than 900 healthcare products and services, has ranked Healthcare Insights first place in budgeting for the past four years.

The Healthcare Insights acquisition, which was effective July 31, is currently projected to be modestly accretive to Premier's fiscal 2016 revenue growth and adjusted EBITDA. Expected revenue and adjusted EBITDA contributions from the acquisition will be incorporated into Premier's fiscal year 2016 guidance, which is scheduled to be announced on August 24, when the company reports fiscal fourth-quarter and full-year 2015 financial results.

About Premier, Inc.

Premier Inc. (NASDAQ:PINC) is a leading healthcare improvement company, uniting an alliance of approximately 3,400 U.S. hospitals and 110,000 other providers to transform healthcare. With integrated data and analytics, collaboratives, supply chain solutions, and advisory and other services, Premier enables better care and outcomes at a lower cost. Premier, a Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award recipient, plays a critical role in the rapidly evolving healthcare industry, collaborating with members to co-develop long-term innovations that reinvent and improve the way care is delivered to patients nationwide. Headquartered in Charlotte, N.C., Premier is passionate about transforming American healthcare. Please visit Premier's news and investor sites on premierinc.com for more information about the company.

Forward-looking statements

Statements made in this release that are not statements of historical or current facts, such as those related to Premier's ability to provide enhanced capabilities, products and services, the timing and amount of expected revenue and adjusted EBITDA accretion from the acquisition, if any, and future operations and integration matters described herein, are "forward-looking statements" within the meaning of the Private Securities Litigation Reform Act of 1995. Forward-looking statements may involve known and unknown risks, uncertainties and other factors that may cause the actual results, performance or achievements of Premier to be materially different from historical results or from any future results or projections expressed or implied by such forward-looking statements. Accordingly, readers should not place undue reliance on any forward-looking statements. In addition to statements that explicitly describe such risks and uncertainties, readers are urged to consider statements in the conditional or future tenses or that include terms such as "believes," "belief," "expects," "estimates," "intends," "anticipates" or "plans" to be uncertain and forward-looking. Forward-looking statements may include comments as to Premier's beliefs and expectations as to future events and trends affecting its business and are necessarily subject to uncertainties, many of which are outside Premier's control. More information on potential factors that could affect Premier's financial results is included from time to time in the "Cautionary Note Regarding Forward Looking Statements," "Risk Factors" and "Management's Discussion and Analysis of Financial Condition and Results of Operations" sections of Premier's periodic and current filings with the SEC, and also made available on Premier's website at investors.premierinc.com. Forward-looking statements speak only as of the date they are made, and Premier undertakes no obligation to publicly update or revise any forward-looking statements, whether as a result of new information, future events or otherwise that occur after that date.

INVESTOR RELATIONS CONTACT:

Jim Storey

Vice President, Investor Relations, Premier Inc.

704.816.5958

Jim_Storey@Premierinc.com

MEDIA CONTACT:

Amanda Forster

Vice President, Public Relations, Premier Inc.

202.879.8004

Amanda_Forster@Premierinc.com