In my many years writing about health care law for Bloomberg BNA, I’ve never written about a presidential election. Politics, sure. Just witness all the litigation surrounding the Affordable Care Act. But I’ve never been asked by my editors to think about what the election of a new president might mean for health care.

This week, two stories presented themselves to me on a silver platter: The keynote speaker at an American Health Lawyers Association conference in Nashville said Hillary Clinton (D) would be the better choice for those concerned about health-care issues, and Donald Trump (R) released a list of potential Supreme Court nominees.

The speaker, a financial adviser who watches the health-care market closely, said Clinton is the better choice in part because she is a known quantity. She’s on record opposing high drug prices, and she set out her own plan to reform health care in the 1990s. Several people in the audience disagreed, saying you can’t always judge a presidential candidate by policies they expressed 30 years ago. They also disagreed with the speaker’s statement that the Republicans probably will lose the Senate if Trump’s elected—a move that would certainly doom his only announced health-care priority so far, repealing the ACA.

Possible future President Trump, however, probably wouldn’t have to worry about an ACA repeal because his Supreme Court would be stacked with conservative justices likely to overturn key provisions of the act or pull back its implementation. Three of the federal judges have heard cases concerning religious objections to the contraceptive mandate. One of those judges served on the only court to reject the government’s position The Supreme Court recently punted on the issue, sending it back to the appeals courts with directions to the parties to try to find a compromise, so it could come up again.

Another federal judge sat on a panel that considered a strict abortion informed consent law. His two colleagues upheld two of the law’s provisions, but rejected one that would have required doctors to tell their patients that having an abortion could cause suicidal thoughts. Trump’s potential nominee would have upheld that provision. Although the Supreme Court doesn’t often take abortion cases, conservative justices could push it to take more in the future in an effort to overturn Roe v. Wade.

The hearts of health-care transactions attorneys may have skipped a beat, however, when they saw the name of Sixth Circuit judge on the list. He took part in a case that has required the unwinding of an Ohio hospital merger.

Whatever your political beliefs, both developments provided food for thought this week.

My AHLA Health Care Transactions Conference story is at http://www.bna.com/clinton-better-choice-n57982072679/

My Trump Supreme Court nominee story is at http://www.bna.com/trump-list-court-n57982072730/

Stay on top of new developments in health law and regulation with a free trial to the Health Law Resource Center.

Learn more about Bloomberg Law and sign up for a free trial.