Sioux Falls, SD

It's not uncommon to run to a grocery store for fresh fruit or a gallon of milk. But now customers can also get a check-up and health information while they're at one regional grocery chain.

Pulled up in front of Hy-Vee on Minnesota Avenue is a mini health clinic on wheels Friday.

"We've kind of taken the attitude that, if we build it, they will come," Dr. David Basil said.

It's called the Hy-Vee Health You Mobile Powered by Avera, created through a partnership between the grocer and the hospital.

The mobile unit is outfitted with two exam rooms providing health information and screenings. Dietitians and pharmacists will staff the vehicle providing health services to areas with limited health options.

"Life is busy. You don't always have the time to get to the physican's office for an annual checkup or anything. That will be wonderful if we did. But we live in the real world," Basil said.

Patients can also the opportunity for a virtual visit with a provider, at a cost of less than $50, through the Avera Now app.

"In a consumer world, we truly have to be where the consumers are," Dr. Preston Renshaw, Avera's Chief Medical Officer, said, "We have to make it easy and accessible for them because if it's not accessible, people just don't go do it. They don't have time."

That's only the start of Hy-Vee's and Avera's push for health care accessibility.

Convenience clinics and kiosks will be built inside four Sioux Falls stores beginning this fall where customers can bring health concerns to providers though a virtual visit.

Organizers in charge of the partnership say when it's the easier for patients to find care, the healthier they will be.

"Early access to preventative health screenings saves people's lives," Renshaw said.

In all, eight sponsored mobile units will be added throughout the region over the next three years.

HealthBeat

Health Beat {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.