Topics: Books, Diet, Editor's Picks, Holiday weight loss, Neuroscience, Nutrition, Science, Life News

The limits of self-control are key factors in our poor eating habits. One reason self-control is limited is because the capacity of the brain’s information-processing system is relatively minuscule.

Scientists generally agree that our brain has two operating systems: a cognitive system and a noncognitive system. The cognitive system requires conscious awareness; it is reflective and deliberate. It can perform mathematical computations, make novel decisions, and engage in long-term planning and “out-of-the-box” thinking. It operates, on average, less than 5 percent of the time and is the internal resource responsible for self-control.

The other 95 percent of the time, our noncognitive system is in control. Impulsive and immediate—and following well-established rules and patterns—it is responsible for quick, automatic decision-making. The noncognitive system is often emotionally charged and responds to external signals, cues, information, signs, or symbols. When a person is under stress, tired, preoccupied, or overwhelmed with too much information, noncognitive processing dominates over thoughtful decision-making. Put more simply, when we are overloaded, we tend to make decisions impulsively. And when it comes to food, impulsivity typically leads to nutritionally poor choices and what we perceive as a loss of self-control.

We can think of our brain as being engaged in a constant ebb and flow between deliberate and automatic processing. Sometimes it is more of a fight between two mismatched warriors, like David and Goliath. David represents the small, nimble, and smart cognitive force that has to face a massive, primitive, noncognitive giant that is in charge most of the time. Goliath is unflagging and never sleeps. Sometimes David can win, but it is nearly impossible for him to win all the time. David can be distracted, he can be worn down, and he needs to sleep. This is not a single battle but an eternal struggle.

Limited Processing Capacity and Food Choices

To illustrate how the cognitive and noncognitive systems interrelate, psychologists Baba Shiv and Alexander Fedorikhin developed an experiment that looked at the kind of decisions people make when their cognitive systems are occupied (also called a “cognitive load”), compared to when they have less to think about. In this study 165 participants were asked to memorize either a two- or seven-digit number (the same length as a phone number without the area code). After they were shown the number briefly on an index card, they were asked to memorize it and then select a ticket for a snack, which was supposed to be a token reward for participating in the study. The participants got to choose either a piece of chocolate cake or a fruit salad. After they selected the ticket, they had to disclose the number they memorized and then complete a final questionnaire about the factors that influenced their choice of snack. Presented with the sentence “My final decision about which snack to choose was driven by . . .” they were asked to choose between “my thoughts or feelings,” “my willpower or desire,” “my prudent self or my impulsive self,” “the rational side or the emotional side,” and “my head or my heart.”

Among participants who had to memorize the two-digit number, 41 percent chose the chocolate cake, while among those who memorized the seven-digit number, 63 percent chose chocolate cake, a 50 percent difference. Those who had to memorize the seven-digit number said their decision was influenced more by their emotional, impulsive side than by their rational, prudent side. The researchers concluded that the group memorizing the longer number had less available brainpower to carefully consider the items, and resorted to impulse.

Given how taxed the average person is by the stresses of his or her job and family life—stresses that far exceed having to memorize a seven-digit number—our tendency to take mental shortcuts when it comes to figuring out what to eat is understandable. Is it any wonder that we sometimes choose cake over fruit? Before we do, does it cross our minds that one bite of cake might have five times the calories of a bite of fruit? Probably not.

The part of the brain that governs conscious awareness is relatively small and processes only forty to sixty bits per second, the equivalent of a short sentence. The brain’s entire processing capacity, however, which includes the visual system as well as the unconscious, automatic system, is estimated to process eleven million bits per second. This is faster than a sophisticated computer and about five hundred thousand times the power of our conscious awareness.

To better appreciate how small our David is compared to our Goliath, look at the grid in [the] Figure [below]. If this 50 × 50 grid represents the entire cognitive capacity of all the neurons of the human brain (Goliath), the single dark square represents an amount about two hundred times larger than the cognitive capacity of our conscious awareness (David).

Why is Goliath so large compared to David? Goliath has to direct all the minutiae of every gesture, movement, action, and reaction. Goliath gets us out of bed, moves our arms and legs just the right amount so we don’t fall over, and alternates our fingers back and forth to efficiently scratch that itch on our scalp. Goliath makes sure that when we walk from the house to the car, we lift our feet just so high to ascend the correct distance from the ground. When we get in the car, Goliath ensures that we elegantly maneuver to a sitting position without bumping our head, and that we find the brake and gas pedal. Goliath is simultaneously processing all that our senses experience—the sights of the road ahead, the sounds of the freeway, the smells of the new air freshener, the aftertaste of coffee, the wind against our cheeks. As Goliath is navigating the journey, David, however, is focused on a very narrow set of goals: what to get Mom for Mother’s Day, which movie to see this weekend, whether Goliath automatically locked the front door, and whether David should go back home and check.

Distractions and Eating

Because our cognitive capacity is so limited, most of us can do or think about only one thing at a time. If we multitask, we can consciously direct only one of the tasks, while the other is handled automatically.

In an experiment conducted by French researchers France Bellisle and Anne-Marie Dalix, a group of forty-one healthy, normal-weight women were asked to come to the laboratory weekly for four weeks. The first week they were asked to eat a meal alone. The following week they had to eat while listening to a description of the food’s tastes and textures. The third week they were asked to eat while listening to a detective story. And the fourth week they were asked to eat the meal with three other women. The meal was exactly the same each visit. The women ate the same amount at every meal except when they had to listen to the detective story. On that occasion, they ate an average of seventy-two calories more—even though they rated their levels of hunger exactly the same on all four occasions.