Angela Malave, 56, of Greenwood used to beg for money daily at the foot of the Legare Bridge in Charleston. Malave has said she is homeless and depended on panhandling to survive. Now that the panhandling effectively has been banned in the city, Malave spends some nights in a tent.

A Charleston plan to drive away roadside panhandlers is working.

In the month since city police have been enforcing a new ordinance that effectively bans roadside begging, they have issued only two citations, said Charleston Police Department spokesman Charles Francis.

City leaders have said the ordinance was necessary because the practice posed a public safety hazard. But some advocates for the homeless say the ordinance doesn’t do anything to help low-income residents, or get to the root causes of homelessness.

The ordinance, which Charleston police began enforcing on Sept. 18, prohibits anyone — including panhandlers, people collecting money for charities or those handing out religious fliers or selling newspapers — from passing items to or from the occupant of a vehicle on a roadway in a traffic lane.

So people making a donation, and those accepting it, are both violating the ordinance, which carries a maximum penalty of 30 days in jail and a $1,092 fine.

Deputy Police Chief Tony Elder attributes the success of the ordinance to a 30-day education campaign that police launched soon after City Council gave the plan final approval. That campaign included officers talking to panhandlers and people who donate to them and explaining the ordinance, handing out cards that spelled out the rules and placing movable lighted billboards at key intersections announcing the day enforcement would begin.

“We took the time to educate the public,” Elder said. “For the most part, voluntary compliance was sought and given.”

And most people who responded to a call to the public on social media said they thought begging along roadsides had been eliminated, or nearly so. However, Patricia Cannon Fisher said she thinks the ordinance should be reversed. A lot of people have no empathy for people down on their luck, she said. “It bothers me that I live in a town where people are so cruel,” she said. “It seems to me there truly is a war on the poor.”

State Rep. Wendell Gilliard, who is pushing for the state to do more for the homeless, said “the ordinance is not getting at the root of the problem.”

Gilliard said he thinks growth and development are eliminating lower-income housing and pushing people out into the streets. And he’s concerned about the growing number of “tent cities” he sees around Charleston.

He’s planning to file a bill this year that would give a tax break to developers who replaced low-income housing that they eliminated to make room for development.

He also said he thinks people handing money to others to try to help them shouldn’t face fines, and the ordinance’s maximum fine of $1,092 is too high.

“Common sense tells you the person panhandling doesn’t have money for a fine,” he said.

Rev. Gordon Cashwell, from the Without Walls Ministry, who works with many homeless people, said he knows people who have panhandled because they really need the money, and others who beg for money to feed addictions.

It’s important “not to enable people to get comfortable in a self-destructive lifestyle,” he said. But he thinks many people could do more to help others in need. For instance, he said, churches could do more to provide long-term housing opportunities.

“Handing money to people, I don’t think that significantly helps them,” he said. But now, we’re pushing lower-income people out of the city, Cashwell said. “If we’re just shifting people around, that’s not what a successful city is.”

Reach Diane Knich at (843) 937-5491 or on Twitter @dianeknich.