Executive Briefing | by Sarah C. Threnhauser & Athena Mandros| May 1, 2015

I have been in a number of strategy meetings over the past couple weeks—each with very different stakeholder groups—and there is one very interesting theme: In the five years since the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), state health and human service markets have become increasingly different, rather than increasingly similar. Why? There are a few factors, but Medicaid waivers are a big reason.

While consumers, clinical professionals, provider organization executives, and health plan executives are all greatly affected by waivers, many stakeholders don’t understand what they are or how they work – which is why our team has put together the definitive guide, What Are Medicaid Waivers & Why Do They Matter?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report.

Why are waivers important? They both show how CMS is driving change through the Medicaid program and also reflect the larger trends that we are seeing across the health care system. There are a total of 406 state Medicaid waivers currently approved by CMS, and these waivers are used primarily to accomplish three goals:

1. To promote the use of home- and community-based services

Example: Pennsylvania Medicaid Planning Changes In Capacity & Service Settings For IDD Waiver Program

The majority of all Medicaid waivers are section 1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services (HCBS) waivers – 72%. HCBS waivers are used to shift long-term services and supports from institutional settings to the community. It’s no surprise that HCBS waivers are the most prominent type of waiver – we’ve seen a continuous trend in the market to move away from institutional care and long-term hospitalizations towards HCBS (Is Your Organization Ready For The “HCBS Era”? ). This shift is spurred by a combination of factors, including a push to reduce costs and to serve consumers in the least restrictive setting possible.

2. To transform Medicaid service delivery through new financing and service delivery models and to expand eligibility to new populations

Example: California 1115 Medicaid Waiver Renewal Features Shared Savings & Global Payment For Uninsured and CMS Approves Virginia Plan To Offer Medicaid Coverage Selectively To SMI Population

Section 1115 waivers are the second largest group of waivers – and of the 18 waiver applications still pending with CMS, all are section 1115 waivers. Section 1115 waivers allow states to use new financing and service delivery models, including performance-based reimbursement models and integrated care management. These waivers are often part of a larger system redesign to shift the delivery of long term services and supports from fee-for-service, to managed (and integrated) care models by consolidating all the HCBS populations under a single section 1115 waiver. They are also the primary vehicle for expanding Medicaid coverage to childless adults (see The ‘Non-Medicaid’ Medicaid Expansion). The growth of 1115 waivers shows the continued push towards value-based, integrated care (The (Inescapable) New Value Equation In Health & Human Services: Why It Will Determine Who Succeeds).

3. To expand the use of managed care

Example: CMS Approves Florida Medicaid Managed Long-Term Care Waiver

The third major group is section 1915(b) managed care waivers, which are used to implement primary care case management systems, implement managed care by requiring Medicaid recipients to choose from a number of competing managed care organizations, use savings from the introduction of managed care to provide additional benefits, and limit the providers from which beneficiaries can receive non-emergency treatment. There are currently 52 active 1915(b) waivers. States continue to move more services, more programs, and more populations to managed care – and away from fee-for-service (see Planning For The New Managed Care).

Distribution & Coverage Of Current Medicaid Waivers Waiver Purpose Total Number Of Waivers Section 1115 Research & Demonstration Projects Test broader reform initiatives for the finance and delivery of Medicaid and CHIP services 54 waivers in 38 states plus the District of Columbia Section 1915(b) Managed Care Waivers Enroll beneficiaries in managed care delivery systems 52 waivers in 30 states plus the District of Columbia Section 1915(c) Home and Community-Based Services Waivers Support shift in delivery of long-term care services from institutional settings to in home and community settings 295 waivers in 48 states – excluding the states of AZ and RI Concurrent Section 1915(b) and 1915(c) Waivers Provide a continuum of services to the elderly and people with disabilities within limits of federal requirements for both programs 5 waivers in 4 states – FL, IL, MI, OH TOTAL 406 total waivers in all states

For a reference guide to this topic, check out What Are Medicaid Waivers & Why Do They Matter?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report. This report is free to all premium members – and can be purchased in our e-store for $495. The reference guide answers a number of questions:

What are the different types of CMS waivers and what populations are covered in each type of waiver? How do state Medicaid waivers differ from State Plan Amendments (SPAs)? How many state waivers are currently in place and how many are pending? What waivers are currently active in each state, and what populations do they serve?

For questions on Medicaid waivers, don’t hesitate to contact me or my colleague, Athena Mandros, Market Intelligence Analyst, at amandros@openminds.com.