The number of Americans who say that they have been personally harmed by the Affordable Care Act has increased since January, according to the results of a Rassmusen survey released on Monday.

The survey, conducted from Feb. 28 to March 1, asked 1,000 likely voters about whether they had been personally affected by Obamacare. Thirty-three percent said that they had been harmed by it, while only 14 percent said that it helped them. Fifty percent said that there was no effect for them.

These numbers are up and down, respectively, from January. That month, 29 percent said that it had negatively effected them, and 16 percent said it had helped them.

Overall, support for Obamacare is low, with only 40 percent holding an at least somewhat positive view of it. Fifty-six percent have a negative view of it.

“This includes 16% who view the law Very Favorably and 41% who have a Very Unfavorable opinion of it,” Rasmussen reports.

When it comes to health care costs, a majority of 58 percent believe that a free market approach to health care is needed to bring them down. Only 24 percent think government should have more involvement, and 18 percent aren't sure.

Obamacare has largely been viewed negatively by the Amercan public. Many polls have shown low approval for it and, in turn, Pres. Obama.

One area of the act in which Obama has drawn criticism is his delaying and refusing to enforce certain parts of the law, which many have said is a violation of executive power. The most recent change that Obama has made to the law is delaying the mandate that will result in canceling insurance plans that don't meet the qualifications set up by the law until after the 2014 elections.

Fifty to 100 million health insurance plans were set to be canceled this fall, which would have harmed the Democrats running in the upcoming elections. Obama issued the delay for this reason, according to the Hill.

“I don’t see how they could have a bunch of these announcements going out in September. Not when they’re trying to defend the Senate and keep their losses at a minimum in the House. This is not something to have out there right before the election,” a health insurance industry consultant said.

Obama has been accused of lying when he, repeatedly, said that no one would lose their health insurance plans if they had purchased them before the implementation of Obamacare. But according to research by NBC late last year, Obama knew that millions of policies would be canceled since the summer of 2010.