"She is a committed conservative who has an undisputed record of fighting for anti-abortion causes," Santorum said of Handel in a statement. "Karen will fight to repeal the [Affordable Care Act], cut spending and stop the heavy-handedness of the Obama administration that is killing job creation in this country."

Handel is fighting to finish among the top two vote-getters this coming Tuesday to advance to a likely July runoff. Businessman David Perdue is leading the pack, but Handel is in a scrum with Rep. Jack Kingston, R-Ga., for second.

On Conger, Santorum praised him as a "passionate leader in the Oregon House fighting for the unborn, health care reform, tax cuts and increasing educational opportunities for children."

Conger is lagging behind neurosurgeon Monica Wehby by 21 points, according to one poll.

On Wednesday, Santorum plunged into the contested Iowa GOP primary backing long-shot college professor Sam Clovis.

Santorum was inclined to stay out of the first-in-the-nation caucus state foray, but said he felt compelled to align himself with Clovis "because so-called conservative groups in Washington, D.C., have tried to anoint a candidate."

[ALSO: Republican 2016ers Look to Pass the Hillary Clinton Test]

Santorum never mentioned her name but he's likely referring to state Sen. Joni Ernst, who has won the backing of the Senate Conservatives Fund and the Chamber of Commerce and potential 2016 rival, Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla.

"Unfortunately, these same groups either don't know the real record, or they are trying to mislead Iowa conservatives about who is the best conservative in this race. Simply put, a voting record that supports tax increases and not showing up for the job the people entrusted you to do are not conservative principles," Santorum said, taking a shot at Ernst, who has sprung ahead of the field in recent polling.

Clovis trails Ernst by 21 points, according to the most recent public survey.

John Brabender, Santorum's chief strategist for his 2012 bid, described Santorum's endorsement process as thorough and unique for someone considering a presidential bid.

"The other candidates do it in a way that says, what's in it for themselves. Rick does it and says, 'what's in the best interest for the conservative movement?'" Brabender says. "I think there's other people who work backwards and say, 'who's most likely to win and can we endorse?' I don't think he does it that way."

Santorum usually also requires a detailed conversation before lending his support, as he did with Handel, according to Brabender.

[MORE: The Next Faces of the Republican Party]