Members Only How to Fix the Affordable Care Act

If you were trying to purchase health insurance in the individual and family market just four years ago, there was a 22 percent chance you would be denied.

But today the percentage of Americans who can be refused coverage is zero. And the millions of Americans who already had coverage are now better protected.

Story Continued Below

In fact, this week marks a milestone for the Affordable Care Act, as the end of the first marketplace open enrollment period draws to a close. Millions of Americans have accessed new insurance options on the marketplace, and we urge those who still need health coverage to visit HealthCare.gov to see their options.

As each of us has said from the beginning, the ACA is not perfect. And as each of us has promised, we are taking important steps to make the law work even better for families and small businesses across the country. From repealing the 1099 filing requirement to easing the paperwork burden on small businesses to allowing individuals to “window shop” for their insurance options on HealthCare.gov, we have already eliminated several unnecessary and bureaucratic barriers while maintaining consumer protections that provide invaluable peace of mind to millions of Americans.

But there is more to be done.

That’s why today we are laying out some next steps to further improve implementation and ease the transition not only for individuals and families, but also for small businesses.

First, we want to give consumers as many choices as possible when it comes to selecting their health plans. By providing a new, lower cost, high deductible option called the Copper Plan (in addition to the existing Platinum, Gold, Silver and Bronze-level options in the marketplace) we will give consumers more control over their own coverage, spur competition and, most importantly, increase affordability.

We are calling to restore startup funds for new consumer-driven health insurance cooperatives, now operating in 23 states. This will allow families to have more options to access health coverage beyond traditional insurance companies, infusing state marketplaces with more competition to reduce average premiums.

We also propose directing state insurance regulators to develop models for their states to sell health insurance across state lines. These multi-state models will help us discern the benefits and challenges of selling health insurance in this manner, and determine if it is a means to increasing choice and competition among plans—potentially driving down costs while maintaining quality and value.

Second, to ease the transition for employers, we want to expand the option for voluntary coverage for employers with fewer than 100 employees, about 98 percent of all businesses. This will enable small and mid-sized businesses to make their own choices for their businesses, and employees can shop for coverage on the individual marketplace.