BRIDGEWATER – Students could soon feel the impact of an impasse in the ongoing teacher contract negotiations between the Bridgewater-Raritan Education Association and the Bridgewater-Raritan Regional School District.

Teacher's union President Steve Beatty said Wednesday he has urged teachers to not take part in extra-curricular activities they are not compensated for.

"We asked them to cease all non-paid volunteer activities," Beatty said. "Most things are going to keep going."

He said some of these volunteer activities include Advance Placement review sessions, Parent-Teacher Organization basketball games and certain clubs.

"No one wanted it to happen," Beatty said. "We have great kids and a great school district, but we have to make the board realize our members are clearly upset about this."

Teachers in the Bridgewater-Raritan Regional School District have been working without a contract since June 30.

The district superintendent's office did not respond to requests for comment.

According to a December press release on the district's website, the Bridgewater-Raritan Board of Education and the association are sparring mainly over a health insurance plan.

The board, at a recent meeting, proposed salary increases of 3.25-, 2.9- and 2.9- percent for the three years of the new contract, but cannot fulfill these increases if the 94 percent of education association members currently enrolled in Aetna Freedom10 remain in that health insurance plan, the release stated.

Aetna Freedom10 is considered a "Cadillac" health insurance plan – or exceptionally expensive plan – under the Affordable Care Act, which would result in a 40 percent tax penalty for the district when the act goes into effect in 2018.

"If that remains we cannot afford to provide salary increases in year three," the board stated in the release. "It is simply too expensive. The board must consider the impact on the overall budget that these insurance costs are causing."

The board said it would instead offer Aetna Freedom1525 in the third year of the contract, which would increase certain doctor copays, such as for specialists.

However, a week ago Congress passed a bill to push the "Cadillac tax" back to 2020, so Beatty said he hopes the district and association can come to an agreement where teachers can keep their current health insurance plan and also receive more than a ".74 percent" salary increase.

"The issue is now over the board's need to come back and offer a deal without the insurance issue in mind," Beatty said.

Beatty said the association originally tried to settle on a two-year contract to avoid the issue for now, but the district rejected it.

The contract will again be discussed at the next Bridgewater-Raritan Regional School Board meeting on Jan. 13.

Lindsay Rittenhouse may be reached at lrittenhouse@njadvancemedia.com. Find NJ.com on Facebook.