Store at Fourth and Cleveland mixes the old with the new

Kali Goetz, owner of Vintage Willows, holds up a new dress paired with a vintage purse Friday at the downtown Loveland boutique she plans to open this weekend. She and her fiance, Gordon Graff IV, are working to finish renovating the space at 202 E. Fourth St. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

LOVELAND -- A new women's clothing boutique that will blend vintage with new is almost ready to open in downtown Loveland.

Vintage Willows owner Kali Goetz and her fiance, Gordon Graff IV, have been renovating the 1,000 square feet at 202 E. Fourth St. with the goal of opening by Saturday, June 21.

The two recent graduates of South Dakota State University moved to Loveland last month from Brookings, where Goetz opened her first Vintage Willows shop almost two years ago.

That store remains open, she said, and she's helping to manage it long-distance.

In South Dakota, her store has a strong student clientele, Goetz said, and the prices are affordable.

"Most boutiques are very expensive, but our prices are very reasonable," she said.

For example, she sells tops from $18 to $40, with higher prices on dresses.

Although she will direct some marketing toward Colorado State University students, she said she expects her clientele in Loveland to be a bit older.

Vintage Willows' offerings will be "more casual wear than professional, but we'll have a mix of both," she said. She makes periodic visits to garment markets in Las Vegas and Chicago, she said.

Although the store will have mostly new clothing, jewelry and accessories, Goetz said she also will offer clothing that's considered vintage — more than 20 years old.

"There are some unique vintage pieces you can mix in with the new," she said. "That's our whole vibe — the old with the new."

Vintage Willows' location at the southeast corner of Fourth Street and Cleveland Avenue previously held the Tenfold Collective, a marketing company that hung 29 brightly colored doors in the building's large windows.

Those doors have come down, and Goetz and Graff are using some of them to build changing rooms. Repurposed pallets and other pieces of old lumber also are showing up in the shop as rustic-looking shelves and display racks.

Goetz has a consumer-affairs degree from SDSU, and Graff graduated with a degree in construction management. After he finishes the shop's remodel, he will look for a job in his field, he said.

Vintage Willows will be open from 11 a.m. to 6 p.m. Tuesday through Friday and 11 a.m. to 5 p.m. Saturday. Phone: 605-228-5828.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Craig Young at 970-635-3634 or cyoung@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.