Is California “ungovernable” after 40 years of Democratic domination?

posted at 3:20 pm on February 22, 2014 by Ed Morrissey

Well, maybe, although there’s a solution for it that’s slightly less extreme than splitting California into six new states. The age-old impulse to partition the Golden State took a new direction, thanks to a Silicon Valley entrepreneur, who has won approval to collect signatures for his new ballot measure, which has precisely zero chance of ultimately succeeding. Instead of two states, Tim Draper wants a half-dozen out of California:

A plan to divide California into six separate US states is closer to making it on to a November ballot, with organizers gaining approval to collect signatures. The seemingly far-fetched initiative, sponsored by Silicon Valley venture capitalist Tim Draper, claims “political representation of California’s diverse population and economies has rendered the state nearly ungovernable.” And on Tuesday, the California Secretary of State’s office gave the movement a boost, saying that proponents “may begin collecting petition signatures.”

He’ll need over 800,000 signatures before mid-July to make the ballot, but that’s not going to be the big hurdle. Neither will the election, although it’s doubtful it will get that far, because Californians aren’t going to vote to dismember the state. And even if they did, Congress is not going to add 10 more Senate seats for Californians to hold.

So yes, this is a pipe dream at best. But it does raise some interesting questions about California, because Draper’s certainly correct that the state has chronically incompetent governance. Instead of dismembering California, though, maybe voters should stop electing Democrats to state offices and overwhelming Democratic majorities to the legislature, as they have for decades (especially the legislature). No one was complaining about the state being “ungovernable” when Republicans won statewide offices, and when Ronald Reagan was governor.

Recently in the Green Room: