Veterans from all wars buried at the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery

Tom Monaco explains the history of the Confederate flag that is etched on an 1899 monument Saturday at the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Veterans from all wars were honored during the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery Committee's annual Veterans Day ceremony Saturday.

The ceremony honored American military veterans living and dead, and servicemen and women who currently are active duty. Three veterans were recognized Saturday.

Joyce Mozley retired after serving 21 years in the United States Air Force. She and her husband, Bill, used to decorate their town's Main Street with flags to honor military personnel when they lived in Missouri. The couple moved to Cañon City about a year ago, and they hope to become involved with the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery, Joyce Mozley said.

"It just feels like something we have to do, something we need to do," she said. "I am also recognizing my father who was in World War II; he was the inspiration for me to join the service."

Saturday's featured speaker was Leonard Nelson who shared the history and meaning of "The Star Spangled Banner."

"The fourth and final stanza gives us hope for the future, and when sung should be done so more slowly than the other verses and with even deeper meaning," he said.

The observance also included two separate flag-raising, one for the Grand Army of the Republic, or Union, and the other for the Confederate States of America.

Advertisement

Carol McNew, secretary for the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery Committee said having two separate flag-raisings at the cemetery is how it's been done dating back to 1912.

"There was a Union camp and a Confederate camp, and the veterans would get together and do a ceremony," she said.

She said the event went into despair after World War II, but the committee has had a ceremony every year to honor veterans since being formed in 2000.

Rick Ulrich, Tom Monaco and a group of observers salute the Confederate flag Saturday during a Veterans Day ceremony in the Confederate States of America section of the Greenwood Pioneer Cemetery. The cemetery also has a section for the Grand Army of the Republic. (Carie Canterbury / Daily Record)

Tom Monaco of the Greenwood Pioneer Cemenery Committee said veterans representing wars dating back to the War of 1812 are buried at the cemetery which has been designated as a state and national historic site. There also are three veterans from the Mexican-American War, several from the Civil War, and some from the Spanish-American War, World War I, World II, Korean War, and one from the Vietnam War.

Monaco said the Confederate burial section is the only one in Colorado. He said the Grand Army of the Republic purchased that section as a final resting place for the Confederates. A monument, that still stands today, was erected in honor of the Confederates in 1899.

"We still work together — Union and Confederate — it doesn't matter, we take care of all the graves," Monaco said.

McNew said the Greenwood Pioneer Cemenery Committee wishes to thank the Civil Air Patrol and the J Troop of the Colorado Mounted Rangers for their participation in the event.

Carie Canterbury: 719-276-7643, canterburyc@canoncitydailyrecord.com or twitter.com/cariecanterbury