Items for It’s Your Business can be submitted online at http://cjonline.com/business, by email to iyb@cjonline.com or by mail to The Topeka Capital-Journal, 616 S.E. Jefferson, Topeka, 66607. Items and photographs will run in print as space permits.

NEW FACES

Bob Washatka, of Topeka, has joined the The Great Game of Business team as a business coach, helping to implement the open-book management practices outlined in the book “The Great Game of Business.” Washatka has more than 30 years of experience in sales, marketing and business ownership. He can be reached at (785) 256-0195 or www.greatgame.com.

Hollyn Smith has been hired by The Columbian Theatre Foundation as gift shop coordinator for the OZ Museum in Wamego. The Kansas State University graduate has taught classes at Catt’s Dance Studio in Wamego and coached the Wamego High School Dazzlers. The OZ Museum recently updated its website at www.ozmuseum.com. Smith can be reached at (785) 458-8686 or hollyn@ozmuseum.com.

NAMES

Mayor Larry Wolgast has announced the following appointments to two community boards in Topeka:

■ Alisa Snavely, to the Topeka Housing Authority, filling an unexpired term ending Dec. 31, 2016. Snavely is the tax director for Berberich, Trahan & Co.

■ Amy Cohen, to the Topeka Human Relations Commission, filling an unexpired term ending Dec. 31, 2015. Cohen is employed by the Disability Rights Center of Kansas and the YWCA Family Peace Initiative.

David J. Rebein, of Dodge City, has been selected to serve as 2014-15 treasurer and Eagles Chair for the Kansas Association for Justice. Rebein, a graduate of Washburn University and The University of Kansas School of Law, is a partner in the Rebein Bangerter Rebein law firm, which has offices in Dodge City and Tampa, Fla.

The Kansas Adjutant General’s Department recognized the following employees for their years of service at the state July 16 at Nickell Armory in Topeka:

■ 30 years — Kerwin Nichols, Yolanda Rightmeier, Be Van Truong and Jane Welch.

■ 25 years — Janice Harper.

■ 20 years — Jean Copeland, Terri Ploger-McCool, Paul Rader, Dave Rapson, Bret Rowe and Danita Simnitt.

■ 15 years — Randy Bradford, Jason Bryant, John Burris, Thomas DeWitt, Scott Higgins, Stephen Larson and Emily Marsh.

■ 10 years — Roland Anderson, Stanton Beckett, Robert Bryant, Stephanie Burdett, Stephen Claspill, Dennis Colsden, Martin Currier, Cheri Froetschner, Henry Garcia, Rhonda Gotschall, Darrin Griffin, Ricky Hall, Scott Heston, Randy Knight, James Leftwich, George Matthias Jr., Darby Prine, William Rector, Karen Thompson, Steven West, Steven Will, Rodney Williams, Ivan Woltje, Joseph Wright, Keith Yoder and Michael Yoho.

■ 5 years — Valerie Arkell, Lyle Babcock Sr., Jeffrey Brummett, Julie Carey, Richard Dechant Jr., Charles Eichem, Scott Ekberg, Harry Heintzelmann, Jesse Hodgson, Scott Humphrey, John Hurst, John Lyons, Colin Mulloy, Sandra Norman, Daniel Scott, Jesse Smith, Jeffrey Terrell, Jonathan York and David Young.

MILITARY NEWS

Brig. Gen. Robert E. Windham Jr. assumed command of the Kansas Army National Guard during a ceremony July 12 at the Museum of the Kansas National Guard in Topeka. Windham, who serves as director of the Army Network Enterprise Center at Fort Riley, was promoted from colonel to brigadier general before the command change. He succeeds Brig. Gen. Eric Peck, who retired as assistant adjutant general and commander of the KNG.

RECOGNITION

Melissa Still, of Topeka, was one of 10 Kansas State University master’s graduates in interior architecture and product design selected to compete at the International Woodworking Fair’s annual Design Emphasis Student Furniture Design Competition next month in Atlanta. Still’s project is a retro slipper chair.

The Jerry Brosius Team helped Prudential First, Realtors in Topeka earn two regional quarterly awards from Prudential Real Estate Network & Relocation Services by claiming first place for residential units for the first quarter in Kansas. Prudential First was awarded first place for residential units and second place for gross commission income for the first quarter in the Midwest region.

MISC.

The Kansas Housing Resources Corp. is accepting applications for the Moderate Income Housing Program through noon Sept. 5. Awards will be

announced in October.

For more information, contact Fred Bentley at fbentley@kshousingcorp.org or James R. Behan at jrbehan@kshousing

corp.org.