× U.S. House votes 401 – 0 on bill to exempt firefighters and emergency responders from Obamacare rules

WASHINGTON, DC(WPMT) Once again by unanimous vote the U.S. House approves the Protecting Volunteer Firefighters and Emergency Responders Act (HR 33). The bill sponsored by Lou Barletta, (R-PA-11) ensures that emergency services volunteers are not counted as full-time employees by the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) under the Employer Mandate of the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare). If volunteer fire companies were subject to the mandates of ACA, they could be liable for crippling new health care costs, causing many to have to close their doors. The bill now heads to the now Republican controlled Senate for its approval.

“To be clear, forcing volunteer fire companies to comply with Obamacare will not extend health insurance to the uninsured,” Barletta said. “Rather, it will close firehouses, placing people at risk.”

Barletta authored the same legislation in the 113th Congress. It passed the U.S. House on March 11, 2014 by another unanimous vote of 410-to-0. When it reached the Democrat dominated Senate, it became embroiled in politics, which effectively killed the bill. Following months of pressure from Barletta, other members of Congress, and firefighters, the IRS indicated that it will not count hours of volunteer firefighters and emergency responders when determining an employer’s full-time employees in compliance with the ACA. Barletta, however, continued to pursue passage of his legislation as insurance against future changes from the IRS.

“This is too important of a public safety issue to be left to the changing positions of unelected federal bureaucrats at the IRS,” Barletta said. “Their arbitrary regulatory guidance could easily be changed back. Our people at home deserve better. We owe our emergency service volunteers – who risk their lives every day – rock-solid certainty.”

Prior to Barletta’s pressure, the IRS declined to indicate how it would classify hours of service for emergency volunteers under the ACA, meaning that fire companies and municipalities could be forced to provide volunteers with health insurance or pay a fine.

“This would be a very big deal in Pennsylvania,” Barletta said, citing numbers from the 2012 National Fire Department Census conducted by the U.S. Fire Administration and the Federal Emergency Management Agency. “Ninety-seven percent of our fire companies are either completely or mostly volunteers. Nationally, almost 92-percent of fire companies use at least some volunteers and over 86 percent depend on all or mostly volunteers.”

Under the Employer Mandate Provision of the ACA, employers with 50 or more employees must provide health insurance or pay penalties. If volunteers were ever considered employees, fire companies could exceed the 50 employee threshold in several different ways: a volunteer department by itself based on size; by being part of a combined, paid-volunteer firefighter department; or by being part of a municipality that has 50 or more public employees in total.

“This legislation says, once and for all, that volunteer firefighters are just that – volunteers – and should not be subjected to the employer mandate,” Barletta said. “It takes away the power of the IRS to change the rules.”

To watch Barletta comment on the merits of the bill click here.