Robert Hughes.

THE Rolf Harris, Robert Hughes and Jimmy Saville sex scandals are just the first act in what will be a long-running saga for the entertainment industry, according to Hey Dad! star Simone Buchanan.

The high-profile charges against Hughes, Harris and now Steven Collins, the star of the 1990s family drama Seventh Heaven, have horrified the public and heightened awareness about sex abuse.

Buchanan believes the cases will lead to many more prosecutions here and overseas.

PREVIOUSLY: Hey Dad! star praises victims

“Rolf Harris, Jimmy Saville, Woody Allen — it all happened at once in the space of a few months,” she said.

“I think it has started a domino effect. The more people who speak up encourages other people to stand up and say something.

“It’s a lot more common than people think.

“But I also know actresses who will not come forward because they are worried it will affect their careers.”

Buchanan, 46, said many actors learned to turn a blind eye to sexual harassment.

Simone Buchanan and her son Remy, 4. Picture: Alex Coppel.

She said speaking out against her TV dad, Robert Hughes, cost her own career heavily.

The actor and mother of two said she had been passed over for many jobs since she backed co-star Sarah Monahan’s account of being abused by Hughes while she was a child star on Hey Dad!

Buchanan said the show, which she mostly remembers as a happy experience, had forever been tarnished in the public’s eyes. And with it, the entire cast.

There were many other sex-abuse victims — some high profile — within Australia’s entertainment industry, who have remained silent for fear of suffering the same fate, Buchanan said.

“I know that I have missed out on jobs because of the case,” she said.

“They don’t want to be associated with it. But that’s OK. I know I did the right thing. How could anyone not stand behind their friend in a ­situation like this and support them?

“My cousin was abused as a child and later killed himself. When I stood up for Sarah I was standing up for the many people in my life who have been abused.”

Robert Hughes and wife Robin Gardiner leave Downing Centre Courts. Picture: Bradley Hunter

Buchanan said it was ­particularly difficult to hear Cate Blanchett thank Hughes’ wife, Robyn Gardiner, during her Oscars acceptance speech this year.

Blanchett’s praise for Gardiner, her longtime agent, came as Hughes was being tried for his crimes against Monahan and other young girls over a 20-year period.

Gardiner has maintained support for her husband, who will spend 10 years behind bars.

Buchanan said she had no regrets about supporting Monahan. It wasn’t the first time Buchanan made a decisions that, with hindsight, probably prevented her from hitting the big time.

She said she was proud to have always put her sons, Tane, 16, and Remy, four, ahead of stardom.

She said she has used what celebrity she has to raise awareness about sex abuse and funds for the Jodie O’Shea orphanage in Indonesia — a cause she discovered during her honeymoon to Bali.

Since becoming a mother, Buchanan had turned down jobs that would have taken her away from home for extended periods because she did not want to leave her children in the care of nannies.

She had instead limited ­herself to projects based in Melbourne.

She said she would never encourage her children to follow in her footsteps — not because she feared on-set predators like Hughes, but because she believed the entertainment industry had become a lot more cutthroat than when she began.

Simone Buchanan in 1988.

“I’d see the same five girls at every audition. I’d get the job one week and someone else would the next,” she said. “It wasn’t like it is now. These days people just want to be ­famous.

“These young people are thrown into Home & Away and set up to believe they’re stars.

“Then they leave and discover that’s not how the industry works.”

Buchanan teaches drama at Film and Television Studio International where she has taught many ex-Big Brother contestants eager to turn their 15 minutes of celebrity into something more.

But fame was never something she chased.

She was also quick to dismiss suggestion she and actor siblings Miles and Beth were the product of pushy stage parents. Buchanan was eight and Miles, 10, when they were enrolled at a drama and dance school as a distraction from their parents’ divorce.

What was meant to be a school holiday program soon became full-time work for the two youngsters who landed roles in the feature film A Good Thing Going, and then a slew of projects including The Flying Doctors and Sons and Daughters.

Eventually, Buchanan was cast in Hey Dad! — the role which would make her a household name.

While working on the sitcom, Buchanan said she was offered a “very big” role in a Hollywood film.

She was keen to accept but the Hey Dad! crew would not or could not spare her for six weeks to film it.

Actors Sarah Monahan and Simone Buchanan during an A Current Affair interview.

Despite all that had ­happened, Buchanan said she had “the time of her life” on Hey Dad! and still counted many of the cast among her close friends.

When Monahan came to Buchanan years after Hey Dad! was axed to say she wanted to pursue her case with police Buchanan didn’t hesitate to offer her support — as did Monahan’s other co-stars, Ben Oxenbould, Julie McGregor and Christopher Trusswell.

Buchanan and Monahan have since become ambassadors for Bravehearts, the charity that supports victims of child-sex abuse.

Buchanan said her work with Bravehearts and the media attention the Hughes case attracted encouraged many victims to contact her to share their stories. She has also received online abuse from strangers who felt she had done the wrong thing by ­Monahan in not coming forward sooner.

But Buchanan was little more than a teenager when Monahan first told her that Hughes had been fondling her.

It did not come as a surprise as Hughes, who Buchanan described as being “very cold with beady eyes”, was “strange” and had a reputation for flashing to the wardrobe and make-up girls.

Hughes also groped Buchanan once, but she had been old enough to fend him off.

At the time, Monahan was sketchy about the details and Hughes’ actions would have been difficult to prove, so Buchanan advised her young co-star to stay away from him.

But Hughes’ behaviour escalated and, among other things, he exposed himself to Monahan — and there was no mistaking his intentions. Buchanan complained to her producer and was told it would be handled. It wasn’t.

Buchanan left the show soon after, unable to cope with the “toxic environment” on set.

Although she would never again have the same level of prime time TV success post-Hey Dad! Buchanan has continued to work on TV shows in between caring for her boys.

She played a small but integral role of an abusive mother in the cult film, Patrick.

Though she admitted filming the violent and confronting role was “challenging” and “difficult” she was proud and excited to have been given the opportunity to show she was capable of being more than the funny blonde.

Buchanan also received critical acclaim for her portrayal of a woman with bipolar disorder on Neighbours .

Her brother, Miles, a Logie-winning actor has battled with mental illness since his teens.

Buchanan said drugs and alcohol were always readily available to young people on set. She was regularly offered them as a youngster.

Though she admitted going through a wild party-girl stage, Buchanan said her family, albeit an unconventional one, had always been the most important thing in her life.

siobhan.duck@news.com.au