Before he started pitching like an ace in the past month, Chad Bettis was an enigma. The talent appeared to be there — a major-league fastball and a killer curveball — but the results were not.

Two short stints with the Rockies over the past two years led to a 1-5 record, a 6.88 ERA and more questions than answers. Was he a starting pitcher? Was he a reliever? Did he truly have the stuff needed to win at the big-league level?

“Yeah, I got down,” he admitted. “Honestly, I lost a lot of sleep over it.”

Something drastic was needed. His career was slipping away, and he wasn’t sure why.

“A broken man will listen to anyone,” first-year pitching coach Steve Foster said. “Brokenness brings out the question from an athlete: ‘Can you help me?’ “

And so, during spring training, the 26-year-old Bettis reached out, though he wasn’t quite expecting what happened next. He was removed from the Cactus League rotation and disappeared into the bullpen to work with Foster and bullpen coach Darren Holmes.

For four consecutive throwing sessions, the right-hander threw fastball after fastball. No curves, no sliders, no messing around.

“Finally, at the end of the fourth ‘pen, they let me throw a few changeups,” Bettis said with a laugh. “I threw 45 pitches, and maybe 10 changes.”

The goal was to break Bettis down to the basics of pitching and fix a fastball that too often was hanging over the plate instead of tailing away from right-handed batters. Even if his fastball sometimes sizzled at 96 mph, big-league hitters were pummeling it.

“It’s all about being able to repeat a delivery and hit a spot,” Foster said. “Chad wasn’t doing that. And if you can’t do that, you’re not going to be able to succeed at this elite level.”

Bettis embraced the change, as well as the drudgery, and has evolved from a flamethrower without a clue into a starting pitcher with a plan. In five starts since getting called up from Triple-A Albuquerque, he is 2-0 with a 2.70 ERA, with 27 strikeouts and just nine walks. From not making the team out of spring training, he has been the Rockies’ best starting pitcher since his call-up.

May 29 at Philadelphia, he flirted with baseball immortality, taking a perfect game into the seventh inning and a no-hitter into the eighth. He ended up allowing two hits over eight innings in a 4-1 victory.

Over his past three starts, he has pitched 22 innings with a 1.21 ERA. He traces his improvement back to those fastballs he threw in Scottsdale, Ariz.

“Those sessions in spring training were game-changing,” Rockies manager Walt Weiss said. “For a while there, it was a little bit of a Rubik’s Cube, because we loved Chad’s makeup and we loved the arm, and we were just trying to get to the bottom of why he was struggling up here when he would dominate at the Triple-A level.”

Bettis throws a fastball that averages 92 mph and a big curve that bends in at 73, 74. That can be a devastating one-two punch, but only if he pinpoints his pitches.

“I knew if I wasn’t able to command the fastball, there was a good chance I would never be able to reach my full potential as a pitcher,” he said. “In the big scheme of things, I knew I had to do it.”

Wednesday night against Los Angeles Dodgers, Bettis wasn’t nearly as sharp as he had been in his previous two starts, but he still allowed just two runs, one earned, through six innings. But he hung tough without having his best stuff, which was promising. So was the assortment of pitches he threw to finish off Dodgers hitters: an 86 mph slider, a 94 mph fastball, a 74 mph curve and an 83 mph changeup.

“It used to be that I was always throwing fastballs in fastball counts,” Bettis said. “I’m just not being so predictable anymore. It’s about being able to throw any pitch in any count, keeping the hitter off balance. I am throwing each pitch with conviction, 100 percent of the time.”

Foster, however, cautions that Bettis is far from a finished product.

“He’s going to have ups and downs,” Foster said. “He’s just not going to take off and run to the top of the mountain. He’s not going to finish 20-0, and the chances are he’s going to experience some failure.

“Our hope is that Darren and I have helped him build up enough calluses, stamina and belief to where he can withstand some setbacks.”