If you're planning to vote Republican, a new RNC survey might help you determine where your political outlook most closely lies: with Ted Cruz, or with Donald Trump. Click the link and see.

COLORADO SPRINGS, Colo., April 28, 2016 — Are you trying to decide, “Who am I? Which candidate should I support? What are my issues? If I were president for a day, what would I do?”

A recent GOP survey of the issues might give you a running start in determining how closely you are aligned with conservative issues and the various candidate positions. The “Exit Poll Ballot,” issued by Jesse Kamzol, national data director for the Republican National Committee, asks respondents to begin by clicking on a candidate.

The survey issues are presented here without the candidate decision. It’s assumed that respondents will lean right. Crossover voters, of course, may also find this list useful as they consider switching teams.

Cruz chose Fiorina over far better options

The survey concentrates only on issues, a refreshing slice of reality in a record-breakingly odd campaign year. Nowhere in this list will you find mention of color or style of hair, relative attractiveness of candidates’ spouses, ability to get along with the mainstream media, or track records or affiliations with the Establishment, inside-the-Beltway political savants or wizards. Also, the GOP has declined to include a box to check if you plan on leaving the country should Hillary win the general election; those subjects are left for respondents to sort out on their own.

The survey:

(reprinted, with thanks to Kamzol with minor adjustments):

Are you Tea Party Conservative, Moderate, Conservative, Libertarian, Other?

If a Democrat gains office, what would worry you most: A rise in Islamic terrorism; illegal immigration; picking Justice Scalia’s successor; curbing religious liberties; neglecting veterans’ rights; job-killing legislation; failing to protect the unborn; extreme versions of ObamaCare; higher taxes on everyone; or hatred of the Second Amendment.

Assuming you’ve made your preliminary selection, what are your top reasons for wanting your candidate to be the Republican nominee? Will beat the Democrat; will enforce legal immigration position; will repeal ObamaCare; will defend religious liberties; will be a strong job creator; will protect the unborn; is trusted to pick Scalia’s successor; not only will correctly name it, but also will fight radical Islamic terrorism; and/or will defend the Second Amendment.

What are your main concerns? Job security, mortgage payments, Social Security, saving for your children’s education, saving for your retirement, social issues, terrorist threats, the cost of living, veterans’ aid or other.

The survey also asks respondents to evaluate statements by the criteria: Strongly agree, Agree, No opinion, Disagree, or Strongly disagree. Here are the statements:

Neither Hillary nor Bernie can be trusted to nominate a constitutionalist to the Supreme Court.

Organizations like Planned Parenthood that perform abortions should not receive federal funds.

The Second Amendment rights are under threat.

Political correctness is poisoning American universities.

It is appalling that a socialist is a serious contender for president of the United States.

Neither Hillary nor Bernie can be trusted to secure the border.

Thanks to Obama and Hillary, Israel and our allies have been abandoned while Iran and our enemies have been empowered.

Under Obama, the office of the presidency has become too powerful.

Our country has strayed from what the founders outlined in the Constitution.

Obama’s executive orders must be rolled back on the Republican candidate’s first day in office.

Traditional American values including the nuclear family are under attack.

A new Republican president should immediately sign into law the ObamaCare repeal bill passed by Senate Republicans.

The EPA, IRS, and VA have exposed how corrupt the bureaucracy can become.

Republicans should continue to hold the IRS accountable for targeting of conservatives.

Under the Obama administration, illegal immigrants are treated better than our veterans.

The next president must put an end to Obama’s military spending cuts.

Climate change deals that cut American energy consumption and allow China to continue to pollute are wildly unfair.

Hillary Clinton’s promise to “put a lot of coal miners out of business” is disgraceful.

California’s decision to raise the minimum wage to $15 will crush small businesses and serve as a bad economic example.

ObamaCare must be repealed and replaced by a market-driven program fueled by competition.

Veterans should be able to choose their own health care providers.

The federal government has usurped too much power from the states.

Supreme Court justices should only interpret existing law, not create new law.

Obama has left you utterly voiceless for the last seven years.

What sort of running mate should the final candidate pick?

Donald Trump: From candidate to presumptive nominee in 24 hours

This list by no means covers all the issues, nor does it accommodate the various political slants one might hold on the issues that are covered here. It is, however, a starting point prepared by the GOP for serious thinkers and voters who are truly concerned about the direction of their country in the next four to eight years.

Hats off to all Americans for whom all elections, local and national, are sacred privileges shared by few other countries. The people are supreme here under our constitution. That supremacy comes attendant with gravity and serious responsibility.

May all Americans’ dissents be peaceful, serious and constructive, entering the final stretch of our national election.

Link to the actual survey here.