Editor's note: This story has been updated to correct the misspelling of Jennifer Rodriguez's name.

Jennifer Rodriguez and Kyle Landis couldn’t have described what a physician assistant does.

She was busy qualifying for four Olympics and winning two Bronze medals in speedskating. He was busy with a professional baseball career that made him an Eastern League all-star in 2012.

Both are now retired athletes and incoming students in the new physician assistant program at Penn State College of Medicine.

Nearly 2,000 people applied for 30 spots in the two-year program, which is open to people who already have a bachelor’s degree.

Rodriguez and Landis aren’t the only uniquely accomplished members of the first class, which begins school in May. Others include military veterans, an engineering professor and a man who played in the Vienna Symphony Orchestra. Still others are seeking a change from more routine careers such as x-ray technician, dietician and bank teller. Some just graduated from college. One is 45.



As a physician assistant, they can expect a starting salary of about $85,000 and plenty of job openings for years to come. The average salary is about $103,000, said Christine Bruce, a physician assistant and director of the Penn State College of Medicine program.

“Our country needs more physician assistants,” she said.

Physician assistants can do many of the things done by doctors, such as diagnosing illness, counseling patients and prescribing treatments and drugs. They can specialize in areas such as family medicine, sports medicine and surgery.

Over the next decade, the supply of doctors is expected to be stretched thin by forces including aging baby-boomers and new patients entering the health care system as the result of Obamacare.

Physician assistants are being counted on to extend the doctor supply by handling routine cases and procedures, and freeing doctors to focus on the harder ones. They can't work independently and must work in conjunction with a doctor.



Landis, the former minor league baseball player, was looking for a fast route to being able to sufficiently provide for his wife and daughter after an injury ended his pitching career.





The 27-year-old Hazleton native was an academic All-American while pitching for the University of Pittsburgh. He left school in 2007 after he was drafted by the Cleveland Indians following his junior season.

His career as a middle relief pitcher was going well and he had his best season in 2012, when he was an Eastern League all-star while playing for Akron Rubber Ducks, who are in the same league as the Harrisburg Senators.

But in 2013 he suffered a torn labrum in his shoulder. Facing surgery and a long recovery, he realized he might be 30 before his arm was well enough to give him a shot at the majors.

“In the sports world, being 27 and not being in the big leagues is actually kind of old. That kind of made my decision for me,” he said.

In addition, he had married, at age 22, a girl he had known since age ten, and they had a daughter. Landis concluded “I needed to get back in school and get into a profession that would make a difference in my family’s life.”

He had begun thinking about life after baseball before the injury. During the 2012 off-season, he took 12 credits at Penn State-Hazleton.

At Pitt, he had attended the school of health and rehabilitation sciences, thinking he would become a physical or occupational therapist, in order to stay involved with sports after his playing days ended. Landis said he has also coached young athletes, which made him realize he wanted a career that allowed close contact with people.

He learned about physician assistants while discussing career options with his father-in-law, a surgeon.

“I really didn’t know you could do all that without having to school for ten years beyond your undergraduate degree,” he said. “You can do 75 percent of what a physician can do. I thought that was an awesome idea.”

The profession of physician assistant was created in the mid-1960s, the product of a search for a way to extend the doctor supply and improve health care. It was modeled on a World War II program that fast-tracked the training of doctors.

Today, there are about 100,000 physician assistants in the United States.

Penn State College of Medicine, located at Penn State Milton S. Hershey Medical Center in Derry Township, had a physician assistant program from 1974 to 1986.

Graduates of the new program receive master’s degrees. To be accepted, they must have an undergraduate degree in a health- or science-related field. They also need at least 500 hours of health care-related experience, although Bruce said the program will consider experience from a broad range of jobs or educational settings.

The intent, she said, is to make sure that people coming into the program “have a taste of what practicing medicine is like.”

“I don’t want people to have an idea that medicine is practiced as seen on ‘Gray’s Anatomy’,” she said. “It’s a calling. It’s not for everyone.”

Total tuition for the two-year program is about $70,000. Bruce said there are several job openings for every physician assistant. Presently, there are 40 openings at Penn State-Hershey for physician assistants and nurse practitioners, who fill a similar role, and one of the purposes of starting the new program it to ensure Penn State-Hershey has an adequate supply, Bruce said.

She said physician assistants spend considerable time talking to patients and educating them, and can have an advantage over doctors, who some patients find intimidating.

“Patients call me Chris. It opens up a lot of lines of communication,” she said.

Jennifer Rodriguez was raised in Miami. She was a world champion inline skater in 1993, then became one of the first to transition from skating on wheels to speedskating on ice in the Olympics.





Known as “J-Rod” and "Miami Ice,” she competed in four Olympics from 1998-2010, winning two Bronze medals in 2002 in Salt Lake City.

During high school she wanted to become a physical therapist. She attended college for a year before focusing full time on skating.

Following the 2010 games, at 33, she was thinking she still could compete for a few more years, but also realizing “at some point you have to figure out life after sports.”

She decided to enroll in the University of Miami, where she received a degree in exercise physiology last spring. She had done in internship at an orthopedic clinic. There, she became aware of physician assistants, and learned they could do things ranging from figuring what’s wrong with patients to treating injuries to having a hands-on role during surgeries.

“I knew I wanted to so something with the body and with sports,” she said.

She believes her skating background will be asset. “I’ve had injuries to every part of my body,” said Rodriguez, 37. “I think I can relate to what people are going through.”

Landis and Rodriguez and their classmates will train side-by-side with medical students. Although Landis has a 3.7 grade point average, he said he’s not “brilliant,” nor did he have great athletic gifts.

“I have no problem putting in the time. I’ll spend five, six or seven hours in the library if that’s what it takes to get it done. I’ve always been that way. That’s what got me so far in baseball,” he said.