Physician-focused organizations in Pennsylvania are questioning the rationale behind a Harrisburg-area insurer's decision to slash reimbursement for patients covered under the Affordable Care Act.

Highmark announced that it will reimburse physicians 4.5 percent less for patients covered under ACA plans starting April 1, and both the Pennsylvania Medical Society and the Pennsylvania Academy of Family Physicians responded this week with official statements.

It is no secret that insurance companies have lost money because of the ACA. Highmark first revealed losses last fall, stating then that the loss was due to unexpectedly high use of services among those covered under the ACA.

Those losses have now reached about $500 million, according to Alexis Miller, senior vice president of individual and small group business at Highmark.

Highmark's earnings report for 2015 hasn't been released.

Despite the losses, Miller said, “We are certainly committed to this market and certainly recognize that it is underserved.”

Miller said that physician payment fee reductions aren’t the first way the insurer has attempted to address its losses, and it won’t be the last.

In the past, Highmark has also made adjustments to its product portfolio, invested in new care-management strategies and made adjustments to broker commissions.

“This is just one in a series of steps that we are thoughtfully taking,” Miller said.

When asked how much the company expects to save by reducing physician payment fees, Miller responded, “What’s more important to focus on is the impact to the average physician.”

Miller said Highmark has estimated the revenue impact on physicians to be about half a percent.

Last year, Highmark had about 350,000 ACA members across all of its markets. Numbers for this enrollment period are not yet available.

In response to Highmark's fee reduction, the Pennsylvania Medical Society is asking about the purpose of Highmark’s estimated $2 billion to $3.8 billion in reserves, and why the formula to calculate ACA utilization appears to have been off.

Miller responded that reserves are for managing short-term periods of recovery, not to sustain long-term finances.

“In this case, with the ACA market, it is a question of long-term sustainability, and reserves aren’t the answer to that,” Miller said. “We’ve got to take steps that will have a year-over-year impact on sustainability.”

In a letter, meanwhile, the Pennsylvania Academy of Family Physicians asked the Pennsylvania Department of Insurance to intervene in Highmark’s decision.

The insurance department has not yet received the letter, according to Ali Fogarty, deputy press secretary, and the department declined to comment further.