Gov. Scott Walker’s decision to decline federal funding for low-income health insurance has had disastrous consequences. (Photo: File/AP)

Gov. Walker's refusal to accept hundreds of millions of federal dollars for BadgerCare provided by the Affordable Care Act may be the worst in Wisconsin history.

The disastrous decision is getting worse and worse, creating an artificial budget crisis which is forcing completely avoidable cuts to our schools and universities.

There is the obvious damage being done every day by needlessly taking away affordable health care from tens of thousands of Wisconsinites just above the poverty line. Walker and his extreme conservative defenders in the Legislature claim these folks will have access to another part of the Affordable Care Act, the on-line health insurance marketplace. But the subsidies provided there were never intended for people with incomes this low.

Access to affordable health care is so fundamental to freedom in the 21st century that it would be well worth it to spend more money to guarantee coverage. If you don't have access to health care, you and your family are one major injury or one major illness away from both financial ruin and the risk of not receiving needed medical care.

What is most stunning about the BadgerCare decision is that it actually costs Wisconsin substantially more money to cover fewer people. By turning down the BadgerCare money, Walker and his allies in the Legislature are both forcing low-income people off health care and forcing massive and needless cuts to education, undermining the basis for economic opportunity for the next generation.

We are talking about big numbers here, enough to roll back virtually all of the education cuts in Gov. Walker's budget. In the two year budget, rejecting enhanced federal dollars for BadgerCare will cost the state an astounding $390 million in the next state budget. This includes both the direct cost calculated by the nonpartisan Legislative Fiscal Bureau, and additional payments to hospitals to partially offset the increased number of uninsured patients.

This loss is going up every month as more adults than projected by the Walker administration enroll in BadgerCare because they fall below the federal poverty line. This is a result another Walker policy failure, his disastrous economic policies. One of the reasons for increasing BadgerCare enrollment is the number of poverty wage jobs being created in Wisconsin. Wisconsin's job quality crisis is so bad that poverty rates are actually increasing at the same time that employment is increasing. The number of Wisconsin workers eligible for BadgerCare and who work for large low wage employers like Walmart and McDonald's increased by 8 percent over the last year alone.

This toxic math shows that the alleged budget shortfalls being used to justify slashing cuts are a manufactured crisis. Because of a purely political decision, tens of thousands of moderate income Wisconsinites are being needlessly denied affordable health coverage, and massive unnecessary cuts are being made to universities, public schools, and other vital public investments in economic opportunity.

This self-inflicted double hit qualifies as perhaps the worst and most irresponsible budget decision in Wisconsin history.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1MSWgHa