BIRMINGHAM, Alabama - When the tornado of April 27, 2011 completely knocked the Bethel Baptist Church of Pratt City building down to its foundations, Pastor Tommy Lewis worried about helping the community first.

"We had to take care of the people," Lewis said. "Devastation was everywhere. Our job was to make sure those people who are homeless don't become hopeless."

More than three years later, the church has been rebuilt, starting from scratch.

"We started from the foundation," Lewis said. "There was nothing left. Zero."

Bethel Baptist of Pratt City will have a grand opening Sunday, Aug. 24, with dedication services at 10 a.m. and 3 p.m. to celebrate its new $8 million facility that replaced the one destroyed by the tornado. It was rebuilt on the same spot.

The congregation began meeting there earlier this month and members have been learning their way around.

"We've got 174 doors in this new building," Lewis said. "I still get lost."

The new building nearly doubles the size of the old one, going from 44,000 to 70,000 square feet, Lewis said. The sanctuary seats 1,800.

Lewis said the 2011 tornado was the third tornado he'd been through as pastor of the church. Other times, the church used its facility to reach out to victims. This time, it had to improvise without a building.

He immediately helped start the Pratt City Disaster Relief Center at Scott School, which became a hub of activity for those needing assistance and those seeking to offer aid.

The church has about 15 acres at 1708 Spencer Ave., off Cherry Avenue.

The neighborhood became known as Mississippi Town because so many of those who settled there in the early 1900s came from Mississippi to work in the coal mines.

Lewis became the pastor of the church there in January 1982.

In 1990, the church dedicated a new facility, and had just paid the mortgage off in the fall of 2010, before the tornado destroyed it in the spring.

Lewis had been trying to bring more unity to his church by holding its 2011 Easter service at Fair Park Arena. He noted that people who attended the early morning service often didn't know their fellow church members who attended the later service.

The Easter service brought a sense of unity. Four days later, the tornado hit.

The church held its first service after the tornado at Fair Park also. The church moved its services to Carver High School, then renovated a storefront mall on Main Street in Adamsville to serve as the church sanctuary and home to its ministries.

"We never were without a church," Lewis said. "The church is people."

On Thursday and Friday, Bethel Baptist hosted a Bridging the Gap Summit, teaching classes on Medicaid, the Affordable Care Act, the My Brother's Keeper Initiative, youth summer meals and Health Ambassador Training.

"We want to take churches from an inside ministry to an outside ministry," said Michael Minor, national director of the federal faith-based initiative for the National Baptist Convention USA.

"We've learned about programs we can take back to our churches to empower our nieghborhoods," said Jacqueline Chapman of Second Calvary Baptist Church in Norfolk, Va.

"We want to reach the least, lost and left behind," said Melody Washington of First Macedonia Missionary Baptist Church in Punta Gorda, Fla.

Dorothy McAdory, president of the Alabama chapter of the International Ministers' Wives and Ministers' Widows Assocation, received training as a certified health ambassador. "If we can help make our congregations healthy, we can help make our state healthy," said McAdory, wife of the Rev. R.L. McAdory, pastor of Faith Missionary Baptist Church in Bessemer.

"This has always been our mission, to be a place of refuge for our community," Lewis said.