As the Affordable Care Act celebrates its fifth anniversary and Florida grapples with the idea of expanding Medicaid, free clinics continue to care for low-income uninsured Floridians. Mark Cruise, executive director of the Florida Association of Free and Charitable Clinics, talked to health reporter Naseem S. Miller about the role of free clinics and the challenges they face.

How does Florida compare with other states in the number of free clinics?

The state has more than 100 free and charitable clinics. This is a number that's growing, even as we speak. We know of at least half a dozen new clinics that are in formation in different areas of the state.

Why do you think that is?

Success begets success for one thing. So when one community has a stellar clinic that does a good job of meeting the needs of uninsured, the word gets out and soon another community wants to do something similar, and before long you have a number of communities that are engaged in this kind of effort.

And obviously the demand for affordable health care for uninsured is not going away or diminishing, but it's increasing. So certainly, the need is there. Until everyone has care, we're going to roll up our sleeves and work very hard and take care of those who have left behind by our health care system.

What role do free clinics play in communities?

When you get right down to it, what we are in communities, we are gap fillers. Just so happens that the biggest gap in health care has been access to affordable health insurance and health care. Interestingly, in the age of the Affordable Care Act, when hypothetically more people have affordable health insurance, the question for our sector has been what would be the new gaps that we end up filling.

Here in Florida, especially because we have not seen fit to expand Medicaid, we haven't had to really address that question yet. There are still plenty of gaps in access to affordable health care. We're looking at excess of 2 to 3 million people who don't have health insurance and two-thirds of them are low-income. Even if Florida expanded Medicaid, studies indicate that there will be 1.5 million Floridians uninsured.

I do communicate with my colleagues in other states that have expanded Medicaid and even in those states, the free and charitable clinics are thriving and flourishing, because there remain gaps, maybe due to lack of Medicaid providers to see this whole population of newly enrolled people. Or, maybe it's what we see here: people who sign up for coverage in the marketplace, it may be the first time they've ever had health insurance. The premium was affordable, but they get sick, or they need to go to the hospital and they learn that they have deductible and co-pays that suddenly it's a little bit beyond their reach. We're seeing some people dropping off the rolls of coverage and coming back to our clinics, and that's distressing to us, but it's a reality.

What's the biggest challenge for free clinics?

As nonprofits, without the ability to collect fees or insurance reimbursements, we're forced to fund-raise. What has made that particularly challenging in recent years is that the Affordable Care Act has caused many donors and funders to assume that the need for free clinics will go by the wayside and so the clinics have had to work especially hard to reinforce that that's not the case.

Do you think the need for free clinics will eventually go away?

We all hope for that day. We wish health care to be available to all, accessible and affordable. But I think that day is off into the future. We as a society seem content to want to maintain a pluralistic health-care system where we have publicly funded coverage for some and we depend on the private sector and employers to cover the rest and we're content to allow large swaths of people to not have coverage. And I think until that changes, the need for our sector is going to continue unabated.

nmiller@tribune.com or 407-420-5158.