A brewery is planned on the grounds of the Monastery Immaculate Conception in Ferdinand, Ind. (Photo: Provided by the Monastery Immaculate Conception )

A brewery has received the OK to operate on the grounds of a monastery in Southern Indiana.

The Ferdinand zoning board approved a special exception Thursday to allow St. Benedict's Brew Works to operate at the Monastery Immaculate Conception in Dubois County, about 60 miles west of Louisville.

The plan also has been approved by the Sisters of St. Benedict.

Vince Luecke, editor of The Perry County News and The Spencer County Journal-Democrat, and Andy Hedinger, an attorney, plan to open the brewery in an unused art studio on the grounds. They expect to be serving up a variety of beers by late winter or early spring.

"The building fits well with our design and what we'd like to do," said Luecke, who is from New Boston. "Folks would be able to come and sample a flight of beers, see how the beer is made and, hopefully, purchase beer to take with them."

Luecke and Hedinger, who will brew the beer on site, are still experimenting with an offering of three to six beers, ranging from light to dark. Luecke said they are considering a creamy ale, Hefeweizen, Belgian wit and Belgian double, as well as some stouts.

More Suds: Increasingly, kickoff time is grab-a-beer time

Whiskey Row: Brown-Forman puts whiskey in Whiskey Row

Luecke said the sisters have been very receptive to the idea. The art space, previously used as a boarding school, was underused. They still are working out the lease with some revenue sharing that would benefit the monastery.

Sister Barbara Lynn Schmitz, prioress for the Sisters of St. Benedict of Ferdinand, said she believed the project would be beneficial for the area.

"If you go back to our history, the very founding monastery sold beer," she said. "I don't see it as a bar. It seems like something that can add to the attractions in Ferdinand."

Videos: Louisville and bourbon

The old art studio will be transformed into a space for sampling beer, and light food, perhaps sandwiches and bratwurst, will be offered. Luecke said they are even working on a pretzel recipe.

The sisters are moving their gift shop to an adjacent building where they sell handmade crafts and cookies.

St. Benedict's Brew Works is timing the opening to coincide with the 175th anniversary of the community, which is rich in German heritage and religious tradition.

The Associated Press contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/YBofrp