Spring is officially here and the REALTORS® Home & Garden Show presented by Unilock is up and running at State Fair Park. Now through March 29, homeowners can gather the latest tips and trends in renovating, landscaping, decorating and entertaining. It’s ground zero for home and garden advice with over 350 professionals all under one roof.

Whether you’re planning a home improvement project or looking to host a dinner party for eight, find your niche by visiting the expo’s many free workshops.

Showcasing Milwaukee’s top chefs and baristas, The Fresh Cooking Patio sponsored by Milwaukee Journal Sentinel lets budding chefs grow their appetite for inventive menus and drinks. Guests may sample the morsels of goodness at the conclusion of demos.

On March 22 at 11 am, Valentine Coffee Roasters will perk up the crowd with best practices for brewing coffee, followed by Micah Kaufman from Café Calatrava at 1 pm and Kyle Cherek, host of Wisconsin Foodie, at 3 pm with at-home cooking tips.

Andrew Muraski from The Grain Exchange will visit on March 25 with simple techniques to elevate your food with fresh herbs and Karen Gill of Down to Earth Chef will present “Different Meals, Same Ingredients” on March 26. Both sessions start at 6 pm.

On March 27, Dave Norris from University Club, 12 pm, Andrew Ruiz from Joey Gerard’s, 2 pm, Zach Espinosa from Harbor House, 4 pm, and Bradford Shovlin from Smyth, 5:30 pm, will talk seafood, supper clubs and cooking with local, seasonal ingredients.

Following them on March 28 is Jennifer Streicher and Chris Green from Black Sheep at 11 am. Christian Schroeder from Nourri at 1 pm, Matt Kerley from University Club at 3 pm, Justin Fuhrman from Café Benelux at 5 pm and Betty Holloway from NuGenesis Farm at 6:30 pm, teaching attendees how to maximize the nutritional value of the foods you eat.

Closing out the show on March 29, is Valentine Coffee Roasters at 11 am, Andrew Muraski from The Grain Exchange at 1 pm and Cole Ersel from Wolf Peach at 3 pm, presenting “Country Pork Pate with House Made Beer Mustard.”

Tour the Garden Promenade and Enter to Win an iPad

Aside from do-it-yourself workshops and cooking demos, the show’s Garden Promenade plants more ideas for recharging yards and patios. Featuring 12 landscaped living spaces, each garden combines plantings, water features and hardscapes with creature comforts like outdoor kitchens, sound systems and fire pits, creating a haven for relaxing or entertaining.

The 12 gardens at the show are designed by by Aquatica, Breezy Hill Nursery, Brennan Landscaping, Inc., Exteriors Unlimited Landscape Contractors, Inc., Extreme Exteriors, Ground Affects Landscaping, Inc., Innovative Exteriors Landscape, Kelly’s Greenscapes, LLC, La Rosa Landscape, MJS Landscaping Services, Quality Landscaping and Landscape Master LLC. Attendees can choose their favorite garden design for the People’s Choice Award and enter to win an iPad. Pick up a People’s Choice ballot at the show’s entrance where a sculpture garden and new interactive water feature is displayed.

Returning by popular demand, four prominent Midwest artists will showcase 20 works of welcoming sculptural art, each inspired by natural and contemporary elements. The 2015 participating artists include Bruce Niemi (www.bruceniemi.com), Don Rambadt (www.donrambadt.com), Peter Flanary (www.peterflanary.com) and Bernard Roberts (www.bernardjroberts.com). Playjet, a new interactive fountain game supplied by Reinders Inc. and designed by Claas WaterWorx challenges attendees to hit moving light targets with a joystick-controlled water jet.



Discover Sustainable Solutions

Solutions Stage seminar attendees will learn about the latest gardening trends and gain fresh design ideas while being surrounded by trees and plantings in Breckenridge Landscape Park. The ambient nature sounds create a spring feeling while the hourly rainstorm complete with thunder and lightning sound effects remind attendees that May flowers are just around the corner.



Visitors can also tour the latest energy-saving concepts and environmentally friendly landscaping ideas at the Sustainable Solutions Idea Center, designed and built by Breckenridge Landscape. This unique environment showcase inspires with the addition of a new trademarked Breckenridge designed fire-water feature ideal for any size space.

Shop the Garden Market & MPTV Great TV Auction Preview

If larger projects aren't on your agenda, lawn ornaments, patio accessories and gardening tools at the Garden Market. In addition, more than 1,000 pieces of art, antiques and collectibles are displayed as part of the MPTV Great TV Auction (Apr 24-May 2). Pre-bids will be accepted on all items at the show.

If you go

The 91st REALTORS® Home & Garden Show presented by Unilock is at State Fair Park from now through March 29 (Closed March 23 & 24). Show hours are Friday and Saturday 10 am to 8 pm, Sunday 10 am to 5 pm, and Wednesday and Thursday 4 pm to 8 pm. Tickets are $8 for adults, free for children 12 and younger and free for active military with ID. The first 500 cars receive free parking, compliments of the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, beginning at 5 pm on March 25 and 26. Visit www.mkehgs.com or call (414) 443-2109 for more information.