You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Billy Elliot the Musical dances its way to Raleigh Memorial Auditorium at the Duke Energy Center for the Performing Arts February 10-15, 2014.





North Carolina Theatre strives to foster the next generation of artists and leaders who will become future patrons of the arts through, training, the opportunity to perform on stage with seasoned Broadway professionals and outreach programs, namely through the North Carolina Theatre Conservatory. Billy Elliot will continue the tradition at North Carolina Theatre of having the best blend of local and Broadway talent. This blend is unique to NCT and sets it apart as a professional regional theater.

To prepare local talent for the Billy Elliot auditions, North Carolina Conservatory offered a Billy Elliot Audition Boot Camp taught by original Broadway cast member Grady Bowman. This is just one example of the professional audition readiness that NCT Conservatory provides.

Thrilling audiences worldwide and winning TEN Tony Awards® including Best Musical, Billy Elliot the Musical is the joyous celebration of one boy’s journey to make his dreams come true. Set in a small Northern England mining town, the story follows Billy as he stumbles out of the boxing ring and into a ballet class, discovering a surprising talent that inspires his family and his whole community, changing his life forever.

Hailed as “The best show you will ever see” by the New York Post, this big musical with an even bigger heart will enchant the dreamer in all of us, the show includes unforgettable songs by Elton John, sensational dance numbers, and a powerful storyline that will stay with you long after you leave the theatre.

Local and NY auditions to be announced this fall.

For tickets visit http://www.ticketmaster.com/promo/kdmyf3

If you or someone you know is interested in the performing arts learn more about North Carolina Theatre Conservatory at nctheatre.com/education.

To stay up to date on the latest information, connect with NC Theatre on Facebook and Twitter.