Four cases of chikungunya fever in Southwest Florida are among the rapid recent increase in Florida of a mosquito-borne illness imported mostly from the Caribbean, according to the state Department of Health.

Two individuals in Sarasota and Manatee counties appear to have contracted the disease on trips to the Dominican Republic. Two Charlotte County cases of Caribbean origin were also reported earlier this month.

There have been at least 50 reported cases of chikungunya in Florida in 2014, all of them acquired outside the United States. That number has more than doubled in the past month. The outbreak in the Caribbean, thought to have affected tens of thousands, was first noticed in December 2013, and the spread to Florida escalated in May.

The virus most commonly causes a high fever, joint pain and swelling, back pain and a rash, but as many as 28 percent of infected people have no symptoms. It is rarely fatal, but the symptoms are described as miserable and debilitating. As with other viral infections, newborns and elders are at the greatest risk.

From 2009 through 2013, according to an April state report on the “emerging threat,” 68 percent of the Florida cases were contracted in the Caribbean region, 26 percent in Latin America, and the rest in Asia and Africa. There has only been one other diagnosis of chikungunya in Sarasota County, in December 2013, contracted by a person who had traveled to Asia.

Although this disease has not been traced to any infection acquired in Florida, it is possible for it to spread from infected humans to mosquitoes, and back again to humans. Health officials are urging Floridians to be conscious of this possibility as the summer rainy season gets underway.

“Avoiding mosquito bites is key to preventing chikungunya and other mosquito-borne diseases,” said William Heyman, Sarasota medical director for the health department. “The typical summer rain pattern increases mosquito activity. Residents and visitors are urged to take precautions to reduce sources of standing water which serve as mosquito breeding sites, and to prevent mosquito bites.”