Topics: 2016 Elections, Disney World, Editor's Picks, Florida, George H.W. Bush, George W. Bush, GOP, Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio, presidential candidates, Rand Paul, Rick Scott, Elections News, Politics News

When is Jeb Bush going to stop being so boring and get mean? This is the question on the minds of the political press corps. Sure, it’s nice that he’s open to any and all questions from reporters and voters alike, but does he have to answer them with his wishy-washy technocratic details? When’s he going to start calling his opponents terrible names so reporters can sex up their Jeb stories a bit?

Everyone wants to see some blood. The hope, now that Bush is tumbling from presumed frontrunner status, is that he’ll be forced to mix it up a little instead of responding to questions with, say, a critique of the wording in subclause 2(b)(ii) of some education bill from 1995. The further you tumble from contention, the more you have to resort to weird humiliating stunts to get attention in this field of dozens of candidates.

And there’s no better place to start getting nasty than at Walt Disney World. Florida Gov. Rick Scott, a malevolent ghoul straight out of the German folk stories on which most classic Disney movies are based, held an economic summit yesterday at the sweltering Orlando money-suck where dreams come true. Bush, finally on some friendly turf, used the occasion “to more forcefully attack opponents” than he’s previously been willing to do, according to the Washington Post. “Bush has mostly avoided sparring with Republican contenders,” the Post writes, “saying that he’s not yet an official candidate and is eager to be a ‘joyful’ alternative for voters upset by partisan warfare. But that strategy doesn’t appear to be working.”

Alright, so give us the skinny: what did he say? Did he call Scott Walker a dingdong? Did he throw a trash can at Ted Cruz? Did he literally murder Mike Huckabee?

Ehh, not really. He made the bold decision — you’ll never believe this — to criticize Rand Paul on national security. He said that Paul was “wrong about the Patriot Act.” Bam! “He also delivered his most personal swipe yet at Rubio,” the Post writes, “in response to the senator’s suggestions earlier in the day that Republicans should elect younger leaders.” Okay, let’s see this uppercut: “It’s kind of hard to imagine that my good friend Marco would be critical of his good friend Jeb,” Bush said.