AIR FORCE ACADEMY — Just call tailback Anthony LaCoste a galloping thoroughbred for the Air Force Falcons. Running with pent-up motivation, LaCoste packed a career into one game Saturday at Falcon Stadium, leaving a bewildered Army defense in the dust on touchdown runs of 73 and 78 yards as the Falcons raced into the winner’s circle for the first time since Aug. 31.

LaCoste scored three touchdowns and rushed for a career-high 263 yards to lead the Falcons (2-7) to a 42-28 victory over the Black Knights (3-6), snapping a seven-game losing streak.

“I’m going to remember this game for the rest of my life,” LaCoste said. “This is awesome. I don’t know what to say. It feels great.”

The victory only soothed some of the damage of a season that is heading nowhere close to a bowl game. But with Army in the losing locker room, at least the Falcons could look at themselves in the mirror.

“Doing this at home against Army is amazing,” said junior free safety Christian Spears, who led the Falcons with 12 tackles. “The season hasn’t gone the way we would have liked, but in our locker room, this is the best 2-7 has ever felt.”

For LaCoste, it was a dream come true. He endured game-ending injuries in his early years and played safety last year. His 263 yards were just 12 yards short of the Air Force single-game record of 275 by Chad Hall, set vs. Army in 2007. LaCoste also became the first Falcons player to have two runs of 70 yards or more in a game.

His 78-yard touchdown run gave the Falcons their first lead of the game, 28-21, with 8:37 left in the third quarter.

While LaCoste supplied the fireworks for the crowd of 36,512, the Falcons got steady performances from freshman quarterback Nate Romine and from a defensive unit that dominated the second half after it looked as if it would get run out of the stadium in the first half.

Romine completed 7-of-8 passes for 111 yards, a couple of throws providing key yards in an eight-play, 75-yard drive to the clinching touchdown with 3:41 left.

“At the end, give Air Force credit,” Army coach Rich Ellerson said. “They throw the ball in a running situation (where) we’re daring them to throw, and they make some plays. They made some circus catches, but they made the plays.”

Air Force’s defense stepped up in the second half after allowing 21 points, 226 rushing yards and 20 first downs in the first 30 minutes.

The Falcons limited Army to eight first downs and seven points in the second half. Army’s only score after halftime came on halfback Terry Baggett’s 10-yard run.

Key play

With Air Force leading 35-28 in the fourth quarter, Air Force freshman quarterback Nate Romine completed a 29-yard pass to receiver Garrett Brown to the Army 8-yard line. Three plays later, the Falcons scored the clinching touchdown with 3:41 left in the game.

Key stat

Army came into the game as the leading rushing team in college football, averaging 340.1 yards a game. Air Force outgained the Black Knights on the ground 343-308, thanks to tailback Anthony LaCoste’s 263 yards.

Irv Moss, The Denver Post