Geneva, N.Y. - An Ontario County destination spot has reportedly added a charge line onto its food bills.

Belhurst Castle, located in Geneva, now displays a line in its receipt subtotals as a "NYS Labor Surcharge."

Tim Girvin knew the romantic meal with his Valentine would cost over $100. What he didn't expect was an extra fee.

"It was a really nice restaurant and you paid for it on top of the tip," Girvin said.

A line in the menu warns of the surcharge. When Girvin asked about it, he was told it would be 4-5 percent of his bill. He was also told it was meant to help offset the $9 minimum wage that went into effect on December 31, 2015.

"We were kind of like, 'Wow, they really are passing it on to the consumer now.' We were a little shocked at that," Girvin said.

The Belhurst staff confirmed the charge and referred us to a marketing manager. She did not return our calls or answer questions left for her.

Labor attorneys told 13WHAM News not only are these surcharges legal in most states, they are common in big cities such as L.A., San Francisco and Miami. New York City, however, is the exception.

It has an ordinance preventing the surcharges.

The charges began popping up to offset the cost of health care mandated by the Affordable Care Act. Surcharges are generating a lot of comment on our Facebook page.

Julie writes, "All of the hotels in Niagara Falls do this. Kinda sneaky." Rich said, "The fact that anyone is shocked that business owners are passing along the costs of doing business shows what a sad state society is in."

Girvin said it affected his perception of a night out.

"It definitely put a damper on the regular consumer. If you want to go out to eat, you have to think about this ahead of time," Girvin said.

A viewer named Randal raises another issue on Facebook.

"I don't believe they can legally list it as a NYS labor charge."

At best, the term is misleading because it implies the state is collecting and keeping the feel.

13WHAM News took the question to the NYS Attorney General's office. A spokesman would not comment and also would not confirm whether the agency has launched an investigation.