The 2016 legislative session is little more than half over.

What have your Peninsula legislators been doing for the last month? Let's take a look, focusing today on legislation sponsored by local House members. (We'll look at the area's senators on Sunday.)

Gordon Helsel, R-Poquoson

Helsel doesn't file the volumes of legislation some of his colleagues do. He hasn't backed any budget amendments this session, and he's carrying a relatively low seven bills.

He got a bill through the House to let localities prohibit people from driving too fast through flooded areas, kicking up a wake that can damage homes or vehicles. State Sen. Mamie Locke, D-Hampton, is carrying the same bill in the Senate, and both are moving forward.

So is Helsel's effort to clarify an existing property tax break for disabled veterans and the surviving spouses of soldiers killed in action. It would extend that exemption to detached garages and other property improvements, not just the principal home and the land it's on.

Helsel's proposed local option to ban plastic grocery bags died in committee. He dropped a bill that would have removed Poquoson from the James or York river basins, a procedural maneuver that has to do with clean water regulations.

The measure might have caused more problems than it solved, but may be revisited, he said.

Something similar cropped up on a bill to name 20 miles of the York River a state historic river. Helsel said he'll revisit that next year and "there could be grants" involved.

Del. Monty Mason, D-Williamsburg

Mason spent his first term watching his bills die or get handed off to Republican sponsors, presumably so the GOP could run ads against his re-election last year noting that he failed to pass a single bill.

He won re-election comfortably, despite serving in a swing district, and his bill-less streak came to an end this session.

He's worked with the McAuliffe administration on a couple of bills meant to strengthen cybersecurity laws.

He got House approval to allow localities to shut the water off faster on people who don't pay their bills, something Newport News requested. The bill also gives localities better ways to work with people struggling to pay, Mason said, and a Republican delegate rose to Mason's defense when the bill was questioned on the House floor.

A Mason bill is also moving to let Internet and cellphone company officials verify by written affidavit that emails, text messages and other information used in court cases are authentic. Now they must testify in person.

Mason's attempt to require students transferring into Virginia colleges from out of state to bring a letter from their former school stating that they left in good standing, as the College of William and Mary already does, died, but it may be revisited in coming years. The legislature passed a number of campus sexual assault reforms just last year and the architects of those changes told Mason they wanted to give the new system a chance to work before tinkering with it.

Del. Brenda Pogge, R-Norge

Pogge's bills run the gamut, from allowing more commercial growing of hemp to making sure the Girl Scouts can recruit in public schools.

She also has a successful bill to tweak the clinical nursing licensure process, and one suggested by a local student to make the eastern garter snake Virginia's official snake. Her bill to expand Virginia's "Right to Try" law on experimental treatments to include nonpharmacological treatments in addition to drugs has also moved forward.

She has a bill to make sure the guardians of incapacitated people don't unreasonably block family access to the person in a coma, which was suggested by a constituent. She's also got support for legislation strengthening a state rule that nursing homes must refund prepayments within 30 days of a resident's death.

Yet another constituent bill deals with the amount of time that must pass before a garage owner can put a lien on a vehicle. A man who was in the hospital and couldn't pick up his motorcycle was behind that one, Pogge said, but the bill died.

Pogge's bill to make sure "youth groups federally listed as patriotic," such as the Girl Scouts and Boy Scouts, can use school property was set aside in favor of a similar bill, which has passed the House and awaits Senate action. Her bill to add party affiliations to the ballot for local candidates was tabled, though a version passed the Senate and eked through a House subcommittee this week.

A pair of Freedom of Information Act bills were set aside for more study. One would let judges invalidate actions taken in improperly closed government meetings. Another would ensure that parents, and only parents, have access to their children's library records.

Pogge's bill to forbid state officials from enforcing any aspect of the federal Affordable Care Act was abandoned because it would have cost the state hundreds of millions in federal health care funds. Her measure to forbid Virginia localities from having sanctuary policies, meaning they don't enforce federal immigration laws, was set aside because it was drawn too broadly, she said.

Her widely supported industrial hemp measure would eventually expand growing permissions granted last year to two university programs, letting other farmers apply for state permits.

"There's huge commercial benefits," she said.

Del. Marcia "Cia" Price, D-Newport News

Price is a freshman delegate from the minority party, which is not a recipe for legislative success.

Her bill to outlaw flamethrowers went down quickly in a House committee. So, too, did her effort to let localities ban firearms in government buildings.

That bill built upon an annual unrealized priority for Price's predecessor, former Del. Mamye BaCote: banning guns in libraries.

Price, like state Sen. Mamie Locke in the legislature's upper chamber, also had a bill to increase penalties for verbally threatening someone. It died in committee.

Del. Jeion Ward, D-Hampton

Ward's annual attempt to undo Virginia's requirement that women have an ultrasound before an abortion went down again this session.

So did her bill to hold a referendum this November on moving Virginia toward independent redistricting.