Buffs sophomore made big strides during redshirt season

Colorado redshirt sophomore George King has some fun ripping off a red shirt last week at the Coors Events Center. King's redshirt season is in the past, and he's eager to help the CU basketball team bounce back after a tough season. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

George King is not unlike other basketball players when it comes to shooting the ball.

When the Colorado sophomore is able to grip the ball on the seams, he's usually more accurate, he said. When the seams are off, sometimes his shot is as well.

Learning to be more accurate with or without the seams is what King calls "an underrated skill" in basketball, and it's one that he's trying to improve upon.

In fact, King has spent a lot of time over the past year working on a variety of skills, and after redshirting during the 2014-15 season, the 6-foot-6 wing from San Antonio could play a significant role in helping CU recover from last year's 16-18 season.

"I would just like to help the team," King said. "I don't care in what way."

To a man, the players and coaches on the CU roster have spent this offseason doing their part to make sure the Buffs have a better season. Ask some of the Buffs about who has made the most strides, and if King's name doesn't come up first, it doesn't take long to get to him.

"I'd say the one guy in particular that really has made leaps and bounds, to me, day by day, has been George King," CU senior Josh Scott said. "Every day he does something that you're just like, 'Wow this kid can play.' "

CU and head coach Tad Boyle have known King can play since the moment they signed him, in 2013, out of Brennan High School. To this point, though, King has had a slower start to his career than he had hoped, as it has taken time to adjust to the college game.

Advertisement

Because the Buffs like King's potential so much, they asked him to redshirt last year — the thought being that they'd rather have a great season from him at the end of his career instead of having him play a limited role off the bench early in his career.

"The biggest thing for me was embracing it and not taking it as, 'I'm not that good,' " King said. "I took it and used it as an opportunity.

"It looked like I was just sitting on the bench in the games but I was learning a lot. Obviously, practices were my games, and I worked out twice as much as the guys did, because game day was their day off (from workouts), and I was in the gym, lifting and on the court shooting."

King has never had a problem finding time to work on his game, and it seems he's always had something to motivate him to improve.

Growing up, he had an athletic sister, Jecia Anderson, to lead the way. Anderson was three years older and, as a 6-foot-2 post who played collegiately at Wingate University, she taught her little brother a few lessons on the court.

"When I was about 12 it was pretty tough games," King said. "She was on the varsity team in high school and I was just a little middle school kid. She was good and I'd come home mad because she beat me."

By 15, King said he was starting to pass up his sister. They still compete a little bit, and while King has a good edge in size, strength and speed, he said, "She's still good and she can still shoot."

These days, of course, King is no longer trying to beat his sister. He's trying to compete for playing time with the Buffs.

King said he's stronger, both physically and mentally, than he was the last time CU fans saw him in uniform, in March 2014.

"I'm pretty much doing the same thing I've been doing — posting up, defending, rebound — since I've been here as a freshman," he said. "I just may be doing it at a higher level, which is key."

He's playing at a higher level in large part because he's now comfortable with the college game.

"Going into your third year, the game just naturally slows down," he said. "The game has really slowed down for me, and I see things now that I didn't as much my freshman year."

With his skills and understanding of the game improved and his maturity level higher, King can't wait to see what this season brings for himself and the Buffs.

"It's been way too long," he said. "A year sitting and watching, I'm anxious."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @BrianHowell33.