Pregnancy is viewed as a special time in a woman’s life. Most women have set limits for themselves on how many babies they have based on any number of factors, such as socio-economic status and age. But 37-year-old British mom Tara Sawyer is addicted to pregnancy, and won’t stop until her “womb falls out.” Sawyer has given birth to seven kids, four of which are her own, and is a surrogate mother of three.

“Surrogacy is very addictive. It’s a huge rush from the moment the test comes back positive,” said Sawyer to Barcroft TV in a video. “It’s an amazing feeling to hand over a child to someone who desperately wants it, and I feel at my best whilst pregnant.” Surrogates carry and give birth to babies for couples who want to have children but cannot due to medical conditions such as recurrent pregnancy loss.

Sawyer, who was adopted as a child, considered surrogacy to provide couples like her parents an opportunity to have a family. In England, according to surrogacy laws, she is entitled to 15,000 euros in expenses, but she refuses to take any payment, being a surrogate for free, the DailyMail reported. Two years ago, she gave birth to her first surrogate baby, who is her biological daughter. However, Sawyer did not feel the “maternal love,” for the infant, and handed over a child that she said, “was never mine to keep.”

At the root of her her addiction to pregnancy are her twin boys Jack and Noah, who are now four. Sawyer delivered the boys prematurely at just 29 weeks via C-section after they developed Twin to Twin transfusion syndrome (TTTS). TTTS occurs when the blood supply of one twin moves to the other the shared placenta, according to Medline Plus, possibly leading to health problems for both infants. After the birth of the twins, Sawyer admitted she felt deprived of the pregnancy, and although she didn’t want any more children, she still craved to be pregnant.

Sawyer couldn’t do all this without the support of her husband, Matt, who understands the void she feels post pregnancy. “It made us stronger as a couple,” he told Barcroft TV. Matt’s main concern was whether his wife, Tara, would be able to hand over the baby at the end of the pregnancy. Now, together, they continue to have surrogate pregnancies. In January, she just gave birth to twin boys, and has already spoken to another gay couple, hoping to be pregnant by the end of the year.

Too many pregnancies do have an impact on the women’s bodies. Having pregnancies too close together doesn't provide the mother time to recover after losing nutrients such as iron and folate after pregnancy and breastfeeding. This is known as maternal depletion syndrome. According to the Mayo Clinic, a pregnancy within 12 months of giving birth can also lead to placental abruption, placenta previa, and autism in second-born children. Tara isn’t afraid of the effects of pregnancy on her body, as she claims she feels at her “best physically” when pregnant. “I take vitamins, go swimming, do yoga and eat healthily.”

“I love having a bump and people cooing over the precious little gift inside,” she said.