The size of the tax and the effect it's expected to have in driving up employees' share of health costs has led to "an emerging consensus among politicians and interest groups against the tax," Levitt said.



Earlier this week, former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who is seeking the Democratic presidential nomination, called on Congress to repeal the Cadillac tax, and "to fully pay for the cost of the repeal."



Clinton, who had already seen her leading competitor for the nomination, Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders, call for such a repeal, is believed to be motivated in part by opposition to the tax among labor unions, a key constituency for the Democratic Party. Unions are largely against the tax because health-care benefits are among the most valued parts of negotiated labor contracts.

The U.S. Chamber of Commerce, usually no friend to unions, also is strongly against the tax. And Republican politicians have lined up against the tax.

But the letter sent Thursday to the Ways and Means and Finance committees of both houses of Congress underscores the fact that repealing the Cadillac tax won't come without a cost. That letter cited the tax's role in both controlling rising overall health-care costs, and generating tens of billions of dollars of revenue for the U.S. Treasury.

The letter from 101 economists and policy analysts noted that the tax was included in the Affordable Care Act to address the "economically inefficient and regressive" tax policy that allows the "unlimited exclusion of employer-financed health insurance from income and payroll taxes."

Among the signatories were MIT's Jonathan Gruber, an architect of the ACA who gained notoriety last year when it was revealed that he publicly cited "the stupidity of the American voter" as one of the factors that led to Obamacare getting passed into law.

The group wrote that the tax "will help curtail the growth of private health insurance premiums by encouraging employers to limit the cost to the tax-free amount."



They also said that the tax will discourage insurance that is so generous to workers that they "have little incentive to insist on cost-effective care, and providers have little incentive to provide it." A key theory behind the tax is that if workers are forced to pay more directly for medical services, they will be smarter consumers and less apt to get treatment that is unnecessary, or which could be obtained at a lower cost.

The economists and analysts wrote that "as employers redesign health insurance plans to hold costs within the tax-free amount, cash wages and other fringe benefits will increase."

"Furthermore, repealing the Cadillac tax would add directly to the federal budget deficit, an estimated $91 billion over the next decade, according to the Joint Committee on Taxation," the economists wrote.