STAFF WRITER

marian galbraith

Lesia Dian Fox, a 50-year-old woman from McMinnville, said she was devastated by the recent state Senate Legislative Committee’s vote to squelch, at least temporarily, Gov. Bill Haslam’s “Insure Tennessee” proposal.

“I called Senator (Janice) Bowling’s office several times and emailed her and asked others to do the same, urging her to support the plan,” Fox said, “but she still voted against it.”

According to the TN.gov website, Haslam unveiled the plan in early December, which was designed to expand Medicaid coverage in Tennessee to nearly 300,000 uninsured residents. It was unveiled after nearly two years of extensive effort and a special session of the Health and Welfare Committee in January to focus on the proposal.

“We made the decision in Tennessee nearly two years ago not to expand traditional Medicaid,” Haslam said at the time.

“This is an alternative approach that forges a different path and is a unique Tennessee solution.

“This plan leverages federal dollars to provide health care coverage to more Tennesseans, to give people a choice in their coverage, and to address the cost of health care, better health outcomes and personal responsibility.”

The 11-member senate committee, however, voted 7-4 to defeat it in the session’s third day.

Supporters of the plan say it was designed as an alternative to Medicaid expansion that would bring billions of federal dollars back into the state each year, not only to cover Tennessee’s uninsured, but also to protect many hospitals on the brink of collapse due to declining reimbursements.

Opponents, including Sen. Bowling (R-Tullahoma), who was one of the seven members who voted against it, say the plan is not clearly worked out and is still part of a larger problem, namely Medicaid Expansion under Obamacare that is fiscally “unsustainable.”

Fox was born legally blind due to toxoplasmosis, an infection she said her mother contracted while pregnant with her.

“I was on federal disability and TennCare for most of my life, from the time I was four or five years old,” she said, “but when I got married, I lost my disability income.

“Then in 2005, I also lost my TennCare coverage, because the rules were changed. My husband gets $1,172 per month for his disability, but that’s considered $72 too much for me to qualify for TennCare, under the current rules.

“If I had dependent children, or had certain types of cancer or if I went into a nursing home, I could qualify for TennCare, but I don’t fit into any of the right categories any more.”

Mrs. Fox said she finished high school through special education classes and has taken some college courses, but only with great difficulty.

“I’ve never been able to work due to my blindness, even after several retina surgeries and other eye procedures,” she said. “I wanted to be a teacher and I tried substitute teaching, but once the teachers realized I couldn’t see the students very well to watch them, they never called me back.”

She and her husband, Billy Ray Fox, now get by on $1,325 per month, including about $153 per month in food stamps.

Mr. Fox said he broke his back after 30 years of working in automotive repair and metal fabrication, but he now receives disability and TennCare coverage after paying into the system for many years. But since Mrs. Fox has always been disabled and never worked, her situation is different, he said.

Otherwise the couple gets by as best they can with help from churches and other charity programs.

In addition to her eye conditions, which she said include glaucoma, macular degeneration and retina problems, Mrs. Fox suffers from high blood pressure, spinal problems and complications from a sleep apnea surgery that she said resulted in serious infections.

“I’m able to see the computer with a 42-inch monitor, and I’ve tried to take some online courses recently, but the government said my financial aid for college has run out.

“But right now, I need health coverage before I can even think about taking courses or working on the computer.”

Also disappointed by the decision was Donna Seely of Tullahoma, a family nurse practitioner and Certified Application Counselor with Pathways to Health, who has been a tireless advocate for the uninsured in Tennessee.

“I can’t believe they killed this plan when it was going to be 100 percent funded by Medicaid funds for the first three years and 90 percent after that,” Seely said.

“The Tennessee Hospital Association agreed to cover the remaining 10 percent after that.”

According to the Tennessee Justice Center, a Nashville law firm that advocates for Tennessee families in need, the committee’s decision to kill Haslam’s plan is costing the state $2.7 million per day in Medicaid expansion funds from the federal government.

These funds, the Center states, include federal taxes already paid in by Tennesseans.

“Instead of staying in our state,” the Center’s website reads, “our tax dollars are going to other states to fund health care coverage for their citizens.

“Insure Tennessee will keep our federal tax dollars here in Tennessee, helping our friends, families and neighbors, and creating jobs.”

Sen. Bowling said she is not unsympathetic to Mrs. Fox’s plight and would like to help her obtain TennCare coverage if possible, but that Haslam’s proposal is not the right answer.

“I’ve been contacted by the Tennessee Justice Center and unfortunately, what they’re saying is not true,” Bowling said.

“First of all, their numbers are a moving target.

“First they said there were 180,000 uninsured, then they go up to 400,000, and I’m not sure what the right number is, but I have researched this subject diligently and I’m also on the Judicial Committee that had a hearing on the matter the week before.

“I relied on the advice of Dr. David Blumenthal, who is recognized by Vanderbilt as the highest expert on Medicaid,” Bowling said.

According to online research, David Blumenthal is president of The Commonwealth Fund, a national philanthropy engaged in independent research on health and social policy issues.

“There were several reasons I voted ‘no’ on this plan, one being that it was supposed to help the rural hospitals, but in reality, 85 percent of the funding was going to go to the teaching hospitals in Nashville, Memphis, Knoxville and Chattanooga, and only 15 percent would go to hospitals in rural areas.

“In addition, Dr. Blumenthal said the governor’s plan is in conflict with the federal Medicaid rules, so those rules would need to be changed in Washington before Tennessee could accept the funds.

“I appreciate the work that went into Haslam’s plan, but it was all verbal and there was nothing definite that was really worked out in writing, and it’s contrary to the federal code in many ways.

“The reality is that (the governor’s plan) was expanding Medicaid, so it’s a decision of whether to expand Medicaid or not to expand it.

“Forty percent of Tennessee’s budget already comes from the federal government as it is, and that’s a dangerous situation for Tennessee to be in. Expanding Medicaid would only make it worse.”

Bowling said one of her main concerns right now regarding TennCare is to dismantle Tennessee’s Intractable Pain Treatment Act, which she said “requires” doctors to prescribe certain pain medications, often for the wrong reasons.

“Right now, 22 million of our TennCare dollars are going to opiates for pain because of this act,” she said, “and it was constructed by the manufacturers of Oxycontin and other highly addictive pain medications that are ravaging our society right now, with neonatal problems in children, addictions and many other problems.

“They promised that these drugs had ‘no street value’ and were not addictive, but we all know that’s turned out to be wrong.”

Asked what she believes to be the next step in terms of getting low-income Tennesseans insured, Bowling said it is out of her hands.

“I’m not an expert on health care,” she said, “and I think Haslam has made a valiant attempt at correcting the problem of our uninsured, but the next step is probably with the Supreme Court, where there is currently a case that will determine a lot of things about the Affordable Care Act.”

Bowling said she thinks the ACA has been bad for Tennessee businesses and is not sustainable for Tennesseeans, while Medicaid, which is a big part of the ACA, “also needs to be changed because it is no longer working.”

Supporters of Insure Tennessee, however, are hopeful that the plan will be brought up again this year, possibly through other committees.

According to Seely, the plan includes two components.

“The ‘Volunteer Plan,’” she said, “provides vouchers for working Tennesseeans to use toward their employer-sponsored plan, if their employer offers it, while the ‘Healthy Incentives Plan’ covers people who work for companies that don’t offer insurance, or who are otherwise below the income threshold to qualify for assistance under the ACA.”

The ACA, she said, assumed that anyone below that threshold would be covered by each state’s Medicaid plan, assuming they accepted expanded Medicaid funding. Tennessee, however, was one of many states that did not.

“The Healthy Incentives plan provides a health savings plan with credits for healthy behaviors, such as annual physical exams, smoking cessation, and weight loss and things like that. It will have premiums and copays based on an individual’s income.

“The Medicaid expansion money would be used to fund these plans at 100 percent for the first three years and then 90 percent after that, and the Tennessee Hospital Association agreed to pick up the state’s 10 percent share after that point.”

Seely also explained that due to changes in the last 10 years, TennCare is only available to low-income individuals who fall into certain narrow categories, such as children and pregnant women, mothers with dependent children, women with cervical and breast cancer, and certain elderly individuals.

These changes left many low-income adults under 65 in an “insurance gap,” she said, who do not qualify for TennCare, yet who make too little income to afford insurance under the ACA, or even qualify for its subsidies.

Sen. Jeff Yarbro, D-Nashville, was one of the four members of the committee who voted “yes” on Haslam’s plan.

“While it wasn’t a perfect plan,” Yarbro said, “I voted for Insure Tennessee because it would have made health insurance a possibility for 280,000 Tennesseans who can’t otherwise afford it. More than half of these people are working but still can’t get coverage.

“The plan had the support of the business community and was a lifeline for the southeast Tennessee hospitals in danger of closing.

“This conversation isn’t over. I and other lawmakers will continue to make the case for expanding access to affordable health insurance in Tennessee.

“We will continue to work with the governor and with common-sense members of both parties to move past politics and do what’s right for Tennesseans.”

For more information visit http://www.tn.gov/tenncare/insureTennessee.shtml.