Ms. Holmes says that from an early age, she was obsessed with going to Stanford, “a symbol of Silicon Valley and invention.”

As a freshman at Stanford, she camped outside the office of Channing Robertson, her chemical engineering professor, to ask to join his laboratory, something typically open only to seniors and graduate students. She more than held her own in the lab, recalled Mr. Robertson, and the following summer she got a position at the Genome Institute of Singapore.

When she returned to Stanford in the fall of 2003, then 19, she laid a thick patent application in front of Mr. Robertson.

Photo

“I truly was astonished,” Mr. Robertson said. She had come up with an idea for a drug-delivery system that would be able to detect drug levels in the blood and wirelessly transmit those results.

“It had never even occurred to me,” Mr. Robertson said, adding that he considers being Ms. Holmes’s mentor akin to teaching Beethoven to play piano or teaching science to Einstein.

Ms. Holmes convinced her parents that her tuition money was better spent on starting a company. They also put in some of their retirement money, she says.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And, like that, Theranos began.

Seeking Venture Capital

Her tuition money and her parents’ retirement funds were a beginning, but not enough to get Theranos off the ground, at least in the way Ms. Holmes was imagining.

She energetically turned her attention to venture capital firms — dozens of which took a look, and in early fund rounds the company was turned down by some of Sand Hill Road’s biggest names, according to former Theranos employees, none of whom would speak for attribution, fearing retaliation from Theranos. They said venture capitalists were put off when Ms. Holmes wouldn’t demonstrate Theranos’s technology. Ms. Holmes insisted that she was the one being choosy. She was looking for patient investors. “You walk in the room, and the question is, ‘What is your exit strategy?’” recalled Ms. Holmes of some of those visits to potential backers. “You want to talk about your entrance strategy.”

Photo

Those investors did not understand the scale of her ambition, she said. They saw as far as a new blood sugar or cholesterol test, but, she said, “we want to build a whole new lab.”

But when it came to fund-raising, Ms. Holmes had an ace up her sleeve: family connections.

Timothy Draper, the well-known venture capitalist, had been a neighbor when the Holmeses lived in California. The children played together. “I gave her her first million bucks to get the business going,” Mr. Draper says. “She totally blows me away with her vision.”

Another anchor investor was Don Lucas. Mr. Lucas is a godfatherlike figure in Silicon Valley who built his reputation by investing in a little start-up called Oracle. To get to Mr. Lucas, Ms. Holmes relied on an introduction from a former top banking executive who went to school with her father at Wesleyan.

Mr. Lucas, who wasn’t available for an interview, served as chairman of the Theranos board for a time and brought in Lawrence Ellison, the founder and chief executive of Oracle, as another investor.

In short order, Theranos raised more than $400 million, giving it, at one point, a valuation of $9 billion.

Photo

That is a remarkable valuation for a start-up, but it might be justifiable if Theranos executes on Ms. Holmes’s vision: to harness engineering technology to make laboratory testing radically cheaper and easier than tests from established behemoths like Quest Diagnostics and the Laboratory Corporation of America.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Beyond cost, Ms. Holmes wants to allow people to bypass doctors and established labs to order and receive their own affordable diagnostic tests, accessible at the pharmacy down the street. (This spring, Theranos lobbied for and won a change in Arizona state law allowing consumers to order lab tests without a doctor’s prescription.) Additionally, the Theranos technology relies on pricking a finger, rather than using a needle, to draw blood. In effect, Theranos sees itself as akin to the personal computer, which displaced mainframes.

Many of the company’s early efforts were far from successful, according to five former employees. Early on, Ms. Holmes courted pharmaceutical manufacturers, where the Theranos technology would allow companies to conduct clinical trials at lower costs. She had no trouble making deals with pharmaceutical companies. “She had every pharmaceutical company eating out of her hand,” one former employee said. But, ultimately, those deals went nowhere, as the technology worked inconsistently, they say.

Ms. Holmes argues that the company’s focus over time simply shifted away from the pharmaceutical industry, but it was able to successfully use its technology. “We can show you the programs we’ve done,” she said in the interview. But when pressed for examples, the company did not provide details. Pfizer said its work with the company was limited and ended years ago. GlaxoSmithKline also said it had not conducted any work with Theranos in the last two years and that none of it had involved its clinical trials.

Another early idea was to create a sleek version of the Theranos blood analysis machine for the home, so that people could prick their fingers and the machine would send the results to physicians and caregivers. The company hired top designers from places like Apple. “The promise of what this could do in terms of personalized medicine was huge,” one former employee said.

Photo

But it didn’t work. The machine at the time was simply too big, two former employees said, making it an unlikely consumer product.

More recently, Theranos pitched a device to the military, but those attempts have also stumbled. In 2012, Theranos representatives visited Fort Detrick in Maryland. Theranos wanted its equipment to be used in the field with soldiers, according to one individual with direct knowledge of the meeting. But the Theranos equipment was heavier than the hand-held device the Defense Department was already using for some tests, and the Theranos tests still needed F.D.A. approval. Theranos says it never intended the meeting to be anything other than an informal demonstration of its technology.

Ms. Holmes insists that the company is making steady progress toward developing tests that will allow people to begin to take control of chronic diseases like diabetes. “Eventually, we’ll get there,” she said.

Ms. Holmes also insists that her employees do not hesitate to tell her when something can’t be done, but that she looks for people who share her sense of dedication. “It is very much to me about a mission,” she said, “not a job.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Taking Back the Story

In recent years, Ms. Holmes says, the company’s sole focus has been to make lab tests widely available by teaming up with drugstores like Walgreens. Theranos prices, posted on the company website, are a fraction of prevailing rates charged by competitors.

Photo

The big challenge, according to Mr. Kovacevich, was for Theranos to become a household name.

As a young woman in technology, a female entrepreneur worth billions of dollars, Ms. Holmes was the perfect vehicle for getting the message across. “We didn’t need advertising,” Mr. Kovacevich said. “You’ll get the best publicity you’ve ever had.” And, in fact, Ms. Holmes appeared on any number of glossy magazine covers, including T: The New York Times Style Magazine.

Though she now faces harsh criticism from the outside, she is still surrounded largely by true believers. Her younger brother, Christian Holmes V, is an executive at Theranos, as is her former Stanford professor, Channing Robertson. Her board of advisers, despite their impressive names, have had little say about how the company operates. Ms. Holmes persuaded George P. Shultz, the former secretary of state, whom she met at a conference, to join in 2011. He then contacted people he knew, like Henry Kissinger and Dr. Frist.

“These were all just friends of George,” said Mr. Kovacevich, who was also introduced to Ms. Holmes by Mr. Shultz.

At this point, her investors and the advisers seem willing to be patient. Elizabeth “will make sacrifices to go slow,” Mr. Kovacevich said. “She knows she has to make money. She wants to change the world in health care.”

But that patience may be wearing thin. After more than 10 years, Ms. Holmes is talking about ways she can remain private — getting new investors to buy out the old ones. The company declined to provide financial information, but she was adamant that Theranos does not currently need more money. “We’re not in a position in which we need to raise equity capital,” she said. “We’re in a position where we will continue to grow from operations.”

While Ms. Holmes argues that Theranos invited the F.D.A. review, the company seems to have been caught off guard after the F.D.A. unexpectedly inspected its manufacturing facilities, where it makes its proprietary equipment, in August and September. The agency told Theranos that it had to comply with its rules, rather than those of other regulatory agencies. According to correspondence made available through a Freedom of Information Act request, Theranos complained of “a fundamental policy shift that is uniquely and highly prejudicial to Theranos.”

Now the company must get approval for all of its equipment — including the devices that are used to analyze and perform tests as well as its so-called nanotainers that are used to collect blood from finger pricks. Ms. Holmes insists, however, that the company can still rely on some of its technology, which she won’t specify.

She is now trying to take back control of the Theranos story. She talks about publishing the company’s internal data, and the company has plans to hold a session with outside experts even sooner to try to convince the doubters. The Cleveland Clinic says it has not reached a final agreement to study the technology.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

And there is the matter of the black turtlenecks.

She claims her mother dressed her and her brother in black turtlenecks when they were young and now she finds them comfortable. Moreover, she wanted to deflect attention from what she might be wearing. But now she admits she is frustrated about how to handle the media fascination they seem to have created. Perhaps, she joked, “I should bring them with me and give them to people as gifts.”