Lifelong cricket player Amin Khatri is a key player, on the field and off, when it comes to cricket in Central Jersey.

Amin Khatri’s cricket team, the Maha Cricket Club, poses after their pre quarterfinal victory at the game played at Chimney Rock Park. Khatri is standing third from the right. (Photo: PHOTO COURTESY OF AMIN KHATRI )

Amin Khatri always has loved cricket, from the time he was a young boy in Bombay, India.

"Bombay is a haven for cricket," he said. "It's been big all along there. I played on my university team when I was there."

Khatri said there are three formats for cricket, the original five-day game, a shorter one-day version, and now the popular Twenty20 or T20 version, which only takes three hours. He plays all the formats, but his favorite is the Twenty20.

"I like the fact it requires a lot of athleticism, as well as patience," he said. "A game changes very fast. And it gets the adrenaline pumping."

He explained that on one ball, (in baseball language, "pitch") a batsman might hit a score for one run or six, depending on how it is hit. So the difference in scoring for an "Over" (6 times a ball is pitched to a batman) can range from 1 to 36 runs. The T20 format has 20-Over "Innings" for each team. The longer formats don't have the same pace of excitement.

"Robin Williams once described cricket as baseball on Valium. Not any more," Khatri said, referring to the fast pace of the T20 format.

Another reason he likes the shorter format is that he and his friends can play for three hours on a Saturday morning, then go home and have fun with their families.

After he came to live in New Jersey, he was instrumental in starting the New Jersey Soft Ball Cricket League (www.njsbcl.com) in 2001 for expats from the British Commonwealth countries who wanted to play cricket here. He said the first league had eight to 10 teams. Today, the league has 96 teams, playing on 47 fields throughout Central Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania. Even some corporations in the area such as Citibank and Credit Suisse have teams that play in the league. They travel all over the northern half of the state to play.

"The furthest north is Hackettstown," he said. The teams are based mainly in Middlesex, Union, Mercer, Bergen and a little in Hudson"

He added that as immigrant populations move west across the state, they are establishing new teams. And Khatri has been a big part of that. Although he lives in Marlborough, he'll travel anywhere to help a community establish a cricket team. This year, Bridgewater called on him and the league to help establish a team, and the township designated a field in Chimney Rock Park for them to play. That team is made up of South Asians, from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. But he said other teams have players from other Commonwealth countries.

"There are Caribbean teams with players from Trinidad and Bermuda in Union and Essex counties," he said.

In other counties, there are players from Australia, Nigeria, South Africa and even Canada.

This year, Khatri's 10-year-old son has started playing cricket.

"He caught up very fast," Khatri said, "especially when he doesn't have soccer."

He added that a friend of his has a youth league in Edison with three or four teams for players younger than 14.

Khatri isn't content to just start a league for adults or to pass his skills on to his son. As a member of the New Jersey Soft Ball Cricket League, he also works with schools to start cricket programs. Because he and the other coaches from the league are volunteers, they usually teach cricket after school or on weekends. And he's been in talks with towns about establishing cricket fields. He said that many towns combine cricket with other sports on the same field. Cricket can be played on fields that also accommodate baseball, lacrosse or football.

In Central Jersey, cricket still is mainly an immigrant sport, but he expects that to change. Rutgers and Kean universities already have cricket teams. Now the league is working to provide scholarships to cricket players, hoping to foster a greater love of cricket at universities. And the league is broadcasting games on YouTube, attracting worldwide attention. They hope to eventually land on television, too.

"You need a certain amount of knowledge to play it. If we can get ESPN or Fox to broadcast cricket games, more people will become familiar with it," he said.

In Central Jersey, organized cricket basically is played from April to October. The league had its final match on Oct. 4, with live streaming on Facebook via YouTube.

"The quality of play here is very high. Even our friends back home watch the games," he said.

Staff Writer Pamela MacKenzie: 908-243-6616; pmackenz@njpressmedia.com.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1wvq6KS