Topics: From the Wires, News

SKOPJE, Macedonia (AP) — Macedonia’s short history of independence has been a troubled one — and its political turmoil appears to be getting worse.

The government in this Balkan nation of about 2 million people is reeling from a massive wiretap scandal and a gun battle between police and ethnic Albanian gunmen that left 18 dead in a border town a week ago. In a region with a long and bloody history of ethnic conflicts and political instability, the developments have caused consternation both domestically and abroad.

Months of accusations between rival politicians locked in a power struggle have plunged the country into one of its deepest political crises since Macedonia gained independence from the former Yugoslavia in 1991.

Potential trouble looms again on Sunday, when the opposition plans an anti-government rally billed as the largest Macedonia has ever seen in the capital, Skopje. The protests are supposed to continue for days, and a rival pro-government protest has been called for Monday.

Sunday’s opposition rally “will be a historic day of reckoning for the current government of Macedonia,” said Nikola Dimitrov, a former national security adviser. “The increasingly authoritarian regime of (Prime Minister Nikola) Gruevski will face a crowd of citizens craving freedom, democracy, rule of law and accountability.”

Dimitrov, now a fellow at The Hague Institute for Global Justice, predicted that “in an all-or-nothing situation, (the government) will be ready to pay a very high price to survive.”

At the heart of the crisis is a massive cache of wiretapped conversations that the head of the opposition Social Democrats, Zoran Zaev, has been releasing since January. Zaev claims that Gruevski, in power for nearly a decade, was behind the mass wiretapping of more than 20,000 Macedonians, including ministers, politicians, police, journalists, judges, foreign ambassadors and religious leaders.

Those conversations, which Zaev said were leaked to him by “patriots” in the domestic intelligence service, purport to reveal corruption at the highest levels of government, including the mismanagement of funds, spurious criminal prosecutions of opponents and even attempted cover-ups of killings. He has demanded that Gruevski resign and new elections be held.

Opposition parties have been boycotting parliament for nearly a year since accusing the governing coalition of fraud in the April 2014 election.

Gruevski, who has won successive elections since 2006, angrily rejects the accusations. He accuses Zaev of participating in a coup plot backed by unnamed foreign spy agencies seeking to overthrow his conservative government.

Some Macedonians are worried.

“I am afraid that Macedonia could enter into civic conflict with unpredictable consequences,” said Julijana Petrovska, a 64-year-old retired economist. “People are so stubborn … and divided that things could get out of control easily.”

But others blame the opposition for creating instability.

Zaev “started to publish recordings he got from foreign spies and now he wants to seize power illegally, without elections,” said Jovan, a 23-year-old law student who would only give his first name for fear of reprisals. “He is the one the most responsible for this crisis.”