Writer questions Port Edwards Board’s motives behind hiring of new police chief and officer and why long-time administrator was forced out. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto)

EDITOR: As a taxpayer in Port Edwards, I feel compelled to mention some issues that fit the saying, “something is rotten in Denmark.”

The Village Board did a trial program in 2015 to add a full-time officer in order to reduce part-time officers and save money. They added another officer, but “savings” are not there. The 2016 budget will cost nearly $150,000 more in health insurance and benefits and increases in the police department expenses.

The hire of a “police chief”: Without naming names, when replacing the retiring police chief, the Village Board passed up a local and respected 25-plus year veteran police officer from the Port Edwards Police Department and promoted an entry-level patrol officer who had not even completed her six-month probationary period to chief.

The hire of a “part-time police officer”: I point out the incident of an officer who used excessive force on a female following a traffic stop and arrest. There was a great deal of publicity on this matter. The officer was charged with felony misconduct in public office and plea bargained to a lesser sentence and quit his job. He should have had his shield taken away and never be allowed to be a servant for the public again. But the new Rookie Chief of Police had worked with him and lo and behold he ends up being hired by the Port Edwards Board. Now we have board members resigning and others not running for re-election. Why?

The position of “administrator”: Someone who was doing a good job held this position for more than 18 years. When there were some big problems dealing with meeting agendas and abuse of power by the board, he asked the village president to hold a closed-session meeting talking about some problems and they in turn would not give him the time of day, so he left us. He had offers from several cities and Wisconsin Rapids jumped at this opportunity and hired him. They did not want to lose out on this well-experienced man.

Wake up, Port Edwards, before all that the previous administrator had done for us, which left us financially in good shape, gets flushed down the toilet.

Dan Gallagher,

Port Edwards

Read or Share this story: http://wrtnews.co/1P83YNb