Buy Photo Patient Shawn Nelson, left, 28, of Keizer, speaks with Dr. Rick Eikrem at the Salem Free Clinics on Wednesday, Jan. 21. (Photo: ANNA REED / Statesman Journal)Buy Photo

Ten years ago, Todd Gould looked around the medical clinic that had been set up at Walker Middle School's gym and tried to envision what it could one day become.

He never imagined it would serve thousands of patients and become a permanent fixture in the community.

Salem Free Clinics celebrated both its 10th anniversary and its 30,000th patient this month, the same month that marks a full year of insurance coverage provided through the Affordable Care Act.

Today, the clinic offers medical, mental health, dental and counseling services at four sites, including its permanent location in Broadway Commons, 1300 Broadway St. NE.

The clinic is similar to a private practice, both physically and operationally. The main location features six exam rooms, a lab, a dispensary, a prayer room, offices, and a waiting room.

Volunteers provide basic adult outpatient care for chronic problems, said Stan Neal, a retired family physician. Doctors use evaluations, exams and lab tests to diagnosis patients' ailments and then get them on a treatment plan. Volunteers who work on a regular basis even establish their own clientele, he said.

Carolyn Kent was impressed with the services provided when she went to the dental clinic, needing her teeth pulled after they became infected.

"They were just as professional and wonderful as if you were paying them a hundred bucks a tooth," she said.

Salem Free Clinics began when Gould was serving as West Salem Foursquare Church's outreach pastor. The church surveyed West Salem's Edgewater district to find out what the community needed.

Gould said he expected to be giving out food, clothing and diapers but was shocked that 70 percent of residents said their greatest need was health care.

Buy Photo Registered nurse and diabetes educator Mary Tavares demonstrates Wednesday, Jan. 21, how to use an insulin pen to patient Nelson Mejia, 32, of Salem, at Salem Free Clinics. (Photo: ANNA REED / Statesman Journal)

For its first five years, the clinic met every first and third Saturday at Walker Middle School.

While its leaders prayed for a permanent home, Salem Alliance Church realized the need for health care services in its own neighborhood. Church leaders decided they wanted to include a medical clinic in the building they were constructing on Broadway, so they called Gould. Salem Free Clinics moved in September 2010.

The expansion allowed the ministry to grow sixfold and begin offering dental care and counseling, Gould said.

To capitalize on the building, the clinic needed money. It sent several letters to foundations, requesting grant applications. The only response was a letter and $50,000 check from the Hahn Foundation, Gould said.

"It allowed us to even dream the dream of growing," he said.

Buy Photo Patient Shawn Nelson, 28, of Keizer, has an EKG performed by Lisa Kroes, a licensed practical nurse, at the Salem Free Clinics on Broadway Street NE on Wednesday, Jan. 21. (Photo: ANNA REED / Statesman Journal)

Since then, the clinic has had everything it has needed, even during the economic downturn. It has never had excess, though, Gould said with a chuckle.

JM Keckler Medical Co. offered to donate six exam rooms' worth of medical equipment if someone would drive to Oakdale, Calif., to pick it up. The clinic just happened to have six exam rooms that needed outfitting.

"There are so many things that came together that are just absolutely providential," Gould said.

Faith is the foundation of the clinic. Many of the volunteers "do what (they) do as an expression of the love of Christ," Gould said.

That love is evident to patients visiting the clinic.

"They're practicing their faith, and that's the marvelous thing," Kent said. "I think that's why you feel so good going in."

Seventy-six area churches send volunteers and support the clinic, but it's not necessary for volunteers or patients to be Christians.

Toward the beginning of each visit, patients are asked if they'd like to have someone pray with them. Gould said 40 percent of patients accept the offer, which identified for him the link between health and spirituality.

When the Affordable Care Act went into effect, there was a perception in the community that free clinics would no longer be necessary.

Clinic leaders knew that wouldn't be the case and proactively reached out to communities they could better serve.

While several regional free clinics closed due to a drop in patient volume, Salem Free Clinics saw only a 4.5 percent decline.

At one time, the clinic turned away 800 patients a month and booked appointments two weeks out. Now they're able to serve every patient who asks and schedule them for an appointment four days later.

"People can actually access care much more readily than ever before," Gould said.

They worked diligently to help patients who became eligible for the Oregon Health Plan seamlessly transition to primary care providers.

Before the federal health care reform law, patient population demographics were consistent. That changed dramatically in 2014. Suddenly, Latino patients made up 40 percent of the population and Pacific Islanders 8 percent, Gould said.

The clinic now serves many undocumented-immigrant workers, who don't qualify for insurance, and citizens of the Federated States of Micronesia, Palau and the Marshall Islands, who legally live in the U.S. but aren't guaranteed medical benefits.

As a result, the clinic had to double the size of their interpreter team and change all of their systems.

This year, the clinic will work to solidify their new systems while looking for populations that aren't being served.

The board will spend the next four to five months looking for a new executive director. After serving as the director since the clinic's beginnings, Gould is moving out of town and getting married.

Gould said he hopes the new leader will be passionate about the clinic's mission and have the relational capacity to be able to keep the clinic running as a volunteer-led nonprofit.

John McConville, who's been volunteering since 2012, is serving as director in the interim.

"The clinic's best days are yet to come," Gould said.

khessel@statesmanjournal.com, (503) 399-6743 or follow on Twitter @KaellenHessel

Read or Share this story: http://stjr.nl/1JCuE6F