With Hillary Clinton is the clear front-runner for the Democratic Party presidential nominee, she is well on her way to racing to become the first female President of the United States. Hillary is no stranger to the people, and although she is well-known to registered voters, some of the first words people think of when speaking about her character are ‘lacks integrity’ and ‘dishonest’. That said, the amazing thing is those same people say that they are going to still vote for her in the 2016 presidential election anyway. While every potential candidate has some sort of skeletons in their closet, Hillary Clinton has a few we’d like to point out.

The former First Lady is once again running for the top seat in the White House, so before you simply cast your vote this election, consider these 8 often overlooked facts:

1. Benghazi

One other issue that continues to hang over Hillary Clinton like a dark cloud is her handling of personal emails regarding Benghazi. The sad truth is that Democrats have the unfortunate position this election of having to hitch their wagons to a person that many in the party admit is untrustworthy, unlikable, and ill-equipped to hold the highest seat in the country.

2. Hillary Clinton Was Subpoenaed

During the first few years Hillary was the First Lady, the Clinton’s were engulfed in the Whitewater controversy. The trouble started back in 1992 when the New York Times released an article alleging both Bill and Hillary Clinton invested and lost money with the Whitewater Development Corporation. The article prompted a full-scale investigation into the actions of the Clinton’s, where every real estate investment they were involved with was now cast under a giant spotlight.

These investments dated back throughout the 1970s and 1980s, and finally counsel Robert Fiske issued a grand-jury subpoena to Bill and Hillary Clinton to turn over all documents that pertained to this matter. To this date, this marks the only time in United States history that a First Lady has ever been subpoenaed.

3. Hillary Clinton talks to herself

As crazy and over the top that this story is, it definitely belongs on the list of 8 little known horrible facts about Hillary Clinton. One of the lesser-known scandals that rocked the White House was call Wackygate, and for good reason. The bizarre story unfolds with Hillary as First Lady, and having private conversations with her hero Eleanor Roosevelt.

On the surface this doesn’t appear to really be that crazy at all, unless you know that Eleanor Roosevelt passed away about thirty years before the Clinton’s moved into the White House. Even though Roosevelt had passed away, Hillary still wanted to communicate with the former First Lady, and would conduct regular sessions to speak with her at length. Despite the story appearing unbelievable, Hillary was filmed holding these imaginary conversations with her deceased hero while in the White House.

4. Hillary Clinton’s Horrible Foreign Policies Record

During Hillary Clinton’s time as Secretary of State, her stance on foreign policies can be called nothing short of deplorable. She aggressively pushed for the 2009 troops surge in Afghanistan. Hillary has been a huge proponent of the same drone war that to date has resulted in the deaths of over 2,400 civilians. Hillary bragged on record about her crippling sanctions imposed on the Iranian culture, yet those sanctions have been discovered to have only benefited the wealthy. Her views on Iranian nuclear enrichment went on to open the doors to a full military intervention. She was in favor of the United States getting involved in the Iraq War, backtracking ten years later to finally admit she regretted that decision after all.

5. Hillary Clinton Ran the State Department Into the Ground

Listen closely to Hillary on the campaign trail as she touts her time running the state department as an accomplishment to hang her hat on. She is quick to talk about the thousands of miles she racked up traveling to numerous countries. One thing you will never hear Hillary Clinton discuss, a single accomplishment that she made during her time there. Pay close attention to the Inspector Generals reports that blast her mismanagement of money, claiming she irresponsibly blew through over $6 billion dollars of taxpayer money due to her lack of control at that department.

6. Hillary Clinton Referred to Her Husband’s Affair as a Right-Wing Conspiracy

After the reports went public about the affair between then President Bill Clinton and White House intern Monica Lewinsky, Hillary Clinton took to the airwaves to quickly dispel the affair. During an interview in 1998 on NBC’s The Today Show, Hillary defended her husband by stating the incident was nothing more than a right-wing conspiracy that has been brewing ever since Bill Clinton was announced President of the United States.

She rambled on about how the right would do just about anything to smear the reputation of her and her husband, and repeated that her husband was in fact innocent. As horrible as her denying the allegations, it looked even worse when Bill Clinton finally admitted he did have the affair with the young intern after Lewinsky produced physical evidence. The conversation about the right-wing conspiracy was never mentioned again by Hillary.

7. Hillary Clinton is Only First Lady to Ever be Fingerprinted by the FBI

During the Clinton presidency, yet another infamous incident called “Filegate” reared it’s ugly head. In June of 1996, allegations arose claiming both Bill and Hillary Clinton had improper access in 1993-1994 to confidential FBI documents. The allegations revealed that the Director of White House personnel security, Craig Livingstone, was improperly requesting background reports from the Federal Bureau of Investigations of people who served under Republican administrations. Concerned that the Clinton’s might be playing dirty like the Nixon’s administration had done decades earlier, the Senate Judiciary Committee took action. Orrin Hatch, then Republican committee chair, requested the FBI do fingerprint analysis of both Bill and Hillary Clinton.

8. Claims to be the mother of Obamacare

Hillary states that she pushed for that exact idea over twenty years earlier. Clinton has nothing new to offer the country, in fact the only policies that she readily talks about are exact extensions of ones President Obama already has in place. Hillary wants China to buy United States debt to fund the stimulus, believes in cap-and-trade, and wants a tax increases on businesses. Nothing new here!