The question keeps coming up among confused consumers considering an application for private insurance or Medicaid under new Obamacare rules: Is there an asset test for Medicaid policies? Do consumers have to lose their house or spend down any other small savings accounts or assets before qualifying for the public insurance program?

We’ve tried to answer the question before, but everyone admits the official answers have also been about as clear as mud up until this point. Colorado Medicaid has finally responded to the confusion with some clear FAQ language on its web site, and we’re linking to it here. In the meantime, we will also cut and paste their language in full — given how often this question is coming up, you can’t have the answer in too many places.

Q: Do I have to lose all my assets before I would qualify for existing Medicaid or the expanded Medicaid rules under Obamacare?

A: Short answer: No. There is not a test of assets, like home equity, for regular Medicaid or CHP Plus health insurance policies. There are some asset-related questions from Medicaid if you are applying for long-term nursing home care assistance, or for disability programs paid by Medicaid. But for the straight-up medical insurance most people associate with “Medicaid,” no, the qualification is based on income level, not assets.

To be more clear, here is a straight cut-and-paste job from the language now included on Colorado Medicaid’s FAQ site. They explain why some people have been confused; there is an asset question that other applicants will see, but it is not considered when people are applying just for Medicaid health insurance:

“There is a question on the shared application with Connect for Health Colorado related to assets. Because this single application must check for all Medicaid programs (including those programs for individuals with disabilities) the asset question is on the application. The asset question will not impact eligibility for those who are not seeking long term care Medicaid.

“If you have questions about your individual or family’s circumstances please call Medicaid customer service at 1-800-221-3943.

“Medicaid and Connect for Health Colorado are working on improving the application to make this question more clear for those applying for their families. Please give us your feedback on any questions that are confusing. Improvements to the language on the application will not be ready until late 2013.

“What is considered an asset?

“Cash, other resources (investments), or real or personal property such as a second home or second vehicles. Primary homes and the primary vehicle are exempt.

“Will Medicaid let me keep a house and still get insurance?

Yes, you can keep your house. If you have questions about your individual or family’s circumstances please call Medicaid customer service at 1-800-221-3943.

“What is an “asset” test?

“For certain programs like those for individuals with disabilities or who are aged (65+) or that include long term care services, Medicaid is required to ask about assets in order to process an application. In certain cases assets can count toward determining eligibility because these programs can have different benefits than regular Medicaid. Since the federal government has different rules for eligibility for these programs, Medicaid is required to ask the asset question.

“While the question is included in the joint application, assets are not counted against families applying for regular Medicaid and do not count towards eligibility for the Child Health Plan Plus program. There are no asset tests for these programs.

“The question is only on the application for those who are needing additional benefits provided through the long term care and aged or disabled Medicaid programs.

“If you have questions about your individual or family’s circumstances please call Medicaid customer service at 1-800-221-3943.”