Florence High School band marches Saturday in the Pioneer Parade in downtown Florence. ( Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record )

Click photo to enlarge «

1

2

3

4

5

» Spirits from the Past ride in the fire truck, owned by Morrie Aves. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

Florence — With perfect weather, the 86th annual Pioneer Day Parade went off without a hitch Saturday in downtown Florence.

The entries ranged from the Shriners to several bands, floats and longhorn steers.

This was the first time for Karen Van Scoyk, Pamela Martinez and Dwinell Heaverly, all of Las Vegas, N.M., to attend the Pioneer Parade, but the second time for Martha Johnsen, also of Las Vegas, who attended four years ago.

"I thought it was the most-charming event," Johnsen said.

Van Scoyk said it's more than that.

"We are so impressed with the patriotism (when) people stand for the flag," she said. "The fact that they brought the veterans (from the Bruce McCandless Colorado State Veterans Nursing Home is another reason). What an honor. There's so much history here and patriotism."

Martinez agreed.

"It's really charming," she said.

David Petty, who grew up in Wetmore, he said he enjoys the annual Florence parade.

"I played drums when I was a kid," he said. "I was in the marching band from sixth to eighth grades."

Nathan Gjelsness, 14, said he also enjoyed the parade.

"It was kind of cool to see the longhorns," he said.

His mother, Connie, said she enjoyed it, as well.

"(It's a) nice parade," she said. "It's nice to see everybody out."

It was a joy to come back for Penrose residents Donna and Don Hansen, who returned for her class reunion and the annual celebration.

"I graduated from here in 1963," she said. "I just think Florence is doing great."

Advertisement

Don Hansen agreed.

"It's a good parade," he said.

Donna said it is a tradition.

"There's a lot of people who think it's important to them, and it's important to us," Donna said.

Since moving to Florence in 2005, Peggy McDuffee has made it a point to attend the parade every year.

"I love seeing all the kids out there," she said. "I like the whole thing. It's a good spirit thing. It's a wonderful tradition they've got going on here."

Pamela Martinez, from left, Karen Van Scoyk, Martha Johnsen and Dwinell Heaverly, all of Las Vegas, N.M., watch the Pioneer Day Parade on Saturday in downtown Florence. (Charlotte Burrous / Daily Record)

This is the fourth year for Colorado Springs vendor Peggy Hoy to set up a booth at the Junktique.

"I enjoy setting up outside," she said. "I've been in the business a little (more than) 50 years."

She mainly deals with antique estate sales, where she finds unique items and primitive type things.

"This is a good market," Hoy said. "People really know their antiques down here."