Pin this on Pinterest Email this story

The Census Bureau released data this week that details the voter turnout in the 2014 election and the numbers are frightening for many reasons.

In last year’s election, only 41.9 percent of the voting age population came out to the polls. This is the lowest number the Census has seen in its entire history of collecting voter activity which began in 1978. While the numbers alone are an unfortunate case, the realities behind them are even more so.

Between the 2012 presidential election and the 2014 midterm election the decline in voter turnout was the strongest among minorities and low-income citizens. And yes, politics are at play here.

The 2014 midterm election is the first election to take place since the Supreme Court ruled against an important provision in the Voting Rights Act, which led conservatives to push the passing of discriminatory laws with the purpose to do just what the 2014 election did – suppress turnout.

Evidence shows that when the process of voting is easier and there are less barriers to the polls, more people turnout but the recent rise in voter suppression laws have affected people of color and the poor the most.

The Census Bureau found the 2014 numbers to be extreme.

Less than 1 in 4 citizens in the lowest income bracket and of voting age turned out to vote, with only half being registered to vote. This is a 48 percent drop since the presidential election. In the highest income bracket, 80 percent were registered and 57 percent voted – a 29 percent decline since the presidential election.

While the highest income bracket noticed a drop another source that analyzes the wealthiest one percent found that in 2008, 99 percent voted, which shows that the very peak of wealth controls most of what happens in America.

Sean McElwee, a research associate at Demos, examined the ways in which a reduced turnout among people of color would effect policy. McElwee used the American National Election Studies of 2012 to examine the differences in opinion between white and non-white voters.

” I focus on four questions about fundamental disputes about the role of government: whether government should increase service, boost spending on the poor, guarantee jobs and reduce inequality. I examine net support, meaning I subtracted the percentage of people in support of the law from the percent in favor,” wrote McElwee in a article for Salon.

Here’s what he found:



The chart further detailed what many minorities already assumed: the preferences of white voters are extremely different than those of non-white nonvoters.

While voter turnout will not fix all the problems in America, it would reduce the bias found across the voting public if the poor and people of color didn’t run into barriers they now face at the polls such as registration. McElwee writes that many political scientists believe that placing the responsibility of registration on voters instead of the government enforcing automatic renewal reduces turnout. Other ways that could boost voter turnout include turning Election Day into a holiday as well as offering non-partisan voter registration drives.

In North Carolina conservatives worked to eliminate same day registration, pre-registration and early voting while passing a strict voter ID law. Also, in Wisconsin, Governor and Republican presidential candidate Scott Walker pushed for voter IDs and laws that disenfranchised 300,000 voters.

Today’s reality shows us we have not gone as far as hoped and politicians are quickly looking to change policy to suppress votes in any way they can.

Should the state be held accountable for automatic voter renewal? Do you think another movement is needed to make sure the work of past voting rights activists is not uprooted?