GLENDALE, ARIZ. — I have spent roughly 900 days covering professional sports in Arizona: 15 years of spring training, and countless summer-time games at the Arizona Diamondbacks’ Combover Dome in downtown Phoenix.

Three memories stick out on this Sunday.

Former Texas Rangers slugger Nelson Cruz hit a line drive at Hi Corbett Field that third baseman Ian Stewart jumped in attempt to stab. The ball nearly pulled off Ryan Spilborghs’ glove in left field. It remains one of the hardest hit non home runs I’ve ever seen. Speaking of home runs, the Diamondbacks’ Richie Sexson hit a ball off the Rockies’ Shawn Chacon that ricocheted off the scoreboard in Phoenix. And Colorado center fielder Willy Taveras provided the best play in Arizona, given the context. He robbed Tony Clark of extra bases in the National League Championship Series as the Rockies rumbled into the 2007 World Series.

I bring this up because of Odell Beckham Jr. He created a new desert memory on Sunday. Everyone knows about The Catch, his falling-backward-one-handed-Cirque du Soleil reception against the Cowboys. Broncos linebacker Lamin Barrow, a friend of Beckham’s, was the least impressed. Why? He told me he witnessed it everyday in practice at LSU. With this in mind, I focused the binoculars on Beckham in pregame Pro Bowl warmups.

The New York Giants star didn’t disappoint. At this point, he should make the highlights only if he uses two hands. His hands are like a baseball mitt. The ball stops on impact, suctioned into his palm. He caught roughly 20 one-handers in the short time I watched. Hype follows him as a young star in the biggest media market. But his athleticism deserves hyperbole.

The Broncos’ season, ultimately, did not. They won a fourth-consecutive AFC West title. They finished with 11 Pro Bowlers, counting alternates, with eight participating in the game. And yet, they went one-and-done in the playoffs, an easy mark at home for the Indianapolis Colts in the divisional round.

With Super Bowl expectations, the Broncos face challenging offseason questions. They begin at quarterback. Will Peyton Manning return, and if so, how will he perform at age 39? Offensively, the Broncos will run more under new coach Gary Kubiak. It means that C.J. Anderson, not Demaryius Thomas or Manning, could be the team MVP next season. Regardless of the quarterback, the Broncos need to reconfigure their offensive line to fit Kubiak’s zone-blocking scheme. It’s unlikely that Orlando Franklin returns at guard. The scheme requires mobile linemen who can reach the second level on blocks. That means the Broncos must sign a right tackle — Paul Cornick and Chris Clark didn’t work out last season — and draft a right guard given how poorly Manny Ramirez performed.

The Broncos will keep Demaryius Thomas and I fully expect them to make a strong effort to re-sign tight end Julius Thomas. They will try to keep defensive tackle Terrance Knighton. It would not surprise me if Rahim Moore receives more money on the open market, leaving the Broncos to find a safety for the second consecutive year in free agency.

Denver’s defense has to improve. Statistically, the unit was fine, but it didn’t inspire fear. Forcing turnovers should be a priority, whether through big hits or sacks. Transitioning to a 3-4 defense could help.

The Broncos received a valuable reminder this season. It’s not enough to play well. But when. Getting into the tournament is the first step — peaking at the right time remains a goal that has been elusive the past two years.

The Broncos boasted 11 Pro Bowlers and 12 wins. They’d take fewer all-stars for a single victory in February.