St. Joseph Health’s decision to buy Petaluma’s Active Sports Club is the health care provider’s latest step in broadening its approach to health and preventative care, a move made as the Affordable Care Act continues to evolve the way patient outcomes are both achieved and assessed.

With 7,000 members and nearly 120 employees, the 41,000-square-foot health club is one of the largest in the region. It features a pool, a basketball court, pilates studio and space for a variety of exercise and wellness programs.

It is the second health club for St. Joseph, which operates Petaluma Valley Hospital, Santa Rosa Memorial Hospital and Napa’s Queen of the Valley Hospital, after the opening of a medical fitness center in Napa in 2007. The health care provider is also planning to open a third center in Newport Beach later this year as part of a joint venture with Sausalito-based Active Wellness LLC.

Terms of the deal were not disclosed. Active, which entered a partnership with St. Joseph in July of 2015, will continue to manage and operate the facility, and all employees will continue under the new ownership. The company also manages the center in Napa, Synergy Medical Fitness Center.

“Health care is an ever-changing field,” said Todd Salnas, president of St. Joseph Health, Sonoma County, in an announcement of the deal. “With employers and consumers seeking more value from their providers, the exciting addition of this notable health club will further strengthen our position as a leader in integrated, outcomes-oriented health and fitness models.”

In the announcement, St. Joseph officials described the Napa club as having been successful in decreasing the number of individuals at a higher risk of chronic disease. Patient outcomes like fewer hospital readmissions now play a significant part in the calculation of Medicare payments, giving room for providers to broaden their approach in manners outside of a traditional hospital setting.

“It’s in nobody’s interest to have anybody cycling in and out of the hospital,” said Anthony Wright, executive director of health care consumer advocacy organization Health Access California.

The purchase did not come without ruffling some feathers, as the Petaluma Health Care District, the public entity that owns the hospital and leases it to St. Joseph, had commissioned a study in 2013 that explored the feasibility of launching a similar venture capable of supplying roughly $2.27 million in annual revenue. While no concrete plans have gone forward, board member Robert Ostroff said last Wednesday that he was nonetheless surprised to “open the paper” to see that St. Joseph, one of four bidders to operate the hospital past 2017, was acquiring Active.

Though noting the earlier study, Ramona Faith, the district’s CEO, said the approach by St. Joseph was increasingly common among health care providers. The 2013 study found the club now known as Active to be the highest-ranking fitness facility in southern Sonoma County, based on measures like program variety and amenities.

“They have experience in that area,” she said of St. Joseph.

The facility opened as Club One in 2009 and became Active Sports in 2014. Jill Kinney, founder of the club, also co-founded Active Wellness and was part of the ownership group of the location in Petaluma, Clubsource at Petaluma LLC.