<p>LISA McKINNON/THE STAR</p><p>Mendocino Farms will open Feb. 2 at the Westlake Plaza and Center in Thousand Oaks.</p>

SHARE LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Chalkboard menus are part of the decor at the Mendocino Farms location slated to open Feb. 2 in Thousand Oaks. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Workers from Luna Gardens Events install a succulent wall garden at Mendocino Farms in Thousand Oaks on Feb.1. The restaurant opens to the public on Feb. 2. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Inside the Thousand Oaks location of Mendocino Farms. LISA MCKINNON/THE STAR Wine is available on tap at Mendocino Farms in Thousand Oaks. The restaurant will open to the public at 11 a.m. feb. 2.

By Lisa McKinnon of the Ventura County Star

The first Mendocino Farms gourmet sandwich shop and marketplace located north of the Los Angeles County line will open at 11 a.m. Monday in the Westlake Plaza and Center in Thousand Oaks.

The location has the same address as Jacks' Restaurant & Deli, which closed at the center in 2011.

The first 250 people to arrive at the new restaurant on opening day will receive tote bags filled with what a media release from the Los Angeles-based chainlet described as "goodies."

Opening-week festivities will continue with the offer of a free cookie with the purchase of a sandwich from 2 to 6 p.m. Wednesday.

A social hour with free appetizers and $1 beer and wine will take place from 2 to 6 p.m. Friday.

A family-friendly festival will feature live music, arts and crafts, and a kids-eat-free menu from 11 a.m. to 2 p.m. Sunday. To guarantee space at the festival, register in advance by clicking here.

The Thousand Oaks location is the ninth in the chain founded in 2005 by Mario Del Pero and Ellen Chen. The menu created by chef and partner Judy Han "promotes a farm-to-table philosophy by using local, seasonal ingredients in its sandwiches, salads and soups," according to a media release.

Specialties include a Kurobuta pork belly banh mi with housemade pickled daikon and carrots and chili aioli on panini grilled ciabatta ($10.45) and the "Not So Fried Chicken" made with shaved roasted chicken rolled in krispies and served with herb aioli and mustard pickle slaw on toasted ciabatta with chipotle barbecue sauce ($9.65).

Vegan, vegetarian and gluten-free options are available.

Hours are 11 a.m. to 9 p.m. daily at 966 S. Westlake Blvd. Call 379-9055 or click on mendocinofarms.com.