Related Political Blotter: More from Jeb Bush's San Francisco event

SAN FRANCISCO -- Republican presidential candidate Jeb Bush came to praise the high-tech innovation economy Thursday, but he ended up fielding some tough questions on discrimination against gay workers and his stance on net neutrality.

The former Florida governor -- after arriving in an Uber car at the South-of-Market-area headquarters of Thumbtack, which connects users with local professional services -- said he wants to lift regulatory and tax burdens that weigh down new business models that otherwise could create jobs.

But one Thumbtack worker pressed him on his opposition to a recent Federal Communications Commission ruling meant to preserve net neutrality -- keeping Internet service providers from favoring some content over other -- and another on Florida's lack of anti-discrimination laws for LGBT workers.

Presidential candidate Jeb Bush addresses employees and other guests Thursday at the headquarters of tech firm Thumbtack in San Francisco. (Kristopher Skinner/Bay Area News Group)

"Sometimes when there's not a problem, maybe we shouldn't solve it," Bush said of the FCC's ruling, adding that applying the Communication Act of 1934 to the Internet economy could lead to regulation of content and stifle creativity.

"It's a stupid idea," he said.

Asked by a gay Thumbtack employee about anti-discrimination laws, Bush replied: "I don't think you should be discriminated (against) because of your sexual orientation -- period, over and out."

But he added that there's an "intersection of your concerns and the concerns of people of faith acting on their conscience."

He said Christians should be able to express and act on their opposition of marriage rights for same sex-couples. "It doesn't mean you're a bigot," Bush said. "It means you're guided by your faith."

Advertisement

Bush held fundraisers Wednesday in Pasadena and Santa Barbara before arriving in San Francisco for a fundraiser Wednesday night at the home of Cavalry Asset Management founder John Hurley and his wife, Kamilla. After Thursday's Thumbtack visit, Bush headed for another fundraiser at Woodside's Village Pub. As with the San Francisco fundraiser, tickets cost $2,700 but co-hosts could pay $10,000 for access to a separate photo reception, while co-chairs could pay $27,000 for both events plus two tickets to a private VIP event with Bush next month in Los Angeles.

Bush, who declared his candidacy June 15, raised $11.4 million in the year's second quarter, but his Right to Rise super PAC raised $103 million during that period. He reportedly is considering shifting some functions traditionally served by campaigns -- including television advertising and ground-game organizing -- to the super PAC, though campaigns and super PACs are forbidden by law from coordinating their efforts.

Bush arrived at Thumbtack in an Uber-summoned black Toyota Camry to underscore his support of the innovation economy that is disrupting other parts of the economy. One day earlier, a California administrative law judge fined Uber $7.3 million for failing to comply with state laws and provide data on its operations.

Uber's license to operate in California will be suspended in 30 days unless the company appeals or a member of the California Public Utilities Commission requests a review.

This kind of friction happens between new business models and old regulatory schemes, Bush told reporters Thursday after his visit to Thumbtack. Still, he said, if Uber officials broke any laws, "they should pay a fine."

Uber CEO Travis Kalanick has praised the nation's health care law for helping his company's independent-contractor drivers find affordable insurance as individuals. But Bush told reporters Thursday he would repeal the Affordable Care Act and replace it with a consumer-based model offering insurance exchanges without mandates in which portable, high-deductible, low-premium catastrophic care policies are the norm -- "a 21st century set of rules on top of 21st century enterprises."

A Thumbtack employee asked Bush if there are any of President Barack Obama's attributes he would emulate. "If I could speak like Barack Obama, if I could light up a room like he could -- charisma is not a bad thing," Bush replied. "I don't ascribe bad motives -- I believe his heart is in the right place. I just think his politics are wrong.

Asked about rival Donald Trump's fiery rhetoric on the illegal immigration issue and Trump's surging poll numbers, Bush replied he'd rather see candidates lay out policy proposals than "prey on legitimate fears and concerns."

Bush also Thursday joined LinkedIn as an "influencer," one of about 500 leaders invited to publish their ideas and insights through the Mountain View-based professional networking service. In his first post, he accused Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton of "rejecting some of the core elements of the shared economy" and doubling down on Obama's economic policies and "mediocre growth path."

But Democrats said Thursday that Bush gives little more than lip service to the innovation economy.

"While Silicon Valley and the rest of the country move forward, Jeb Bush is looking backward, relying on the same failed trickle-down economics," Democratic National Committee spokesman Eric Walker said in an email. "The only innovative economic idea we've heard from Jeb is that he thinks 'people need to work longer hours.' "

Bush last week in New Hampshire said that to attain his goal of 4 percent annual economic growth, "we have to be a lot more productive, workforce participation has to rise from its all-time modern lows -- it means that people need to work longer hours." His campaign later said he was referring to underemployed and part-time workers.

Bush is scheduled to hold a town hall Friday morning at a charter school in Carson City, Nevada, before speaking at the Maverick PAC 2015 Mavericks Conference at the Venetian hotel in Las Vegas. That PAC, aimed at engaging young conservatives, is run by Bush's sons, George P. Bush and Jeb Bush Jr.

Josh Richman covers politics. Follow him at Twitter.com/Josh_Richman. Read the Political Blotter at IBAbuzz.com/politics.