This year’s spike in initial public offerings is heralded as another indication that we are in the midst of a real and durable economic recovery.

With the volume of IPOs in 2013 already above the full-year total for 2012, there is good reason to believe that the market’s recovery is in full swing. In other times, this would be encouraging news for the job market. However, it appears that the regulatory environment is stifling the types of IPOs that will drive true job creation.

Gary Sturisky

Since the 1970s, 92% of job growth at public companies has occurred following IPOs, according to data recently compiled by the Securities Exchange Commission, with most of that growth occurring in the first few years. Although strong IPO activity is historically associated with healthy job growth, this post-recession IPO increase doesn’t offer the same promise.

While the overall volume of IPOs is rising, large companies account for the vast majority of the increase. That is not in itself bad, but history suggests we get more bang-for-the-buck in job growth when more small or mid-sized companies are going public.

Scott Vanlandingham

The shift away from IPOs coming out of the middle market is in part the result of increased regulation driving up the costs of issuing an IPO. Further, the cost of being a public company is higher than ever, offsetting many of the benefits. Congressional leaders became aware of this shift and made attempts to address it through the JOBS Act. We are not, however, seeing the needed return on the job-creating, middle-market IPOs.

While middle-market companies do not need IPOs to create jobs, going public can accelerate growth dramatically. When companies reach a turning point in building their businesses and need an increase in capital, they look at their menu of options. Increasingly, they are concluding that there are simpler ways to gain capital than through an IPO.

You can’t blame them. In fact, non-IPO capital raises are a good choice for businesses at the moment — but for a nation that desperately needs to see more job creation, it’s not the preferred option. Acquisition activity, either by a competitor or private equity, rarely results in as much job growth as an IPO because the organization is not organically growing in the same way.

There are other issues at play, not just regulatory red tape. Some are hard to address through policy changes or regulatory adjustment. For example, growing signs of economic improvement have not lifted the cloud of uncertainty that hangs over much of the business community. While employment and gross domestic product are growing, they are still too slow to turn caution to optimism in the boardrooms of many growing companies.

High-End Spenders Shrug Off Headwind (3:28) Despite continued weak employment data and gridlock in Washington, consumers are showing surprising signs of confidence, and opening their wallets to buy big-ticket items ranging from washing machines to fast boats. Ben Casselman joins MoneyBeat. Photo: AP.

Legislative and regulatory trends in Washington have amplified the pressures that middle-market firms face when exploring an IPO. In the early part of the 2000s, we saw a substantial uptick in legislation such as Sarbanes-Oxley and regulatory changes like the Regulation National Market System, which contributed to significantly higher costs and created prohibitive complexity for smaller firms evaluating IPOs as their growth strategy.

These changes, and others that came more recently such as Dodd-Frank, were defined by considerations related to the largest companies and protections for the smaller ones, not by concerns for the mid-sized firms that happen to be best-suited for going public.

For middle-market companies, the prospect of going public became even more daunting due to the regulatory uncertainty surrounding implementation of the Affordable Care Act. ACA is a major drag on middle market companies, most of which are well above the 50-employee threshold for the employer mandate. These firms are more likely than large companies to need to make major changes to adjust to the law’s new requirements. Middle-market companies have also been more cautious since the passage of January’s tax agreement, which created an income threshold that exempted owners and partners in much smaller firms, but left mid-sized companies exposed to higher rates.

Congress recognized the link between IPOs and increased jobs last year and attempted to bridge the critical connection with the JOBS Act. Passed with rare bipartisan support, the legislation aimed to eliminate some of the hurdles that smaller firms seeking to go public encounter when trying to secure financing.

Unfortunately, the legislation has been thwarted by a string of implementation delays; it hasn’t helped companies move past the regulatory and economic challenges to accessing equity capital. The JOBS act has not been in place long enough to say for certain it was ineffective, but at this time the legislation’s success at bringing back the IPO market is in serious doubt.

More from MarketWatch