Former football coach gives pep talk to Boyle's squad

Former Colorado football coach Bill McCartney made an appearance at basketball practice on Thursday to try and fire up Tad Boyle's team. ( Jeremy Papasso / Daily Camera )

CU men's hoops preview FRIDAY: UCLA Bruins (8-5) at Colorado Buffaloes (7-5), 8 p.m. at Coors Events Center in Boulder. BROADCAST: Radio — KOA (850 AM). TV — Fox Sports 1. COACHES: Colorado — Tad Boyle, 5th year (99-55; 155-121 career); UCLA— Steve Alford, 2nd year (36-14; 499-249 career). PROBABLE STARTERS: Colorado — G Askia Booker, 6-2, Sr. (15.3 ppg, 3.3 rpg, 3.1 apg); G Jaron Hopkins, 6-6, So. (5.6 ppg, 2.5 rpg, 1.5 apg); G Xavier Johnson, 6-7, Jr. (13.5 ppg, 5.7 rpg); F Wesley Gordon, 6-9, So. (7.5 ppg, 6.3 rpg, 1.2 bpg); F Josh Scott, 6-10, Jr. (14.8 ppg, 7.7 rpg, 2.0 bpg). UCLA— G Bryce Alford, 6-3, So. (17.5 ppg, 6.1 apg, 2.8 rpg); G Norman Powell, 6-4, Sr. (15.1 ppg, 4.6 rpg, 2.0 apg); G Isaac Hamilton, 6-4, So. (12.1 ppg, 3.8 rpg, 2.3 apg); F Kevon Looney, 6-9, Fr. (12.8 ppg, 10.4 rpg, 1.9 apg); F/C Tony Parker, 6-9, Jr. (10.1 ppg, 7.6 rpg) NOTABLE: This is the Pac-12 Conference opener for both teams. ... UCLA has lost three in a row, while CU has lost two in a row. ... Speaking of this week's practices, Boyle said: "We've put some new stuff in, we've done a lot of teaching and watched a lot of film with our guys, individually and as a team. It's been a good three days, there's no doubt." ... After scoring 101.3 points per game in its first three games of the year, UCLA has averaged 67.9 points in the last 10 games. ... Looney is one of two Pac-12 players (along with Washington State's Josh Hawkinson) averaging a double-double. ... Under Boyle, the Buffs are 4-0 in conference home openers. ... UCLA lead the series 8-1, with CU's only win coming on Dec. 7, 1962. ... UCLA leads the Pac-12 in offensive rebounds, grabbing 13.7 per game. ... The Bruins have all five starters averaging in double figures, but rank 11th in the conference in field-goal percentage (43.1 percent).

Like many athletes at Colorado, Josh Scott is well aware that the football team won a national championship in 1990.

On Thursday, Scott got a better idea as to why.

Bill McCartney, who coached the CU football team from 1982-1994, spoke to Scott and the rest of the Buffaloes' basketball team before practice on Thursday.

"Honestly, I understand why they won a national championship," said Scott, a junior forward. "He gets you fired up. The way he speaks and what he talks about, it's very motivational and it's very honest and to the point.

"He was honest with us from what he saw and he also gave great tips as to how championship teams and how good teams play and look and lead. It was good."

The Buffs (7-5) could use some tips right now. After limping to the finish of non-conference play, CU will host UCLA (8-5) on Friday in the Pac-12 opener.

CU head coach Tad Boyle has met with McCartney a few times over the years, and still has the notes from his first meeting with McCartney nearly five years ago. Boyle figured now was a good time to bring the former football coach in to speak to his team.

"Coach Mac is as good of a motivational speaker as I've ever been around," Boyle said. "He got my juices flowing and I think he got our players' juices flowing, and we practiced well (on Thursday)."

CU is looking for anything to provide a spark as they open Pac-12 play. They've lost two in a row and four of six.

CU's recent struggles have kept Boyle awake at nights. In fact, Boyle said he had a negative attitude and struggled to sleep on Wednesday night.

Knowing McCartney was coming in on Thursday morning, Boyle said he changed his attitude on the drive to work.

"I made a vow to myself when I drove to practice this morning that it's important that I show positive signs and I'm encouraging," Boyle said. "We've talked about where we've been enough. Now it's time to talk about where we're going to go."

Is Boyle's positive attitude a New Year's resolution?

"We'll see how long I can keep that one," he said with a laugh. "I'm going to try, though."

Boyle and the rest of the Buffs view Friday's Pac-12 opener as a fresh start, of sorts. They haven't played particularly well to this point, but can turn their season around with a great run through conference play.

"It's conference, so we're kind of 0-0," Scott said. "It's a chance for us to do things differently."

UCLA has the same feeling. The Bruins have lost three in a row and are 4-5 in their last nine games. Bruins coach Steve Alford said the Bruins have had poor starts during their recent struggles and are also working on sharpening up their defense and ball movement on offense.

"We have to gain from our experiences," Alford said this week.

Boyle echoed that sentiment on Thursday when talking about the Buffs.

"We have to learn from the mistakes we've made," Boyle said. "We have to learn that we have to play with a sense of urgency; we have to learn that we have to execute down the stretch of games in order to be successful. If we learn from our mistakes, we'll be fine. If we don't and we continue to struggle in areas we've struggled in, it's going to be another mediocre part of the season."

For both teams, Friday's opener offers a chance to turn the tide.

"You're going to have two teams that I think will be very well prepared and fight very, very hard to try to get that first conference win," Alford said.

After some much needed family time, followed by three productive days of practice, the Buffs are ready to fight for that win, Scott said.

"It's a battle of wills," he said. "It's going to be a tough fought game tomorrow. It's important to realize that tomorrow it's going to be time to, like coach Boyle says, tear the nails out of the floor. It's going to be a tough game."

Brian Howell: howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33