When a high-school student from Bergen County turned down NYU to attend a small college in Pennsylvania, he did so because he'd be able to do lab research his freshman year, and because he could create his own major of "inequality studies."

More than a decade later, Aakash Shah is a newly-minted doctor who is to be honored at the White House this morning for the community health organization he founded.

The group, Be Jersey Strong, recruits and trains college students to help people who have had trouble enrolling in the Affordable Care Act.

Of the 500 volunteers his organization has recruited and trained, about two-thirds speak a second language, according to Shah. That allows Be Strong Jersey to provide help in more than 50 languages, including Akan, Fanti, Gujarati, Igbo, Telugu, Twi, and Urdu.

Shah's stroke of genius was to realize that two groups underrepresented in Obamacare enrollment – the so-called "young invincibles" as well as immigrant Americans for whom English is difficult – could both be served by college-age volunteers.

Immigrant groups would welcome help in their home language, while people under 30, who have been slow to sign up because of a belief they're too health to need insurance, might be more likely to listen to someone their own age. "We hold particular sway with 'young invincibles' because we're mostly 'young invincibles' ourselves," said Shah, 28.

Be Jersey Strong operates out of Cliffside Park, where Shah grew up. Since his days at Bergen County Academies, he has studied as a Rhodes Scholar at Oxford, and earned his medical degree through Harvard Medical School. (He just got matched to do his residency in emergency medicine at Rutgers - Robert Wood Johnson Medical Center.)

All of these experiences drove home the message that what happens in a patient's life outside the examining room may have more impact on health than any specific doctoring. Shah said he constantly came across people who could qualify for subsidized health insurance, but who found the whole enrollment process far too daunting.

When he would inquire about that, the answer was usually, "It's not as easy as it sounds, doc,'" he said. Immigrants as well as young adults often don't grasp the meaning of deductibles, copays, or premiums, and the flashiest website in the world wasn't going to help them. Instead, they needed "good old-fashioned one-on-one help."

The fledgling group received its non-profit status last July, and was able to get volunteers from more than 20 college campuses to help with the third annual open enrollment period for Obamacare.

Interviewed Thursday, Shah, 28, was about to join his parents, Rupa and Kaushik Shah, as well as younger brother Kevan, for the drive to Washington. President Barack Obama was tentatively scheduled to be at the presentation, assuming he returned from Argentina in time.

Shah was nominated for recognition from the Obama administration's "Champions of Change" program by Rachel Linstead Goldsmith, of EnrollAmerica, the non-profit set up to help people get insurance through the federal marketplace.

She said she was struck by his willingness to build his organization around volunteers, given that sometimes people in the non-profit can be less than enthusiastic about relying on volunteers instead of paid employees.

"He's really focusing on students in the health field, which means that even if they don't stay in New Jersey or with Be Jersey Strong, they've had a deeper look at what health insurance can mean for people."

The 10:30 a.m. ceremony will be live-streamed on the White House website.

Kathleen O'Brien may be reached at kobrien@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @OBrienLedger. Find NJ.com on Facebook.