Buy Photo From left, WZTV-17's Kelly Sutton, Mayor Megan Barry and Kelsea Ballerini watch the big music note ascend to the top of the tower on Broadway in Nashville on Thursday. (Photo: Dave Cardaciotto / For The Tennessean)Buy Photo

It’s a milestone that reporters often use to size up the start of a new officeholder. And it’s one that Nashville Mayor Megan Barry herself cited shortly after her historic election victory in September:

The first 100 days.

As of Sunday, Barry has held the city’s top post for exactly that.

She’s had around 160 public speaking engagements, from rotary club meetings to groundbreakings, met with all 40 Metro Council members and sat down with Tennessee’s Republican leadership trio of Gov. Bill Haslam, Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey and House Speaker Beth Harwell.

She’s gradually assembled most of her mayor’s office staff, putting together what appears to be the most diverse mayoral administration in Nashville’s history in terms of women and minorities. Barry, the first woman ever elected mayor of Nashville, has engineered another likely first: a Metro mayor’s office composed of more women than men.

“We’ve been very deliberate in making our staff look like Nashville,” Barry said.

Her election win in September attracted widespread attention. In fact, following her inauguration that same month, Barry received a congratulatory phone call from former U.S. President Bill Clinton. Weeks later, Barry helped introduce Clinton’s wife, presidential candidate Hillary Clinton, at a November campaign rally at Nashville’s Fisk University.

Barry, a Democrat and former at-large Metro councilwoman, discussed her short time in office in an interview with The Tennessean from the downtown mayor’s office — an office that, as is customary for a new mayor, has undergone a slight face-lift. There’s new carpet, newly painted walls and window shades. And with her own money, Barry has brought in some new furniture and wall paintings, including a set of prints from Nashville street photographer Michael Ray Nott.

Not surprisingly, Barry said she’s sought to spend her the first three-plus months zeroing in on areas she talked about on the campaign trail, including her three main pillars of public education, transportation and affordable housing.

“Those are the things that we’ve focused on over the 100 days — while also building a staff to do it,” she said.

And yet, to this point, Barry — a star of liberals and progressives in Nashville — hasn’t pushed forward a policy agenda for Metro government that is noticeably different than the previous eight years. To the contrary, there’s been striking continuity from her predecessor Karl Dean to herself.

While other mayoral candidates figured to make wholesale changes in leadership if elected, Barry has retained key members of Dean’s administration. Most notably, she named top Dean aide Metro Finance Director Rich Riebeling her new mayor’s office chief operating officer and promoted Talia Lomax-O’dneal to be finance chief. She named the Metro Council’s attorney Jon Cooper the new Metro law director and she kept the mayor’s office Economic and Community Development Director Matt Wiltshire in that same role.

Barry, asked about that continuity, quickly pointed out that the vast majority of her staff members are new to Metro. Nevertheless, the overlap is there, and that shouldn’t be a surprise: During the campaign, Barry secured support from much of Metro’s establishment after pushing for a continuation of the pro-growth, pro-business politics of Dean.

In that election, Barry overcame millions of dollars in self-financing from four of her six campaign opponents to win. She also faced attacks from runoff election opponent David Fox that her politics were far too left of Nashville’s mainstream and that she would concentrate primarily on national social issues as mayor.

“I will let you be the judge of that,” Barry said when asked whether she’s proven that criticism to be unfair. “I would tell you that (what) I’ve focused on is the stuff I talked about during the campaign, and that really hasn’t wavered.”

Though Barry hasn’t used her first 100 days to unveil a single defining policy proposal, she has been dealt some early challenges. Above all, homicides, particularly gun violence among youth, have increased in Nashville from previous years, prompting her to promise a “concrete action plan” that will seek to reduce youth violence in particular.

Below are issues, themes and challenges that have shaped Barry’s First 100 days, and what the mayor has said about them.

Mayor’s office diversity

Including Barry, there are 28 people working inside the mayor’s office — 16 women and 12 men. Eight mayor’s office employees are African-Americans and two are Latino. Barry eventually plans to install a chief diversity officer to oversee diversity throughout Metro government.

“For the first time, I think ever, we actually have parity,” Barry said of those numbers.

Buy Photo Mayor Megan Barry is joined on stage by children from the Edgehill Bike Club during the Metro Christmas tree lighting ceremony. (Photo: Alan Poizner / For The Tennessean)

Local-hire amendment

One week after Barry's inauguration, Tennessee Attorney General Herbert Slatery issued a legal opinion arguing that Amendment 3, approved by Nashville voters in August to create a new local-hire rule for Metro-funded construction projects, violates state law. Barry had already delayed implementation of the policy, which is to require at least 40 percent of workforces on city-funded construction projects be Davidson County residents. Barry created a committee of labor representatives and construction and building leaders to push ahead with that local-hire goal.

“There’s been a lot of working going on behind the scenes on Amendment 3,” Barry said.

Education

While Dean had his biggest influence in education through his support of charter schools, Barry has sought to stay out of that controversial issue. She’s made assisting the Metro school board in hiring a new superintendent to replace Jesse Register her top education priority. Barry’s mayor’s office is co-chairing a new 17-member task force that is working to identify and recruit superintendent candidates. She recently named Laura Moore, a former vice president of policy at the Nashville Area Chamber of Commerce, her education liaison. Barry has also floated the idea of an incentives program to help recruit new teachers, including the possibility of workforce housing for first-time teachers.

Affordable housing

Barry has created a new four-member Office of Economic Opportunity and Empowerment that includes one employee — Adriane Bond Harris — to serve as senior adviser for affordable housing. Meanwhile, a consultant for the Metro Planning Department recently unveiled recommendations for a voluntary inclusionary zoning policy that would use incentives to try to get developers to pursue affordable housing projects. The policy, which would require Metro Council and planning commission approval, recommends $10 million in annual funds for affordable housing.

“We’re making progress on affordable housing, but we have a ways to go,” Barry said.

Transit

Similar to affordable housing, Barry has created an Office of Infrastructure that includes two new hires devoted to transit. That’s led by new transportation director Erin Hafkenschiel, a former transit policy consultant from California. The Metro Transportation Authority is in the middle of its nMotion planning process for future mass transit possibilities. In the meantime, Barry also touts short-term steps designed to improve the flow of vehicles and transit, including a revamped traffic-signal timing plan for 560 Nashville intersections and new cell phone app that provides real time route information.

Buy Photo Mayor Megan Barry joins a young girl named Tennessee to light a candle after a gathering to honor Paris on Nov. 15, 2015. (Photo: Adam Tamburin/The Tennessean)

‘A welcoming place’

Barry has twice issued statements to show support for refugees in Nashville as well as Muslims following the recent terrorist attacks in Paris. When Haslam called for a pause in allowing Syrian refugees into Tennessee, Barry said Nashville should remain a “warm and welcoming place.” She later took part in a statement of solidarity with Nashville Muslims that was led by the Metro Human Relations Commission.

Youth violence

Barry last month held what is expected to be the first of multiple community summits on youth violence. Amid rising homicide rates in Nashville, she has vowed to unveil a plan in March that would seek to reduce gun violence in Nashville. One area she intends to focus on is connecting youth to greater job opportunities.

Fair board’s gun show vote

Barry opted not to take a hard-line stand on the fair board’s controversial vote last month regarding gun shows. The board voted 3-0 to halt future gun shows until operators agree to new safety measure that satisfies the board. She asked Metro attorneys to review the legality of the vote. Though the legal department has not issued a formal legal opinion, attorneys have said the board should carry out existing contracts with gun show promoters. That means gun show will continue this month.

Homelessness

One of her quickest actions after being elected mayor was to make clear that Metro would not issue citations to homeless people who were living in an encampment at Fort Negley park in Nashville. That came after Metro parks officials had originally set a deadline for them to move out. More recently, a new report shows that homelessness has increased in Nashville by 5 percent in just one year. Barry has said she hopes to coordinate efforts between Metro and nonprofits to address homelessness.

Reach Joey Garrison at 615-259-8236 and on Twitter @joeygarrison.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1OAXar6