US actor Richard Dean Anderson poses as he arrives to take part in the ceremony marking the 20th anniversary of the Jules Verne festival on October 11, 2012 at the Rex cinema in Paris. Every year since 1992, the Jules Verne Aventures association has organised the Festival Jules Verne, a meeting place for all lovers of science fiction with concerts, films or sountracks. AFP PHOTO THOMAS SAMSON (Photo credit should read THOMAS SAMSON/AFP/Getty Images) (Photo: AFP/Getty Images)

MacGyver, the television series of the late 1980s and early 1990s , revolved around secret agent Angus MacGyver (played by Richard Dean Anderson) whose practical application of scientific knowledge and inventive use of common items was legendary. MacGyver always seemed to get out of tight spots and survived. So, what the heck does MacGyver have to do with the economy?

Economic prosperity will depend on new approaches by companies, communities, states and the nation, application of scientific knowledge, the ability to be inventive, and the willingness to take risks in the face of uncertainty. We now find ourselves in an environment that demands all these skills and more. Like MacGyver, we must have the ability to deal with ever-changing conditions, new competitive forces some of which reveal themselves overnight, and the death of traditional businesses replaced by new upstarts. We definitely live in times of exponential change.

Many, including those among us in Fond du Lac County, feel nothing but fear as a result of this exponential change. That is a natural emotion but it can also be paralyzing. Was MacGyver scared when faced with uncertainty and seemingly unsolvable situations? Of course, any of us would be frightened but the difference is that MacGyver drew energy from the challenges to find novel solutions. Citizens of Fond du Lac County, we must do the same to find economic success moving forward.

Fond du Lac County has experienced success in manufacturing that provided the cornerstone of the local economy. Healthcare has grown substantially to become the second largest employment sector in the county. But the evolving new economy will impact these sectors. Manufacturing will still be a major contributor to the economy but with decreasing employment moving into the future. Fond du Lac County’s recent ranking as ninth in the nation’s small metros for advanced manufacturing specialization is a recognition of technology application in production. Where healthcare is headed is anyone’s guess at this point. Bottom line: we must explore and pursue new opportunities and new business sectors.

The pursuit of new economic opportunities will require approaches much different from those of the last 50 years! Those approaches must involve collaboration and cooperation among governments and organizations, regional initiatives, and a focus on a workforce that has expertise in S.T.E.M.-based (Science, Technology, Engineering and Mathematics) education and skills. These are no longer casual choices but absolute requirements for success.

The Fond du Lac County Economic Development Corporation (FCEDC) has led the creation of a collaborative network of resource providers called IGNITE! Business Success. IGNITE! is comprised of 16 organizations dedicated to supporting entrepreneurial development in Fond du Lac County. This network is unique in Wisconsin and is garnering national attention.

FCEDC is also in discussions with surrounding counties in terms of marketing the region. Such an effort creates more “critical mass” in terms of economic development assets and is more attractive to companies searching for new locations.

The FCEDC is committed to supporting the County’s existing businesses through assistance for their sustainability and growth. Existing business programs are no longer based on models involving interviews with company officials, issuing reports, or attempting to solve problems that should have never developed in the first place. It’s about making sure that the business climate in Fond du Lac is the best in Wisconsin, period!

The FCEDC has a business intelligence capability that no other economic development organization possesses in Wisconsin and which very few in the Midwest have. This allows the FCEDC to provide market and other research to businesses at very affordable costs.

We must continually look for inventive ways of growing the economy in the midst of great change and make the best utilization of resources for maximum impact. Again, the way we have done things in the past will no longer produce results. Redundancies and duplications must be eliminated. We must be willing to take risks, and have the mindset of the entrepreneur…try something, if it works build on the idea; if it doesn’t work, quit and try something else.

Although MacGyver was fictional, his message was very relevant: do not fear change, improvise as needed and innovate, innovate, innovate. If we do these things, we will succeed.

Steve R. Jenkins is president of the Fond du Lac County Economic Development Corporation.

Read or Share this story: http://fondul.ac/1NwMlrl