De Blasio snoozes & NYC loses

Valley Stream, L.I.: Re “Late & lame” (Nov. 13): It’s been said that 98% of success in life is just showing up, and this unfunny joke of a mayor doesn’t have the fundamental commitment, respect and human decency to get even that part right. The residents and victims’ families in Belle Harbor had every right to be livid about the mayor’s callous disregard . Michael Cerrone

Howard Beach: So Mayor de Blasio was late for a memorial in the Rockaways, citing fog when he took the ferry. I am sure if the ceremony had been in Brooklyn or Manhattan, he would have been there on time. It now seems we have only two boroughs, Brooklyn and Manhattan, and he could not care less what happens anywhere else. Manny Agostini

Brooklyn: When people are habitually late for appointments, they are sending a clear statement to those constantly waiting for them: They are saying, “My time is important and your time is not.” Andrea Allen

Don’t nickel-and-dime transit

Manhattan: Straphangers are fortunate the MTA increase is only 4% (“Keep the fare fair,” editorial, Nov. 13). The MTA took a hit this spring when Albany raided its coffers of over $50 million, in addition to recent labor settlements that are being paid for through the diversion of “pay-as-you-go” capital. Given those factors — along with the $15 billion gap in its five-year capital program and Controller Tom DiNapoli’s July report on the billions needed to maintain and modernize existing transit systems — the MTA could have easily reverted back to its originally planned fare increase of 7.5%. Instead, it opted not to, even though the reduced fare increase will put additional pressure on borrowing and thus the operating budget and service delivery. Our policymakers in Albany should recognize more than ever that the MTA is the economic engine that keeps the city and state moving. They must do everything they can to ensure that the next MTA capital program is fully funded. It’s what all passengers depend on for a safe, secure and reliable ride. Denise Richardson, General Contractors Association of New York

Going soft on crime

Staten Island: Re “Don’t fear the reefer!” (Nov. 11): Don’t think marijuana is a dangerous drug? Let’s ask the surviving family members of NYPD narcotics Detective Luis Lopez, who was killed over a marijuana haul. What’s next? Letting $3 crack vials walk, too? Lois Martano, ret’d detective, NYPD Narcotics Division

Forgive and forget

Clearwater, Fla.: Kyle Beebe was only 23 when convicted of marijuana possession. The decision of outgoing Arkansas Gov. Mike Beebe to pardon his son is clearly that of a loving and understanding father. Others may disagree, but I fully concur with Beebe. Kids will sometimes do stupid stuff. Nevertheless, everyone deserves a second chance, along with forgiveness. I wish both Beebe and his son well. JoAnn Lee Frank

Never forget

St. Albans: I think veterans should be remembered not just once a year — they should be remembered all year long. These brave men and women sacrificed their lives so that all Americans can be safe and free. Many of them lost their lives in defense of our country and our allies. It is terrific that U.S. companies have hired more than 160,000 veterans. Many veterans who come home have serious health problems such as PTSD. We should respect all living veterans every day of the year. May U.S. soldiers who never made it home rest in peace. Leslie Langer

Caught in a lie

Manhattan: Great column by Charles Krauthammer (“Obamacare at last exposed,” Nov. 14). One of the law’s architects, Jonathan Gruber, helped the President and his followers deliberately deceive the American people. He actually admitted that the “lack of transparency” and the “stupidity” of the American people were crucial to getting the law passed. From the Congressional Budget Office all the way down to the citizens, the bill was written in a way to deceive us all. Because this administration and top Democrats were so insistent on selling us a phony story — “You can keep your doctor,” “You can keep your plan” — many are now feeling the effect of this questionable law. Some of the faithful are trying to pretend they knew nothing. Former House Speaker Nancy Pelosi recently denied knowing Gruber, but she was singing his praises a few years ago. Krauthammer sums it all up: “the arrogance of an academic liberalism that rules in the name of a citizenry it mocks, disdains and deliberately, contemptuously deceives.” Sam King

Dissatisfied citizen

Manhattan: As a low-income voter, I voted for President Obama twice — and twice got a real hosing. He took away my food stamps for the month of November. Meanwhile, Michelle wears her expensive dresses. It’s like they are telling us to eat cake. I will remember this when I go vote again. I may not vote at all after all this. Helen M. Murphy

Bunglers-in-chief

Bronx: To Voicer Isabel Malave: I also found President Obama’s gum-chewing incident very disrespectful — unpresidential, if you will. Why, it was almost as embarrassing as President Ronald Reagan falling asleep while meeting with the Pope, or President George H.W. Bush vomiting on the Japanese prime minister’s lap or President George W. Bush doing his dance to promote malaria awareness. Tsk, tsk. Michael Brennan

False alarms

Copake, N.Y.: Anyone else notice that ISIS and Ebola are no longer the threats the media told us they were now that Republicans won big in the midterms? When will working people wake up? I guess Bill Maher is right when he calls most Republican voters “corporate America’s useful idiots.” Joseph Cannisi

A fine thank you

Maspeth: What is becoming of this city (“Blame kid,” Nov. 13)? Bus driver Howard McLean — doing his job on Veterans Day (and a veteran himself), with a wife who has stage four cancer — gets in a tussle with some low-life punk trying to cheat the system, and he is facing termination. Are you kidding me? I thought it was a federal offense to assault a city bus driver. Now I know why, after 30 years of driving a city bus, my dad put in his papers to get out — because of stuff like this. Lance Lovejoy

The moon hits your eye

Forest Hills: Must we see Kim Kardashian in the paper every day (“Rump roast,” Nov. 13)? How much was she paid to pose nude in Paper magazine? How do you think her daughter will feel when she sees these pictures after she grows up? Are there not more important events and people to put in the paper, other than Kim and her family? I find her nude pictures disgraceful, and I really don’t want to see her in the paper again. Lillian Zimmerman

Like a big pizza pie

Newark: I’m not sure if you’re aware, but there are U.S. soldiers in Afghanistan and around the world fighting for our freedom. They should be the ones gracing the cover of the Daily News. Eileen Pagan

Unimpressed

Massapequa Park, L.I.: Why the big fuss over Kim Kardashian? To me, she looks like a cow walking on her hind legs. Now, Amal Clooney — that’s class. I guess beauty is in the eye of the beholder. Richard Banks Sr.

Vast tracts

Stratford, Conn.: When is the Postal Service going to assign a ZIP code for Kim Kardashian’s butt? Peter Sulzicki

Shake on it

Monroe Township, N.J.: I agree with Voicer E.P. Buddin. Every sporting event should have players shake hands or bump fists to show sportsmanship at the end of every game. Some sporting events only do it at a championship game. Sports being the No. 1 viewed event, young males and females should see this gesture carried on. I was at a minor-league baseball game during the summer and was surprised that the teams didn’t come on the field and shake hands. My adult son said, “Mom, that stops after Little League.” Why? Even in tennis, which I play, the players comes to the net, winner and runner-up, to congratulate one another for a good game. Let’s teach our young players to appreciate the effort to play a fair game, win or lose. Regina S. Brennan