John Gerard Lewis manages the Stable High Yield model on Covestor , an online marketplace for investment management. He is founder and president of Gerard Wealth Management , a fee-based registered investment adviser based in Olathe, KS. John holds a Bachelor's Degree in Business Administration from Kansas State University and did graduate studies at the University of Dallas and Rockhurst University.

Reasonable minds can differ on investment advice, and rarely do I read in respected financial publications duly considered viewpoints that cry out for refutation. But boy, did I find one in a recent issue of Forbes magazine.

It's not that the age-old debate over individual bonds vs. bond funds is illegitimate. It's a fair topic, and in most economic circumstances, persuasive arguments can be made for either investment product. But, with all due respect, the case for funds over individual bonds that is made by William Baldwin in the Nov. 24 issue is specious.

Mr. Baldwin's wholly insubstantial thesis is so comprehensively weak as to actually make it a bit difficult to counter, because even the most genteel refutation must necessarily contain so many pejoratives. Mr. Baldwin has written many astute columns in the pages of Forbes, but here it is as if he suddenly realized he had a deadline to meet and rushed to bang out fixed-income fictions sufficient to fill a page.

He begins his attack on individual bonds by using the rather absurd hypothetical of your broker earnestly recommending a Caa-rated bond, as if that's the norm. His next disingenuous example has your broker pushing an East St. Louis revenue bond due in 40 years.

Do reputable brokers more commonly tout junk bonds than investment-grade issues? Do they pay no mind to violating suitability standards or other investment-adviser regulations? It is, after all, only their livelihoods that are at risk.

That was just the beginning. Next was floated the pretense that to buy individual bonds "you need $100,000 trades to have any chance of getting a decent price and you need 50 issues to diversify your credit risk."

Goodness, where to begin...

A hundred grand for a decent price? On Dec. 4, five Microsoft 2.375s due May 1, 2023, could have been bought for a total outlay of $4,988.41. Is that price "decent"? Wrong question, because if the yield-to-maturity is to your liking, who cares about price?

When buying a bond, it's yield-to-maturity (YTM) — or yield-to-worst for a callable bond — that matters, not price. Price is merely a component of calculating YTM. Thus, with the YTM for this nine-year corporate at 2.44% and the 10-year Treasury below 2.3%, I might have bought this Microsoft issue in a heartbeat. (I didn't, but I wasn't shopping on that day.)

Oh, and that bond isn't rated Caa. It's rated Aaa by Moody's and AA+ by S&P.

Mr. Baldwin goes on to posit that individual bonds only make sense if you're investing $5 million and work at it full time.

Well, wrong and wrong. In the forgoing example we invested less than $5,000 in a bond that has an S&P credit rating equivalent to that of the U.S. government. This research took roughly a nanosecond to complete, not a 40-hour workweek.

More sophistry, in comparing fund management fees to bond trading costs: "That irresistible sewer issue you picked up at 98 cents on the dollar may fetch a mere 96.5 on resale. The broker has to cover his Lexus payments somehow," reads the Forbes column.

We could just as easily postulate: "That irresistible bond fund you picked up at 98 cents on the dollar may fetch a mere 96.5 on resale." Bond fund prices also rise and fall.

Mr. Baldwin then asserts that it is simply better to hold bond funds because should a personal emergency arise you might have to sell your individual bonds and thus have to pay a commission. Well, if you've done a proper job of asset allocation, you will already have stored enough ready cash to meet most emergencies. Besides, in an emergency, what's a trading commission? You do what you have to do. (See? You can make the point without deriding brokers' automobiles.)

Moreover, you may have bought your bond fund through your regular stockbroker, like I do. (Yes, I currently own some very short-term bond funds.) In that case, you're going to pay a commission anyway.

Finally, Mr. Baldwin asserts a fund advantage should an investor want to do a tax-loss swap as interest rates rise, because the two transactions involving no-load funds wouldn't incur the sales commissions that the individual bond transactions would.

But that scenario, too, is contrived. A prudent individual-bond investor is going to ladder maturities so that no such tax-loss swap would be necessary in the first place. Indeed, there would be no realized "losses" because a properly allocated percentage of the bond portfolio would be maturing on a scheduled basis. Those funds are then reinvested at the long end of the ladder. There is no loss, and that always beats deliberately taking a loss.

He concludes by reciting the familiar merits of bond funds: low expense ratios, liquidity and diversification — and all of that is valid. But it's all trumped by a greater factor.

A bond fund has no fixed maturity date, and with interest rates poised to someday rise, an unfixed maturity date is an investor's greatest enemy. Rising rates mean declining principal. If Joe buys a 10-year individual bond, he'll get the principal (the par value) of the bond back when it matures, regardless of what interest rates do. But a bond fund doesn't mature, so if Sam buys a bond fund and rates then rise for 10 years, his principal at that time will be less than it was when he bought it. Joe wins.

If you're now persuaded, here are a few individual issues to consider, all of which are rated at least BBB- by Moody's — and none of which are rated Caa:

(Issue, coupon, maturity, yield-to-maturity or yield-to-worst. Data as of Dec. 10.):

American Realty Capital Properties, 2.0%, due Feb. 6, 2017. YTM: 3.26%

Safeway, 6.35%, due Aug. 15, 2017, YTM: 2.334%

Rowan Companies, due Sept. 1, 2017, YTM: 2.295%

Transocean, 6.5%, Nov. 15, 2020, YTM: 7.943%

SESI, 7.125%, Dec. 15, 2021, Yield-to-Worst: 5.666%

Disclosure: Lewis owns bonds of American Realty Capital Properties, Safeway and Transocean.

More from MarketWatch