Buy Photo Maven Campbell, 10, attempts a free throw during the Clarksville Optimist Tri-Star Basketball skills contest on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey/Special to the CJ)Buy Photo

The annual Clarksville Optimist Tri-Star Basketball skills contest was held Saturday at Clarksville Middle School.

Children age 8 through 13 competed in dribbling, passing and shooting events, looking to take home a trophy in the national skills competition organized by Optimist Club International.

Dribbling a ball while weaving through traffic cones, attempting free throws and aiming passes at a target board, the kids gave it their all while their fans watched from the bleachers.

In the crowd was Doug Caldwell, who came with his granddaughters, Kerington Caldwell, 4, and Kendal Melnyk, 10.

“They both just love basketball,” he said.

Although Kerington was too young to compete, that didn’t stop her from practicing her dribbling skills while Kendal warmed up. Kendal plays for the Bridgepointe Elementary School basketball team.

“I was the only third grader they let on the team last year,” said the fourth-grade student. “I just like basketball. I like to watch Kentucky play.”

Another participant, 10-year-old Maven Campbell, said he wanted to compete in the skills contest as a way to practice. As a homeschooled student, he said he doesn't play on a team, but practices at his friends' houses.

Trophies were awarded to the top three finishers of each age and gender. The top two in each bracket can advance to the district competition in Jasper, Ind. All participants received a medal.

The Optimist Club hosts the event in conjunction with the Clarksville Parks Department. The event is part of the club’s winter Saturday Morning Program schedule. In conjunction with the parks department, they offer free activities and trips for students in grades one to eight.

“This is one of the few events we do as part of the International Optimist Club,” said event organizer Mickey Higdon. “We’ve established a lot of our own activities.”

Running every Saturday into March, The Saturday Morning Program provides a free activity for youngsters. Upcoming events include swimming at the New Albany YMCA’s indoor pool, roller-skating at Jammerz Rollerdrome, and a trip to a University of Louisville baseball game.

Information on the program and pre-registration can be found on the parks department website at clarksvilleparks.com.

The Clarksville Optimists also sponsors a Challenger Baseball team for mentally and physically challenged players on Thursday nights in May and June.

“We had 98 players last year,” Higdon said. “Last year we had from ages four to 64.”

Buy Photo Courtney Austin, 10, is unimpressed with Clarksville Parks Department marketing and program coordinator Ken Conklin’s attempts at blocking before the Clarksville Optimist Tri-Star Basketball skills contest on Saturday. (Photo: Jenna Esarey/Special to the CJ)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1XaIa9G