But names are tricky. They denote and connote at the same time. The difference between forgettable and memorable can be found in one word.





The words Portland and weird in the same sentence make for tasty entertainment just about anywhere. The Miami Herald, on its Weird News blog, last week told readers about Portland Commissioner Steve Novick's proposal to name TriMet's new bridge over the Willamette River after the cartoon character Lisa Simpson. Novick wasn't quoted in the wire report, but his extended logic was previously trotted out publicly as roughly this: Hey, Lisa's an environmentalist! The conscience of the show! While Novick often strikes us an original thinker, in this instance the certified smart guy thought himself over a cliff.

Portland won't have it easy in capturing the right words and tone in naming its new light-rail bridge, connecting downtown with Southeast Portland and the Portland creep-fearing Clackamas County. We hope this changes. Bridge naming has been a snap in other places such as Redding, Calif., where the Spanish architect Santiago Calatrava designed a cable-stayed pedestrian bridge whose sole tower acts as a giant sundial, hence the winsome name Sundial Bridge. You can't do much better than that, though we think Bridge of the Gods, spanning the Columbia River at Cascade Locks, evokes place, cultural history and timeless aspiration all at once while being a downright beautiful thing to say.

But in Bridge City? Except for the Steel and Broadway bridges, most of our conveyances over the Willamette River are named for dead white men, worthy but obscure to many: Sellwood, Hawthorne, Burnside, Morrison, and Fremont among them. The new TriMet bridge, by contrast, offers a chance at something altogether different and dynamic while being utterly Portland.

The bridge will have no cars, joining a MAX line with room for pedestrians and bicyclists, and it will land in two propitious places: near Oregon Health & Science University's South Waterfront campus on the river's west bank, and south of OMSI on the east bank. The structure itself, hardly another Erector Set model, will stand out for its airy spray of cables that will, at night, sparkle in light that changes in intensity with the river current below. We suspect, among other things, the bridge will become a lunchtime favorite for those drawn to two 14-foot-wide bicycle and pedestrian pathways offering exercise and views without cars whizzing by.

But names are tricky. They denote and connote at the same time. The difference between forgettable (The Pulaski Bridge in New York) and memorably aspirational (The Pulaski Skyway in New Jersey) can be found, well, in one word. Sometimes, history exerts cold reckoning, as in the case of Mount Hood, regrettably named for a guy who never saw the peak and fought for England against us in the American Revolutionary War. Sometimes, too, folks can be tempted to tweak light rail's doubters: Naming TriMet's span the Bridge to Clackistan would hardly extend a handshake to Clackamas County's commission chairman, John Ludlow, who advocated for a failed and somewhat Portland-phobic effort to stop the soon-to-be southbound MAX train well short of Oak Grove. Meanwhile, the thoughtfully suggested name The Abigail Bridge, for the courageous Abigail Scott Duniway, would correctly throw into reverse a gender bias in our bridge names but also extend the habit of monumentalizing a person's name.

The process ahead has many steps. Anyone can make a suggestion through Dec. 1. A committee working for TriMet, led by Chet Orloff, will then find 12 names from among the anticipated 7,000 proposed, before reconsidering that subset of 12 and reducing it to six. At that point, Orloff told The Oregonian's editorial board, the public will be engaged to find favorites from among the six. By March, the committee, taking into account the public's preferences, will forward three or four possible bridge names to TriMet's board of directors for a naming decision by April.

It might seem fussy. But then that's what naming is about. Like it or not, the largest car-free transit bridge in the United States will be situated in Portland, Oregon, a place of immense pride in its history, culture, natural resources and zoomy inclination to the edgy, the weird, the celebratory, the possible. The right name just might embody one or more of such values. And any way it goes, the right name should match in beauty, pertinence and recognition the value of the icon itself: a new, all-Portland way to cross the river that defines and unites us.