Fresh from his surprise second place finish in South Carolina on Saturday, pro-life Republican presidential candidate Marco Rubio is contrasting himself with pro-abortion Democratic presidential candidates Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders. He says the two abortion advocates would be a disaster for the nation and would keep pro-abortion Obamacare in place.

Here’s a transcript of the conversation:

DICKERSON: “‘Would you expect to see specific policy on?”

RUBIO: “On everything. On health care. We all agree we’re going to repeal Obamacare what but is it I.T. Going to be replaced with. Again, on issues of energy. How are we going to utilize our energy resources, what is the role of federal government in higher education. What kind of justices would you appoint to the supreme court not just because we have vacancy now but at least one or two potentially in the next four to eight years. Virtually every major issue that is before this country that is natural per view of the federal government, have some specificity of what you’re going to do if you want to be president. Up to this point it hasn’t been a huge factor but it will be. Let me say this, the Democrats, if we nominate someone who is nebulous would you husband about these things they’re going to eat our lunch in November. We have to at this timely have someone ready to go that can win because we cannot lose this election. They cannot be the next president.

SIGN THE PLEDGE: I Pledge to Vote for a Pro-Life Candidate for President

In another interview, Rubio warned pro-life voters that “If Hillary Clinton is elected or Bernie Sanders, all of Obama’s disastrous policies become permanent.”

TAPPER: “We’ve seen the dynamic in this race. Donald Trump goes after somebody who is not polling as well and can destroys that person whether it is Rick Perry or Lindsey Graham or Jeb Bush. You’re now rising in the polls to a degree. Are you ready for Donald Trump to come after you?”

RUBIO: “Yes. First of all, Donald Trump did attack us. He attacked us in August, September, October, November. He was, you know, attacking us then and he didn’t destroy anybody. What he’s been good at is saying things that are over the top and then the press covers it. Everybody — you guys like to cover it because it helps with ratings and it’s interesting, and you can’t ignore it. But we’re at a different stage now. I mean, Republicans now have to nominate someone. We can’t lose this election. If Hillary Clinton is elected or Bernie Sanders, all of Obama’s disastrous policies become permanent. I think that’s what’s going to drive voters from here out. We have to win. And I give us the chance to nominate someone. I’m as conservative as anyone in this race. I have a 15-year record of conservative action that people can look at. So I didn’t just become a conservative two years ago. But I’m the conservative that can unite our party, grow our party and win this election. We have to win. And if I’m nominated, we will.”