Buy Photo Some of the makeshift homes in homeless encampment Tent City as they appeared in May. Lakewood expects to spend some $600,000 to depopulate the camp and clear out debris by the end of June. (Photo: Asbury Park Press file photo )Buy Photo

The number of homeless people in Ocean and Monmouth counties is down as more superstorm Sandy-displaced residents have moved out of emergency shelters and into their own homes or more permanent housing.

But homelessness numbers are up at the Shore compared to what they were five years ago, according to data released Monday from NJ Counts 2014, a statewide point-in-time count of the homeless.

The annual census, which always takes place in the final 10 days of January, gives a glimpse of homelessness across the state and is used to apply for federal funding to combat homelessness.

Statewide, the homeless population is up 1,898 people, nearly 16 percent, compared to the 2013 census. Volunteers counted 13,900 men, women and children during this year’s count on Jan. 28.

A portion of the statewide increase is linked to changes by some New Jersey counties to include residents who get temporary rental assistance as homeless people in emergency shelters, said Katelyn Cunningham, with Monarch Housing Associates, a nonprofit group that directs the homeless count and works to ensure quality affordable housing for everyone.

That’s not the case in Ocean and Monmouth counties, where the number of people in emergency shelters was down compared to last year.

Monmouth County saw a sharp drop in its overall homeless population, which is at 632 people, compared to last year when the number was at 918. Monmouth County’s homeless population was at 650 people in the count before Sandy and was at 604 in 2010.

The increase comes largely from the number of people in emergency shelters, while those without shelter and in transitional housing are down over the five-year span.

Ocean County’s homeless population was 627 people during this year’s count, down from 682 people last year. The count was 649 people in 2012, the last count before Sandy, and 590 in 2010.

The number of people who did not have shelter during this year’s count was down once again compared to last year, at 58 people versus 93 in 2013.

Minister Steven Brigham of Lakewood Outreach Ministries said the count may have been down because some Tent City residents already were being housed by Lakewood Township through a deal that would close the encampment.

The numbers also can be skewed by the services offered in a county. The homeless count, for example, shows a much higher portion of Monmouth County’s homeless are children and families than in Ocean County.

Cunningham attributed that to Monmouth County having emergency shelters for families, while homeless families in Ocean County would be placed in hotels or motels.

Brigham said the push to build bigger houses on larger property makes housing unaffordable.

“You need about three minimum wage jobs to afford the basic necessities. It has created an economic environment where the housing has to be too big, with too much room,” he said. “There’s just a lot of things they are doing that creates housing that is too expensive for the poor.”

By the numbers

13,900 men, women and children counted in statewide homeless census

632 homeless people counted in Monmouth County

627 homeless people counted in Ocean County

58 people without shelter

Read or Share this story: http://www.app.com/story/news/local/how-we-live/at-risk/2014/06/09/shore-homeless-numbers/10262107/