2014-08-27 News Sadowski takes parting shot at meeting

Former Imlay City Clerk proffers reasons for abrupt departure

by Tom Wearing write the author

News School bells to ring Director's job in jeopardy? EMS assessment on horizon? Recent Tom Wearing Finding H.O.P.E.

2016-May-18 Making the grade in Imlay

2016-May-18 Troop turns 90!

2016-May-18 Registration ongoing for Polly Ann walk

2016-May-18 LCEMS mulling .95 mill tax levy

2016-May-11 Vandals caught

2016-May-04 More... Extras e-mail this article link to a friend letter to the editor about this article print this article facebook twitter digg it share Larger | Smaller IMLAY CITY — In the aftermath of former Clerk/Treasurer Tim Sadowski's sudden resignation, city officials are looking into various allegations he made in a letter that he read aloud at the August 19 city commission meeting.



Sadowski, 31, who was hired by Imlay City in November of 2012, tendered his resignation to City Manager Tom Youatt on Wednesday, Aug. 13, effective immediately.



At the August 19 meeting, Sadowski alleged several reasons for his abrupt departure; including: that the city commission had been "kept in the dark" during the past year; that he is "not subordinate to the city manager;" that his efforts to inform the city commission regarding financial matters had "gone by the wayside" and "placed as communication at the back of city commission packets, after requesting they be placed as agenda items;" that he did not receive a standard 1% pay raise at the end of his first year, and that he did not receive a 2% raise that was awarded to all 54 city employees on July 1, 2014.



He additionally alleged that what might have been intended as a pay increase for city employees—the first in six years—actually translated to a $900 pay cut, due to additional out-of-pocket health insurance expenses incurred by employees.



Lastly, Sadowski claimed that as of June 30, 2014, the city reported a $934,000 "profit," due in large part to increased water and sewer rates, increased water usage at the Vlasic pickle plant, and operational reductions in the city's general fund.



Former Imlay City Clerk/Treasurer Tim Sadowski addresses commissioners at August 19 meeting. At the conclusion of last Tuesday's regular meeting, some city commissioners asked new City Manager Tom Youatt to investigate Sadowski's claims, and he agreed to do so and report back to the board.



On Friday, Youatt offered preliminary responses to the former clerk/treasurer's allegations.



Youatt said any concerns Sadowski had regarding the city's finances could have been brought directly to the attention of the city commission at any time.



He added that "if any employee did not receive the 2% raise approved by the city commission, effective July 1, it will be provided."



Responding to Sadowski's claim that the 2% raise actually resulted in a pay cut for city employees, Youatt said: "The City provides its employees the best health insurance plan the City can afford. With implementation of the Affordable Care Act, health insurance plans have recently undergone significant changes for all local governmental entities, including the City of Imlay City."



Relative to the current financial state of the City of Imlay City, Youatt said "city finances are stable and are consistently being monitored."



After hearing Sadowski's concerns, city commissioners accepted his resignation by a vote of 5-2, with Commissioners Greg Dennis and Al Ramirez casting the dissenting votes.



"It was the intention of the board that any changes would be beneficial to all employees," said Dennis, referring to the pay increase to offset changes in the health care plan. "I'd like to know if there was a misunderstanding. I think we need to take a look at that."



Commissioners later agreed 7-0 to have the clerk/treasurer vacancy posted on the Michigan Municipal League's web site and in local newspapers.



Short-time service



Sadowski's past employment record as a village manager or clerk/treasurer in Potterville, Mayville and Roscommon and Stockbridge reveals a history of brief service, ending with his resignation from each of those positions.



Sadowski took on the part-time clerk duties in the City of Potterville on July 19, 2005. He later moved up to full-time clerk, before accepting the city manager's job.



He reportedly left Potterville in January 2007, amidst allegations of internal problems involving staff and other matters.



In April of 2010, he resigned as the village manager of Mayville, after just two years on the job.



In his resignation letter, Sadowski said he no longer had the will nor desire to serve the Mayville community, alleging that his authority as village manager had been stripped away and his purchasing power reduced.



"My hands have been literally tied," Sadowski said at the time. "Since I can no longer do my job, I am leaving."



In June of 2011, Sadowski stepped down abruptly as Roscommon's village manager after just six months on the job. Shortly after he took a position with the Village of Stockbridge.



He served as Stockbridge's Village Clerk from June 20, 2011 through Nov. 8, 2012, leaving that position to accept the clerk/treasurer's job in Imlay City later that same month. IMLAY CITY — In the aftermath of former Clerk/Treasurer Tim Sadowski's sudden resignation, city officials are looking into various allegations he made in a letter that he read aloud at the August 19 city commission meeting.Sadowski, 31, who was hired by Imlay City in November of 2012, tendered his resignation to City Manager Tom Youatt on Wednesday, Aug. 13, effective immediately.At the August 19 meeting, Sadowski alleged several reasons for his abrupt departure; including: that the city commission had been "kept in the dark" during the past year; that he is "not subordinate to the city manager;" that his efforts to inform the city commission regarding financial matters had "gone by the wayside" and "placed as communication at the back of city commission packets, after requesting they be placed as agenda items;" that he did not receive a standard 1% pay raise at the end of his first year, and that he did not receive a 2% raise that was awarded to all 54 city employees on July 1, 2014.He additionally alleged that what might have been intended as a pay increase for city employees—the first in six years—actually translated to a $900 pay cut, due to additional out-of-pocket health insurance expenses incurred by employees.Lastly, Sadowski claimed that as of June 30, 2014, the city reported a $934,000 "profit," due in large part to increased water and sewer rates, increased water usage at the Vlasic pickle plant, and operational reductions in the city's general fund.At the conclusion of last Tuesday's regular meeting, some city commissioners asked new City Manager Tom Youatt to investigate Sadowski's claims, and he agreed to do so and report back to the board.On Friday, Youatt offered preliminary responses to the former clerk/treasurer's allegations.Youatt said any concerns Sadowski had regarding the city's finances could have been brought directly to the attention of the city commission at any time.He added that "if any employee did not receive the 2% raise approved by the city commission, effective July 1, it will be provided."Responding to Sadowski's claim that the 2% raise actually resulted in a pay cut for city employees, Youatt said: "The City provides its employees the best health insurance plan the City can afford. With implementation of the Affordable Care Act, health insurance plans have recently undergone significant changes for all local governmental entities, including the City of Imlay City."Relative to the current financial state of the City of Imlay City, Youatt said "city finances are stable and are consistently being monitored."After hearing Sadowski's concerns, city commissioners accepted his resignation by a vote of 5-2, with Commissioners Greg Dennis and Al Ramirez casting the dissenting votes."It was the intention of the board that any changes would be beneficial to all employees," said Dennis, referring to the pay increase to offset changes in the health care plan. "I'd like to know if there was a misunderstanding. I think we need to take a look at that."Commissioners later agreed 7-0 to have the clerk/treasurer vacancy posted on the Michigan Municipal League's web site and in local newspapers.Short-time serviceSadowski's past employment record as a village manager or clerk/treasurer in Potterville, Mayville and Roscommon and Stockbridge reveals a history of brief service, ending with his resignation from each of those positions.Sadowski took on the part-time clerk duties in the City of Potterville on July 19, 2005. He later moved up to full-time clerk, before accepting the city manager's job.He reportedly left Potterville in January 2007, amidst allegations of internal problems involving staff and other matters.In April of 2010, he resigned as the village manager of Mayville, after just two years on the job.In his resignation letter, Sadowski said he no longer had the will nor desire to serve the Mayville community, alleging that his authority as village manager had been stripped away and his purchasing power reduced."My hands have been literally tied," Sadowski said at the time. "Since I can no longer do my job, I am leaving."In June of 2011, Sadowski stepped down abruptly as Roscommon's village manager after just six months on the job. Shortly after he took a position with the Village of Stockbridge.He served as Stockbridge's Village Clerk from June 20, 2011 through Nov. 8, 2012, leaving that position to accept the clerk/treasurer's job in Imlay City later that same month.

Tom Wearing started at the Tri-City Times in 1989, covering the Village of Capac as a beat reporter. He later served stints as assistant editor and editor. Today, he covers Imlay City and Almont as a staff writer. He enjoys music and plays drums and sings with various musical groups in the Detroit Metropolitan area.

Wednesday 05 - 25 - 16

11:49 Site Search



May Category