Sen. Ted Cruz Ted CruzFiorina returns to attack Clinton's 'lust for power' Trump clinches GOP nomination Eleven states sue Obama over transgender bathroom directive MORE (R-Texas) and Sen. Rand Paul Rand PaulOvernight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota Overnight Regulation: GOP slams new Obama education rules Paul blocks chemical safety bill in Senate MORE (R-Ky.) should drop out of the presidential sweepstakes because they are not ready for prime-time, as proven by their recent performance regarding the Islamic State in Iraq and Syria (ISIS) terrorists.

ADVERTISEMENT

I call Cruz and Paul the warrior wimps. They want to destroy the ISIS terrorists and prevent them from mass-butchering Middle Easterners and attacking Americans. But how would they do it? They would oppose military aid to the Free Syrian Army. And they would oppose American ground forces against ISIS. Presumably they would attack ISIS with press releases and incoherent speeches.

On Mondays and Wednesdays, Cruz and Paul sound like Winston Churchill, ready to destroy ISIS, but when it comes to putting their votes where their mouths are, they become wimps and sound the call for retreat from ISIS.

Make no mistake, I make no apologies for what either President Obama or Congress have been doing. The most coherent and honorable player in Washington is Sen. John McCain (R-Ariz.), who Paul shamefully slandered with the false charge that McCain had met with ISIS, which obviously is not true. And many of my brother and sister liberals were not heroes in recent votes. Stay tuned for more about them.

But there is a two-faced weakness to both Paul and Cruz, who alternate between trying to appease Republicans on the right with tough talk and whimpering about all of the actions they are against (who do they sound like with that?).

At times Cruz sounds like he wants to oppose any military action against ISIS, which would let ISIS prosper; other times, he almost sounds like he wants to bomb the South Texas border to prevent ISIS from crossing over.

I predict that Texas voters will not take kindly to Ted Cruz's war talk with wimp actions, and I predict that whatever Rand Paul's position on ISIS may be today, it will be something else tomorrow.

I believe we need to bomb ISIS and support the Free Syrian Army with at least 6,000 to 10,000 serious special forces on the ground.

As for Paul and Cruz, in a week that did not make the president or Congress look good, their warrior wimp policies lay at the bottom of the heap, destined for failed presidential campaigns and future trouble back home.

Budowsky was an aide to former Sen. Lloyd Bentsen (D-Texas) and former Rep. Bill Alexander (D-Ark.), who was then chief deputy majority whip of the House. He holds an LL.M. degree in international financial law from the London School of Economics. Contact him at brentbbi@webtv.net.