129 Flares Filament.io 129 Flares ×

The 2014 primary election is fast approaching. Early voting will begin on February 18, and Election Day is March 4. In addition to selecting which candidates will appear on the November general election ballot, the primary is also time for members of each party help shape this year's party platform.

Both the Democratic and Republican primary ballots will have several referendums at the bottom asking voters to weigh in on which issues should guide the 2014 party platform. People vote on whether they are for or against each of the non-binding issue referendums at the bottom of their primary ballot.

The issues on this year's Democratic primary ballot were chosen by Democrats across the state in an online vote held by the Texas Democratic Party. Of the 19 possible issue referendums presented by TDP, four received over 50,000 online votes and will be on this year's primary ballot.

Issue referendums provide an important look at each party's priorities. These are the issues that will guide each party platform, and they provide insight into what voters think are important. Referendums on this year's Democratic ballot include immigration reform, Medicaid expansion, non-descrimination legislation, and a living wage–highlighting the party's focus on alleviating inequality and being inclusive to people from many backgrounds.

See the 2014 Democratic primary issue referendums after the jump.Democratic Referendums:



IMMIGRATION REFORM The United States Congress must pass immigration reform; including an earned path to citizenship for those individuals contributing to the economy and the dependents of those individuals

A LIVING WAGE FOR ALL TEXANS Congress should pass legislation raising the federal minimum wage to at least 110% of the federal poverty level for a family of four without exception

MEDICAID EXPANSION The Governor and the Texas Legislature should accept federal funds; as provided in the Patient Protection & Affordable Care Act of 2010; for the expansion of Medicaid to provide coverage to millions of uninsured and underinsured Texans.

NON-DISCRIMINATION LEGISLATION The Congress and the Texas Legislature should adopt legislation that expands protections against discriminations in employment; housing; and public accommodations based upon sexual orientation and gender identity

You can see how the referendums will look on a sample Travis County ballot here.