Monday, August 10, 2015 - by Emmett Gienapp

Ted Cruz is, as he told hundreds of Chattanoogans on Monday, "optimistic."

In the last week, he has been given several reasons to be riding high. Following the first GOP primary debate which was broadcast nationally on Thursday, Senator Cruz has slingshotted in the polls to second place behind Donald Trump.

According to an NBC survey, his support has more than doubled to 13 percent, hurdling several candidates in the process.

In addition, he also raised more money for his campaign last quarter, $14.3 million, than any other candidate. Jeb Bush was the next highest with $11 million.

Speaking at Graceworks Church on Lee Highway, the senator touched on a wide range of contentious issues that have gripped the GOP primary discussion saying that, as President, he would tear up the Iran nuclear deal, repeal Obamacare, and put an end to sanctuary cities. Concerning the recent nuclear deal with Iran, he said, “The prospect of a nuclear Iran is the single greatest security threat facing America today.”

He also reiterated statements he has made previously that Iran is the largest national financier of radical Islamic terrorism.

According to Senator Cruz, failure to reject President Obama’s deal will free up $100 billion that will “flow into Iran.” He said that a significant portion of that inflow would find its way into the hands of terrorists.

He said that money would be used to fund the murder of Americans, Israelis and Europeans so the current administration is, in a way, funding terrorism.

With five flags set behind him on stage to pay homage to the victims in Chattanooga of the July 16 shooting, he said that “Chattanooga has joined a list of communities which have seen the face of radical Islamic terrorism.”

He gave a message to the young radical “considering taking up arms” or joining ISIS that “If you join ISIS, you are signing your death warrant.”

Senator Cruz also touched on various other issues, both foreign and domestic, and was met with loud cheers and standing ovations after stating his stance on each one.

He listed several stances saying that he would instruct the Federal Department of Education to end Common Core “now,” as well as begin the process of moving the embassy in Israel to Jerusalem, and push for an investigation into the policies and practices of Planned Parenthood.

He also said that he would push for a fundamental tax reform and a simple flat tax so that all Americans could "do their taxes on a postcard."

At the end of his speech, he pointed back to the hope he sees for the future, after lambasting the current administration and negatively comparing President Obama to President Carter, saying that the current political and social environment is nearly identical to that of the late 70s.

He went on after that comparison to say, "Now why does that analogy give me so much hope and optimism? Because we know how that story ended. Millions of men and women all across this country rose up to become a part of the Reagan Revolution.”