U.S. Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes addresses members of the United Mine Workers of America in Hazard, Ky., on Wednesday. The union's endorsement has boosted Grimes' push to win over coal workers in the state. Win McNamee/Getty Images

Fancy Farm, Ky. – Secretary of State Alison Lundergan Grimes literally had a dozen coal miners standing behind her on stage as she campaigned in Eastern Kentucky alongside former President Bill Clinton, a country boy himself. This is coal country, after all, and Grimes is making her case that she may be a Democrat, but when it comes to coal, she doesn’t think like one.

[READ: Grimes and McConnell Face Off at Fancy Farm]

As determined as Sen. Mitch McConnell is to make the November election a referendum on President Barack Obama’s perceived “war on coal,” Grimes is single-mindedly dogged about escaping the narrow frame.

“I have a message for President Obama,” Grimes said in a radio ad that ran this summer. “Mr. President, Kentucky has lost one-third of our coal jobs in just the last three years. Now, your EPA is targeting Kentucky coal with pie in the sky regulations that are impossible to achieve.”

Not only is Grimes distancing herself from the energy policies of Obama, who won only 4 out of 120 counties in the Bluegrass State in 2012, she’s attempting to beat McConnell at his own coal game. If McConnell is on the side of the industry, Grimes is comfortable taking her place alongside miners who work in the coal fields of the eastern and western corners of the state.

“When it comes to Kentucky coal miners, Mitch McConnell doesn’t care,” Grimes said over the weekend at the annual Fancy Farm picnic in the state. “I stand here today proudly, endorsed today by the United Mine Workers of America. They are standing shoulder to shoulder with me because they are tired of the hot air from Sen. McConnell. They are ready for a senator who will fight for their job and their black lung benefits.”

Some have pointed out that the United Mine Workers of America only represents a small minority of coal miners in the state and none in the coalfields of Eastern Kentucky at all. Yet, the union gave Grimes the support of thousands of retirees and an open door to talk about coal on her own terms.

"She has to be deliriously happy that the United Mine Workers endorsed her," says Al Cross, a journalism professor at the University of Kentucky and an expert on state politics. "She needed some coal card to play and the UMW gave her one,"

The endorsement allows Grimes to refocus the issue in the Kentucky Senate race. Instead of a debate about industry, Grimes hopes to turn the conversation to who is really standing up for coal workers in the mines.

Yet, as Grimes asserts herself as the candidate who supports expanding black lung benefits under the Affordable Care Act and tighter safety regulations in the mines, Kentucky’s coal industry is reeling from decline. According to the Kentucky Energy and Environment Cabinet, the number of coal jobs in the state sits at its lowest level since the data was first recorded in 1927. At the end of July 2014, 11,715 Kentuckians had coal jobs – less than 1 percent of the state’s population. It’s a drastic decline since Obama took office in 2009 when 17,903 people worked in the mines.

The rapid loss of jobs in the coal mines is what McConnell’s team believes will give the 30-year incumbent his edge in the race.

“We know what Obama needs to wage his war on coal,” McConnell echoed into the microphone at the Fancy Farm picnic. His supporters, raising two-faced Grimes-Obama heads on yard sticks responded in unison: “Obama needs Grimes.”

[ALSO: Alison Lundergan Grimes Raises $4 Million for Fight Against Mitch McConnell]

During his eight-minute speech, McConnell barely mentioned Grimes before the 5,000 supporters who gathered before him for the annual political showdown. Unlike Grimes, who takes every opportunity she can get to attack McConnell’s record in the Senate, McConnell doesn’t care to shine the spotlight on his youthful and spirited opponent. McConnell, 72, is betting his campaign on his seniority in the Senate and Obama’s energy policies, which carry a poisonous legacy in the state and are seen as eradicating Kentuckians' way of life.

At the political picnic Sen. Rand Paul, the state's junior senator and also a Republican, made a more direct and memorable case for why Grimes would hurt Kentucky’s struggling coal industry. In a short poem, Paul didn’t shy away from uttering Grimes’s name. Instead he took “Obama’s rubber stamp” head on.

“There was once a woman from Kentucky, who thought in politics she would be lucky. So she flew to LA for a Hollywood bash. She came home in a flash, with buckets of cash,” Paul recited from the podium with an extra tinge of southern drawl. “To liberals she whispers, coal makes you sick. In Kentucky, she claims coal makes us tick.”

Even as Grimes has visited mines and run targeted ads distancing herself from Obama, Grimes’ campaign has faced criticism for its approach on coal. Her campaign released an ad this summer that featured a coal miner and the message “President Obama and Washington don’t get it.” Later, it was revealed that the photograph was actually of a European model. And, after promising Kentuckians she would use a private fundraiser with Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev., to speak out about coal, news broke that her prepared remarks did not mention coal.

The missteps matter in Kentucky.

“I cannot quite put my finger on her. She tries to come off like a hick in some of her commercials and stuff,” says Cleda Turner, the director and founder of the Owsley County Outreach program, a development and charity program for the poorest county in the state and one of the poorest in the country.

Kentucky coal may only employ a few thousand in the state, but Kentucky still gets more than 90 percent of its energy from the natural resource, making the industry as much of a part of the state’s identity as bourbon or race horses. For the people in Eastern and Western Kentucky who depend on the mineral for their paychecks or to bring in business at their stores, coal is a source of deep pride.

“Once a coal miner gets coal in their blood then they are a coal miner to the core,” Turner says. “They pray every day that they don’t lose their jobs.”

Even as the coal jobs disappear, Turner says there’s no other industry to absorb the unemployed and nothing else workers would rather do.

Bill Bissett, president of the Kentucky Coal Association, says that while just a few thousand Kentuckians work in mines, support for the industry extends far beyond. He cites 70,000 people in the state have purchased “Friends of Coal” license plates, and the reality that both candidates in the Senate race are tripping over one another to talk about how much they support coal. In Kentucky, it’s not unusual for Democrats to have a soft spot for the industry. The state’s Democratic Attorney General Jack Conway announced a lawsuit against the EPA just last week over the administration's regulations on coal-fired power plants. Democratic Gov. Steve Beshear also signed a bill this year that would allow coal-fired power plants to set their own carbon dioxide emission standards.

[MORE: Is There Really a War on Coal?]

The debate about coal could have looked very different if actress Ashley Judd had entered the race instead of Grimes. Unlike Grimes, who is constantly reminding voters she is a friend of coal, Judd had established herself as an anti-coal candidate. Judd’s previous comments about how mountaintop removal was akin to the “rape of Appalachia” may have been in large part why she stayed out of the race.

Bissett says the culture of coal is so ingrained in Kentucky that statewide candidates cannot be elected in the Bluegrass State unless they are pro-coal. While his organization does not endorse candidates, Bissett insists McConnell has a strong legacy of fighting for the industry.

“Both candidates are saying very positive things about coal and use, but we have taken issue with Secretary Grimes. who has tried to infer McConnell is responsible for job losses in Eastern Kentucky,” Bissett says. “That is very unfair. We put the lion's share of the blame at the foot of the president, the EPA and Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid, D-Nev.”

James Bailey, director of the Kentucky Center for Economic Policy says that in the Senate race, the fight to out-support coal actually undermines the economic development that is possible in the state.

“When the conversation is all about a war on coal, it distracts from the real conversation we need to be having. How do you build a new economy in the face of the reality that the coal industry is not going to stay the way it was?” Bailey says. “If you believe that it is Obama’s war on coal, all you need to do is change the laws. If you understand there are bigger structural issues at play, you realize we need to be looking in a different direction for our long-term economic growth.”

For some voters in Eastern Kentucky, the economic hardship has become so untenable they are tired of giving McConnell a chance bring jobs back.

"The coal business is gone, and people don’t understand. They don’t want to believe it,” says Penny Robinson, as she finishes up some corn bread at a Democratic Marshall County Bean Dinner.

From Clay County, Kentucky, Robinson drove five-and-half hours to see Grimes speak at Fancy Farm, and isn’t shy about her belief that Grimes is a candidate who can win and bring new life to coal country.