The events are open to the public, but guests are asked to RSVP by emailing Nevada@MarcoRubio.com.

Lt. Gov. Mark Hutchison is chairing his campaign in Nevada.

Republican presidential hopeful Marco Rubio is kicking off his visit with a rally at the Peppermill Casino in Reno the evening of Aug. 31. The next day, he’ll visit the Carson City Community Center before heading to Pioneer Crossing in Yerington at 2 p.m. and the Fallon Convention Center at 5:30 p.m.

Nevada Attorney General Adam Laxalt hosts the Morning in America, Inaugural Basque Fry at Corley Ranch Saturday at Corley Ranch in Gardnerville.

Deliala Burke, 7 1/2, and her 3 1/2 brother Keenan of Sparks play near an old wagon Saturday at Corley Ranch.

Former Ambassador John Bolton greets a supporter Saturday at the Inaugural Basque Fry at Corley Ranch.

Wisconsin Governor Scott Walker addresses the large crowd with Job's Peak in the background Saturday at Corley Ranch.

Joan Reid of Carson City helps herself to a plate of Basque food Saturday at Corley Ranch.

Republican presidential hopeful Carly Fiorina speaks to a large crowd Saturday at the Inaugural Basque Fry Saturday in Gardnerville.

Republican presidential hopeful Dr. Ben Carson poses for a photo with Congressman Mark Amodei Saturday at the Inaugural Basque Fry at Corley Ranch in Gardnerville.

Max Yasgur loaned his New York farm to the greatest lineup of musicians 46 years ago.

On Saturday, the Corley Ranch south of Gardnerville hosted a handful of presidential candidates seeking the support of Nevada’s Republican caucus voters who nominate a candidate in late February.

A conservative Basque fry featured four Republican hopefuls who offered both rhetoric and solutions to take back the White House from the Democrats in 2016.

Although the candidates met the public during the day and delivered prepared speeches to about 1,500 people at allotted times, organizers and local politicians said they were pleased with the event and the reaction. Many of the other invited presidential candidates, though, attended the Iowa State Fair this weekend. Attorney General Adam Laxalt, along with the Nevada Republican Party, Douglas County Central Republican Committee and Nevada Federation of Republican Women, resurrected an event once hosted by Laxalt’s grandfather, former Nevada governor and U.S. senator, Paul Laxalt.

The darling of many guests was Tea Party favorite, Sen. Ted Cruz of Texas. Earlier in the day before the event featured opening remarks from Laxalt and its first speaker, Cruz talked to the media under shade tree outlining some of his ideas and discussing the government’s control of state lands.

“Eighty-four percent owned by the federal government. That is fundamentally wrong,” Cruz said of Nevada, noting in his home state of Texas, the federal government owns only 2 percent of the land.

Cruz said the federal government should transfer the land back to the state. During his stint in Congress, Cruz said he introduced an amendment to limit how much land the federal government may own in each state.

When pressed how states would pay to administer the lands, Cruz reverted back to Texas, saying ideally only 2 percent of the federal government should own Nevada land.

“It needs to be the state of Nevada’s people who own the land,” Cruz said, adding once in private hands, the land can be developed for recreation or development.

Cruz and Dr. Ben Carson enjoyed rock-star status, following their handlers as they maneuvered through big crowds. Many people either wanted to shake their hands or have a photo taken with them.

Bob Clifford of Fallon, who is involved with the local Tea Party, said he was reserving judgment on which candidate could do the best.

“Terms of my favorites is the one who can do change,” Clifford said.

Both Republican state Sen. James Settelmeyer, who represents Churchill County, said he was pleased with the inaugural event and the candidates who made appearances. Besides Cruz and Carson, former Hewlett Packard CEO Carly Fiorina and Wisconsin Gov. Scott Walker attended.

Former New York Gov. George Pataki, who was listed to speak, didn’t attend. No reason was given. Former United Nations Ambassador John Bolton spent time talking to small groups of attendees.

Settelmeyer said the guests appreciated the opportunity to see the candidates at the Basque fry.

“I would’ve loved to seen all the candidates here, but I’m glad to see many of the top tier candidates,” Settelmeyer added.

For the weekend he said Gardnerville was the center of presidential politicking for a day.

Republican Assemblywoman Robin Titus, whose district includes Churchill County, said Nevada is important in attracting presidential candidates because of the caucus process.

As for Titus, she said she supports Walker but she also likes Carson.

“He’s not vetted in a political office. I need to see people’s track record,” Titus aid.

The first-term lawmaker said she is impressed with Fiorina, but like Carson, she wants to see the candidate’s record on the issues.

Churchill County Chief Deputy Attorney Lane Mills said he was also impressed with Fiorina and Carson.

“I like Carson. He’s a likable guy and came off as genuine,” Mills said.

Walker has made several trips to Nevada after announcing his candidacy for president. He listed his accomplishments occurring in a blue state dominated by Democratic legislators.

“I took Wisconsin to a right to work state, and I defunded Planned Parenthood four years ago before there was any video,” he said to the delight of the partisan crowd.

A common theme from every candidate was the Affordable Care Act. Walker was no different. The second-term governor said Obamacare must be repealed.

Walker said he has traveled throughout the country, talking to voters.

“I can tell you a lot of people are fed up with Washington. It’s 68-square miles surrounded by reality,” Walker said, drawing loud applause and laughter.

All four candidates railed against Democrat Hillary Clinton, the current frontrunner in her party for the presidential nomination.

In a separate interview after his speech, Walker was asked about any plans to resurrect the Yucca Mountain nuclear storage idea. He said his decision would be based on scientific data, not politics.

Carson said the United States is a land where many people can realize their dreams. For him, it was becoming a successful neurosurgeon.

“I love anything to do with medicine,” he said.

Carson’s comments on his life led into how today’s individuals must take responsibility for their own lives, not rely on others. Carson pointed out Americans live in a “can-do” nation, not what the country can do for them. He said his mother, for example, worked various jobs to ensure Carson and his younger brother succeeded. She required her sons to check out books weekly from the library and do reports on them.

“She was soft spoken but forceful,” he said.

When he mentioned his religious beliefs and his mother’s faith, Carson was down to earth in seeking help.

“The nice thing with God is you don’t need a Ph.D. to talk to him,” he said.

While Carson discussed his personal beliefs more than policy, the retired physician said it was wrong for the federal government to own so much land in Nevada, and he favored a strong military.

Fiorina, who appeared in the second-tier of debaters on the Fox News Channel 10 days ago, received favorable responses for her comments and presence on the stage. That winning formula for Fiorina was also apparent Saturday. Before the debate, she said about 40 percent of Republicans didn’t know of her ... now most of them do.

As she did in the Fox debate and at many of her campaign stops, Fiorina has taken Clinton to task, accusing her of lying about the Benghazi attack in 2012, her personal computer’s server and State Department emails found on her personal computer.

Fiorina said her goal is to make people aware of conservatism and how it works in government. She decried how liberal-leaning lawmakers in California have bowed to environmental policies and regulations that have restricted the state’s ability to store water, specifically an issue heightened during the drought.

Fiorina, who believes in a strong military and feels strongly for veterans’ care, said if elected president, she would make two calls on her first day: The first would be to Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu telling him the United States would “stand by” his country and the second, to the supreme leader of Iran, telling him no deal on a nuclear treaty until the Iranians allowed inspections at every military and nuclear facility.

Churchill County Commissioner Bus Scharmann said Carson and Fiorina were great speakers at the Basque Fry.

“This is a neat gathering like the old stump speeches,” he said. “I liked her speech talking about the first two calls she would make after becoming president.”

Scharmann, though, said he wished other presidential candidates had attended the Gardnerville event.

Overall, Rural Caucus Chairman Wes Rice said the Basque fry was an outstanding event that attracted candidates willing to mingle with the crowds and guests from every county in Nevada.

“We had friends from Elko here and Mineral and Esmeralda counties,” he added. “We have a lot of volunteers from Carson City and Douglas County. I’m impressed with the rural effort.”