“Why?”

That was my first reaction. Why would a life-sized statue of a half-naked man, dressed just in his white undies, be displayed on the grounds of the pristine, prestigious campus of the all-female Wellesley College in Massachusetts?

Then came my split-second follow-up reaction: “Why has this statue, ‘The Sleepwalker’ by Tony Matelli, caused such an over-the-top feminist fuss?”

In a recent Wall Street Journal piece, Lenore Skenazy writes, “Grab the smelling salts, ladies,” as she takes on the 700 “angry and aggrieved students and alumni” who have signed a petition demanding the removal of the statue.

The feminists, you see, feel that the male image is a “trigger,” a catalyst that can stir up memories of a sexual assault, even though in the words of another writer, this image “also triggers … a kind of pity, tinged with fear on his behalf. He’s out of place, there’s snow in his nostrils, he’s vulnerable.”

One petitioner wrote, “A school endorsing the decision to expose its female students to this … violates the Civil Rights Law.”

But, Skenazy counters, “Since when is it a ‘civil right’ not to be offended by a piece of art? Who gets to decide which art we chuck?”

Wellesley alum Sheila Kowal, a retired financial adviser, might very well chuck “The Sleepwalker” in his entirety. Kowal feels that it represents a “coarsening of the culture … that its ratchet-up ‘shock factor’ and its baiting of women to react is a form of sexism itself.”

Perhaps I’m taking the “bait,” but I find I agree with Skenazy’s argument against this new wave of “political correctness.”

“There’s a great irony in hearing that so many Wellesley students, espousing feminist rhetoric, want to be treated like Victorian maidens, too delicate to view a statue of a guy in his undies. It’s the opposite of feminism,” continues Skenazy.

In 2002, the Justice Department under Attorney General John Ashcroft ordered the breast 0f the mostly nude female statue “Lady Justice” covered in blue cloth so as not to offend certain sensibilities. Do feminists want to be joined at the hip with their censors on the right?

“I thought from the beginning the protesters were way off base and making themselves look a little silly,” said Wellesley alum Sigrid Freese of Denver. “Why haven’t the students made a joke of it and dressed the guy in a Wellesley sweatshirt and sarong or kilt? I feel there are far more troubling issues to protest about both on campus and off.”

Actually, some students have made a joke of it. Reports abound of giggling college girls throwing snowballs at the statue, dressing him in outlandish outfits, posing with him and sending photos out on Facebook or Twitter.

In response to the petitioners, Wellesley president H. Kim Bottomly on Feb. 20 ruled that the statue would stay where it is until Matelli’s temporary exhibit ends in the spring.

Another Wellesley alum, a clergywoman who prefers to remain anonymous, brought me up a little short: “Although I don’t particularly like the statue and am glad it is not a permanent addition to campus, I don’t think it should be removed to protect the students. But then, I have never been raped or physically abused.”

Neither have I.

But what if I had been? And then, what if I had subsequently encountered this looming spectral image on a dark and snowy night? Yes, I might have been shocked, scared, even terrorized for at least a moment.

So, then, would I have taken a deep breath, powered through the fear, and not let it “trigger” me into signing a petition that could curb my own right to free expression and those rights of my classmates in the future?

I hope so.

Dottie Lamm (dolamm59@gmail.com), former first lady of Colorado, is a psychiatric social worker and a feminist activist.