Fox News' Chris Stirewalt recently called 10 prominent Republicans in Washington – a pollster, a senior House leadership aide, a retired member of Congress who now lobbies and a top communications guy among them – and asked them to play a game of "Would You Rather?" Stirewalt asked each whether businessman Donald Trump or Texas Sen. Ted Cruz is the better choice for the party – and he told them that he wouldn't take "neither" as an answer.

Seven out of 10 said they'd choose Trump. None would allow their names to be used. Stirewalt concluded that there's a "growing sense" around Washington that maybe Trump wouldn't be so bad. Even Bob Dole came out and said that although he supports former Florida Gov. Jeb Bush, he thought Trump was a guy who could make deals with Congress.

[VIDEO: Trump's Tantrum Doesn't Bode Well for Leadership]

Politico reported this week that Alex Castellanos, a respected GOP strategist, went door-to-door in Washington and New York over the last few months visiting Republican donors, operatives and lobbyists in an effort to find funders for an eight-figure anti-Trump ad campaign. The proposed negative ads would portray Trump as a "flawed strongman." The result? "No takers," Castellanos told Chuck Todd on "Meet the Press" earlier this month. Some thought Trump would collapse on his own. Others had business dealings with him. Some were afraid of retribution.

Todd asked if it is too late to stop Trump. "It's too late," Castellanos said. "Two-thirds of the party is in one of those guys' pocket [Cruz or Trump]. One-third is in the establishment lane."

I beg to differ. It's not too late. Not a single vote has been cast.

A few brave Republicans have come forward to say that Trump is completely unacceptable. Katie Packer, a veteran of Mitt Romney's 2012 campaign, has started the anti-Trump Our Principles PAC; Make America Awesome, another political action committee, is now running ads in Iowa. And groups supporting Bush and Ohio Gov. John Kasich have run anti-Trump ads as well. (Underscoring, by the way, the falseness of Stirewalt's choice: To be against Trump does not mean you are for Ted Cruz.)

Last week Rich Lowry, editor of National Review, organized 22 conservatives – from members of the religious right and tea partyers to a former Reagan cabinet member – to each write why they oppose Trump. The full edition of the magazine, entitled "Against Trump," should be a must-read for all voters – it made a serious and convincing case that Trump is not a conservative at all, but rather a populist with authoritarian tendencies. The authors pointed out his inconsistent positions on abortion, gun control, single-payer health care, higher taxes on the wealthy, immigration and his unprincipled and dangerous foreign policy positions. Not surprisingly, Trump tweeted that they were all a bunch of losers.

[PHOTOS: The Big Picture – January 2016]

I share the frustration that many of those same conservatives have with the gridlock in Washington, and with the party leadership's failure to offer voters a viable alternative to the Obama administration's reckless march to the left. Republicans now control both chambers of Congress, including the House for the last five years. They've had plenty of opportunities to put forth a credible proposals to replace Obamacare, secure the border and reform our immigration system, reduce our nearly $20 trillion national debt and, most of all, advance a meaningful working-class agenda for economic growth. We're still waiting. If you ask me, the Republican leadership deserves every bit of the anger being directed at it by its own voters. But that doesn't make Trump the best candidate for those voters.

It's not too late for good people to say that our next president should support women, war veterans and the disabled – not mock or denigrate them; that we believe experience counts when it comes to our commander in chief, and that the last seven years have taught us that on-the-job training is unacceptable; that we want fact-based, well-researched and consistent ideas for expanding opportunity for all Americans, strengthening our military, securing our border and limiting the size of government. We want a leader who respects life and the God-given dignity of every person. We want someone who uplifts and inspires, who plays by the rules and is a happy warrior. We need a president who knows how to build consensus. We seek integrity in our leaders, consistency of thought and action, and not least of all, humility. And finally, we want a leader who can unite the country, gain the support of mainstream voters and win the general election.

Donald Trump has none of those qualities. And it's not too late to say so.

It's also not too late to talk about all the money Trump inherited from his father, all the bailouts he's accepted, all the bankruptcies and defaulted loans. It's not too late to hear from all the people who suffered because of his business deals – the laid-off workers, the small business owners who sat across the table from him, the homeowners who had dealings with his failed mortgage company and those whose property he tried to get through abuse of eminent domain.

There's still time to point out to those who like Trump's promise of sticking up for the downtrodden that he's often the one doing the trodding. Make America Awesome's Iowa ad, entitled "Real Trump Record," catalogs examples from his business dealings and bankruptcies before ending with the line: "That's the real Trump record: fighting for himself – not us."

What bothers me the most about Trump – as a mom of two daughters, especially – is the way he bullies women. He tries to torment and intimidate everyone he doesn't like, and he especially seems not to like women. There is no denying he is a misogynist bully.

[OPINION: Misogyny Is Behind Donald Trump's Boycott of Fox Debate With Megyn Kelly]

Why the other Republican candidates are not attacking him more strenuously – and instead are engaged in a circular firing squad against each other – is beyond me. And why the Republican National Committee dropped National Review from cosponsoring a GOP debate – so much for free speech by an opinion magazine – is beyond me as well.

Trump is not the right man to lead the party – or our nation – forward.

These are dangerous times, and we can do better. Much better.