Health More Than 700 Newborn Babies Exposed To Tuberculosis CREDIT: Shutterstock

Officials in a Texas hospital are scrambling to give free screenings and follow-up care to more than 700 newborns and 40 employees thought to have been exposed to tuberculosis, the El Paso Times reported Friday.

The El Paso Department of Public Health issued a statement on Friday stating that a worker infected with tuberculosis interacted with patients in Providence Memorial Hospital’s nursery for nearly a year before doctors diagnosed him with the disease.

“TB is a serious but treatable disease that is spread through the air,” the health department said in a letter to parents. “Although TB is not easy to catch from another person, we want to be extra sure that your child is examined.”

Tuberculosis, the potentially fatal disease also known as TB, affects the lungs and other parts of the body. It thrives in dense housing, shared living spaces, and areas with poor ventilation. The infected can spread tuberculosis through the air when they cough and sneeze. Drug-resisistant strains of TB are on the rise, threatening a global crisis.

More than one million people worldwide — particularly those living in areas with poor health care systems — succumb to the disease each year, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). Defeating tuberculosis depends of proper use of medication, as prescribed by doctors. If left untreated, the disease poses great risk to infected people and those in their immediate surroundings.

To mitigate the risk of tuberculosis mutating into a deadlier, antibiotic-resistant strain, patients have to take a cocktail of antibiotics over the course of six months, as suggested by WHO. But that doesn’t happen often, a recent Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) study found. According to the study, health care providers in 75 percent of U.S. hospitals often prescribe the wrong dosage of prescription medication to their patients.

Experts say that mismanagement and misuse of prescription medication may have caused more than 70 cases of drug-resistant tuberculosis (MDR-TB) in the United States in 2013. In the previous year, China and India reported a combined 124,000 cases, which proliferated in areas where people lived in close quarters.

“What could happen is progressively multi-drug resistant TB takes over from normal tuberculosis,” Dr. Mario Raviglione, the director of the WHO’s Global Tuberculosis program, told BBC News last year. “If this happens, not only would millions of patients potentially die of this form of TB, but if I look at it from an economic perspective the cost of dealing with millions of potential cases is enormous.”

Experts say TB’s comeback is partly because it is regarded as a “disease of poverty,” and because pharmaceutical companies assumed that current vaccinations would eliminate the disease. The Tuberculosis Vaccine Initiative, a Netherlands-based organization dedicated to the research and development of new tuberculosis vaccines, says that efficient drug therapies, new vaccines, and accurate diagnoses can quell the spread of the disease and save tens of millions of lives across the world.

While a host of vaccinations — including BCG, TBVI, and Aeras — have either been developed or are currently undergoing the development stages, many hurdles exist in doling out treatment.

Between 2001 and 2011, prices of vaccine packages that treat nearly a dozen diseases increased by more than 2700 percent, according to the Public Library of Science. A 2011 UNICEF Supply Division data set also showed that Western pharmaceutical companies charged the United Nations program more for its products than its Indian and Indonesian counterparts.

While the Affordable Care Act, dubbed as Obamacare, allows poor people to receive complementary preventative care — which includes immunizations, screening, and tests — Texas’ low income residents may not be able to use those services, due to the state’s refusal to expand Medicaid.

Texas currently leads the nation in the number of uninsured with 6 million people — one out of six of whom is children. Uncompensated medical treatment costs the state $4 billion annually, according to a letter that judges from Texas’ six largest counties sent to state legislators in August. A White House report released that month stated that Medicaid expansion would cover 1.2 million Texans by 2016.

In the Lone Star State, where tuberculosis affects Latinos and African Americans in great number, proper vaccination can be effective against the disease that’s been called a silent killer. This reality holds especially true for low-income children, a group found often to not be up to date on their vaccinations. As the CDC said in its recent report, early immunization can prevent excessive school absences and lower future health care costs.