FORT COLLINS —The questions are getting repetitive, because there aren’t limitless ways to ask coach Jim McElwain and the Colorado State players what it feels like to be “(fill in number of wins) and one.”

For several weeks now, it has been astounding, and it’s gotten to the point where the Rams can win one easily — as they did against Hawaii on Saturday night, winning 49-22 to get to 9-1 for the season — and it comes off as just taking care of business.

With his top receiver, sophomore Rashard Higgins, not playing because of a shoulder injury, Garrett Grayson threw for 278 yards and four touchdowns against the Rainbow Warriors before leaving the game early in the fourth quarter.

WATCH: Jim McElwain, Charles Lovett talk about Rams’ win over Hawaii

Four different receivers — Elroy Masters Jr., Charles Lovett, Steven Walker and Xavier Williams — caught Grayson’s TD passes as CSU stretched its winning streak to eight and took sole possession of first place in the Mountain West’s Mountain Division with a 5-1 league record.

“Nine and one,” McElwain said. “It’s pretty cool. Sitting and just reflecting on what these guys have committed to, really from that (New Mexico) bowl game on, when they came back from spring break and when they came back to Ram U (conditioning), I think they’ve really turned into a football team.

“We’re not the most talented outfit out there, but the guys are playing together, they’re playing with energy and for the most part, they do their job. I can’t tell you how proud I am of them. I’m proud for the state of Colorado and I’m proud for the Ram fans that support these guys, because they’re doing something special.”

Said Grayson: “Obviously, we’ve never been here. My senior class has never been here. For the freshmen coming in this year, this is something hopefully they can get used to. I think that’s how it’s going to be for many years to come.”

PHOTOS: Colorado State Rams vs. Hawaii Rainbow Warriors, Nov. 8, 2014

In the rout of Hawaii, a 52-yarder to Lovett in the second quarter was Grayson’s 24th scoring pass of the season, bettering his total in 2013 and the CSU record he had shared with Justin Holland, who threw for 23 TDs in 2005. By the time he and the other starters left the game early in the fourth quarter, the senior from the Vancouver, Wash., area had nudged the record up to 26 with two regular-season games remaining.

“There wasn’t ever a time where I was, ‘Dang, I wish I had Rashard,’ or anything like that,” said Grayson. “It was really, go out there and play catch and let those guys make plays. I’ve seen it all year and now you guys see what we can do without him. I don’t want to take anything away from him, because he’s a great player, but as long as I can get those guys the ball and let them make plays, I think they can do it.”

Dee Hart rushed for 115 yards and one TD on 11 carries for the Rams, and Treyous Jarrells pitched in with 69 yards and two scores.

Leading 42-15 just past the midway point of the third quarter, the Rams turned their attention to attempting to avoid the sort of late-game letdowns that made several of their previous wins turn into nail-biters — or at least deceptively close — at the finishes. And at least away from the sideline, scoreboard watching continued as fans and others followed the progress of the simultaneous and wild Boise State-New Mexico game in Albuquerque.

Boise State ended up pulling out a 60-49 win over the Lobos. While CSU has a half-game lead over the Broncos and Utah State, Boise State owns the tiebreaker over CSU; CSU owns the tiebreaker over Utah State. A three-way tie with one loss isn’t possible because Boise State faces Utah State on Nov. 29.

Terry Frei: tfrei@denverpost.com or twitter.com/TFrei

Game balls

Garrett Grayson, QB, CSU — With four TD passes, he surpassed the school single-season record he had shared with Justin Holland since 2013.

Dee Hart, RB, CSU — Rushed for 115 yards on 11 carries.

Charles Lovett, WR, CSU — Had four catches for 134 yards, including 71- and 52-yarders.

Terry Frei, The Denver Post