Mark Neaman admits he's in an uphill battle to save his proposed merger with Downers Grove-based Advocate Health Care against Washington, D.C., regulators who are trying to quash the deal.

The CEO of Evanston-based NorthShore University HealthSystem should know. The veteran hospital executive has been through this before, but the fight looks to be even more difficult this time.

The Federal Trade Commission alleges that the merger, which would create a 16-hospital system, will reduce competition and harm consumers. This is the second time the FTC has fought a hospital merger orchestrated by Neaman. In 2004, the FTC challenged the combination of Neaman-led Evanston Northwestern Healthcare and Highland Park Hospital, which had merged four years earlier. (Evanston Northwestern was later renamed NorthShore.)

The Federal Trade Commission is challenging the merger of Advocate Health Care and NorthShore University HealthSystem, saying that the combined entity will have too much market power in northern Cook and southern Lake counties.Advocate and NorthShore say they compete against hospitals across the Chicago area, not just along the North Shore. Source: Illinois Department of Public Health.

The commission ruled that Evanston Northwestern's acquisition of Highland Park Hospital violated antitrust laws by "substantially" raising prices above competitive levels following the transaction. But in a victory for Neaman, the commission allowed Evanston Northwestern to keep the hospital as long as it accepted guidelines in negotiating contracts with health insurers.

The FTC has reason to be wary of the Advocate-NorthShore merger because of NorthShore's pricing behavior following the 2000 acquisition of Highland Park Hospital, said David Marx Jr., an antitrust lawyer with McDermott Will & Emery who's not involved in the lawsuit.

When the FTC challenges mergers, it usually deals in the theoretical. The agency relies on economic analysis to determine whether a merger would reduce competition.

But in evaluating the Advocate-NorthShore deal, the commission has evidence of post-merger anti-competitive conduct by one of the parties. The previous case is a rare example of the FTC challenging a hospital merger after it has been consummated and finding proof of price increases.

The geographic market the FTC analyzed a decade ago is almost identical to the one at issue today. It's suburban Chicago's affluent North Shore community, which spans northern Cook and southern Lake counties along Lake Michigan. The combined entity would operate six of the 11 hospitals in the FTC's alleged market, giving it too much market power, the agency said.

The hospitals say the size of the market is much larger, essentially all of the Chicago area. In court papers filed Tuesday, NorthShore pointed to inconsistencies in how the FTC defined the relevant geographic market in 2004 and 2015. In the first case, the commission found that Advocate Lutheran General in Park Ridge was not a "sufficient" substitute for hospitals in Evanston, Glenview and Park Ridge. Now the FTC says Advocate and NorthShore are "close, if not each other's closest, competitors" on the North Shore.

"The FTC's experience with (the North Shore) market and the fact that there are no new entrants makes that experience somewhat relevant," said Mark Rust, an antitrust lawyer at Barnes & Thornburg who's not involved in the case. "It certainly doesn't help the case of the hospitals."

Neaman, who has led the Evanston-based hospital group since 1992, shrugs off his past issues with the FTC.

"Let's keep in mind we didn't divest anything," he told the Tribune's editorial board in a meeting Tuesday. "I don't think (the 2004 case) had any real impact on this case."

Neaman is not letting his lawyers speak for him in defending the merger against the government. He accused the commission of gerrymandering the geographic market and protecting the status quo in a dynamic Chicago-area health care market.

There's been a wave of consolidation as hospitals merge and buy up physician practices, creating new behemoths. The Affordable Care Act has unleashed some of this merger frenzy because one of the goals of the health law is to coordinate care between hospitals and doctors.

New players have also surged into the region, from stand-alone imaging facilities to health clinics at pharmacies. Neaman sees them all as competitors because a big portion of his business is done on an outpatient basis.

"We think the arguments of the FTC are spurious, that they fall short of any sense of reality and are inconsistent with how this marketplace works," Neaman said.

The FTC declined to comment because the case is in litigation.

Judging by his comments critical of the government, the NorthShore CEO is gearing up for a lengthy fight. Neaman, 65, who began his career as an administrative assistant at Evanston Hospital in 1974, has a business history of taking on all comers.

The FTC's 2007 ruling of antitrust violations didn't deter him from expanding and taking risks. Two years later, Neaman purchased another medical center in his backyard, Skokie Hospital, which is less than 4 miles from Evanston Hospital, without objections from the commission. He also tried to buy Lake Forest Hospital but lost out to Chicago-based Northwestern Memorial.

Neaman has built up NorthShore's outpatient services by buying physician groups. And he ended a decades-long academic affiliation with Northwestern University, switching to the University of Chicago, at the risk of losing a trusted brand name in the market.

Neaman and his counterpart at Advocate, Jim Skogsbergh, say the merger will benefit consumers by increasing the quality of care, lowering its cost and eliminating duplication.

In its lawsuit filed late last month, the FTC was skeptical of any possible benefits from the merger. The agency said claims of reduced health care costs are based on "speculative and unsubstantiated assumptions."

The FTC has found that, when hospitals join forces, their goal is not just to control costs or improve care but to get increased bargaining power in negotiations with health insurance companies and employers, said Martin Gaynor, a health care economist at Carnegie Mellon University and former director of the FTC's bureau of economics.