AUSTIN — Greg Abbott is strongly pro-gun and anti-abortion. He loves the tea party. And his lawsuits opposing same-sex marriage and lifting a deportation ban on illegal immigrants made recent headlines.

Expect to hear none of that Tuesday.

When Texas’ new Republican governor is sworn in and offers his inaugural speech and his legislative agenda, close advisers say, Abbott will hew to broader issues with wider appeal: relieving snarled traffic, improving education, easing taxes and keeping Texas’ economic engine churning.

Abbott is not about waving red banners, they said. He is more into dog-earing a 420-page blueprint of priorities developed during his campaign.

“He’ll be a no-drama governor,” said top political adviser David Carney. “He’ll be somebody focused and prioritized and will work with the Legislature.”

On Tuesday, in the sunshine of the Capitol steps and in the shadow of Rick Perry — the longest-serving and most powerful governor the state has known — Abbott is expected to lay out an agenda that reflects his methodical campaign.

Gone will be Perry’s flair for declaring as legislative “emergencies” controversial topics such as requiring pre-abortion sonograms or cracking down on immigration. And while Abbott might not lend rhetorical flourish to those issues, he is likely to succeed on them without having to take the lead — or the heat — thanks to a Legislature in which staunch conservatives have unprecedented clout.

Abbott’s entire political career has been in the legal arena, as a judge and, for the last 12 years, as the state attorney general. His policy and political chops are about to be tested, and neither lawmakers nor voters know what style of governing to expect.

But so far, Abbott appears ready to put his shoulder behind big, potentially bipartisan, issues, albeit in bite-size pieces crafted to keep government spending low. He will let partisan, politically charged issues take care of themselves.

“There are core issues that are very important to the citizens of Texas,” said Angela Hale, a longtime Abbott adviser who is now a media consultant. “Transportation, education and some kind of tax relief. Making sure Texas is No. 1 in economic development.”

Hale and others pointed out that a cadre of GOP lawmakers are ready to jab at hot-button issues. And Abbott will likely sign their bills if they hit his desk.

But that’s not where they expect his attention to be as governor.

Hale said he’ll keep promises to social conservatives. “You can pass the things you promised, but the focus and vision is about making Texas a better place that will keep Texas moving,” she said.

Carney agreed. “Open carry [of handguns] will pass the Legislature in some form. There would be no need to make that an emergency item,” he said.

In the weeks leading up to the inauguration, Abbott has met with contingencies of lawmakers, both Democrats and Republicans, to discuss issues.

Veteran Rep. Harold Dutton, D-Houston, said Abbott met with the Legislative Black Caucus. Dutton said he’s also worked with Abbott in the past to develop legislation to help the attorney general’s office better collect child support.

“The minority party here has a place trying to develop a policy for all of Texas,” Dutton said. “He’ll be open to that. I’m really trying to listen to his ideas, and I think he’s sincere in listening to ours.”

Lone Star Project director Matt Angle, a leading Democratic consultant, said he is not soothed by Abbott’s conciliatory words but is more anxious about his actions.

“If meeting with a Democrat counts as being bipartisan, we really have sunk to a new low,” Angle said.

He pointed out that Democrats in the Legislature represent about 9 million Texans. Angle said he had little faith that their voices will be heard.

“Politically and substantively, they’re going to shut those people out. They won’t do anything to accommodate policy positions by Democrats,” Angle said.

On education, for instance, Abbott has rejected Democratic calls for universal early childhood education and instead is proposing modest improvements with relatively little new money — $59 million a year.

Angle noted that while Abbott publicly reaches out to Hispanics, he has refused to settle three lawsuits — two on redistricting and one on voter identification — in which federal courts have found intentional discrimination against Latinos.

And he expects Abbott will encourage “the tea party wing of the Legislature to do the dirty work for him” on guns, abortion and cuts to vital programs, adding: “Then he’ll sign them if they get on his desk.”

“There’s no evidence of bipartisanship. It’s easy to list a number of issues people care about; it’s what you do about them,” Angle said.

Cal Jillson, a Southern Methodist University political scientist who closely monitors state government and politics, said he sees Abbott as a mix of a leader who wants to solve big problems and a staunch social conservative.

But because he was never seriously challenged during last year’s campaign, Abbott has never had to identify himself as more in line with either the GOP’s traditional business wing or the tea party, he said.

“We don’t know enough about Abbott. He was like a sailor, tacking back and forth as the winds permitted and seemed to require,” Jillson said.

In his speech and dealings with the Legislature, Abbott will work to get transportation and education programs accomplished and then sign some of the hot-button issues without expending much political capital on them, Jillson predicted.

But his rhetoric of accomplishment is likely to be inflated, he said.

“Abbott says, ‘I want Texas schools to be the best in the country.’ Then he wants to spend this tiny amount on pre-K education enhancement. Well, you don’t get from the lower middle ranks of public schools to No. 1 by tinkering at the margins,” Jillson said.

“You have to go at it with both guns blazing, and he just can’t do that based on the ideological shape of his Republican majority,” he said.

Indeed, Abbott is far from the guns-blazing type, or even “bold declarations,” said adviser Carney.

He is measured and cool. But he will be driven to get his priorities done, Carney said.

“I’ve never played poker with Abbott, but I wouldn’t want to,” Carney said. “I know his ultimate goal is to take my money. But he’s just a guy who won’t show his cards all at once.”

Follow Christy Hoppe on Twitter at @christyhoppe.