Yvonne Whisenhunt of Longmont participates in a demonstration at Ken Pratt Boulevard and Hover Street on Saturday to bring awareness to homelessness in the Longmont area. ( LEWIS GEYER )

About 15 sign-bearing volunteers gathered at the southeast corner of the intersection of Ken Pratt Boulevard and Hover Street on Saturday to alert passing motorists and their passengers that Longmont's homeless need help.

The noon to 2 p.m. demonstration, organized by the Longmont Housing Opportunities Team -- a group of organizations and individuals working to end homelessness in the community -- was intended to inform passers-by that Longmont's homeless aren't just single individuals trying to cope for themselves.

Sandy Stewart, a member of the OUR Center staff, said that "about 68 percent of the people we see" who have housing problems "are families with children."

Longmont Senior Center manager Michele Waite, said, "we're seeing more homeless seniors."

Ron Bolton of Berthoud participates in a demonstration at Ken Pratt Boulevard and Hover Street on Saturday to bring awareness to homelessness in the Longmont area. ( LEWIS GEYER )

OUR Center executive director Edwina Salazar said that in a relatively higher-income area like Boulder County, "people don't always know the extent of the problems in a community" facing some members of that community -- problems like homelessness.

For years, it's been difficult for low-income residents "to survive here," Salazar said, and people often try to keep their homes by foregoing the expenses of other things, such as health care and nutrition.

Human services agencies are seeing "many more families that are doubled up in housing," sharing quarters in order to afford them, Salazar said.

She and others noted that a number of people displaced by September's floods are still trying to find affordable housing to allow them to continue to live and work in Longmont.

Advertisement

Linda Johnston, one of several members of The Heart of Longmont United Methodist Church congregation who showed up to participate in Saturday's effort, agreed that there's a shortage of housing "for those who are just barely making it."

Johnston, the owner of Abo's Pizza, said she's lived in Longmont since 1964 and has been seeing a lot more homeless people in the neighborhoods north of the downtown area.

Johnston said she didn't know whether the community's homeless numbers are on the increase, "but it's not getting any better."

The handmade cardboard signs carried by people participating in the homelessness-awareness event included a number that described what they said are "myths" and "facts" about the homeless.

Among the myths, according to the signs: "Homeless R Lazy"; "Homeless R Single"; and "Most Homeless R Young." Among the facts, the signs said: "1/3 of Homeless R Employed: "Homeless R Families with Children"; and "Seniors R Homeless Too".

Saturday's Longmont demonstration came a little more than two weeks before the annual point-in-time survey of the homeless in a seven-county metropolitan Denver area. This year's survey is to start the night of Monday, Jan. 27, followed by daytime surveys Jan. 28 through Jan. 31.

Last winter's Metro Denver Homeless Initiative surveys put Longmont's homeless population at 1,180, up 34 percent from January 2012.

When the January 2013 survey results were released last July, Kathy Fedler, coordinator of Longmont's Community Development Block Grant and affordable housing programs, said most of the increase from a year earlier had been in families with children.

That, Fedler said, reflected a continuing negative economic situation in which many Longmont families were pretty hard hit by the recession and were still having a hard time finding jobs and getting back into good financial shape.

Longmont Housing Opportunities Team members have said they're concerned that this year's survey will show that more and more families with children are falling into homelessness.

John Fryar can be reached at 303-684-5211 or jfryar@times-call.com.