Back in the 1980s, I stood with a Dallas City Planner and Historic Preservationist in City Park, which now houses the Dallas Heritage Village. Back then, there was a single building relocated from Northern Texas with a central breezeway. The family lived on one side, the animals on the other. Now Heritage Village consists of what its website calls "the largest and finest collection of nineteenth century pioneer and Victorian homes and commercial buildings in Texas."

"Nice historic building," commented the preservationist. "Worth saving. Unlike other buildings we're required to designate. Here, anything 25 years old is eligible for historic preservation. Histo-presto." I never thought I would confront anything this bizarre again.

Then I moved to Boulder.

For over 20 years, my home has been a 1954 two-bedroom "shack" in Martin Acres. During this time, I have not heard the Boulder City Council, staff, county commissioners, nor outsiders say one positive thing about Martin Acres. Instead, comments include one county commissioner worrying that mountain development would become a "vertical Martin Acres," a resident raging to the Camera's Open Forum insisting the whole subdivision be razed, and a current City Council member calling the houses "ticky-tacky" and adamantly not wanting more of that in the shining model of sustainability he has envisioned for Boulder. Most recently, columnist Ron Laughery referred to Martin Acres houses as "ugly." So imagine my neighborhood's increased displeasure to learn that Martin Acres and eight other subdivisions have been deemed preservation worthy by city staff. Not necessarily preservation worthy now, but "conservation worthy," with more restrictions on top of "compatible development."

Advertisement

Give me a break.

This is a not even thinly disguised effort to keep $300,000 dollar plus homes "affordable," restricting homeowners' ability to recoup all the investments they have made to turn their houses into sustainable desirable homes, and allowing the neighborhoods in which council members (who don't reside in these "preservation-worthy" neighborhoods) to grow in value. Even more deplorable is that these naysayers to Martin Acres have not spent time here, seen the numerous tasteful and sustainable but hardly historic renovations made to existing homes, nor become familiar with the community. As Laughery correctly points out, many of these decision makers are of the PLAN-Boulder ilk, and disinterested in any diversity of opinions that resides in Boulder.

Historic preservation is a slippery slope. When done properly, historic designation can save buildings whose architecture is significant, or whose inhabitants contributed to the history of the area in some significant way (Paul Revere's home), or can protect an entire area (historic college campuses). Here in Martin Acres lies Billy Martin's (an early settler and active player in Boulder's history) 1878 home. That's it. At the rate the city is going, it might as well declare Moorhead and US 36 (also parts of the Martin parcel sold off by Billy's family) scenic highways. And the city isn't really interested in historic preservation; it allowed the powerful University of Colorado to demolish many of the circa-1900 Craftsman bungalows on Grandview - homes that have architectural and local historical significance.

When I mentioned this insanity to a longtime Boulder resident, he said that getting "collector" license plates, good for five years, once required a 25-year-old vehicle. In 2009, that changed -- too many cars qualified. Now1975 defines "collector" -- another arbitrary histo-presto date.

There are great things worth preserving in Martin Acres -- the neighborhood association (the oldest in Boulder), Martin Park (the site of numerous neighborhood events), Creekside Elementary School, the state-of-the-art sustainable renovations, and the down-to-earth residents who have no interest in legislating our community onto the rest of Boulder, nor being unfairly restricted by a city government that is clueless about the nature of its diverse neighborhoods. If the city wants to do something meaningful, it can contribute financially to what well-functioning neighborhood residents determine for themselves as constructive for their 'hoods. After all, we live here and pay taxes. Tone deaf council and people like Laughery don't step foot here; had they, they might reconsider their offensive, ill-informed comments made about Boulder neighborhoods.

In a design seminar at the University of Massachusetts-Amherst, renowned landscape architecture professor Joe Volpe said, with characteristic metaphor mixing, that bad planning and design decisions were like "barking up a dead horse."

If the city moves forward with this designation, they will have successfully barked up a dead horse. Given so many "historic" districts with so many residents, it's time to vote this council out.

Sarah Massey-Warren is a former Historic Boulder communications coordinator.