Are you behind the budding Romney 2016 campaign? While some in the public may believe that Mitt Romney has been neglected by the Republican Party following his defeat for the U.S. presidency to President Obama back in 2012, that is certainly not the truth. In fact, CBS News reveals this Saturday, June 14, 2014, that the former presidential nominee is in fact back in the spotlight regarding Republican support, having reportedly been mentioned as a potential candidate in the 2016 election. Romney has said no to these allegations, however, but does seem very intent on helping encourage other bidders.

Wikimedia Creative Commons

Mitt Romney may have only been in the news in recent months for his criticisms of some of President Obama’s new policies like Obamacare, but a Romney 2016 rally has been ignited this week — with other possible presidential candidates. The former U.S. nominee drew a number of candidates at a national “ideas summit” earlier this weekend in the state of Utah.

This backing of Republican support is said to have even extended to Romney itself in the election, though it remains a full two years away. Aside from the president sweepstakes, a number of other right-wing candidates gathered together in Iowa on Saturday afternoon to participate in the Republican Party’s state convention. Even Governor Chris Christie made a special appearance in California to raise some impressive money for the eventual gubernatorial candidate.

According to the press release, CNN's Political Ticker has noted that Romney billed the political summit in Utah to serve as on “opportunity meeting” of sorts, one where a fresh supply of conservative minded individuals and political ingénues might congregate to consider the next steps for both Republicans and the country as a whole. A total of six possible GOP candidates in the upcoming presidential election were mentioned, and a Romney 2016 support rally was even in contemplated.

A cited list of political figures considered at Park City over the weekend included, says CBS, none other than “Chris Christie, Sens. Rand Paul, R-Ky., and Rob Portman, R-Ohio, Gov. Susana Martinez, R-Ohio, former Gov. Mike Huckabee, R-Ark., and Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., who was Romney's political running mate back in 2012.”

It seems that Mitt Romney once feared that if he lost to President Obama in the most recent U.S. presidential election, he would be considered a “loser” by the Republican Party and one with no shot of making a significant difference in the future. However, that does not seem to be the case at all, as the “ideas summit” seemed in staunch support of Romney, even going so far as to saying that he might still be a race contender again this 2016.

Mitt Romney might very well be "the only person that can fill the stage," acknowledged MSNBC host and a previous Republican congressman Joe Scarborough during the commencement night of the ceremony. Even Democrats are aware that he stands as a significant nominee in the eventual election, likening him to a “giant.”

"He would be a giant in a field of midgets," added Montana Gov. Brian Schweitzer, a Democrat who's considering a possible 2016 presidential bid as well.

At this time, however, Romney has only been backing other possible candidates for the Republican slot, and is not reinforcing any rumors that he himself might pursue a second attempted bid. With President Obama’s end of his second term not that far off, who do you see as a possible nominee? Would you consider Romney running again, or is he right to be saying no to the idea at this point in time?

"The unavailable is always the most attractive, right?" he joked to a news source. "That goes in dating as well."