Mile-Hi lease

Yes about the Mile-Hi lease. This doesn't need to be on any kind of city ballot. It should be a settled issue. I don't understand why this keeps going on and on and on and on for these very few people who seem to have an issue with that.

$3 charge

We're going to be charged $3 on Sunday for the Super Bowl commemorative edition. It should have been made an opt-in option, not an opt-out. After all, some of us get the Times-Call and the Denver Post on Sunday.

School taxes

• This is about school taxes. A proposal to reduce property taxes is to convince the St. Vrain Valley School District to let Weld County take care of their own schools. Number two, limit property taxes collected per year. And three, privatize the school district, so a company can limit spending and break up the expensive teachers union.

• It seems that recent griping about taxes centers primarily on the property tax, which is one of only two taxes in Colorado that are based on the value of an asset. Not too much wrong with that, especially with all these million dollar homes. But when we consider what these taxes do and what they mean, we ought to listen to Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes, who said taxes are the price of a civilized society.

Firing blanks

In reference to the T-C Line "Bullets come down": What she was hearing probably was somebody firing a gun in the air using blanks. No moron should shoot a gun with projectiles in the ground or in the air. They are blanks.

Enough Broncos

Advertisement

I read a great comment: Enough with the Broncos stuff. Yes, they won. Get over it. Enough is enough. Oh, please, watch out for God because he's a Bronco fan. Watch out.

Debate coverage

This morning I was looking forward to reading about the nationally televised Democratic debate. It was on TV last night, and I didn't see one word mentioned about it. I hope that you will give equal coverage to Democratic candidates as well as Republican.

Composting

In my opinion the curb-side composting is a real bad idea, and I would urge everyone that is not in favor of it to either call their council person or go to the meeting on Tuesday night, because otherwise you can be sure that the environmental groups are going to get this pushed through.

Aliens and hospitals

Most Americans, by an overwhelming majority, think that illegal aliens should use a hospital in their native countries. That is why Donald Trump is so popular.