Buy Photo Kim Novy, the mother of 13-year-old twins, Lauren and Lindsey holds all of the medication both girls take each day to help control their epilepsy, on Monday, Jan. 19, 2015 in their home in Altoona. Novy explained that the girls currently take three different medications, at most they have taken up to five and have tried and failed 12 different types of medication. (Photo: Kelsey Kremer/The Register)Buy Photo

Americans age 65 and older consume about 40 percent of the prescription drugs sold in this country. The cost to taxpayer-financed Medicare and seniors is more than $100 billion annually. To put this in perspective: Spending on drugs for 14 percent of the U.S. population is more than 12 times the entire budget for the state of Iowa each year. Meanwhile, the largest drug companies together earn about $80 billion to $90 billion in profits.

Obviously, something is wrong in this country.

Democratic presidential hopefuls Hillary Clinton and Sen. Bernie Sanders are right to outline plans to address this issue. We hope Republican candidates will do the same, and whoever next resides in the White House will demand concrete changes from Congress.

“It has gotten to the point where people are being asked to pay not just hundreds but thousands of dollars for a single pill,” said Clinton during a forum in Iowa last week. “That is not the way the market is supposed to work. That is bad actors making a fortune off of people’s misfortune.”

However, this is exactly how a Republican-controlled Congress intended the pharmaceutical market to work when it crafted a drug benefit for Medicare in 2003. Among the “bad actors” are Washington lawmakers. While other countries use the power of government health insurance buying pools to leverage down the cost of drugs, Congress specifically prohibited Medicare from doing this. It handed over administration of the benefit to private companies and ensured taxpayers and seniors would pay whatever drug companies demanded going forward.

That’s exactly what this country is doing, and we’re paying handsomely for it.

Data released by the federal government this year showed 14 drugs cost taxpayers and Medicare beneficiaries more than $1 billion each, which accounts for nearly a quarter of prescription drug spending. The most expensive drug, one used to treat a rare blood disorder, was dispensed only 24 times in 2013, but cost the government $1.4 million.

The United States spends more per person on prescription drugs than any country in the world. In fact, we spend about 36 percent more than the next highest spender, Canada, where the government negotiates down prices. In addition, the U.S. spends twice as much per person than Canada on all health care while our northern neighbors beat us on every measure of life expectancy, including life expectancy for current seniors.

Clinton’s plan to reduce the cost of drugs includes capping out-of-pocket spending on drugs, requiring drug companies to spend a defined portion of profits on research and development, ending tax benefits for direct-to-consumer advertising and allowing Americans to import less expensive drugs from other countries, including Canada.

These are ideas both Republicans and Democrats should embrace. They should also revisit the mess created by their predecessors in 2003 during a middle-of-the-night vote on a Medicare drug benefit. Representatives were cajoled, threatened and bribed into voting “yes” to a bill that cleared the way for drug companies to reap huge profits. Taxpayers and seniors continue to pick up the cost.

A long night in Congress, an expensive night for taxpayers

A few years ago, the opinion staff asked former Rep. Leonard Boswell to reflect on what happened on the floor of Congress in 2003 when lawmakers passed legislation adding a drug benefit to Medicare. It was 3 a.m. The voting machines, which are usually open for 15 minutes, remained open for nearly three hours.

“It was a long night,” said Boswell.

Both Hillary Clinton, a senator at the time, and Bernie Sanders, in the House, voted against the bill. Early in the voting, it looked as though the bill, crafted by drug companies, would not pass, he said. Boswell thought they had the votes they needed, including those from several Republicans, to defeat it. But then Republican House leaders held the vote open for hours while pressuring members to change their votes and approve the bill.

While he didn’t recall seeing drug industry lobbyists on the floor, Boswell cited “disingenuous stuff going on.” He described a Republican lawmaker and friend who was “shook up” by the arm-twisting. “I saw a grown man shaking. I wonder what he was told that caused him to do that,” Boswell said. “I think in my career, that was the worst case I ever saw of forcing people to change their votes. This is far beyond anything I’ve seen before or since.”

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1FyTkkL