Tulsa angler Fred Kirk and a group of several retirees who go fly-fishing on Tuesday mornings hit the Upper Illinois River earlier this week and connected on a variety of fish, especially Kirk, who caught six species – smallmouth bass, largemouth bass, spotted bass, green sunfish, long eared sunfish, and bluegill.

Kirk fished with a five-weight fly rod, floating line, 1X tippet and some floating flies called BooglePoppers and BoogleBullets.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Kirk said another angler told him about the flies a year ago but he learned their value on a guided trip in April on the Devil’s River in Texas. The guides wanted the anglers to use a crawdad imitation, but Kirk strayed. “I always want to try something different,” he said.

Although a guide told him smallmouth in the river seldom if ever took a surface fly, he tried it anyway. “In one hole I hooked three bass that were more than five pounds,” he said. “I fell in love with that fly right there.”

On the Upper Illinois Kirk said he most often casts the fly to the edge of the bank, gives it one good twitch to pull it about a foot off the bank, and then lets it sit. “Usually if they’re going to hit it they get it real quick,” he said. Smallmouths also will rise from fast water to strike the bullet fly stripped across the surface, Kirk said.