Gov. Bill Haslam announces his proposal to expand Medicaid through his own plan in December. A new poll commissioned by a group supporting Haslam says majority favor Insure Tennessee. (Photo: File/Erik Schelzig, AP)

The majority of Tennesseans — Democrats, Republicans and Tea Party members alike — support Gov. Bill Haslam's plan to expand health care coverage using federal funds, according to a new poll released by a group advocating for Haslam's plan.

Even without knowing anything about the plan, 44 percent of self-identifying Republicans polled support Insure Tennessee, compared to 16 percent who oppose the plan and 40 percent who are undecided, according to the poll.

Conducted by North Star Opinion Research, a GOP polling firm, the poll focuses on Republican opinions. After contacting 400 people who identify as Republicans, the pollsters say the majority support the plan once they learn more about it, and would be more likely to vote for a lawmaker who also supports the plan.

"It is critically important that Republicans hear the case for the plan. If all they hear are the arguments against the plan, the levels of support found in this survey will never materialize," states a memo from the polling firm.

More from the poll:

After pollsters made statements defined as arguments for and against Insure Tennessee, 61 percent said they support the plan compared to 26 percent who oppose it, while 14 percent remained undecided.

Of those polled, 52 percent said they'd be more likely to vote for a lawmaker if he or she supports the plan, compared to 29 percent who say they'd be less likely to support their politician if the lawmaker supports the governor.

Of those who said they support the Tea Party, 60 percent said they support Insure Tennessee.

Of those who consider themselves "very conservative voters," 56 percent support Insure Tennessee.

89 percent of Republicans approve of Haslam. The poll says the administration should continue to brand the plan as the governor's based on that popularity.

The results are slightly different than those reported by a Middle Tennessee State University poll. The MTSU poll found that nearly two-thirds of those surveyed had never heard of Insure Tennessee.

Of those who did know about the plan though, the two polls show comparable levels of support: the MTSU poll found of the one-third who know the plan, 49 percent like it, 11 percent oppose it and another 40 percent are undecided.

Haslam spokesman Dave Smith said the governor's campaign committee commissioned the poll.

A group of conservative lawmakers and advocates are opposing the governor's plan, likening it to the Affordable Care Act, also known as "Obamacare." The plan could face tough sledding in the legislature during a special legislative session, which begins Monday.

This is a developing story. Check back in for more information.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Dym6Me