Story Highlights Floyd Memorial Hospital in New Albany has trimmed staff and cut nurse's pay

Floyd CEO Mark Shugarman said there are no discussions about a sale, merger with any hospital group

The 236-bed facility has averaged 169 in-patients per day, which has cut revenues

Through attrition, buyouts, the numbers of nurses, orderlies, technicians has cut from 818 to 805

Struggling with declining numbers of patients and changes in the health care industry, Floyd Memorial Hospital in New Albany has trimmed staff, cut employees' pay and hours and imposed other cost-cutting tactics.

Floyd Memorial's administrators said the tough choices come in a challenging business climate, but they've tried to avoid layoffs and other measures that would affect the quality of care.

"We'll ride through this difficulty," said Mark Shugarman, the hospital's chief executive officer. "We try to take a very balanced approach."

Despite suggestions by Floyd County officials that the county should consider selling the 60-year-old nonprofit community hospital at 1850 State St., Shugarman said there are no discussions about a sale or merger with any hospital group.

Meantime, its leadership has been busy dealing with the fallout from a 6 percent decline in average daily census since the start of the year. The 236-bed facility has averaged 169 inpatients per day, which has cut revenues.

In response, administrators reduced additional pay that nurses and other employees received for working second and third shifts from 15 percent to 10 percent per hour with a cap of $5 less per hour. They also eliminated weekend "differential" pay and paid meal breaks for third-shift employees.

The hospital also hasn't filled various manager slots following retirements and resignations in a streamlining in which five top positions — chief quality officer and managers of the emergency department, medical inpatient unit, clinical manager for surgery, and health information — were absorbed into other jobs, hospital spokeswoman Cindy Ferree said.

Floyd Memorial, with about 2,330 employees, laid off its vice president of human resources and his duties were absorbed by the director of education, who subsequently became the director of human resources and development.

Through attrition, the numbers of nurses, orderlies and technicians has fallen from 818 a year ago to 805, Ferree said.

Administrators have focused on other ways to save cash by renegotiating supplier and equipment repair contracts and pushing for tighter turnaround on collecting accounts payable, Shugarman said.

But the hospital also spent millions of dollars in the last five years, purchasing 21 physician practices — a trend aimed at boosting the array of specialists and doctor referrals.

"To survive, hospitals have to align with doctors. If we don't, our competition will," Ferree said.

Hospitals have been slammed as employers have shifted to high-deductible insurance plans, and by cuts under the federal Affordable Care Act, Medicaid and federal sequestration, said Doug Leonard, president of the Indiana Hospital Association, a trade group that represents Indiana's hospitals.

They've also taken a hit from reduced "bad debt" reimbursement from Medicare, which is paid to cushion the impact of uncollected co-pays and deductibles for low-income seniors, said Brian Tabor, the association's vice president for government relations.

The Indiana Hospital Association estimates Hoosier hospitals have absorbed $6.5 billion in cuts since 2010. At Floyd Memorial, uncompensated and charity care, which is a part of the "bad debt" calculation, increased from $36.9 million in 2012 to nearly $41.8 million last year — the largest increase it had seen since 2008, Ferree said.

The cost-cutting hasn't been easy on employees. Kathleen Phelps, a nurse for 25 years at the hospital, decided to leave in May after managers announced they would change the calculation for the lump-sum pension option after Aug. 30. The point was to create an incentive for employees to take an annuity instead, which concerned Phelps.

If the hospital were purchased or the place fell on more hard times, she said, would the annuity still be available to retirees?

Phelps worked last in the cardiac catheterization lab, where staffing levels were well maintained. But she said she saw nurses assigned to other units feel increased pressure after hours for technicians, aides, orderlies and unit secretaries were trimmed.

"You could tell people were so stressed out. At some point, it's not going to be sustainable," said the 56-year-old Phelps.

The ratio of patients to staff has not changed, said Ferree, adding that "there may be fewer people there, but there's also fewer patients."

Floyd's 6 percent drop in daily census is significant, but other hospitals across the state have staggered under higher numbers, Leonard said.

In Indianapolis, he said, the three largest hospital groups each laid off 1,000 employees last year.

On the positive side, hospitals and doctors are being forced to recast the way they do business. The new era dictates that doctors and hospitals focus more on keeping patients healthy and out of the hospital.

"We're going through an amazing time of change," said Leonard, who worked 40 years in hospital administration. "Nobody's got a playbook so the system is changing right in front of us."

Reporter Grace Schneider can be reached at (812) 949-4040. Follow her on Twitter @gesinfk.

Estimated Savings

Eliminated third shift paid meal break: $251,763

Eliminate weekend differential: $212, 679

Reduce shift differential from 15% to 10%: $72,421

Source: Floyd Memorial Hospital and Health Services

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1qiqvgy