New York’s hometown auto show has long been one of the oldest auto shows, dating all the way back to the year 1900 (ask your great-great-grandpappy about it if you can), but it’s become one of the most important across the world.

FOLLOW THE DAILY NEWS AUTOS ON FACEBOOK. ‘LIKE’ US HERE!

Automakers from all over bring their biggest and best to the Javits Convention Center every spring, and 2016 is shaping up to be no different.

We’re so excited about it, we even rolled out an awards program for the occasion, and several automakers won big.

Here are the 10 cars, SUVs, and concepts we’re most looking forward to at this year’s New York International Auto Show.

A new face (and more) for the Acura MDX

Acura will unveil the sharp new 2017 MDX during next week's New York Auto Show. (Acura/Wieck)

Acura’s best-selling MDX luxury SUV is getting much more than a facelift for its Big Apple debut next week, including changes like “added luxury comfort and convenience features, and advanced new powertrain technology,” as well as the new grille first seen on the Precision Concept in Detroit. Whatever changes they make, it’ll have to be pretty drastically bad to keep the MDX from continuing to sell like hotcakes… or whatever else is selling like hotcakes apparently used to these days.

The “new” Subaru Impreza

The big story here is that the new Impreza lineup will be the first model to use the new Subaru Global Platform. (Subaru)

We know what you’re thinking: “Gosh, that teaser photo sure does look like the front end of the current Impreza!” Turns out, you’re probably right. Subaru has already shown us a few Impreza concepts, but now it’s time for the real deal in New York. The big story here is that the new economy car will be the first model to use the new Subaru Global Platform, the Japanese automaker’s first foray into the ever-popular world of modular architecture. That may sound like a whole lot of mumbo-jumbo, but don’t worry: it’ll still have standard all-wheel-drive.

A(nother) Nissan GT-R refresh

This gif shows the GT-R's iconic taillight design, leading us to believe Nissan could unveil a new generation at the 2016 New York Auto Show. (Nissan)

Everyone was wondering earlier this week if Nissan was about to drop the microphone at Javits by showing an all-new GT-R supercar. As we’ve recently found out though, it’s just the final refresh for the aging Godzilla. But you know what? After almost 10 years on the market, the GT-R is still one of the fastest and best-value supercars you can buy. We don’t care if it’s just a facelift, keep Godzilla around!

Hyundai’s Genesis “New York Concept”

The teaser shot from Hyundai indicates it could be a midsize sedan to be unveiled in New York. (Hyundai)

Hyundai is getting very serious about its new Genesis global luxury brand, and now they’re attempting to grab some of the spotlight in New York. The aptly-named “New York Concept” is supposed to be a preview of what their upcoming BMW 3 Series-fighting sedan will look like, but judging by the photo, it looks a heck of a lot like the Aston Martin Lagonda ultra luxury sedan. Even the logos look similar! Well, you know what they say: imitation is the sincerest form of trying to score some cool factor.

The new Honda Civic Hatchback (finally!)

The sharp Civic Hatchback certainly defied all our expectations, even with its handsome contemporaries in the Civic coupe and sedan. (Nick Kurczewski)

Honda showed us a very sexy concept in Geneva of what a Civic Hatchback could (and will) look like, and they’re bringing the real deal to NYC. The all-new Civic has been lauded as a return to form for Honda, who seemed to have lost their way a bit with previous generations of the top-selling economy sedan. Now, though, you can have a Civic in sedan, coupe, or hatchback form, and the hotter and more fun Si and Type-R models are on their way in the coming years too.

A Mazda MX-5 Miata Coupe or Hardtop?

Joy: Pure, unadulterated, and absolute. That describes what you feel when driving the all-new, completely redesigned 2016 Mazda MX-5 Miata. (Mike Ditz)

Whether it’s a true coupe or a power folding hardtop, more Miata is never a bad thing, especially considering its recent win as our most fun car of the year. Enthusiasts have been clamoring for an MX-5 coupe forever, and it could be high time that Mazda finally delivers. Either that, or they’ll carry on the power retractable hard top model from the last generation, but seeing as the new Miata is all about saving weight, that may not be practical. Just tell us already, Mazda!

The not-a-coupe Mercedes-Benz GLC-Class “Coupe”

Mercedes-Benz first introduced us to the GLC Coupe concept in April 2015. (Mercedes-Benz)

The Germans have a funny way of pretending certain vehicles are coupes when they actually aren’t. It started with BMW, and has spread to Mercedes-Benz too, but the trend carries on and we’ll be getting another coupe-like SUV in New York in the form of the GLC-Class Coupe. While it won’t be a massive ‘Bahn-burner like the GLE450 AMG Coupe, the GLC version promises to be a more city-friendly, stylish rival to the BMW X4. We don’t know why we like it, but we do.

Some kind of Toyota Prius

Could Toyota be planning some sort of hybrid small crossover? We'll find out next week. (Toyota)

Toyota has us guessing with this photo. They claim it’s an addition to the 2016 Prius lineup, and while it could be a successor to the Prius c or v, it seems like something bulkier. Could Toyota be planning some sort of hybrid small crossover? That would be interesting, considering the RAV4 Hybrid just came out. All we know is that our interests are piqued.

The most affordable Porsche ever

The Macan is our favorite entry luxury SUV, and it just got even more entry-level with a turbocharged 4-cylinder option. (Porsche)

Our award-winning entry luxury SUV just got even more intriguing with a lower base price and smaller, turbocharged engine. Porsche made an excellent package even more intriguing by announcing a more affordable Macan for New York. While it’s not dirt cheap at $55,450, nor economical with a highway rating of 23 mpg, it will stand as the cheapest entry point into the Porsche owner’s club this side of a rusty 924.

A badass, supercharged Camaro

The 2017 ZL1 is a supercharged, 640-horsepower middle finger to the rest of the performance car world. (Chevrolet)

Ah yes, the one that’s got everyone all hot and bothered. The previous generation ZL1 was a supercharged monster, so it’s expected that Chevrolet was not about to let their muscle car crown be held for too long by the Challenger Hellcat. Meet the 2017 ZL1, a 640-horsepower middle finger to the rest of the muscle car world – and the performance car world in general, for that matter.

Did you find this article helpful? If so, please share it using the "Join the Conversation" buttons below, and thank you for visiting Daily News Autos.