For Claudie and George D'Arras, the Paris terrorist attacks hit very close to home. The couple, which is usually busy running their restaurant Bistro du Beaujolais, instead was busy working social media trying to get updates on family and friends around Paris.

For Claudie and George D'Arras, the Paris terrorist attacks hit very close to home. The couple, which is usually busy running their restaurant Bistro du Beaujolais, instead was busy working social media trying to get updates on family and friends around Paris.

For Claudie and George D'Arras, the Paris terrorist attacks hit very close to home. The couple, which is usually busy running their restaurant Bistro du Beaujolais, instead was busy working social media trying to get updates on family and friends around Paris.

For Claudie and George D'Arras, the Paris terrorist attacks hit very close to home. The couple, which is usually busy running their restaurant Bistro du Beaujolais, instead was busy working social media trying to get updates on family and friends around Paris.

Flowers left at a makeshift memorial in front of the Bataclan concert hall in Paris, where dozens were killed as gunmen fired machine guns into the crowd. Survivors described it as a blood bath. (Source: CNN)

People photograph bullet holes in the windows of the Carillon cafe in Paris Saturday Nov. 14, 2015, a day after over 120 people were killed in a series of shooting and explosions. (AP Photo/Jerome Delay)

Flowers are placed outside the Bataclan concert hall, Saturday, Nov. 14, 2015 in Paris. (AP Photo/Christophe Ena)

(RNN) – There were three Kalashnikov rifles in getaway vehicle used by the attackers on several Paris locations, British newspaper The Guardian reported. The abandoned vehicle, a black Seat, was found Sunday in Montreuil, an eastern suburb of the French capital,

In addition, six family members of Ismael Omar Mostefaim have been taken into custody by police investigating the Paris attacks, according to Agence France-Press.

French media identified French national Mostefa, 29, as one of the attackers, and are working with other countries to ID the others. The French newspaper Le Monde said that Mostefai was identified by his fingertip, found after he detonated the suicide vest he wore inside the Bataclan concert hall, the deadliest of the six attacks.

Six of the seven terrorists who died in the attacks blew themselves up with suicide vests. French police shot the other dead when they they stormed the Bataclan.

French police are working with investigators in Belgium, Germany and Greece to find out who the others were.

According to the New York Times, the FBI is sending agents to Paris to assist with the investigation as it continues.

The Guardian reported that Paris police called the terrorists "seasoned, at first sight, and well-trained." The police are investigating to see if any of them had ever been to fight in Syria.

French President Francois Holland said the attacks were "prepared, organized and planned overseas, with help from inside [France], the Guardian said.

There is a Belgian connection - police arrested three men trying to cross the border into Belgium and three more French nationals were detained after a raid in Brussels, where they all lived. Police there have opened a formal terrorism investigation, according to The Guardian.

Mostefai's brother and father voluntarily notified police and were arrested in his hometown of Courcouronne, which is a just a few miles south of Paris. Their homes have been searched. The older brother told police he had not had contact with Mostefai for years.

Mostefai had several minor criminal convictions and was the father of a baby daughter born in 2010, according to Le Monde.

Mostefai was radicalized in 2010, CNN reported, and despite a few minor criminal offenses beginning in 2004, he had never been in jail. Police had flagged by police as an Islamic extremist, but he was never charged with terrorist activity.

Syrian and Egyptian passports were found on the bodies of two other terrorists who died at the Stade de France, where France was playing Germany in a soccer match before 80,000 fans. One of the attackers tried to get into the game, but was found to be wearing a suicide vest. He fled and blew himself up outside the stadium.

The Paris prosecutor Francois Molins said Saturday that three suspects were arrested at the Belgian border, and three others, all Frenchmen, were arrested in Brussels, where they all lived.

ISIS has claimed responsibility for the coordinated attacks last Friday night, which killed 129. More than 350 people were injured.

Among the victims is one American, Nohemi Gonzalez, 23, who was a student at California State University in Long Beach, CA. She was studying interior design abroad in Paris and was believed to have been killed at a restaurant.

"My heart is heavy and I am deeply saddened for the family and Long Beach State community, and I grieve with all those who have lost a cherished one," California State University Chancellor Timothy White said in a statement. "Many campuses in the CSU have students studying abroad in France, and all others are known to be safe."

During a press conference Saturday, Paris prosecutor Francois Molins confirmed that 352 people were wounded in the bombings and 99 are critical. He also confirmed the death toll and that seven attackers died.

Molins said in the first attack, a car pulled up outside a restaurant in Paris and someone opened fire from inside the vehicle.

Several suspects were identified following the bombings, Molins said, due to fingerprint analysis and a Syrian passport found in the vicinity of one of the bombers. The Syrian passport belongs to a 27-year-old man, according to Molins.

Greek authorities told The Guardian that the Syrian passport found on the terrorist had passed through Greece on Oct. 3. That information has been passed to French authorities. The Greeks categorically denied rumors that a second suspected bomber posed as a refugee passing through Greece.

Molins said the explosives used in the bombings are known as TATP, a homemade explosive using hydrogen peroxide.

Earlier Saturday, Belgium authorities arrested three people in connection with the terrorist attacks in Paris on Friday night.

Officials confirmed the arrests in the Brussels suburb Molenbeek on Saturday afternoon.

"Belgian authorities showed up, stopping three individuals this morning," Molins said. "The three individuals live in Belgium and are not known to French authorities."

A French TV station and newspaper reported the raid was carried out Saturday targeting three people believed to be connected to the Paris bombings to look for evidence of their involvement.

Officials are looking for connections to other sources beyond those directly involved in executing the attack.

Reports from Belgium justice minister Koen Geens indicate a vehicle near the Bataclan was rented in Belgium. He said the raids are related to an investigation into the person who rented the car.

ISIS took responsibility for the attacks in Paris with an online statement. The group said eight militants wearing suicide vests and wielding machine guns orchestrated a coordinated attack at various strategic targets around the city.

French President Francois Hollande on Saturday called for three days of mourning. He had blamed ISIS for the attack prior to the group admitting responsibility.

Hollande announced the mourning period in an address to the nation, adding that France will be merciless in its response. Hollande said ISIS carried out an "act of war."

"France will be pitiless concerning the barbarity, and will use all means in the framework of the law," he said. "Long live the republic and long live France."

Hollande said France would be firm in the face of the tragedy. He said France would fight, and that France would be determined and unified. He called the deadly acts an “abomination and a barbaric act.”

Seven of the terrorists who waged attacks in Paris died from self-detonated bombs. In all, six sites were targeted. Police are seeking any accomplices to the dead terrorists.

Explosions were heard outside the Stade de France in the middle of a Germany vs. France soccer game. President Hollande was evacuated from the stadium when bombs went off outside. Officials told CNN that the explosion near the Stade de France was a suicide bomber.

Paris attacker with explosive vest was blocked from entering Stade de France: https://t.co/J7fQ34gKhh — Wall Street Journal (@WSJ) November 14, 2015

More than 100 people were killed at a concert at the Bataclan music venue where attackers took hostages before police stormed the building. Eleven people also were killed at a restaurant.

According to CNN, police engaged in a shootout with attackers at the concert hall before storming it. An American rock band, Eagles of Death Metal, was performing at the hall at the time of the attack.

Julien Pearce, a radio reporter in Paris, escaped the concert before the raid and told CNN that men in black entered the building and opened fire with AK-47s. The attackers were not wearing masks, according to Pearce, and they appeared to be in their 20s.

"Everybody was on the floor covering their heads, and we heard so many gunshots and the terrorists were very calm, very determined, and they reloaded three or four times," he said.

When Pearce got to the streets of Paris, he said he saw injured people on the ground. The French reporter was still receiving texts from friends hiding in the Bataclan.

"When I went on the street, I saw 20 to 25 bodies laying on the floor," he said. "People were very badly injured with gunshot wounds. I took a small girl, a teenager, she was bleeding very badly, and I ran with her."

In response to the attack, the French president closed French borders, mobilized the military, instituted a mandatory curfew and declared a state of emergency.

"There is reason to be afraid, but this is a nation that knows how to defend itself," Hollande said.

On Friday, President Barack Obama pledged to work with the French to bring the shooters to justice.

"This is not just an attack on Paris, not just the people of France, but an attack on all of humanity and the values we share," Obama said.

On Saturday, Paris closed schools, museums, libraries and other city-sponsored facilities. The French Culture and Communication Ministry said in a statement that major museums would remain closed on Sunday as well.

The attacks come 10 months after the shooting at the offices of Charlie Hebdo, a satirical magazine in Paris where 11 people died in January.

The two gunmen in that attack, brothers who were French citizens claiming ties to al-Qaida, were killed days later in shootouts with police. The magazine frequently depicted caricatures of Muhammad, an egregious offense to the Islamic faith, and extremists had tried to target the publication before.

Copyright 2015 Raycom News Network. All rights reserved.