Health and Human Services has put out a new report today looking at insurance offerings on Federal and State Exchange market places, reports CNBC's Bertha Coombs.

Burwell's announcement comes exactly a week after Minnesota's Obamacare exchange lost the insurer PreferredOne that had sold nearly 60 percent of the health plans this year on that marketplace. The exchange, MNSure, will now just have four insurers selling plans to new enrollees this coming season.

On an informational map distributed by HHS on Tuesday, Minnesota is listed as being one of seven states for which insurer-participation data is not available. The other states are Hawaii, Massachusetts, Nevada, Oregon and Vermont, all of which have had serious problems with their exchange operations, as well as Kentucky, which has been a surprising success among the state-run marketplaces.

Read MoreThe good (and bad) news about employer health plans



Burwell's announcement of more insurers selling plans is likely to be seized on by Obamacare advocates as proof that more insurance companies believe they can make money by participating on the government-run exchanges.

A number of insurers had sat on the sidelines during Obamacare's first open-enrollment period because of concerns that their plans would be overwhelmed by too many sick enrollees and not enough healthy enrollees to offset the cost of providing benefits.

However, Burwell's announcement Tuesday did not include details on the prices that are expected to be charged for plans sold on HealthCare.gov or the other state-run exchanges when open enrollment begins Nov. 15. Enrollment in the plans is set to end three months later, on Feb. 15.

Price could play a big role in determining how many people enroll in coverage this year, or who drop out of coverage. Another factor, which likely plagued Obamacare's enrollment efforts last year is awareness.

A new poll out this week by the Transamerica Center for Health Studies found that 22 percent of uninsured Americans did not obtain health insurance this year because "they were not aware of the individual mandate to obtain coverage" or pay a fine equivalent to up to 1 percent of their income.Another 43 percent of uninsured respondents to the same poll had not even heard of the Obamacare exchanges, which are they only places they can buy health plans and get federal subsidies that in many cases offset the cost of their coverage significantly.