<p>Frank Cagle</p>

Ho. Ho. Ho.

The Republicans who control the U.S. Congress worked overtime last week to deliver their voters Christmas presents. They passed a 2,000-page omnibus bill which, like a Christmas tree, has ornaments hanging all over it.

For you deficit hawks, they passed a $1.2 trillion budget bill that adds $60 billion to the deficit, and an estimated $6 trillion addition to the national debt over the next 10 years.

For all you "right to life" people who voted to give Republicans control, they fully funded Planned Parenthood.

For those of you who worry about Obamacare, the bill keeps the program in place but cuts the revenue intended to fund it — so the program stays, but funded with borrowed money.

For you people concerned about Middle Eastern immigrants and the possibility of terrorist cells, they provided full funding for the refugee settlement program.

(Let me just note that U.S. Reps. John J. Duncan Jr. and Phil Roe voted against the deal, while Chuck Fleischmann voted for it. U.S. Sens. Bob Corker and Lamar Alexander voted for it, of course.)

I could go on, but I'm about to lose my pre-Christmas munchies over my keyboard. Suffice it to say that conservatives everywhere are appalled and Senate Minority Leader Harry Reid thinks it's great. You can go to the Internet to find out which of your greatest concerns were sold down the river and how you were betrayed. More House Democrats voted for the bill than Republicans.

But take heart. It's all for a good cause. New House Speaker Paul Ryan has effectively moved spending, immigration and the budget off the table for the upcoming election year. These issues will not be the subject of battles in Congress because the Republicans have already caved on them. No chance of a government shutdown, the ultimate horror for Washington pundits and liberal newspaper editorial boards. Because we know that if Democrats refuse to vote for a budget they don't like and the Republicans stand firm, and the government shuts down, it's the Republicans' fault.

But that doesn't mean establishment candidates will be helped. You can thank Donald Trump and Ted Cruz for that. They will continue to tap into the anger of the rank-and-file Republican voters who see Washington in general and Congress in particular as being infested with special interests and out of touch with average Americans. Because they are right.

In 1971, 61 percent of the American people were classified as middle class. The greatest success story in the history of the world. Last week it was announced that the members of the middle class have now dropped below 50 percent. Real income, adjusted for inflation, hasn't grown since the 1970s. Jobs are going overseas, illegal immigration depresses wages, special tax breaks and increasing income inequality are a result of budget and tax policies caused by inaction or, worse still, actions by politicians in Washington. Our children and grandchildren tell pollsters they do not expect to have as good a life as their parents. And that's just sad.

Maybe I need to reconsider. Perhaps Trump is what the national Republican Party deserves.