Indianapolis, IN

Seven people were shot early Saturday morning in an Indianapolis neighborhood known for its nightlife, police said.



An Indianapolis Metropolitan Police Department officer heard multiple gunshots at 2:23 a.m. Saturday in Broad Ripple, police spokesman Lt. Christopher Bailey said in a news release.



One man is in critical condition at a local hospital, Bailey said. Five other men and a woman also were shot, but do not have life-threatening injuries. All of the victims were in their 20s.



"I've been told there were quite a few people out ... on a typical Friday night, bouncing from bar to bar. Someone opens fire in a crowd like that, we're lucky more weren't hurt," Bailey said at a news conference early Saturday morning.



No one has been arrested in the shooting and a motive for the shooting isn't known, Bailey said. Police interviewed the victims and had left the scene by noon.



Broad Ripple is a neighborhood about 8 miles north of downtown Indianapolis that's bustling with bars and restaurants, and is a popular spot with college students and other young people. The shooting happened about a half-hour before the bars were to close at 3 a.m.



Bradley Knight, who lives in the area, witnessed the aftermath of the shooting.



"I heard a lot of people run inside really quick and I ran out to see what was going on and then somebody said somebody started firing off shots so we walked around the corner to see what was going on and there were like people stampeding out and just fire trucks and ambulances and like 20 cops' cars came just rushing in. It was pretty intense," Knight said.



The shooting is the latest in a violent year for Indianapolis, which is on track to rival its record of 162 homicides, set in 1998. Though gun violence and related deaths are declining in large cities such as Chicago and New York, Indianapolis is ranked 22nd on the FBI's list of deadliest cities.



Carrie Baker, a part-time worker at a watch and jewelry repair shop on the street where the shooting took place, said police were looking late Saturday morning for a bullet that pierced the building.



"It's still definitely scary," Baker said.