Vince Winkel Business Sunday

Most of you have probably seen the large Whole Foods store at the Village at the Peaks; it's pretty hard to miss the 40,000 square foot structure and signage.

However the mystery was when it would open.

For most of this year the target was January 2016.

The target changed Friday morning, when Whole Foods announced that the store would not open for another 11 months.

The target now is to open around Christmas, 2016.

Whole Foods, the company, has not had a good year. Last month it posted quarterly earnings that were below expectations, it has been accused of price manipulation, other large grocers are digging into the organic food market, and there has been talk of a possible takeover of the company.

The developer of the Village at the Peaks said Friday that the Whole Foods company remains very committed to Longmont.

"They signed a 20-year lease with us," said Allen Ginsborg of NewMark Merrill Mountain States, the project developer and property owner.

A new timeline for the Longmont location was somewhat expected after a Nov. 5 conference call with investors. During that call, Whole Foods announced a new plan to open new stores at a more moderate pace.

Main Street

The paving work on Longmont's South Main Street has shut down for the winter, which should ease some of the congestion around First and Second avenues, which should make local businesses happy.

Advertisement

As my colleague Karen Antonacci reported a few days ago, crews have installed storm drainage improvements and new pavement from First Avenue to Third Avenue, and the project is now about 40 percent complete.

The second phase of repaving Main between Ken Pratt Boulevard and Second Avenue will begin in mid-February. The work on the Main Street Bridge, where contractors are replacing the bridge one half at a time, will continue through the winter.

Bottles

Some very cool news to report from the people at 300 Suns Brewing in Longmont. They have expanded their efforts to include bottling beer.

Last week they unveiled the new Slow Order Barrel-Aged Stout, their first-ever bottled beer.

The special hand-bottled, hand-numbered bombers (22-ounce singles) are now available at local liquor stores and at the brewery while supplies last.

The stout was aged in oak whiskey barrels procured from Woods High Mountain Distillery in Salida, CO.

"Slow order is a railroad term; when the light is yellow, it's time to slow down. Like all of the brewery's creative beer names, it reflects something that the 300 Suns owners love about Longmont... the railroad tracks that run just north of the brewery," said 300 Suns co-owner Jean Ditslear.

"We wanted to wait for the right time and the right beer," added brewmaster Dan Ditslear, "and the first time we brewed this, we knew this was it."

The brewery, which opened in early 2014, is located at 335 First Ave.

Last minute gift idea?

A local fellow we interviewed a few months back, Larry Reynolds, has a political card game now on the market. This could be the perfect gift for a loved one or friend with a passion for politics. It's called Political Zingers.

The editor selects a subject and story line for tomorrow's edition and asks reporters for political cartoons to complete it.

Each reporter is dealt seven cartoon cards. The first editor selects one subject and one story line and reads them. Reporters each submit the cartoon card zinger they want the editor to choose. When all the cartoons are in, the editor reads and shows them. Depending on your friends, there just might be discussion before the editor chooses the winner. Then the editor role passes to the next reporter and a new round starts. The winner has the most cartoons "published" by the end of play.

Check out the details at politicalzingers.com. You can buy it at the Boulder Bookstore, the Tattered Cover, or on Amazon.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel