By of the

Milwaukee's primary business booster group is pushing state lawmakers to cut funding for the Citizens Utility Board, a move that would cripple the group that represents consumers when utilities like We Energies seek state approval for rate increases.

The proposal, spearheaded by the Metropolitan Milwaukee Association of Commerce, was unveiled and approved Wednesday by the Legislature's Joint Finance Committee. If approved by the Legislature, it would eliminate a grant that provides $300,000 a year in utility ratepayer dollars to CUB, which was created by state law more than 35 years ago.

Last year alone, CUB — which has a total budget of $771,580 — helped persuade the Wisconsin Public Service Commission to reduce utilities' initial rate proposals enough to save customers a total of $161 million.

"We are truly a bargain," said Kira Loehr, CUB's executive director and general counsel. "There is no other state agency or group in the country that does what we do on the budget we have."

Four out of five U.S. states have an office created to represent consumers when power companies seek to raise rates or build expensive projects.

The change would also limit funding for CUB and other groups to hire expert witnesses in utility cases.

The Milwaukee business group has been at odds with CUB in cases before regulators in recent years, including debates over whether downtown Milwaukee businesses or We Energies electric customers should pay for costs to convert the city's only coal-fired power plant to natural gas.

Steve Baas, MMAC vice president of government affairs, said his group lobbied for the measure that the Republican-dominated finance committee adopted on a 12-4 party-line vote.

"We're a membership organization, and our members are concerned about utility rates," Baas said. "It's hard to justify to them why a single Madison-based special interest group was getting a $300,000 subsidy out of their rates for their office, operations and salaries."

In all, the budgetary move would save ratepayers $671,300 a year, according to the Finance Committee. Last year, the state's top five electric and natural gas utilities collected $8.6 billion from Wisconsin ratepayers. So this cut would represent savings of less than a penny for every $100 that electric customers pay.

Budget smaller than most

CUB's budget pales in comparison with most utility consumer advocates around the country, said Charles Acquard, who runs the National Association of State Utility Consumer Advocates.

A total of 40 states have a consumer advocate that's paid for either by taxpayers or ratepayers, he said.

Most have budgets much bigger than CUB's. In Ohio several years ago, Republican lawmakers voted to roll back funding for that state's utility consumer advocate. Even after the change, the group still has a budget of about $5.6 million.

The average utility advocate office has a staff of 10 and a budget of $2 million, Acquard said.

The Wisconsin CUB "is very tiny. This is four employees — that's one of our smallest offices, if not our smallest office," Acquard said. "To me it shows they're doing their job, with very few dollars."

Republicans on the Joint Finance Committee said they can't see why ratepayers should fund advocacy groups and expressed concerns about frivolous lawsuits.

Groups that hire expert witnesses to testify in PSC hearings would have to finance half of the cost of those witnesses, under the proposal.

"This is a way to say if you think your issue is legitimate, then you should pony up some cash, too," said Sen. Alberta Darling (R-River Hills), the co-chairwoman of the budget-writing panel.

CUB is occasionally involved in lawsuits challenging PSC decisions, but CUB's Loehr says it uses member donations rather than PSC funding to finance litigation.

2015 grant gets OK

Many states have utility consumer advocates that are part of the state attorney general's office, but Wisconsin does not. For much of its history, CUB has relied on membership donations as well as grants in addition to funding from the PSC to advocate in utility cases.

When grant and membership money was diminishing as a result of the Great Recession, lawmakers in 2009 created a special grant that CUB used to fund its operations.

Although any group that advocates for utility ratepayers is allowed to apply for the grant, CUB has been the only organization to apply.

Asked about the committee's move, Public Service Commission spokesman Nathan Conrad said the commission had no position on the change, given that policy-setting is the purview of the Legislature.

The PSC voted unanimously to award $300,000 to CUB for 2015 in December, describing the group as "one of the Commission's most active intervenors, providing professionalism to all the cases in which it participates. Equally, as a grant recipient, CUB has been forthcoming, prudent, and worthy of this nominal award, and the benefits of this grant can be shown in the increased and beneficial participation of CUB in Commission cases since 2011."

CUB participated in 26 different cases before the PSC last year.

'Skin in the game'

The move to cut funding for CUB and other groups that advocate at the PSC comes at a time when the state's utility rates have risen faster than the rate of inflation and rank second-highest in the Midwest.

On Friday, Green Bay-based Wisconsin Public Service Corp. filed plans to raise rates by 9.4% in 2016, an increase of $94 million.

"This is a classic example of why CUB's involvement is critical," Loehr said. "The last four years, Wisconsin Public Service has come in for at least a 5-to-10% rate hike and CUB has helped knock that down to, in some cases, a refund for residential customers, and for others, no increase."

The MMAC's Baas said the business group's position isn't an attack on CUB, given that the funding that would be eliminated has only been in place since 2009. "This isn't a vendetta against CUB; these are common sense things that just look at how we're spending ratepayer money and whether there's really any defensible rationales for it."

Baas said it's important for groups to have their own "skin in the game" when they are spending ratepayer dollars.

During utility rate cases, MMAC — which includes We Energies Chairman Gale Klappa on its board of directors — routinely speaks out in favor of rate increases.

Loehr says consumers across the state have provided "skin in the game" for CUB.

"CUB's 'skin in the game' so to speak is the $1, $5 donations that we've received from folks of all walks of life across the state — low income, middle class, wealthy, elderly, people on fixed incomes — that have helped keep the doors open for 35 years to represent their views before the Public Service Commission," Loehr said.

"What we'd like to know is why some of the most iconic Wisconsin corporations, businesses, law firms, you name it, that are members of MMAC are OK with their organization effectively stomping out this consumer participation at the Public Service Commission?"

Utilities' positions

The state's largest utility, We Energies, has taken no position for or against the CUB funding change, a spokesman said. Spokesmen for several other state utilities said they have had no problems with the existing funding mechanism.

On Friday, the Customers First coalition, which includes utilities Madison Gas & Electric, WPPI Energy and Municipal Electric Utilities of Wisconsin as well as unions and other advocacy groups, urged the finance committee to reverse its decision.

The change "will significantly diminish the consumer's voice in decisions affecting the cost and quality of utility service in Wisconsin," said Matt Bromley, who heads Customers First. "Efficient and effective utility regulation requires regulators to make sound judgments in which all viewpoints are carefully weighed and considered. The consumer's role in this process is critical and must be maintained."

Twitter: twitter.com/plugged_in

Facebook: www.fb.me/JSBusiness