Got Obamacare tax questions? You might be out of luck — FATCA’s here — Koskinen gets the Times treatment

GOT OBAMACARE TAX QUESTIONS? YOU MIGHT BE OUT OF LUCK. Big changes will be coming next filing season thanks to Obamacare — but IRS Commissioner John Koskinen warned yesterday that budget cuts will hurt the agency’s ability to answer taxpayer questions about the new provisions. Koskinen, speaking at the IRS Nationwide Tax Forum in Chicago, said the level of phone service next year will drop to 53 percent if the agency doesn’t receive proper funding.

“If we don’t receive the funding and we can’t do the hiring needed to handle this call volume, we estimate our level of phone service next year would plunge to 53 percent, which would be the lowest since 2008,” Koskinen said, according to his prepared remarks. “At 53 percent, that would mean close to half of those trying to get our help over the phone would not get through.”

Story Continued Below

IDENTITY THEFT, REFUND FRAUD SPURS DEPOSIT CHANGE. Another change on tap for next year will be new limits on the number of refunds that can be electronically deposited into a single account. “Starting in January, direct deposit will be limited to three refunds into one account,” Koskinen said. “Any subsequent refund will automatically be converted to a paper check and mailed to the address on the tax return. … We’ve also identified a number of tax preparers who abuse direct deposit to either serve as a banker for their clients or to take their fees from the refund. We’ve identified about 4,400 personal accounts held by tax preparers where multiple refunds were deposited. We’re putting a stop to that, too.”

FATCA’S HERE. Our Rachael Bade reports, “The little-known Foreign Account Tax Compliance Act, tucked into a jobs bill in 2010, requires every foreign bank, insurance company and other financial institutions with U.S. connections to play a new role in sniffing out American tax dodgers. It’s even inspired other countries to try their hand at similar efforts. Backers call it a long-needed response to wealthy Americans stashing billions in income offshore. Opponents cry American imperialism. But both sides say it is historic.”

“Despite the July 1 start date, detractors are still fighting. Banking groups have lost several lawsuits trying to change the law, but prominent conservative lawyer James Bopp Jr., a lawyer for Citizens United in its historic campaign finance win at the Supreme Court, is gearing up to challenge it in the coming months.” Pros: http://politico.pro/1qvQS5i

IT’S WEDNESDAY! It was an amazing run, but that’s it — and your Morning Tax-er is gonna miss rooting for the USMNT at this World Cup. If you want to talk taxes, you can find me at mweinger@politico.com or on Twitter at @ mweinger. As always, please follow @ POLITICOPro and @ Morning_Tax.

HOUSE & SENATE: Out.

KOSKINEN GETS THE TIMES TREATMENT. The New York Times is out with a profile of the IRS commissioner: “Hired to rehabilitate an agency that went awry targeting political groups, Mr. Koskinen’s style — quick-witted to the point of being flip and sometimes impolitic — has left some wondering if he is the right person to restore the I.R.S.’s battered credibility. He was two years into retirement in May 2013, filling his days with tennis, theater and grandchildren, when he received a series of urgent telephone calls. The White House and Treasury Department wanted to know if the then 73-year-old with a history as a Washington fixer would be willing to come back to work for one last rescue mission.”

“After a moment of contemplation, Mr. Koskinen, who as a child dreamed of being president, agreed. The decision sent him into the center of the worst firestorm in the agency’s recent history and made him Washington’s most prominent punching bag. ‘I think I need counseling,’ Mr. Koskinen said, sitting at the head of the long wooden conference table in his beige and brown third-floor office at the I.R.S. headquarters. ‘I’m a recidivist, going from one kind of crisis to another.’” http://nyti.ms/1xeB0Vi

OOF: HHS IG RELEASES OBAMACARE SUBSIDIES FINDINGS. POLITICOPro’s Brett Norman reports that “the HHS Office of the Inspector General has found that the federal health insurance exchange failed to resolve 2.6 million of 2.9 million inconsistencies on Obamacare applications during the first three months of the initial open enrollment period. The inconsistencies, most relating to income and citizenship claims, don’t necessarily mean that the information submitted was inaccurate or that the applicants received premium subsidies that they shouldn’t have, but the new finding does suggest a sizeable blind spot in the review process.” Here’s the report: http://1.usa.gov/1rfaZoq

OBAMA MOCKS CONGRESS ON HIGHWAY TRUST FUND. POLITICOPro’s Kevin Robillard has the story: “‘I haven’t heard a good reason for why they haven’t acted,’ Obama said of the lawmakers in a speech in front of the Key Bridge, which connects Washington to Arlington, Virginia. ‘It’s not like they’re busy with other stuff.’” http://politico.pro/1qOLgkq

VAN HOLLEN, LEVIN: OUR BILL WILL ‘SOLVE’ HTF, INVERSIONS. Reps. Chris Van Hollen and Sander Levin have an op-ed out touting how the legislation they introduced last week — The Stop Corporate Expatriation and Invest in America’s Infrastructure Act — will tackle corporate inversions and replenish the Highway Trust Fund. The Democrats say the bill “will put an end to tax-avoiding corporate expatriations and devote the resulting revenue to the Highway Trust Fund.” http://vtd-tar.co/1z6jbd0

NEW 501(c)(3) FORM CUTS DOWN THE PAPERWORK. The IRS yesterday introduced a new — and way shorter — application form for 501(c)(3) tax-exempt status. Instead of the whopping 26-page Form 1023, the new Form 1023-EZ is just three pages long. So what charitable orgs can use the always preferable less paperwork option? The agency says most small organizations are eligible to use the streamlined form, and that perhaps as many as 70 percent of all applicants, qualify. Most groups with gross receipts of $50,000 or less and assets of $250,000 or less are eligible, the IRS announced.

The release notes “the change will allow the IRS to speed the approval process for smaller groups and free up resources to review applications from larger, more complex organizations while reducing the application backlog. Currently, the IRS has more than 60,000 501(c)(3) applications in its backlog, with many of them pending for nine months.” http://1.usa.gov/1qv9J0p

SCOTUS AGREES TO HEAR TAX CASES NEXT TERM. The Supreme Court yesterday agreed “to weigh a challenge to a Colorado law that requires out-of-state retailers to provide data on sales they make to customers in the state in an effort to encourage the payment of sales tax,” Reuters reports. The court will also weigh “an appeal filed by the Alabama Department of Revenue in a case involving CSX Transportation Inc. The state is challenging a July 2013 ruling by the 11th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, which said a state tax on fuel purchased in the state is discriminatory because rail carriers like CSX have to pay it but companies that transport freight via water and road do not have to.” http://reut.rs/1mFkJkn

TREASURY ANNOUNCES LONGEVITY ANNUITIES FINAL RULES. Bloomberg reports, “Retirees with 401(k) plans and individual retirement accounts will have more flexibility to purchase annuities that don’t start paying out until age 80 or 85, under final rules from the U.S. Treasury Department. The rules announced today provide a new way for retirees to limit the drawdowns of their account balances that are now required starting after age 70 1/2. Instead, under the rules, they could use as much as 25 percent of their account balances up to $125,000 to purchase deferred annuities.” http://buswk.co/1m6ETYD

TRUE THE VOTE-IRS HEARING SET FOR NEXT FRIDAY. “A federal judge scheduled a hearing for next week on a grass-roots conservative group's request to investigate missing emails at the Internal Revenue Service as part of the group's lawsuit against the agency,” The Wall Street Journal reports. “U.S. District Judge Reggie Walton ordered the hearing on Tuesday, after conservative group True the Vote filed a motion seeking to speed up discovery and ‘preserve and prevent further destruction’ of documents and electronic data. Among other things, the group wants a forensic expert to figure out how the emails were lost and examine whether any of the missing data can be recovered.” http://on.wsj.com/TB31rd

NORTH CAROLINA VOTERS NOT FANS OF MFA. WRAL reports, “Most North Carolina voters oppose a federal bill that would allow online retailers to collect out-of-state sales tax, according to a poll released Tuesday by the National Taxpayers Union and the R Street Institute. The poll, based on a telephone survey of 400 North Carolinians likely to vote in the 2014 general election, showed that 70 percent of respondents oppose” the Marketplace Fairness Act. http://bit.ly/V9zJRN

QUICK LINKS:

—Bloomberg View’s Megan McArdle: “Lois Lerner, Colonel Mustard and the Blue Screen of Death.” http://bv.ms/1kb5FLj

—The Washington Post reports that D.C. prosecutors have dropped charges against the IRS employee who drove his car onto the White House grounds in May. http://wapo.st/1pTZX4j

—Howard Gleckman in Forbes: “A Payroll Tax Math Error Adds $5 Billion To The Deficit.” http://onforb.es/1xdvnXu

—CNNMoney reports, “Think filing your tax return is a pain? You've got nothing on American pilots who live abroad.” http://cnnmon.ie/VE2577

DID YOU KNOW? Bear cubs are born blind, hairless and weighing less than two pounds.

Tips, comments, suggestions? Send them along via email to our team: Rachael Bade ( rbade@politico.com), Kim Dixon ( kdixon@politico.com), Brian Faler ( bfaler@politico.com), Kelsey Snell ( ksnell@politico.com) and Mackenzie Weinger ( mweinger@politico.com).