U.S. Rep. Matt Cartwright admits that the rollout of the Affordable Care Act has been "rocky," but he's still sure it's the best solution for insuring Americans.

That's why he hosted a town hall meeting this afternoon in Wilson Borough on the federal health care law, also known as "Obamacare."



Cartwright is a Democrat whose 17th Congressional District represents part of Northampton County, including the Easton area. He fielded questions for about an hour and a half from the nearly 70 people who attended the meeting at the Strausser Community Center. He made it clear that he's "listening" to the public's comments, suggestions and criticisms for making amendments where he sees fit.

He said, however: "I'm not open to giving up on the Affordable Care Act's goal of universal health care."



Jim Palmquist, president of the Pennsylvania Chapter of the AARP, and Athena Ford, advocacy director for the Pennsylvania Health Access Network, joined Cartwright at the session.



The congressman organized similar town hall gatherings at two other locations in the 17th District in Pottsville and Wilkes-Barre. At Pottsville, Cartwright took heat from attendees who were vocal in their concerns about the act.



Cartwright is in his first term and a supporter of the health care law, President Barack Obama's signature piece of legislation.



Before the question-and-answer session began, Cartwright welcomed Wilson Borough police Chief Steven Parkansky's presence. He jokingly assured the chief that "these are nonviolent events, but we'll see." One attendee asked about the penalty for not signing up for health insurance; one asked how the law impacts a part-time worker whose company doesn't offer insurance; and another was skeptical about Cartwright's expertise on the bill, considering that he admitted that he didn't read the whole thing. Cartwright told the crowd that the questions that require a little more research would be answered through email or a letter. Cartwright acknowledged problems with signing up for the insurance program online, noting that he and his staff were going to enroll in a health care plan "as soon as that website works." Bethlehem Township, Pa., resident Glenn Krier was opposed to the bill and also to taxpayers paying about 70 percent of Cartwright's, and his staff's, health care bill when he gets on the plan next year. Krier, who is retired, said those employees should foot the bill themselves because they may qualify for subsidies. "I do not support the bill," said Krier, stating that there is too much government control. While Krier said the meeting was "very good" and informative, he said a few questions went unanswered. "They didn't get to the heart of the matter," he said. Before the hearing ended, Cartwright said he and other politicians will probably be "tinkering" with the law. "I'm open to changes," he said. "There's going to be bumps along the way."