WASHINGTON — When House Republicans overwhelmingly voted to cut food stamps and eliminate traditional Medicare, U.S. Rep. Frank LoBiondo didn't agree with his party and joined House Democrats in voting no.

He did the same thing when Republicans voted to make it harder for workers to unionize.

LoBiondo (R-2nd Dist.) can be described as the least loyal member of the New Jersey congressional delegation when it comes to toeing the party line on controversial bills, according to a vote study conducted by Congressional Quarterly.

Indeed, on one of every five votes that pitted a majority of House Republicans against a majority of House Democrats, LoBiondo crossed on over to the other side. Only four House Republicans dissented more often.

The New Jersey politician who toed the party line most often was U.S. Sen. Cory Booker (D-N.J.).

In fact, in the Senate, only three Democratic lawmakers cast their lots with their party more often than Booker on votes that pitted a majority of Republicans against a majority of Democrats, according to the CQ vote study.

LoBiondo twice voted against House GOP budget plans that made deep cuts in social programs such as food stamps in order to increase defense spending and balance the budget in 10 years without raising taxes. He and Rep. Chris Smith (R-4th Dist.) were two of just three House Republicans who bucked their party and opposed efforts to overturn federal regulations that made it easier for workers to form unions.

"For me, it's all about representing the district," LoBiondo said. "It's all about putting my constituents before party. If I think it reflects what's best for the district, I'm going to support it."

In the House, only Reps. Chris Gibson of New York (30.5 percent), Walter Jones of North Carolina (30.1 percent), Robert Dold of Illinois (25.5 percent) and Carlos Curbello of Florida (20.2 percent) among the 246 Republican members deviated more from the party line than LoBiondo (19.9 percent) on issues that pitted a majority of the GOP against a majority of House Democrats.

Booker, meanwhile, has worked across party lines on issues such as criminal justice, co-sponsoring bills with Tea Party-backed U.S. Sens. Rand Paul (R-Ky.) and Mike Lee (R-Utah).

However, such bipartisan efforts are not taken into account in the vote studies, nor is legislation that passes with the support of both Republicans and Democrats. Rather, the CQ study only tracks votes in which a majority of one party and a majority of the other party are on opposite sides.

Under that definition, Booker cast his lot with his fellow Democrats more often than most of his colleagues, recording a party unity score of 99.6 percent. That tied him for fourth with U.S. Sens. Sherrod Brown of Ohio, Mazie Hirono of Hawaii and Jeff Merkley of Oregon.

Tied for first with a 100 percent score were U.S. Sens. Kirsten Gillibrand of New York and Edward Markey and Elizabeth Warren of Massachusetts. There are 44 Senate Democrats and two independents who caucus with them.

"I don't think that way," Booker said. "I think about what's best for New Jersey. My loyalty is always first to New Jersey and our nation before anything else."

In the Senate, Robert Menendez (D-N.J.) had a party unity rating of 97 percent. In the House, Reps. Frank Pallone Jr. (D-6th Dist.), Donald Payne Jr. (D-10th Dist.) and Bonnie Watson Coleman (D-12th Dist.) voted with the Democrats against a majority of Republicans 99 percent of the time.

Rep. Scott Garrett (R-5th Dist.) was the most loyal House Republican among the state's congressional delegation with a 95 percent party unity score, followed by Rep. Leonard Lance (R-7th Dist.) with 91 percent.

Jonathan D. Salant may be reached at jsalant@njadvancemedia.com. Follow him on Twitter @JDSalant. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook