Kelly Absher, a marketing and events organizer, appears to be a serious candidate running against City Councilman Finbarr Saunders, who represents seat C on the nine-member Knoxville City Council.

Absher has returned a qualifying petition to the Knox County Election Commission, as has Saunders. David Williams, who gives Hollywood Drive as his address, has taken out a petition for the Seat C post but has not yet returned it. Perennial candidate Pete Drewer has taken out petitions for all three city-wide council seats up this year. To be on the ballot, Drew can pick only one position, says Cliff Rodgers, elections administrator.

Absher, who says he uses social media extensively in his business, is appearing at various public functions as he campaigns. He said he and Saunders will meet for breakfast today at Pete's to get to know each other better.

He said he's running against Saunders "by default" because he has been on civic or community committees with at-large councilmen George Wallace, representing seat A, and Marshall Stair, representing seat B.

RAMSEY UPDATE: Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey says he doesn't think Insure Tennessee proponents are helping to solve the problem of those needing health care by showing up carrying signs and shouting to make their side noticed.

"Nobody likes to be picketed," he said Saturday after he auctioned a building in foreclosure on Central Avenue Pike from the back of his truck while the health care proponents stood across the street making their point.

The Blountville Republican, who makes his living as an auctioneer, said he would like to help some 280,000 Tennesseans who fall into a gap between TennCare and buying insurance on a health exchange, but he would like it done through block grants the state can control. Block grants are not part of the federal Affordable Care Act or Gov. Bill Haslam's proposed Insure Tennessee, which failed in two Senate committees.

At least two dozen Insure Tennessee supporters showed up through organizing efforts of a statewide Health Care Campaign, the Tennessee Justice Center and other activists, mostly Democrats.

DEMOCRATIC SPEAKER: Gwen Schablik, chair of the Knox, Anderson and Blount counties committee for the Tennessee Equality Project, will speak to 4th District Democrats at 6 p.m. Tuesday in the Bearden Library, 100 Golfclub Rd. She will talk about her trip to Washington in April to hear arguments before the U.S. Supreme Court on the constitutionality of same-sex marriage bans, including Tennessee's.

Georgiana Vines is retired News Sentinel associate editor. She may be reached at 865-577-6612 or gvpolitics@hotmail.com.