Fears of a "looming" global crisis of antibiotic resistant superbugs intensified this week as new data reveals alarming rates of bacteria resistant to last resort antibiotics that can lead to life-threatening infections across the world.

The problem is due to overuse and misuse of antibiotics, according to researchers, who also rejected the notion that new antibiotics could help resolve the world-wide crisis.

"No matter how many new drugs come out, if we continue to misuse them, they might as well have never been discovered," Ramanan Laxminarayan, director of the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy (CDDEP) and co-author of the report, "State of the World's Antibiotics, 2015" said in an announcement. Instead, he said the only sustainable solution is to limit overuse and misuse of antibiotics.

One place to start is in the United States, which leads in per capita consumption of antibiotics, according to the report. The nation is also second to China in its consumption of antibiotics in livestock.

And though wealthy countries like the U.S. still use far more antibiotics per capita, the new data reveals high rates of use in low- and middle-income countries. For example, in India, 57 percent of the infections caused by the deadly superbug Klebsiella pneumoniae, were resistant to carbapenem antibiotics, a last-resort drug, in 2014 compared to 29 percent six years earlier. In comparison, these same drugs are still effective against the infections in 90 percent of cases in the U.S. and more than 95 percent of cases in most of Europe.

"Carbapenem antibiotics are for use in the most dire circumstances--when someone's life is in danger and no other drug will cure the infection," said Sumanth Gandra, an infectious diseases physician and CDDEP Resident Scholar in New Delhi, in the announcement. "We're seeing unprecedented resistance to these precious antibiotics globally, and especially in India. If these trends continue, infections that could once be treated in a week or two could become routinely life threatening and endanger millions of lives."

The data also reveals infection rates caused by 12 common and potentially deadly bacteria, including Escherichia coli (E. coli), Salmonella, and methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus (MRSA).

The report outlines six strategies that all countries can follow to halt the spread of resistance:

Improve water, sanitation and immunization: Better access to clean water and sewerage systems and providing improved coverage for existing and new vaccines will ensure a safe and healthy food supply, reducing the need for antibiotics and thus reducing antibiotic-resistance rates.

Better access to clean water and sewerage systems and providing improved coverage for existing and new vaccines will ensure a safe and healthy food supply, reducing the need for antibiotics and thus reducing antibiotic-resistance rates. Improve hospital infection control and antibiotic stewardship. The report calls for better hygiene, particularly handwashing between patients, and implementation of antibiotic stewardship programs to reduce infection rates.

The report calls for better hygiene, particularly handwashing between patients, and implementation of antibiotic stewardship programs to reduce infection rates. Eliminate economic incentives that encourage antibiotic misuse and overuse in hospitals, communities and agriculture.

in hospitals, communities and agriculture. Reduce and eventually phase out antibiotic use for growth promotion in agriculture .

. Educate health professionals , policymakers, and the public on antibiotic use and promote conservation.

, policymakers, and the public on antibiotic use and promote conservation. Work with politicians to gain their support for policies to address the threat of antibiotic resistance.

Meanwhile, the U.S. has recently taken action to address the growing threat. This week the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services announced the establishment of a Presidential Advisory Council on Combating Antibiotic-Resistant Bacteria to provide advice, information and recommendations to the HHS regarding programs and policies related to combating antibiotic-resistant bacteria.

HHS also announced a strategic alliance with a global biopharmaceutical company to accelerate the development of new drugs to treat multi-drug resistant bacterial infections. Although the CDDEP report said only 20 percent of efforts should focus on new drug development, HHS said in the announcement that lack of investment in new drugs has helped create a "perfect storm" with the rise of antibiotic-resistant infections.

The Joint Commission has also launched a Speak Up on Antibiotics campaign to help educate the public on the appropriate and safe use of antibiotics, as well as the risks associated with antibiotic overuse. The campaign includes complete package of free resources, including an infographic, podcast and video.

To learn more:

- here's the CDDEP online map on resistance

- read the report

- check out the report announcement

- see the HHS announcements about the advisory council and alliance

- here's the Joint Commission Speak Up campaign information

Related Articles:

Report: Superbugs a 'looming global crisis'

Antibiotic-resistant superbugs: 'Health crisis of this generation'

Antibiotic-resistant superbugs: Deadlier than previously thought

AHA15: The next public health threat is antibiotic resistance

Antibiotic shortages ratchet up superbugs' threat to patient safety

At antibiotic stewardship forum, White House lauds hospitals' superbug plans

White House plan calls for aggressive measures against superbugs

WHO releases international antibiotic resistance plan

Antibiotic stewardship can curb rise of deadly superbugs