The American Board of Medical Specialties (ABMS) has competition for the board recertification process: the newly established National Board of Physicians and Surgeons (NBPAS).

It's offering an alternative route for recertification in internal medicine specialties. A 2-year certification costs $169.

The group's president, Paul Teirstein, MD, chief of cardiology at the Scripps Clinic in San Diego, has been a critic of maintenance of certification (MOC).

Teirstein recently penned a piece in the New England Journal of Medicine enumerating MOC's pitfalls. He is also the creator of two web-based anti-MOC petitions that thousands of physicians have signed.

Other board members hail from Harvard, Columbia, the Mayo Clinic, the University of Massachusetts, and New York University.

Commenters on the board's site are voicing support.

But Westby Fisher, MD, an interventional cardiologist in Evanston, Ill., and another vocal MOC critic, was more cautious. He noted that the NBPAS process does not meet Affordable Care Act requirements, which determine eligibility for physician incentive payments by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

Application requirements for NBPAS certification include:

Previous ABMS certification

A valid, unrestricted medical license in at least one U.S. state

Completion of at least 50 hours of continuing medical education in the past 2 years, or completion of 100 hours for physicians with lapsed certification

Active hospital privileges for certain specialties (including interventional cardiology, electrophysiology, and critical care)

Here are some previous installments of MOC Watch:

There's no sitting on the fence when it comes to revised maintenance of certification (MOC) rules. This blog gathers MOC-related news and opinion to foster discussion on what has happened since January 2014, when the American Board of Internal Medicine adopted the requirements -- and what is likely to happen in coming months.

Have a tip or want to counter a point? Email s.yurkiewicz@medpagetoday.com.