Sioux Falls, SD

Two leading international figures have taken differing stances on limits to free speech in the wake of the recent terror attack in Paris on satirical newspaper Charlie Hebdo that killed 12.

Pope Francis maintained that freedom of speech has limits with regard to criticism of religion, maintaining that “there is a limit to free speech.”

"One cannot provoke, one cannot insult other people's faith, one cannot make fun of faith," he said.

British Prime Minister David Cameron disagreed, remarking how “in a free society, there is a right to cause offense about someone’s religion.”

Cameron explained on CBS’ “Face the Nation” Sunday that he too is Christian.

"If someone says something offensive about Jesus, I might find that offensive, but in a free society I don't have a right to wreak my vengeance upon them,” Cameron said. “We have to accept that newspapers, magazines can publish things that are offensive to some as long as it's within the law."

The first issue of Charlie Hebdo following the attack portrayed a cartoon of the Muslim prophet Mohammad, prompting extreme Islamic cleric Anjem Choudary to deem it an “act of war,” according to the London Independent.

News

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.