A nation founded on the principle that government will keep its hands off religion cannot be a nation whose government commands Catholic nuns to violate their beliefs.

On Wednesday, the U.S. Supreme Court heard arguments about whether the dictates of Obamacare trample the conscience rights of the Little Sisters of the Poor and several other faith-based employers.

The very existence of this case is a shame.

OBAMACARE IS REALLY GOOD, SAYS PRESIDENT OBAMA

Regulations that implemented President Obama’s health insurance program require cost-free access to 20 pregnancy prevention measures. Those range from birth control pills to surgical sterilization and include morning-after and week-after medications.

Disregarding the tenets of some religions, the rules sparked a backlash by churches and religiously affiliated employers that find moral offense in some or all the contraceptive techniques.

In good faith (PAUL BUCKOWSKI/ALBANY TIMES UNION)

The administration retreated into offering a so-called accommodation: religious objectors need only file a piece of paper to opt out, at which point the government will order their insurers both to provide the coverage and to notify beneficiaries that the employers had nothing to do with it.

By the government’s telling, the simple act of filling out a piece of paper places the slightest possible burden on the free exercise of religion — and exempts objectors from participating in conduct deemed sinful.

The Little Sisters and their fellows at the Supreme Court see the world very differently.

Before Obamacare, they provided employee health insurance. Like most plans at the time, theirs did not include contraception, let alone free contraception.

Then came the government’s order — plus the threat of huge fines if they refused to sign the paper that enabled the government to order their insurers to achieve the aim they consider sinful.

Essentially, the Sisters believe that the administration is converting them from a private employer that exercises its faith every day to an agent of a government that, pardon the language, doesn’t give a damn about their beliefs.

They are, in fact, correct that the administration places a higher value on universal free contraception than on strictures of faith with which it disagrees. Those it has cast aside much too facilely — even as the administration’s lawyer acknowledged at the Supreme Court that the nuns sincerely believe the government seeks to force them to sin.

The administration’s disregard for conscience comes into focus by considering its willingness to exempt many secular employers from the contraception mandate.

Big corporations that provided substantial health coverage before Obamacare’s enactment are exempt. Cities like New York are similarly off the hook. Also exempt are businesses with fewer than 50 workers.

But not people of clear, well-established conscience.

A long time ago, Obama should have put the government into the business of directly providing contraception to any employee of a religious objector who applied for it. Instead, he’s fighting for the right to tell American’s of faith that the government can tell them which of their beliefs count. And that’s the shame of the case.