Eagles down 2-1 in first-round series

Colorado Eagles right wing Darryl Bootland (27) gets leveled away from the puck Sunday by Ontario Reign defenseman Matt Register (43) at the Budweiser Events Center. The Eagles dropped Game 3, 5-1. ( Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

There is simply no room for mistakes at this time of the year.

Every error carries a heavy price. Every second spent in the penalty box is a detriment to the team.

Power plays, as they so often do, shaped the complexion of Sunday night's pivotal Game 3 between the Colorado Eagles and Ontario with the series tied at a game apiece.

Ontario took advantage of Colorado's lack of discipline to net five power-play goals in a 5-1 win at the Budweiser Events Center and grabbed the critical game of the series for a 2-1 lead, the Reign's first of this postseason.

Neither club was squeaky clean in a game defined by its physicality, but the Eagles' penalties were chronic, and ultimately, deadly.

"I thought we were very undisciplined. As soon as we got down it was like all the sudden we weren't focused on the game plan," Colorado coach Chris Stewart said. "Regardless of a bad call by the referee or we weren't playing well, we were gonna stick to the game plan and we didn't do that."

There were no signs of Colorado's eventual unraveling in the opening 15 minutes of the game. The Eagles controlled the puck and dictated terms early in the first period before striking the contest's first score midway through, which had led to wins for each team when doing so in the series.

Forward Vitalijs Pavlovs fired a blast from the blue line and the puck nicked an Ontario defender's leg on the way toward goal, catching Reign netminder Jussi Olkinuora by surprise as it found its way to the back of the net with 8 minutes left in the first.

The night went progressively worse for Colorado from that point forward.

Ontario answered back with a power-play goal of its own less than 4 minutes after to equalize. Colorado took a penalty seconds later to supply the Reign with their second man-advantage score with 1:07 left in the first, after having scored none in the first two games.

A promising 1-0 edge turned into a 2-1 deficit that felt much deeper.

"As soon as they go up 2-1 it was almost like we let it self destruct," Stewart said. "You have to learn to win those one-goal games in the playoffs, that's all there is to it."

Penalties became a plague for the Eagles the entire second period, taking five in the frame alone, resulting in two more power-play goals for Ontario. The first came off the rebound of Eagles rookie goalie Jacob DeSerres, who could do little more than scramble as his defense failed to clear any Ontario bodies away from the crease.

The second followed a pair of penalties from Teigan Zahn and Nathan Moon, which gave the Reign an extended 5-on-3, ending in their fourth power-play goal in nine attempts through just two periods.

Colorado Eagles forward Kyle Kraemer (19) tries to move the puck across the blue line Sunday evening as his jersey gets pulled by Ontario Reign defenseman Jeff May (11) during 1st period Sunday. (Michael Bettis / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"We were taking a little bit more selfish penalties down the stretch and then you're giving up the 5-on-3's, which might go from a good power play at 20 percent to a 50 or 60 percent," Eagles captain Trent Daavettila said. "You're just taking the odds away from yourself."

Trailing 4-1 entering the final frame wasn't an enviable position. Knowing that it was largely of their own making made the feeling that much worse for the Eagles.

"We fell apart when we were called upon," Stewart said. "That's not what you need when you want to be successful in the playoffs. When called upon, you have to answer the bell. ... We were the author of our own grief."

Colorado's struggles with discipline and the penalty kill overshadowed what was another tough game in the offensive zone. The Eagles were handed a plethora of power-play opportunities of their own, nine in total, converting only on Pavlovs' first-period goal.

For the third consecutive game the Eagles were out-shot by Ontario and failed to maintain a presence in the Reign's zone. Most shots were limited to the perimeter, and on the occasion the Eagles managed to work the puck down low, the finish eluded them.

"I think it's going to start with getting pucks behind their D and working low," Daavettila said. "We're taking shots every time down on the rush and it becomes a one-and-done as opposed to getting it deep, grinding away for a bit and then try to get high to low. We're getting shots with no one out front yet."

Ontario would add final insult to injury with 6:05 remaining in the contest on its fifth goal on the man advantage.

Colorado remains in a favorable position despite Sunday's letdown with two more games left at home Wednesday and Friday (7:05 p.m.), giving the Eagles a chance for three wins heading back to Ontario for a pair needing just one for their first series win since joining the ECHL in 2010.

Cris Tiller: 970-669-5050 ext. 511, tillerc@reporter-herald.com or twitter.com/cristiller

Reign 5, Eagles 1

At Budweiser Events Center

Colorado 1 0 0 — 1 First period — 1. Colorado, Pavlovs 1 (Gardner, Moon), 13:49 (PP). 2. Ontario, White 2 (Kitsyn, May), 17:15 (PP). 3. Ontario, White 3 (Brown, May), 18:53 (PP). Second period — 4. Ontario, Rutherford 1 (Nunn, King), 14:47 (PP). 5. Ontario, King 1 (Register, Rutherford), 17:27 (PP). Third period — 6. Ontario, Register 2 (King, Blackwater), 13:55 (PP). Shots on goal — Ontario 27; Colorado 25. Power plays — Ontario 5-for-13; Colorado 1-for-9. Goalies (shots-saves)— Ontario: Olkinuora (25-24); Colorado: DeSerres (27-22).

Ontario 2 2 1 — 5