The resistance to a gas tax hike in Colorado is softening among key leaders on the Western Slope, where crumbling roads and bridges are prompting conservatives to support the idea.

The influential Club 20 civic organization is considering a resolution to endorse a gasoline tax hike after its transportation policy committee gave it preliminary approval. And two local Republican lawmakers also support asking voters to increase the state tax — which has remained constant at 22 cents for more than 20 years.

The support became evident at the Club 20 meeting Thursday in Grand Junction, where Gov. John Hickenlooper told leaders he would support them if Democrats and Republicans can agree on the plan.

“If you got all the Republicans and all the Democrats and all the legislators unified in this, I’d be happy to stand beside them,” Hickenlooper said in an interview Friday. He said “that’s the only way (it would) have a remote chance of passing.”

Hickenlooper rebutted a report in the Colorado Statesman that stated the Democrat called for a 10- to 12-cent hike in the state gasoline tax to provide more money for road and bridge projects. “I certainly didn’t call for a gas tax hike,” he said.

Christian Reece, the Club 20 executive director, said her notes show the governor would support a gas tax increase, but she did not recall the governor assigning numbers to the proposal.

Rep. J. Paul Brown, an Ignacio Republican who attended the meeting, also said the governor said he would support the tax hike.

“Those guys are the ones who are pushing the gas tax so they shouldn’t be trying to foist it off on me,” Hickenlooper said sharply, referring to the lawmakers.

What Hickenlooper prefers is a plan to reclassify the fee that hospitals pay to the state so that it wouldn’t count toward the revenue ceiling set by the Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights.

If lawmakers agree, it would allow more than $200 million in road dollars to flow to projects for the foreseeable future, he said.

Any tax hike would need voter approval under the state’s Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights. But Brown and Rep. Yuelin Willet, R-Grand Junction, said a question about increasing the gas tax should go to the ballot.

“I think it’s worth looking at an increased tax,” said Rep. Yuelin Willet, R-Grand Junction, who cautioned he’s not yet taking a position on the tax hike. “We are seeing a lot of deterioration on the Western Slope roads.”

John Frank: 303-954-2409, jfrank@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ByJohnFrank