PITTSBURGH, Nov. 10, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- UPMC Health Plan will offer residents of Allegheny County and Erie County the lowest-priced Silver metallic level health insurance plans on the 2015 Health Insurance Marketplace. Last year, 73 percent of the plans purchased on the Marketplace in Pennsylvania were Silver plans. UPMC Health Plan's Marketplace plans are also the lowest cost in each of the other three Metallic categories — Bronze, Gold, and Platinum.

The plans offer customers a choice of multiple provider networks to suit their needs. Plans offered by UPMC Health Plan provide full access to UPMC's network of world-class hospitals and physicians as well as community partner providers.

Open enrollment for 2015 begins on Nov. 15, 2014, the second year that individual and family plans are available through the provisions of the Affordable Care Act. These plans are primarily available for the under age 65 population.

It is important that Marketplace consumers remember two things while shopping and choosing a plan. First they should see if they qualify for financial assistance or check to be sure they keep the subsidy they received last year in order to get the best value and lowest price. Second, they must check the network and make sure their providers are in the plan they select.

"UPMC Health Plan is pleased to offer western Pennsylvania a broad selection of affordable and innovative health insurance products including the lowest priced plans," said Diane P. Holder, President and CEO, UPMC Health Plan. "While this is the second year of the Marketplace, this year is very different with the variety of choices and pricing changes. We encourage consumers to be smart shoppers and we have trained staff to be able to personally assist people with their choices. We offer the options of calling, visiting our website, or seeing us in person at our mall locations."

Many people qualify for financial assistance with their plans but don't know it because they didn't check. Even people who purchased insurance on the Marketplace last year will need to check their subsidy eligibility because it can change each year based on income. In addition, some plans that offered lower rates in 2014 may charge more this year, while other plans may be less expensive than they were before. Although adults who enrolled for health insurance plans through Healthcare.gov will be automatically re-enrolled, they may not maintain their subsidy from year to year unless they check back in with the Marketplace. Many will find opportunities to save more money or find more complete coverage if they shop around for a different plan.

All of the products we offer will include access to our award-winning customer service and our online and mobile tools to assist members in understanding their care to maintain or improve their health.

For more information about UPMC Marketplace products or to enroll in health insurance coverage, call 1-877-563-0292, or visit www.upmchealthplan.com/coverage. You can also visit any UPMC Health Plan Connect Service and Sales Center located at six area shopping malls: Monroeville Mall in Monroeville, Century III Mall in West Mifflin, South Hills Village in Bethel Park, Ross Park Mall in Ross Township, The Mall at Robinson in Robinson Township, and Millcreek Mall in Erie.

About UPMC Health Plan

UPMC Health Plan, the second-largest health insurer in western Pennsylvania, is owned by UPMC, an integrated global health enterprise. The integrated partner companies of the UPMC Insurance Services Division – which includes UPMC Health Plan, UPMC WorkPartners, LifeSolutions (EAP), UPMC for You (Medical Assistance), and Community Care Behavioral Health – offer a full range of group health insurance, Medicare, Special Needs, CHIP, Medical Assistance, behavioral health, employee assistance, and workers' compensation products and services to nearly 2.3 million members. Our local provider network includes UPMC as well as community providers, totaling more than 125 hospitals and more than 11,500 physicians throughout Pennsylvania and parts of Ohio, West Virginia, and Maryland. For more information, visit www.upmchealthplan.com.

SOURCE UPMC Health Plan