By CHRISTINE HAWES, correspondent



On a typical day, registered nurse Cheryl Stuart will conduct about 30 vision screenings on students at Braden River and McNeal Elementary schools.

She'll oversee about 25 students receiving check-ups at the health clinic at McNeal Elementary.

Stuart will usually need to monitor at least two diabetic students each day, and will then create a list of other "high-risk" students in the schools she serves.

Then, Stuart will need to spend time training other staffers in how to accommodate those high-risk students, using information she has already gathered from parents and loaded into a countywide computer system.

The days of school nurses handling little more than scrapes and fevers are long gone. Today, with more students having a greater variety of more serious medical issues, the job of a school nurse is more complex than ever.

"People assume school nurses are there just to deal with boo-boos and Band-Aids, but it's way beyond that," says Sherri Reynolds, head of pupil support services in Sarasota schools.

Even the most routine of nursing task has become more complex today for school nurses. For example, Stuart says administering medication to a child is a time-consuming, multi-step process for school nurses.

"It's a totally different game nowadays," says Sue Troxler, health services specialist for Manatee schools. "Conditions are more complex now. More students are mainstreamed, creating more risk factors. Combined with the economic challenges of our times, we're coordinating a lot more services for our students. More students don't have insurance and don't have access to care or services."

To get a clear picture of how much more school nurses are doing today, consider these statistics from the National Association of School Nurses:

nFrom 1999 to 2008, the prevalence of pre-diabetes and diabetes increased from 9 to 23 percent of American adolescents aged 12 to 19 years.

nThe number of children discharged from hospitals who are dependent on mechanical ventilation increased by 55 percent from 2000 to 2006.

nThe prevalence of food allergies among kids has increased by at least 18 percent, with peanut allergies doubling from 1997 to 2002.

nUp to 18 percent of children and teens are now on regular medication.

According to the association, Florida ranks 48th out of 50 states and the District of Columbia in the availability of nurses in schools, with 2,537 students for every school nurse. Vermont is number one, with 396 students per nurse. The association recommends a ratio of 750 to 1 if all students are healthy; 225 to 1 in more typical situations, where special needs populations are part of the student body.

It used to be that school nurses would need to ensure students brought a doctor's prescription and parent's note with their medication. But "when a parent brings in medication today, we have to check to make sure the prescription was written correctly," says Stuart. "Then we have to count the medication, and then sign off on it. ... The bottom line is, it's just another way we're trying to keep students safe and healthy while they are at the school."

Because so many more students with extreme conditions are now mainstreamed into regular classrooms, school nurses have to be trained in a wider variety of procedures and devices, Troxler says: "We're not only doing catheterization and tube feeding; we now have students with tracheotomies. We're monitoring all kinds of bodily systems: respiration, cardiac, blood pressure. ... Care is just more complex."

Troxler says nurses need to do far more training of teachers and other staffers today — to help them understand what to watch out for among their medically fragile students.

Nurses today also need to be involved in all kinds of emergency preparedness, for situations as diverse as tornadoes, fires and school shootings. One of the most timely topics school nurses are addressing today is concussion awareness; both Sarasota and Manatee school nurses are undergoing training on how to respond to head injuries.

Reynolds describes the role of a school nurse as a problem-solver, educator, counselor, referral specialist, mediator, and mentor. And she says it's not for everyone.

"It's not the kind of job every nurse wants to have because it's not always that structured," she says. "You have to be flexible as a school nurse; it's not always, 'this happens at 10 and this at 11.'"

The need to be comfortable with uncertainty, along with the relatively lower pay for school nurses, has made it hard to attract school nurses, Reynolds says. School districts can't compete with the salaries paid by hospitals to nurses.

"We have a hard time attracting people to the job; I started this year with three vacancies and have had a hard time filling them," she says. "We need more nurses."