'It is a challenging problem'

Colorado Horse Rescue: Prairie dog relocation What: Boulder County commissioners will hold a public hearing on amending the county's vegetation management agreement with Colorado Horse Rescue, a change that would allow that organization to relocate 60 prairie dogs from its property at 10386 N. 65th St. to county-owned open space lands. When: 11 a.m. Tuesday Where: Third-floor hearing room in the downtown Boulder County Courthouse, 1325 Pearl St., Boulder

As many as 60 prairie dogs may soon be bound for a new home, if Boulder County commissioners on Tuesday approve amending the county's 14 ½ year-old vegetation management agreement with Colorado Horse Rescue.

That old pact set forth the county's expectations for Colorado Horse Rescue — a nonprofit organization that rescues and rehabilitates and finds new homes for abandoned or abused or unwanted horses — to restore vegetation on about 35 acres of its 49-acre property at 10386 N. 65th St.

Modifying the 1999 revegetation agreement would permit Colorado Horse Rescue to proceed with plans to remove up to 60 prairie dogs and relocate them to county-owned open space, either at Rabbit Mountain northeast of Lyons or grasslands northwest of Colo. 128 and McCaslin Boulevard.

"We've been working to come up with solutions" to prairie dog management problems in order to restore a grassland cover, said Carol Brice, Colorado Horse Rescue's executive director.

Advertisement

"It is a challenging problem, but we're doing everything we can to figure it out," Brice said.

Kim Sanchez, the chief planner in Boulder County's Land Use Department, said her staff is recommending the commissioners approve the proposed amendment to the Colorado Horse Rescue's vegetative management plan to allow the organization to relocate prairie dogs onto county open-space property before mid-September.

Under county Parks and Open Space Department policies, prairie dog relocations can only occur between July 1 and Sept. 15, "to allow the juveniles to get big enough" for the move "and to relocate before it gets cold, in order to ensure better survival of the relocated animals," Sanchez wrote in a memo to the commissioners for Tuesday's meeting.

On July 14, the Board of County Commissioners opened the door to the possibility of providing new county open-space homes to as many as 120 prairie dogs that have to be removed from other properties. That could include — in addition to the 60 prairie dogs from the Horse Rescue property — up to 60 other prairie dogs that have to be removed from a 13.4-acre property long 95th Street north of South Boulder Road in Louisville, where the Boulder County Housing Authority plans to build its Kestrel affordable housing project.

The 60 of Colorado Horse Rescue's prairie dogs to be relocated to county open space would only amount to about 18 percent of the 340 prairie dogs estimated to be currently present on that organization's property, Sanchez said, but it "will help CHR achieve their revegetation effort" and would repopulate open-space sites historically occupied by prairie dogs.

Brice said Colorado Horse Rescue has been working with groups such as the Prairie Dog Coalition, an arm of the Humane Society of the United States, to come up with ways to address the county's requirements that Horse Rescue revegetate its pasture land and establish a grassland cover that would mitigate runoff and dust problems.

Brice said Horse Rescue has already taken steps such as installing fences installations to prevent prairie dogs from sprawling onto revegetated areas.

Uncertainties about what Colorado Horse Rescue may ultimately propose as part of its overall long-term prairie-dog control and revised vegetation restoration plans have held up county commissioners' consideration of the organization's application for county approval of a number of improvements to its 49-acre North 65th Street property.

Still pending, under a county Limited Impact Special Review process, is Colorado Horse Rescue's plan to build a 5,000 square-foot hay barn, a 700 square-foot classroom addition to its arena, two 120 square-foot loafing sheds, two 6 square-foot blanket sheds, three 576-square-foot pasture sheds and a 960 square-foot storage shed.

Boulder County commissioners were originally scheduled to consider that land--use application on April 2, but Colorado Horse Rescue asked that it be postponed to give the organization time to consider prairie dog control alternatives. It's now expected to be set for a late-September commissioners' hearing.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc