Bartender is longest continuous staffer at downtown landmark

Bartender Jeanette Barrie, who has worked at the Boulder Theater since it reopened in 1988, talks to a customer during a concert last month at the historic downtown venue. ( Jeremy Papasso / Staff Photographer )

She is part of the fabric of downtown Boulder and has been for decades.

She has been all but left for dead, only to be brought back to vibrant, colorful life, after many thought it might be impossible.

She can lift people's spirits with the ease of a song or raised glass among old friends.

You may think you know a little something about her — but explore further; there are some surprises.

All that and more can be said of the Boulder Theater.

But it's also true of a woman who has tended bar at the theater since it reopened Nov. 15, 1988, after a nearly six-year closure, making Jeanette Barrie the iconic city landmark's longest continuous employee.

Jeanette Barrie behind the bar at the Boulder Theater on Nov. 15, 1988, the night it reopened after sitting closed and dormant for six years. (Courtesy Jeanette Barrie)

"She is the face of the Boulder Theater," said her friend Jay Elowsky, owner of Pasta Jay's.

But a face, to the countless thousands who have been graced with a cold drink and a smile by Barrie and forked over a few bills or a piece of plastic in return, is often no more than a face.

"They think they know me," she said during a recent interview, shaking her head and smiling.

Then she laughed.

Second chances for Barrie and theater

Boulder Theater patrons wouldn't know that Barrie used to walk past the then-shuttered venue after moving to town May 6, 1986 — "I'm impeccable with dates" — and peer through the glass of its darkened doors.

Jeanette Barrie's Boulder Theater highlights Michael Hedges, Nov. 15, 1988 (the theater's reopening): "Playing his guitar and dancing barefoot across the stage." Iggy Pop, Dec. 1, 1990: "Just blew my pop-punk mind." Lindsey Buckingham, April 7, 1993: "Mick Fleetwood playing his vest, turning it into a drum machine." Johnny Cash, June 17, 1997: "Sold out in 20 minutes at the end of his career." David Crosby (with CPR), Nov. 22, 1998: "Right after he got a new liver." Subdudes & "their brother band" the Radiators, numerous shows: "Rocked the house throughout the era." Sonia Dada, numerous shows: "With Paris Delane's baritone and Scotty's (Michael Scott) tenor bellowing in the chambers." Ian Anderson (of Jethro Tull), Oct. 4, 2003: "Interview and amazing flute playing left us breathless." Richie Havens, numerous shows: "Truly one of my favorites. The Babaji of '60s era; he was our guru." Lou Reed & Laurie Anderson, April 12, 2008, same day as their Boulder wedding: "I arranged a beautiful, exotic bouquet for the newlyweds My mother was a florist." Gogol Bordello, May 1, 2014: "Close to my birthday; so much fun, and I love those guys." Elvis Costello, March 1, 2015: "He played solo guitar, inside a TV set... his voice was still just angelic."

She'd press her fingers against the old stone walls of 2032 14th St.

"I could feel this building has such a presence and needed to be alive and dance," Barrie said. "And I said, 'I want you to dance, I want you to live, I want you to sing. I am with you. I want to help you. I will be with you every step of the way to support you.'"

Barrie's spiritual connection with a Boulder historic landmark that originally opened on the site of the Curran Opera House in 1936, and has been reborn more than once over the past 79 years, is understandable.

By her telling, she, too, has been granted a few second chances at life.

Her first hurdle was being born a "blue baby," the umbilical cord wrapped around her neck. Another was a disastrous car accident in her native upstate New York at the age of 22.

"I went right through the windshield, my eye popped out, I had an orbital blowout fracture; I was holding a boom box with no seatbelt, and a corner of the boom box went into my gut, lacerated my liver and my two feet were just mangled in the wreckage," she recalled.

"At some point, my heart stopped and I was gone, but I was looking down on myself and I saw myself laying on the hospital bed," Barrie said. "I had the experience that I went back to the planet where I came from, and all of my ancestors hugged me. It just felt like this really warm loving feeling ... and I felt really grateful to be alive after that experience. I was in the hospital for a month."

The Boulder Theater, which has served as a live music venue since 1988, is seen last week from across 14th Street. (Mark Leffingwell / Staff Photographer)

Barrie said she was told by doctors she would "never walk or run or dance" again. But once in Colorado, which she first visited in 1985, she rehabbed herself, she said, hiking Chautauqua to the tune of Steve Winwood's "Back in the High Life" and UB40's "Red Red Wine" on her "old-fashioned" Walkman.

Trail running came next. Then skiing. Barrie was just back from a summer 1988 trip to the Yukon with a friend when she discovered she'd lost her job cocktail-waitressing at the Hotel Boulderado.

That same day, Barrie spotted a small sign just one block away in the window of the still-closed Boulder Theater: "Help Wanted."

"I rang the bell, which has been broken for years," she said. "I knocked on the door and nobody answered, and so I pushed the door and it opened and I walked inside and I said 'Hello?' and nobody answered. So I walked upstairs and saw another door, and I pushed it.

"There was a guy named Chuck Semple there, and I said, 'Hi, I want to work here.'"

Save for when the theater suffered another brief closure from June 1993 to February 1994, Barrie has been there ever since.

'I've kind of moderated a little bit'

On a recent visit to the venue on a sleepy weekday afternoon when the space was all but empty, Barrie riffed on the building's character. She referenced what she sees as the "yang" of the "three erupting blue phallic symbols" in its exterior facade, balanced by the "yin" of a design she sees as very suggestive of female anatomy on the interior ceiling.

"Welcome to the womb," she said, gesturing toward the pink walls which she feels reinforce the distaff sense of the concert space. She also mentioned the "ancestral" or "grandmother energy" spirit in the room.

Dick MacLeod, known to many in the city as Dark Cloud, is the onetime theater manager who went to jail for four months on a 1994 check fraud conviction stemming from his time managing the facility.

MacLeod also lived in the theater's VIP space on the top floor, "officially for five years, but actually for 10," he said.

He was there the day Barrie first punched in.

"Jeanette was/is lovely and she had many admirers in those years as I suspect she does now," MacLeod wrote in an email. "There was a period when it seemed like she got deliveries of flowers every day. Looking so delicate, everyone was very protective of her, even though she's tough as nails."

He called her an employee whose word could be taken at "face value first and always."

MacLeod also recounted an honor Barrie garnered at a late-1980s staff Christmas party, when the theater was doling out George Paper awards, named for a manager who allegedly accidentally hung himself while working on lighting rigging in 1944. Paper's ghost reportedly haunts the hall to this day.

"The first year," MacLeod recalled, "Jeanette won the Most Likely to Dance Naked Around the Fire, with another component I can't recall, at the announcement of which everyone nodded sagely and applauded."

But that was then.

"I've kind of moderated a little bit," said Barrie, who moved to Longmont in 2005 and still resides there.

She started studying health and wellness at what was then called Metropolitan State College in Denver in the early 1990s. That helped lead Barrie into a second business she runs independently as a Thai yoga massage therapist.

"At Metro, I was full-time in school studying, and then I was working here (at the theater) full time, and there were nights that I would work until 3 ,4 in the morning, close up everything, count the money, get a few hours' sleep in the VIP room, or write my paper, get on the bus a block away, go to school, come back and take a nap on the bus," Barrie said. "I did that for a couple years."

Despite burning the candle at both ends and sometimes maybe singeing it a little in the middle, she carried it off.

Boulder resident Ray Tuomey was working at the theater as early as 1992, doing everything from freelance sound, lighting and stage managing to production management for "etown" and other shows.

"I just love her," Tuomey said. " She's a ball of energy, a kind and sweet soul and always has a smile and a kind word to share. Always a positive influence."

Helen Forster, co-founder and co-host of "etown," has known Barrie since 1988. She said Barrie bartended the reception after her wedding to husband and "etown" partner Nick Forster in 1991.

"She's just a dear friend and total iconic Boulder fixture in my view," Helen Forster said. "I can't imagine Boulder without her.

"And I can't imagine the Boulder Theater without her."

A hug from David Crosby

Now holding an individualized B.A. degree in Integrative Therapies in Wellness and Lifestyle Counseling, Barrie finds that her private practice is complemented by her theater work.

"With the healing work I do, the energy work that I do, I learned here how to relate to people, and how to connect to people," Barrie said. "I can hone that skill into my practice, where I can actually, one-on-one have intuition and go right to the point where they're having pain. I learned that here, working with people drinking alcohol in the music theater."

Memories are stacking up for Barrie, who won't talk about her age, beyond confiding that she is "old enough to know better, young enough to have fun."

And much of the fun at the theater — beyond the camaraderie of its changing cast of characters, the staff antics at events such as the annual Exotic Erotica Ball, where she has been a French maid, a French maid/mermaid hybrid and more — has largely been about the music.

Asked to cite her favorite shows over the years, she rattles off everyone from Lou Reed to Hot Rize with Red Knuckles & The Trailblazers, featuring its original members Pete Wernick, Charles Sawtelle, Tim O' Brien and Nick Forster, "another big brother whom I feel kin to."

There are tales about the famous that she can't share. There are also some stories that she can.

"David Crosby played right after he got a liver transplant, found out that someone like Melissa Etheridge got his seed and had a baby, and that he had a grandson," she said. "After the show, I thanked him, and I said, 'I grew up listening to your music.'

"He let me give him a hug," Barrie continued, "and I said, 'I was sending you light.' He said, 'You were doing the lights?' I'm like, 'No, I was just sending you light.' And he gave me a big hug. That was after getting a liver transplant. Most people are paranoid to even touch anything" after such a procedure.

"Arlo Guthrie," she said, continuing to sift through the countless personalities encountered over time. "I love Arlo. He's a sweetheart. But I can't hear 'Alice's Restaurant' again. I just might crack."

Richie Havens, Michael Hedges, Elvis Costello, Laurie Anderson, the roster of luminaries that have made her life memorable — one night, one tune at a time — is seemingly endless.

'My haunting to this place will be a blessing'

Barrie is making no sounds about closing the bar for a final time. But she knows that day will come.

"I don't think I want to do five days a week, and I don't think I want to do it 'til 3 or 4 in the morning. And some of the music now, I just don't really care for," she confessed.

Barrie has gained the ability though, she said, "Like the proverbial husband who sits in the chair and says, 'Yes dear, yes dear,'" to selectively mute the volume.

"If it's music that's not moving me, I can shut that off the same way that I can shut off the cacophony or the misinformation that my left eye gives me when I see double from the car accident," she said.

"The bar manager will walk up to me and say, 'God this music sucks,' and I'm like, 'Wow, I didn't notice it. I wasn't even hearing it. And now that I'm listening to it, wow, you're right.'"

The summers tend to slow down at the theater, with many bands paying the bills by hitting the outdoor festival circuit. Barrie doesn't mind the lull.

"My Thai massage, that's what balances me," she said. "I get to do my healing work, and I'm really present with people. It balances out the 2-second, 2--minute rapport with people — 'Hi, how can I help you? What can I get for you?' I think if I did just one or the other, I would go crazy."

There will come a time when Barrie moves on from the Boulder Theater. But with so much time invested there, will she ever be gone completely?

She laughs off anecdotes about the theater's supposed ghosts, but in the next breath alludes to them: "A couple people have told me they've seen shadows go right by me."

Someday, those apparitions could have Barrie as a companion.

"I think when I die, my haunting to this place will be a blessing," she said, the late afternoon sun casting an amber glow in the upstairs lobby.

"I'll be that glass that almost falls to the floor — but returns itself to the tray. The 'computer glitch' that will save the day.

"There's always going to be some presence of me here."

Charlie Brennan: 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan