Packers Blog The Journal Sentinel's team of Packers beat writers provide the latest news, notes and analysis SHARE

By of the

St. Louis --- More of the regulars will see action today. For the Packers offense, this will be a needed early test, too. The Rams boast arguably the best defensive line in football with Chris Long, Robert Quinn, Michael Brockers, Kendall Langford and Aaron Donald up front.

Follow along on the JS Live Blog once the action begins at 3 p.m.

A few points of interest...

Rodgers' debut. The Packers held Aaron Rodgers back in the Nashville rain last weekend, so he'll get his first action today.

Last year, Rodgers was sharp in Preseason Game No. 2, completing 10 of 12 passes for 134 yards and a 113.2 passer rating against the Rams. But in what proved to be a bit of foreshadowing, Rodgers and the first-team offense weren't as efficient in the red zone. On Rodgers' three drives, the Packers settled for three field-goal attempts. They'll want to punch a drive into the end zone this summer.

"It's a real good defense," Rodgers said. "It'll be good to get out there with JC (Tretter), get some reps with him and some timing with some of the receivers. It'd be nice to take a of couple hits maybe, legal hits. This is the time of year we're trying to get to be playing the right way and get in and get out."

As Mike McCarthy noted this week, the Packers are more interested in the other end of the passing game. Rodgers will be throwing to new targets in a game setting for the first time. Mistakes will be amplified. The likes of Richard Rodgers, Davante Adams and Myles White will be getting important work with the quarterback.

JC Tretter's finishing touch. Corey Linsley's bull strength has been evident in practice. But Tretter has gained some distance at center of late, flashing athleticism at the second level in the run game at Tennessee. With a strong outing in St. Louis, he might be able to win that starting spot at center once and for all.

As the physicality in practice has intensified, Tretter is holding his own, too. That interior of Brockers/Donald/Langford will be a precursor to what he sees Week 1 at Seattle.

"I think JC’s off to a great start," McCarthy said. "I think the Tennessee game was definitely impressive. I want to see him stack success anytime you play well. We’re getting ready to play against an extremely talented, very good defensive front, so this will be great work for us."

The back-up battle. This week, Alex Van Pelt said the No. 2 job is wide open. Scott Tolzien has made strides these first three weeks of training camp, and could get the reps right after Rodgers today.

Seeing both quarterbacks operate in the same conditions should help Green Bay's decision-making process.

"Both guys have played well in practice," Van Pelt said. "Matt had a heck of a conditions to play in, in that first quarter. That’s as bad as I’ve been around as far as rain. Scotty got a little reprieve. It was still coming down but not quite like it was in that first quarter. So it was really hard to evaluate him throwing the football. But the way (Flynn) responded this week in practice was very, very strong. He did some really good things this week as far as rhythm and timing.

"It was good to see him bounce back after having a rough day due to conditions.”

The rain, Van Pelt admitted, "washes out" the evaluation process.

"It was tough to throw the football, it really was," he said.

Jeff Janis in action. This past week, Janis became the resident Play-a-Day standout. The size/strength/speed combination Ted Thompson raved about when the Packers took Janis in the seventh round last May has been on display --- against Green Bay's better corners, too.

It'd probably be difficult for the Packers to sneak Janis onto the practice squad if Janis' big plays carry over to game day.

Acknowleding that he is a raw player, Janis also believes he can help Green Bay sooner rather than later.

“I think there’s still a lot of time left," Janis said. "Hopefully this game coming up, I’ll be able to make an impact in that. Hopefully, in the next two after that, hopefully too. I think if I get those chances, coaches will feel comfortable with me.”

The D-Line "juice." Remember that buzz word? Mike Trgovac and the Packers thought they added plenty of "juice" to their defensive end with Jerel Worthy in the second round of the 2012 draft.

Now, Worthy is off to New England, part of a turbulent off-season. The Packers gave up on a 51st overall pick. But they still want large men with quicks on the defensive line; that's the direction of the game. After a rocky first preseason game, third-rounder Khyri Thornton will be one such player in the spotlight today. In spurts, you can see his power, but he's also a project.

(Journal Sentinel photo by Mark Hoffman)