Stocks ended an otherwise choppy session of trading with only a slight loss Tuesday, thanks to an end-of-day rally that occurred in spite of international investment volatility and persistent weakness in oil prices.

The Dow Jones industrial average was down only about 13 points when the market closed Tuesday, having rebounded after plunging more than 140 points within minutes of the opening bell. Losses at the beginning of the day were due mostly to international underperformance, as Japan's Nikkei 225 index dropped 5.4 percent Tuesday and the Stoxx Europe 600 was down 1.5 percent.

Japan's losses were thought to be partially tied to Wall Street's disappointing Monday (as the Dow shed nearly 178 points to start the week) and partially to the Japanese government's new negative interest rate policy, which was announced at the end of last month.

[MORE: U.S. News' Best Stocks Rankings]

Under negative interest rates, a central bank essentially charges private banks a fee to deposit money into government holdings rather than paying out interest – comparable to a bank charging consumers fees to hold their money rather than doling out interest payments. In theory, the policy is designed to stimulate consumer spending by encouraging banks to make loans more accessible.

But with Japanese private banks now facing charges from the country's central bank, investors have begun to fear for the profitability of affected institutions. Two of Japan's largest banking and financial services companies, the Mitsubishi UFJ Financial Group and the Sumitomo Mitsui Financial Group, were both trading down about 5.4 percent Tuesday afternoon.

It's worth noting that China's stocks – which have periodically suffered significant declines since the turn of the new year and have regularly dragged international markets down with them – actually weren't involved in Tuesday's global rout. Trading desks in China, Hong Kong and other primary Asian markets were closed again Tuesday for the Chinese New Year.

Still, China's absence from the international marketplace wasn't nearly enough to calm investors and stimulate gains, particularly as oil prices continued to fall. Prices for barrels of both Brent crude – which serves as a global pricing benchmark – and West Texas Intermediate – primarily considered a U.S.-focused oil metric – at least temporarily dipped below $30 Tuesday, effectively erasing modest gains seen at the end of last week.

The oil pricing benchmarks firmed up Tuesday afternoon, which likely helped drive the last-minute rally on Wall Street that kept daily losses from being worse than they could have been.

"Financial markets will stabilize only when oil prices do," Mark Zandi, chief economist at Moody's Analytics, wrote in a research note Tuesday. "The plunge in oil prices is the proximate catalyst for the selloff in markets, as the previously high-flying stocks and bonds of energy companies have cratered."

Even as these headwinds continue to blow against the stock market, an overwhelmingly positive job openings report released by the Bureau of Labor Statistics showed America's levels of hiring and voluntary quits rose to their highest levels since 2006 last month, while the number of vacant positions sat at its second-highest spot ever. Investor sentiment jumped noticeably after the report was released Tuesday morning, with the Dow heading into positive territory only about 10 minutes after the data's release.

"Despite the turmoil in financial markets and increasing talk of recession, the labor market continues to improve and is moving toward full employment. Job openings and hiring are up, workers are leaving their jobs to find new ones, and layoffs are very low," Gus Faucher, senior vice president and macroeconomist at The PNC Financial Services Group, wrote in a research note Tuesday. "The past two years have been the best for job growth since 1999, and the labor market will remain solid in 2016."

Investors may have to lean on domestic labor market gains for sentiment boosts in the coming months, considering oil prices continue to fluctuate and international economic growth looks anything but assured. Traders also are likely to keep an eye on Federal Reserve Chair Janet Yellen's congressional testimony on Wednesday and Thursday for clues as to how America's central bank will handle interest rate increases going forward.

Goldman Sachs is among a host of market-watchers that has already dialed back expectations for a March interest rate increase, with analysts saying in a research note last week that "risks are tilted to the downside" and "it is still easier to see the committee slowing down the rate of increases [than] speeding them up."

The Fed indicated in December that it planned to increase interest rates on three or four separate occasions in 2016. But international unease and stock market weakness may force the central bank to stay its hand to avoid sparking an unintended crisis.

In fact, a growing pool of investors and analysts don't think a rate hike will be warranted throughout the rest of the calendar year.