Buy Photo A spiritual journey forms the core of “God and Other Men: Religion, Romance and the Search for Self-Love,” a memoir by Myrna J. Smith of Frenchtown, a former professor at Raritan Valley Community College. Smith writes about topics from the broken relationships in her life to the lessons she learned from non-Western religions and philosophies. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Courier News)Buy Photo Story Highlights Myrna J. Smith of Frenchtown, a former professor at RVCC, is the author of "God and Other Men: Religion, Romance and the Search for Self-Love," published by Cape House Books.

A native of Oregon, Smith was exposed at a young age to Christianity and the mystical writings of Edgar Cayce. Her life was also informed by difficult relationships and abandonment.

Smith's book draws on her meetings with a variety of spiritual teachers and gurus. She sums up her philosophy in three short sentences: "Love everyone. Stay present. Forgive everything."

When she was growing up in eastern Oregon in the 1940s and 1950s, Myrna J. Smith attended church every Sunday with her mother. There she was indoctrinated in the teachings of Christianity.

But during that same period, her father shared with her his interest in the writings of Edgar Cayce, the self-professed psychic and mystic who gained fame in the early 20th Century.

"I had hell and damnation on one hand, and karma and reincarnation on the other hand," said Smith, now a Frenchtown resident.

Those practices at a young age started Smith on a spiritual path that she acknowledges is unconventional. She has studied Eastern religions and philosophies, and she has met with a host of teachers and gurus.

Those studies have been filtered through Smith's life experiences, which include emotional abandonment by her grandmother, marriage at an early age followed by divorce, and the death of a longtime partner.

Her journey forms the core of "God and Other Men: Religion, Romance and the Search for Self-Love." Smith's memoir was published this past fall by Cape House Books, based in Allendale.

Smith said she did not set out to reveal so much of herself when she started the book. "I had studied with people, and I thought I should write about these teachers," she said.

"Then I decided to carry that story on the back of the narrative of my life," Smith added. "I had to admit a lot of things that people might feel comfortable. But if I can help one person, it's worth it."

Family relationships

The narrative began with the spiritual tension between her parents. But it also included her relationship with her paternal grandmother, Vida Pershall. (Smith's maiden name is Myrna Pershall.)

Smith admired her grandmother, who had a collection of spiritual writings.

However, Smith said, "My grandmother would leave us for a time and then come back. One time, she just left."

Myrna was in early teens at the time, and the departure of her grandmother deeply affected her. Though Smith saw her grandmother again at family gatherings, she made no attempt to reconnect. "When she left, I returned the favor," she said.

In 1961, when she was 20, she married Gary Smith. In 1970, they and their three children moved to New Jersey, where he worked for Merck & Co.

Shortly after the move, Myrna Smith found a teaching position at Raritan Valley Community College in Branchburg. She remained there until 2006, teaching literature, writing, and eventually a course on world religions.

"Raritan Valley is a marvelous school," Smith said. "I loved teaching there."

Smith's life underwent another upheaval in 1977, when she and her children returned from an out-of-state skiing trip to find that her husband had left. "He longed for the big sky, and I think he wanted to go back," she said.

"He was a good person," Smith said. "I have no regrets marrying him, and I have no regrets divorcing him (in 1979)."

Smith writes candidly about her sense of abandonment because of her grandmother and her husband. She also describes her time with a man she identifies only as "Charlie," who has since died.

"I had a lovely relationship with him," she said. "He was a wonderful person, but I had to write some negative things about him."

But Smith stressed that her book is less about any difficulties in her life and more about the great joy she has derived from her spiritual quest.

In "God and Other Men," Smith recounts her travels to such locales as India (which she has visited five times), Hong Kong, and Vietnam.

"My teachers live within me," she said. She also relied on three simple lessons that she has learned that she feels lead to inner serenity: "Love everyone. Stay present. Forgive everything."

"I'd like people to take away (from the book) that traumatic things can happen in life, and you can still have a happy life," Smith said "There's joy to be found in life."

Receiving kudos

In a relatively short time, Smith's book has gained attention. Elizabeth Gilbert, author of the best-selling "Eat, Pray, Love: One Woman's Search for Everything," and a fellow Hunterdon County resident, wrote a positive reaction of "God and Other Men."

Smith's memoir is "culled from all the great philosophical traditions of the world and the hard-won lessons of her own heart," Gilbert wrote. "This book tells the whole tale in language that never veers from the elegant."

Closer to home, Smith has had an impact on people in her role as a prayer chaplain at the Unity Spiritual Center in the Pattenburg section of Union.

One person touched by Smith's message is Karen Stirberg of Holland Township. Stirberg said she has been inspired by Smith since she met her after a service about five years ago.

"Myrna is a lovely lady," Stirberg said. "I've got to know her. She's very well-traveled, so her takes are very intriguing to me."

Stirberg read "God and Other Men" and was moved by it. "I couldn't put it down," she said. "I hadn't realized how connected we were, because of similar broken relationships. I responded to that. I cried over it."

"I realized that throughout the journey of life, struggling is necessary," Stirberg said. "It's not supposed to be easy. If we didn't have these challenges, it would be worth it. You have to go through darkness to appreciate life."

Smith said she appreciates the positive feedback from readers such as Stirberg, who sometimes refer to her book as a "page-turner." "That surprises me," she said. "But it does have a lot of magical things in it."

She added that some of her experiences have included working with mystics who have related messages from the afterlife. "People who have had these experiences don't like to talk about them," she said. "But they are real."

Smith said that even people who do not subscribe to an organized religion still should recognize the importance of a spiritual journey. "People believe in the external life," she said. "I believe in the internal life."

"When I was in India, I met people who are so evolved," she said. "I met someone who had no bicycle, no radio. He didn't depend on eating regularly or sleeping regularly. But he was one of the happiest people I ever met."

"The material life doesn't bring satisfaction," Smith said. "I remember a nun telling me that there's a place in us that only God can fill. I would say, rather, that people need to get in touch with a grounded being, though I'm reluctant to call it God."

For the future, Smith said she still plans to visit other countries, though she added, "I'm getting a little old for this travel."

Smith has no plans to continue writing, but she does not rule out the possibility. "If I find I have something to say, I'll write another book," she said.

At a glance

For more information about Hunterdon Coounty author Myrna J. Smith or her new book, "God and Other Men: Religion, Romance and the Search for Self-Love," visit www.myrnajsmith.com or www.capehousebooks.com/myrnajsmith.htm.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1AYpZbI