Lee-Lee Prina

October 2, 2015

Karabi Acharya joined the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation (RWJF) in May 2015 as a director in the Research-Evaluation-Learning unit. She directs the RWJF’s “strategies for global learning as it identifies best practices in other countries” and adapts them “to improve the social determinants of health in communities in the United States,” according to the RWJF website. Previously, Acharya was global director for Ashoka, a nonprofit worldwide network of social entrepreneurs who want to change the world.

Jim Knickman, founding president and CEO of the New York State Health Foundation, plans to step down from his position during the first half of 2016—after his successor is named. He will be returning to academia: he will join the faculty of New York University. In May 2006, he became the foundation’s first employee! “New York’s success in implementing the Affordable Care Act, improving care for patients with diabetes, attracting federal funds to support community health centers and vulnerable veteran families—Jim’s fingerprints are on all of these accomplishments,” said Robert G. Smith, who chairs the foundation’s board of directors, in a September 28 press release. Knickman previously was vice president of research and evaluation at the RWJF.

Knickman has written several articles for Health Affairs, including “Understanding the Craft of Philanthropy: Do We Make Something That Should Be Simple Too Complex?,” which appeared in the journal’s GrantWatch section in 2007.

He also wrote this recent Health Affairs Blog post, “Refocusing Philanthropy after ACA Implementation,” which was published on April 15, in the GrantWatch section.

At the California HealthCare Foundation, three staffers have been promoted. Sandra Shewry became vice president of external engagement; Andy Krackov became associate director of external engagement; and Sally Mudd became director of communications. External engagement encompasses “health policy communications, publishing, online presence, government relations, and audience engagement functions,” according to the foundation’s website.

Read Sandra Shewry’s “Free The Data: A Revolution To Improve Health Care,” December 15, 2011, in the GrantWatch section of Health Affairs Blog.

Andy Krackov wrote “If You Partner, They Might Just Come: One Foundation’s Effort To Disseminate Data On Quality Of Care,” March 13. 2014, for the GrantWatch section of Health Affairs Blog.

Neil Steinberg, president and CEO of the Rhode Island Foundation, has been named a member of the Working Group for Healthcare Innovation. “In an ongoing effort to strengthen [Rhode Island’s] healthcare system,” Gov. Gina Raimondo (D) signed an executive order creating the group, said a July 23 e-alert from the foundation. The panel will look for and recommend improvements across the Ocean State’s health care system.

According to an obituary in the New York Times, John M. Templeton Jr., president and chairman of the John Templeton Foundation, died in May at age 75. Templeton was a pediatric surgeon who retired from medicine to manage the foundation and later became its top staffer, the newspaper said. Although the foundation does not have a Core Funding Area in health per se, it awarded a grant in 2013 to the Dana-Farber Cancer Institute for work toward launching the Harvard Initiative on Health, Religion, and Spirituality. Michael Balboni, one of the institute’s three leaders, commented in an e-mail to me that “Dr. Templeton was especially understanding of the field of spirituality and health because he was a leading academic surgeon.” The Templeton Foundation “helped our initiative get started, which is especially meaningful since Dr. Templeton graduated from Harvard Medical School.”

The Templeton Foundation does, however, award grants in the field of genetics. This Core Funding Area is still in its early stages and is not accepting unsolicited proposals. John Marks Templeton (known as Sir John Templeton), who established the foundation, had a longstanding interest in genetics. He was made a “Knight Bachelor” by British Queen Elizabeth II “for his many philanthropic achievements,” according to the Templeton Foundation’s website.

Marilyn Williams was named research, evaluation, and strategic learning manager at the Colorado Trust, according to a June press release. Most recently, she was with Mile High United Way, where she was data and evaluation manager. The release noted that since 2008, Williams has been both a full-time and adjunct lecturer and researcher at the University of Denver, “focusing on health disparities, geographical information systems and other topics.” She holds a master of public health degree from the University of South Florida.

Ernest J. Wilson III, dean and the Walter H. Annenberg Chair in Communication at the University of Southern California’s Annenberg School for Communication and Journalism, has been elected to the California Wellness Foundation’s board of directors, according to his bio on the foundation’s website. He also is a member of the National Academies Board on Research Data and Information.

JOB OPENING

The Commonwealth Fund seeks someone for the position of vice president, cost control and Medicare. The position will “likely” be in the Commonwealth Fund’s Washington, D.C., office, and, ideally, the foundation is seeking a person with an advanced degree in economics or a related field. Read about other requirements for the job by clicking on the second link. I confirmed yesterday that this job is still open.