On Friday, supporters of liberty discovered an unlikely ally. The improbable champion advocating for a left-right alliance is none other than Ralph Nader.

What was equally surprising was that Nader had chosen to discuss this alliance not at a forum conducive to his beliefs, but at the Cato Institute. His willingness to speak at the revered libertarian think tank took everyone by surprise.

Nader participated in a panel discussion on his new book, Unstoppable: The Emerging Left-Right Alliance to Dismantle the Corporate State. The other participants on this panel were Daniel McCarthy (Editor of the American Conservative) and Tim Carney (Senior Political Commentator at the Washington Examiner).

The panel was moderated by Brink Lindsey, Vice President of Research at the Cato Institute.

“You heard that right. Ralph Nader is speaking at Cato,” Lindsey remarked during his introduction of Nader. “The sound you are hearing is heads popping across D.C.”

During the discussion, Nader spoke about how he believes that there are “areas of convergence” for citizens from across the political spectrum. He stated that he believes that this is the most promising alliance to bring about real change in Congress.

Nader cited the activities of the recent coalition that has formed in Congress against the Wall Street Bailouts to ending the warrantless wiretapping ability of the NSA.

Stopping crony capitalism

Nader’s main focus was on the topic of crony capitalism. He explained that it is crony capitalists and corporatists that are the common foe of economic prosperity.

In addition, he explained that these individuals are quick to invoke the name of the free market economist, Adam Smith. He said that when crony capitalists and corporatists use Adam Smith to justify their actions that they are ignoring the most important tenants of Smith’s philosophy.

“Corporatists misinterpret or conveniently avoided that Adam Smith was worried about corporate coercion as much as government coercion,” said Nader. Smith, in Nader’s opinion, was against government control because it would eventually lead to corporate control.

In unanimous agreement, all of the other panel members echoed Nader’s sentiments of the emerging alliance.

Daniel McCarthy also agreed that the issue of crony capitalism has the potential to bridge the divide between the political spectrum. “Progressives are against abuses of capitalism,” said McCarthy. “so are conservatives and libertarians.”

Mr. McCarthy referred to the abuses of capitalism as those that benefit big business and leave small businesses without the ability to survive. He went further to say that he believes this alliance presents a “tremendous alternative” to the status quo politics in Washington.

“Are they trying to crush mom and pop?”

Tim Carney added that conservatives became hypersensitive to crony capitalism in 2008. He explicitly mentioned that conservatives took notice when they saw that President Obama received $1 million in campaign contributions from Goldman Sachs employees and that the President allowed pharmaceutical companies to write Obamacare.

He stressed that there are too many institutions and outside groups that are lobbying for corporate welfare. Carney asserts that the supporters of corporate welfare operate under the premise that “because there are good things, we must preserve that.”

Carney suggested that in order to help promote this alliance, that there needs to be an institution against corporate welfare.

“Government shouldn’t be taking money from regular people and giving it to big businesses,” said Carney. “Are they trying to crush mom and pop?”

The overall tone of the panel was very positive and the members believed that there is a growing alliance not only in Congress, but in main street America.

Nader closed in kind with the same attitude. “We must focus on where we agree to help our country and our economy,” he said.

Having been once seen as the outlying political lightning rod, Mr. Nader now finds himself in a rare position to become a bridge builder in this divided country. Nader, whether he realizes it or not, has just made himself a unifying symbol against crony capitalism.

Brian Walsh Brian is from New Orleans, Louisiana and graduated last fall from the University of New Orleans with a Bachelors in Political Science. More Posts - Facebook

RELATED ARTICLES

COMMENTS