Campbell’s, the official soup sponsor of the NFL, announced three new soups with a pub taste and Clay Matthews as the 2013 “Mama’s Boy.”

Campbell’s, the official soup sponsor of the NFL, announced three new soups with a pub taste and Clay Matthews as the 2013 “Mama’s Boy.” Youtube Screenshot Caithimh Toradh: Clay Matthews Campbell's Chunky Soup Commercial

As the National Football League (NFL) regular season is ready to kick into high gear with the 2013 season opener on Thursday, Sept. 5th, football fans are ready to cheer on their favorite team and players. Campbell’s, the official soup sponsor of the NFL, has introduced three new soup varieties and announced Green Bay Packers linebacker and Super Bowl XLV champion, Clay Matthews, as the newest “Mama’s Boy.” Matthews will replace 2012 “Mama’s Boy” Victor Cruz, New York Giants wide receiver and Super Bowl XLVI champion.

Campbell’s “Mama’s Boy” campaign aims to strengthen the company’s brand while leveraging its NFL sponsorship. The campaign was first introduced in 1997 and has since then featured several high-profile NFL players to glorify what tough and focused competitors they are on the field, but what mama's boys they are off the field, said Campbell’s. “Throughout the history of the campaign, Campbell has brought passionate football fans delicious and hearty soups in flavors they love, paired with a ‘Mama’s Boy’ they can relate to,” said Mark Materacky, senior brand manager of Campbell's Chunky Soup.

Matthews will be joined by Casey Heyward and John Kuhn, Green Bay Packers teammates, in three different ads. According to Campbell, the men will take a peek into Matthews’s locker and discover a “Mom Cave” where the player is served his pre-game Campbell's Chunky Soup.

The soup company has also partnered with Matthews for the “Sacks for Soups” program to support local communities. Every time the NFL player “sacks” an opposing team’s quarterback during the 2013 NFL regular season, Campbell will donate 1,000 soup cans to a local food bank in the opposing team’s city and 1,000 cans to a food bank in Green Bay, Wis. The “Sacks for Soups” program will provide much needed relief to food banks across the United States. Campbell has also stated that it will donate $1,000 to CM3 Charitable Fund, Matthews’s chosen charity, for every “sack” that he does in the NFL regular season.

While the Camden-based Campbell Soup Company has suffered a financial loss with a reported $158 million in its fiscal fourth quarter, it still remains health-focused, reports Philly.com. Jonathan Feeney, analyst at Janney Capital Markets' Philadelphia office, told Philly.com that he liked that the soup company had refocused on selling more hearty soup in places where it is popular.

Campbell has announced a line-up of three new soups based on foods that fans love to eat when they watch the games. The following soups are now available at your local grocery store:

Campbell's Chunky - Hearty Cheeseburger Soup – 200 Calories

Campbell's Chunky - Hearty Cheeseburger Soup – 200 Calories Screenshot: Campbell's Chunky - Hearty Cheeseburger Soup

Campbell’s Chunky - Spicy Chicken Quesadilla – 190 Calories

Campbell’s Chunky - Spicy Chicken Quesadilla – 190 Calories Screenshot: Campbell’s Chunky - Spicy Chicken Quesadilla

Campbell’s Chunky Philly-Style Cheesesteak – 150 Calories

Campbell’s Chunky Philly-Style Cheesesteak – 150 Calories Campbell’s Chunky Philly-Style Cheesesteak