More than a million Bikers rumble through Washington on 9-11







Figure 1 © 2 million Bikers to DC's page on Facebook







Figure 2 Armenian Genocide of 1915 courtesy of the Blaze



By Desmond McGrath They remember the enemy that the mainstream media and the white castle choose to forget.I must say in my 40 + years of being a racer, rider and collector of classic motorcycles I have never been so proud of the unknown souls who I have passed on the varying highways and byways with a lowered left hand of greeting, than seeing what they accomplished on that day in opposition to the offensive one million Muslim march (later renamed) on the 11th anniversary of the attacks on the twin towers, Pentagon and attempted attack on another target that was thwarted by the heroic passengers and crew of flight 93 and the one year anniversary of the treasonous abandonment of Ambassador Stevens and Sean Smith, Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty to Islamic extremists.Nothing confirmed my feelings about Washington D.C. being a Potemkin's village more than the fact that I never saw any bikers on the Washington D.C. traffic cameras that day while checking numerous times during my hectic workday after observing 9 minutes of silent prayer on the time that the first building was hit and another 11 minutes of silence on the time that the second building was hit. I had book marked the camera links earlier and checked them regularly during my work. It did not dawn on me that something was amiss until I saw other videos posted by participants showing the sheer numbers of motorcyclists involved. This camera looping was more studiously documented by others giving evidence that there was a huge disinformation campaign by persons unknown to deny the new crusaders their glory in pushing back, with a non-violent show of solidarity and brotherly love against the Islamic onslaught and de-Christianization of America. Washington looks more like Pyongyang every day and less like the ideals espoused and demonstrated by first president for whom it is named.I still remember that day in 2002 vividly as I was taking a now deceased survivor of the German Internment camps to brunch and he kept telling me "It's like watching the Reichstag burning all over again" before our meal he said a grace and prayer for all who died that day and begged God to spare myself and others from what he lived through as he feared it was happening all over again.While the sniveling underwear clad thirty something leftist bloggers ensconced in their parents basement parroting slogans and agitprop opinions might view the looped videos as gospel and deny the event like many in sphere of Islamic influence deny the Jewish Holocaust of WWII or Armenian genocide of 1915, there is to quote Shakespeare "Something is rotten in the state of Denmark.""The appalling thing in the French Revolution is not the tumult but the design. Through all the fire and smoke we perceive the evidence of calculating organization. The managers remain studiously concealed and masked; but there is no doubt about their presence from the first." (Lord Acton, Lectures on the French Revolution, p. 97.)Given that the current ruler of the White Castle rose from undocumented obscurity constantly voting present with bizarre minimum of electoral challenges before his coronation speech as the Democratic Presidential Candidate "The rise of the oceans began to slow and the planet began to heal" as if he were the new messiah leading us to the promised land across the Potomac ; I wonder what Sir Winston Churchill, whose bust was quickly removed from the White House; would have to say about its current occupant considering this was his observation on Russia."Lenin was sent into Russia by the Germans in the same way that you might send a phial containing a culture of typhoid or of cholera to be poured into the water supply of a great city, and it worked with amazing accuracy. No sooner did Lenin arrive than he began beckoning a finger here and a finger there to obscure persons in sheltered retreats in New York, in Glasgow, in Berne, and other countries, and he gathered together the leading spirits of a formidable sect, the most formidable sect in the world, of which he was the high priest and chief. With these spirits around him he set to work with demoniacal ability to tear to pieces every institution on which the Russian State and nation depended. Russia was laid low. Russia had to be laid low. She was laid low to the dust. – Winston Churchill, 6 November 1919, House of Commons.I find it most intriguing that there was more Christian solidarity, brotherly love and patriotism as "One Nation under God" shown by the Bikers who rode in memory of the 9-11 victims of 11 & 1 year ago, than exists in the Sodom and Gomorrah that has become the ideological wasteland inside the beltway. Some might be shocked at that statement, but they too easily forget that Jesus of Nazareth was no quiet, cherubic choir boy, but a rebel against the status quo, an opponent of the money changers in the temple and agitator in a rebellion of love and peace against the Rome collaborating hierarchy of Judea's ruling elite, where Caesars were deified. The very symbol of Christianity, the cross, was tool of roman torture and execution, and Christianity is the only religion that has its universally recognized symbol such an instrument of brutality and death. In the world's breakneck joyride down the yellow brick road towards the New World Order, the ruling elite appear to like the idea of us talking about this dude who lived 2000 years ago about as much as the devil likes holy water. Who are these ruling elite that would deny the two wheeled crusaders recognition for their moment of patriotic reverence for those who have fallen?It should be remembered that it was the Pharisees, a small group of ruling elite, who bore the brunt of Jesus's wrath and conspired to have him Crucified, making it look like a Roman execution, despite Pontius Pilate symbolically washing his hands of the matter. Likewise there is substantial evidence that the Pharisee's starting with Salman Al Farsi, not only influenced but actually hijacked the Muhammadan foundation of Islam against not only Christianity but also non-Pharisee controlled New Testament Jews. I suggest you do your own detailed research in this matter.I would challenge all of you to take the time and start by reading Dr. Bella Dodd's "School of Darkness," you can find in those pages all the elements of subversive control that are going on now in America, from the czars in the White Castle to the Union Leadership who sold the rank and file into the slavery of Obamacare.The Pharisee's are amongst us now, glorifying Islam in school textbooks, and attacking Christianity at every turn, espousing the annihilation of Israel. Using its High Priests of Atheism like the ACLU or Michael L. "Mikey" Weinstein to purge the fundamental underpinnings of America from the Armed Services that are so often called upon to protect with their Lives and Sacred Honor the Christian foundation of One Nation under God, especially after 9/11, an attack of greater infamy than the Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor.Capitalism is not the avowed enemy of Communism, Christianity is; as well as any other religious experience that recognizes a higher power than the state and a communion with the divine. Look at China and the level of Capitalist (aka Monopolist) activity; then look at the extent they still crack down on Christians, The Buddhists of Tibet and the emerging Falun Gong.Through my friend Elizabeth Mouland, who entered Tibet covertly in 1997 and photographed the conditions existing in Tibet, I was afforded the opportunity to spend time with Palden Gyatso, who had been imprisoned and tortured by the Communist Chinese for 33 years. I had a number of philosophical discussions with him through his interpreter, and despite his very limited command of English, there were times he answered me directly in broken English, with a fire and energy in his eyes that was never extinguished by the decades of abuse and torture.The two statements that he made that still resonate with me today were in response to my question asking him why he thought the Communist treated him so. The first statement was "in Communism the state is considered divine and the leader the embodiment of that divinity, and I refused to bow to those false prophets of a godless ideology"; the later statement was "In Tibet and in (north) America Governments were constituted by the people to protect the rights conferred by God and thus manifest these immutable truths in the day to day lives of the people."Several days later there was a public event in the meeting hall of a local church, with people from all walks of life and ages. Beginning with Elizabeth's slide show followed with a talk by Palden via his interpreter and closing in a question and answer session. The horror of the tortures (the instruments thereof he had smuggled out of Tibet) he endured were so moving that one young woman in her early 20's stood up in tears and asked "What can I do to help you and your cause? Should I convert to Buddhism in support for you?" Palden's response took everybody by surprise."If you want to know my experience and help my cause, you should first get to really know your religion Christianity. What I experienced pales in comparison to what Jesus of Nazareth endured in his death, or Christian martyrs have endured since then to pave the way for the lifestyle you take for granted. Our enemy is a common one, an enemy that never sleeps, an enemy that abhors the divine creation of Man and Man's adoration of his Creator"We have an enemy amongst us now, the puppets of the Pharisee's, the pawns of Babylon's Banksters. The mainstream media and Hollywood are not an arm of the White House propaganda machine, but rather like the undocumented occupant of the oval office, myriad puppets, whose masters are studiously hidden, weaving the tapestry of lies and forging the shackles of enslavement. It is the total denial and obfuscation of America's Christian Heritage, a purging of the sacrifices made and deprivations experienced by the founders of this great nation as the only truly free nation in the known history of mankind as One Nation under God.In my opinion, the bikers ride to Washington was more important than any Medieval Crusade or any conscripted pilgrimage to Mecca. It did not grow out of a religion that forces conversion at the barrel of a gun or the sting of a cold steel blade at the back of one's neck. It was born of the freedom from religious persecution upon which America's roots of the Liberty tree became firmly planted; that despite the decadence of Hollywood and the high priests of Moloch constantly legislating from their courtroom positions of anointment by unholy oil, against our Christian heritage; America is still a Christian nation. A nation of rugged individualists, steeped in American exceptionalism, of trailblazers and patriots who recognize each other on their two wheeled iron steeds, exercising their freedom, and being unafraid to speak their mind.Political correctness is nothing but a Marxist method of turning the rugged individualists of American Exceptionalism into the panty waisted metrosexual graduates of liberal colleges. I rather break bread and share a drink with a biker with a working man's Phd who is not afraid of speaking his mind than waste my time with someone whose true ideology is not known until you vote them into office and they set about making the country in their image.The question is, will the rest of America follow the bikers example and heed the words of the founders of this great nation and refuse to surrender to monarchical ambitions being decreed daily from the White Castle? Or do we as Alexander Solzhenitsyn described "Cower under our staircases powerless and unarmed at every knock on the door out of fear of the organs of the state?"As for me as long as my lungs can breathe air I will shout out against the tentacles of tyranny that nightly grows, as long as my heart beats espouse my love and respect for what God has wrought through his most humble servants who signed the Declaration of Independence and Constitution, as long as my hands can write I will commit my opposition to totalitarianism, and as long as my legs can hold up my iron steeds on the turnpikes and byways I will seek out others who cherish their freedoms and liberty to cruise the nations roadways, unafraid to speak their minds or show their patriotism by their deeds as they did for 9/11.© Desmond McGrath