"The Pirates of Penzance" will be the first Gilbert and Sullivan production by the CU College of Music since 2006. ( Glenn Asakawa / University of Colorado )

Related Stories 'The Pirates of Penzance' at Macky is a glorious romp

If you go What: CU Opera presents "The Pirates of Penzance" by Gilbert and Sullivan When: 7:30 p.m. Friday, Oct. 24-Saturday, Oct. 25; 2 p.m. Sunday, Oct. 26 Where: Macky Auditorium, 285 University Ave., University of Colorado campus, Boulder Tickets: $14-$38 Info: 303-492-8008 or cupresents.org

Not so long ago, the light operas of Gilbert and Sullivan were regular summer fare at the University of Colorado's College of Music. Even in the early 2000s, "H.M.S. Pinafore," "The Mikado," "Iolanthe," and "The Pirates of Penzance" were performed as part of the summer musical theater and operetta program. In the 1980s, the summer festival was entirely devoted to these so-called "Savoy operas."

But that program was ended in 2010, and a G&S show has not been staged at CU since 2006. That changes next weekend, when "The Pirates of Penzance" opens the 2014-15 CU Opera season at Macky Auditorium.

The production replaces the planned staging of Cole Porter's "Kiss Me Kate," which was canceled because of contractual issues with the publisher.

Program director Leigh Holman characterizes the replacement as a "happy accident."

"Sometimes things fall apart because other things are meant to present themselves," she said. "We always wanted to do something light and sparkly, with English singing and dialogue, to begin the season."

Music director Nicholas Carthy noted that, when the change was made, auditions already had been held for "Kiss Me Kate."

"We had to look at what we could do with the people who auditioned," he said. "And this fit perfectly."

As was done with last spring's production of a Stephen Sondheim revue, the opera singers from the College of Music are joined by students from the Department of Theater and Dance. The show is double cast, and one performer from each program was cast in the iconic role of the Major General.

Holman said that bringing back Gilbert and Sullivan has been her goal for a while. She said the style of "The Pirates of Penzance" is lighter than grand opera but requires more classical vocal work than most musical theater.

"The tunes are so memorable, and the humor is relevant, even if it is a little dated."

And, she added wryly, "Pirates," written in 1879, is in the public domain.

The summer festival was held in the small Imig Music Theater. Staging the piece in the cavernous space at Macky is an entirely new undertaking. There are new sets, including a ship deck on the stage, and everything will be grander.

Holman said the piece is a delightful mixture of ridiculous comedy and beautiful music. Carthy added that it veers between parody and sentiment with breakneck shifts.

The musical style owes a lot to European composers such as Rossini and Offenbach. Carthy noted the enormous amount of sung text.

"The verse songs are extremely difficult to pull off," he said. "The text, which is incredibly witty and clever, is also extensive. There are thousands of words for the actors to cope with. It really taxes their ability both to project the words and to sing a vast number of them in a short amount of time. We're talking about an incredibly high number of words per minute."

The most famous example of this, of course, is the patter song of the Major General, which is still parodied extensively and remains a part of popular culture in film and television.

Holman explained how the political humor and satire, which are so integral to the work, can be made relevant today.

"Obviously some of these 19th century references are very dated," she said, "but it is common to update them for the time of the performance, to make the humor current."

To that end, there will be some pointed references to 2014 politics and news, and a few anachronistic props.

Carthy said the enduring popularity of Gilbert and Sullivan lies in that comedy.

"It's really the root of all British humor," he said. "Monty Python has obvious roots in the Savoy operettas. You see it throughout British culture, and it really represented the birth of English populist entertainment."

Speaking of the music, Carthy said Arthur Sullivan once was considered the greatest English composer after the 17th century master, Henry Purcell. Sullivan wanted to do more serious work, but financial concerns kept him working with librettist and lyricist William Gilbert. Some of Sullivan's hymns, such as "Onward, Christian Soldiers" and "The Lost Chord," are extremely familiar.

Carthy added that both the orchestra and chorus are enjoying the preparation immensely.

"It's well written and crafted," he said, "and sometimes lighter stuff is more difficult to bring off."

He said the chorus includes a lot of "real individualists" who understand that humor is hard work.

"We have a lot of hilarious little cameos in the choruses and lovely individual details," Carthy said. "It's incredibly enjoyable watching it all come together."