From appearances, Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid derives little pleasure from his job, perhaps a deputy to the paragon of joylessness.

Alternatively, he is up in arms:

Up in arms:

Up in arms:

And up in arms:

Myriad issues are the sources of his frustration, such as the Koch brothers, the Koch brothers, the Koch brothers, the Koch brothers, the brothers Koch, never The Brothers Karamazov, and the Koch brothers.

If you didn’t care to click on the preceding links, here are the headlines you need to know: “Harry Reid: All Obamacare ‘horror stories’ are untrue,” “Reid calls Republicans ‘Koch addicts’ from Senate floor,” “Harry Reid blames Republican obstructionism for Russian annexation of Crimea,” “Harry Reid responds to Benghazi committee with KOCH BROTHERS,” “Harry Reid: Koch brothers are ‘one of the main causes’ of climate change.” These are chronological. Notice the, ahem, progressive meltdown, as he begins with criticism of the Koch brothers’ involvement in the national health care debate and ends with blaming the Koch brothers for climate change and Russia’s illegal seizure of Ukrainian territory. He is unable to respond to Republican action on any issue, even the investigation of the Obama administration’s response to a foreign policy disaster, without invoking the Koch brothers.

Make what you will of the Republican-backed House Select Committee on Benghazi: “Republicans care more about defending billionaires like the Koch brothers” were the opening words to Reid’s response to news of its formation.

Bitter, bitter man.

News outlets have produced supercuts in recent days depicting Reid as grumpy, ageist and racist, in light of his Asian jokes in front of a group of Asians that he later admitted were “in extremely poor taste.” The Washington Post’s Aaron Blake reminded everyone that Reid “does stuff like this a lot.” The “stuff” to which he refers is misconduct of the tongue, which says nothing of the misconduct of his office.

Life, indeed, is tough.

But Red Alert Politics has dug into the archives to demonstrate that it wasn’t always like this. In 1986, Reid, then a member of the House of Representatives, gave an interview to C-SPAN in which he discussed — effusively! — then-Sen. Paul Laxalt (R-Nevada), a close friend of President Reagan; issues affecting the state of Nevada; and his own political career.

Stills of the footage reveal that Reid was, amazingly, thrilled:

Simply thrilled!

To be there.

During this 85-minute interview, Reid lamented that Democrats and Republicans sometimes have to run against each other (“What a shame it is there has to be elections,” he said he told Laxalt, a Republican, during a conversation between the two), praised the public-service virtue of representing the constituents back home, and just downright had fun.

This video reveals a different side of Reid that modern America has rarely, if ever, seen, a once happy warrior who smiled amid the discussion of politics and local issues and spoke with respect and praise of Republicans.

Reid, of course, went on to be elected senator, and eventually became an expert at grousing and abusing the power of his office.

See a glimpse of what life looked like before, in those halcyon days: