By Sarang Bhalerao

The Eden Gardens cauldron, the partisan crowd expecting the home team to win in 15.2 overs, the lost plot in the middle overs and the hope quickly fading for the Kolkata Knight Riders finishing in the top two. Or was it? The stage was set for Yusuf Pathan to exhibit his pyrotechnics.

Yusuf carelessly hit the first ball of his innings, bowled by leg-spinner Karn Sharma, straight to deep midwicket. For a moment when the ball was in the air, there would have been a sense of disappointment in the Kolkata fans. “What have you done, Yusuf?” But in about a couple of seconds the Sunrisers fans would have said: “What have you done Anirudha Srikkanth?” And they must have kept saying that again and again. The next 20 deliveries faced by Yusuf Pathan showed why he has been retained by the Knight Riders.

Off-spinner Parvez Rasool was taken to the cleaners. A six over deep square-leg kickstarted Yusuf’s innings. A flat slog sweep offered Sunrisers second chance of Yusuf but Dale Steyn floored the catch and Kolkata motored along. Twenty-two runs came off Rasool’s over.

The next over Karn Sharma saw Yusuf hit two sixes which brought the required run-rate down considerably.

The next over was an intriguing battle. Sunrisers’ strike bowler Dale Steyn came into the attack to arrest the run riot. But Yusuf didn’t spare him either. The first ball was clubbed past Steyn for a boundary. Two sixes – one hammered over deep midwicket and the second hit over long-off – saw Yusuf giving scant respect to arguably the world’s best bowler. Two boundaries followed and 26 runs came off the over.

“I’ve never seen such an innings. It was unbelievable hitting,” said KKR skipper Gautam Gambhir who, for a change, was smiling and demonstrating his ecstasy. Sport sometimes compels one to bring out such reactions reflexively.

Yusuf registered the fastest fifty in the IPL history – timing the innings to perfection when his side had an arduous task of chasing down the total in 15.2 overs.

The seventh six of Pathan was bludgeoned over deep midwicket as the equation came down to run-a-ball. Yusuf was out the next ball caught at deep midwicket. Had the catch been taken 21 balls earlier it would have been Kolkata who would, in all probability, have headed for the Eliminator in Mumbai.

“I know how much I work hard in nets and in free time when there’re no matches. I just keep backing myself. It’s like being well prepared before an exam. I don’t care about what people say,” said Yusuf reacting to the criticism he has faced all this while for not performing consistently.

This is some resurgence from the side that was quizzical after seven games – winning only two. Seven games later, they won all of them and are serious title contenders. With Robin Uthappa in red-hot form (scoring nine consecutive 40-plus scores in IPL 2014), the bowling in top form and Yusuf too coming into the party, Kolkata have a great chance to go to Bangalore on June 1.