New charges have been brought against sniper Eric Frein after the discovery of a letter he wrote to his mother and father explaining how gunning down two Pennsylvania state troopers was all part of his majestic plan to “wake people up” and start a revolution. Frein ambushed the two troopers in September — killing Corporal Bryon K. Dickson II and critically wounding Trooper Alex Douglass, who remains hospitalized.

Frein was a self-styled “survivalist” and right-wing extremist who spent most of his time playing dress-up as a Serbian soldier (because he liked the uniform best) and doing military reenactments. Friends of his told reporters that he may have been attempting to reenact the first Rambo movie.

After spending 48 days in hiding, and making it to the FBI’s 10 Most Wanted list, Frein was captured on October 30 near an abandoned airfield in Pennsylvania. He was charged with first-degree murder and attempted murder, and is now being charged with two additional terrorism as his letter to his mother and father suggests that the shooting was a political act.

The letter states:

Our nation is far from what it was and what it should be. I have seen so many depressing changes made in my time that I cannot imagine what it must be like for you. There is so much wrong and on so many levels only passing through the crucible of another revolution can get us back the liberties we once had. I do not pretend to know what that revolution will look like or even if it would be successful. Tension is high at the moment and the time seems right for a spark to ignite a fire in the hearts of men. What I have done has not been done before and it felt like it was worth a try. If I am dead I would like to be buried in a wood casket (no lead lined casket!) so that my remains can return to where they came from. I realize that this may not be possible though, laws and what not, so don’t sweat it. Also, light a candle for me at the Russian or Greek Orthodox church in Stroudsburg from time to time. It doesn’t need to be during a liturgy, just whenever they are open. I am sure you can figure it out. I do not have a death wish but I know the odds. I tried my best to do this thing without getting identified, but if you are reading this then I was not successful. If I am still alive and free know that I will do my best to remain as such. And as time goes by, if circumstances change, if my spark hit good tinder, then I may be able to return one day. I am sorry. You guys are great parents, I am just not a good son. I squandered so much opportunity and support and rarely tried my best at anything. God knows I do not deserve the things I had, maybe He knew I would be sacrificing all of it in the end, or maybe this is just the final squander. Who knows. I love you. Please forgive me of my many faults. And thanks for putting up with me for so long.

I’m sorry, but I have to say this–fuck this guy. Corporal Dickson’s kids have to grow up without a father because Eric Frein was mad that the world wasn’t the way he wanted it to be? And really–what did he think was going to happen? He was going to kill these random troopers and then everyone would be like “Oh! Hey! That guy sure has a great, if incredibly vague, point about the way this country should be! Let’s all go back to the way things were in the 1800s so we don’t keep upsetting a bunch of losers who think their lives would have been better if they had been born back then!”

He’s mad that his life didn’t turn out the way he wanted it, but admits he barely tried, and that he squandered opportunities. What are opportunities if not liberties? What freaking “liberties” were being so cruelly stolen from him? What? Was he mad about Obamacare? Did a man have to die because he was upset about Obamacare?

Frein states, “[w]hat I have done has not been done before and it felt like it was worth a try.” Actually yeah. It has been done before. People are murdered every day by scumbags like Eric Frein, and I’ll bet you they all think they have fabulous reasons for their crimes as well. His crime is not special.

He claims to have been a history buff. Well, if he had paid a bit more attention to the way these things usually work out, he might have realized that they usually don’t work out in favor of the assassin. John Wilkes Booth didn’t get his way on the Civil War. Charles J. Guiteau didn’t get to hold office, and, in fact, his attempted assassination of Garfield spurred support for the Pendleton Civil-Service Reform Act, which was one of the things he was hoping to prevent by Arthur being president. John Hinckley, Jr. did not win the affections of Jodie Foster.

I realize it’s easier to just write Frein of as a random psycho–although he has no history of mental illness that I know of. However, he’s also the product of an extremely toxic mind-set that is actually held by a not-insignificant number of people.

You ever go to the TheBlaze.com? Nearly every advertisement on there is for “survivalist” supplies that will ostensibly be needed in the near future when the jack-booted thugs raid the homes of innocent conservatives in order to take away their guns and send them to FEMA Camps. You ever listen to Alex Jones or other conspiracy theorists? That guy literally just compared net neutrality to Hitler. Gordon Klingenschmitt, a disgraced ex-Navy Chaplain who was just elected to be a Colorado State Senator firmly believes that President Obama is possessed by a demon. I mean, if you really, really believe that stuff, almost any of it, you don’t have to be “mentally ill” to believe you have to take drastic measures to stop it.

It’s possible that if Frein didn’t latch on to right-wing ideology, that he would have latched onto something else and killed people anyway. I’m not saying that couldn’t have happened. I’m also not saying that there aren’t people who have killed or attempted to kill others for leftist reasons–Czolgolz claimed he was an anarchist and was obsessed with Emma Goldman, Squeaky Fromme said she tried to assassinate Gerald Ford because she loved the environment so much, among other examples. However, I think the rhetoric on the far right has gotten so extreme that it’s gotten to the point where it practically encourages this type of action as the only option left.

I hope Frein doesn’t get the death penalty. I really, honestly do. To give him the death penalty would be to give him the martyr’s death he so desperately wants. I want him to spend the rest of his life in prison. I want his cell adorned with the pictures of the children whose father he took away, so he has to look at them every day. So he can’t go on thinking he’s some kind of hero. I want him to have to live with it. I want him to see what it is like to really have your liberties taken away.