Sandra Bernhard is “thrilled” about the U.S. shift in policy with Cuba — and scared. “I’m shaking in my boots for those people. I hope they don’t go down there and plunder the island and establish Chick-fil-A’s everywhere,” she tells the Daily News.

“But it’s very exciting,” adds Bernhard. “Cuba has a thriving and vibrant people and they deserve to have proper food and medicine. And I’ve wanted to go there for a long time.”

The keen-eyed, sharp-tongued comedian’s immediate travel plans involve trekking from Chelsea, where she lives with longtime girlfriend Sara Switzer and 16-year-old daughter Cecily, to Joe’s Pub, where “Sandra Bernhard is #blessed,” runs from Dec. 26-31.

With 238,000 Twitter followers, Bernhard is a social-media maven. She concedes that the title of the show is laced with “more than a bit of irony,” aimed at Twitwits who “throw around these fake terms of thankfulness like they’re flipping flapjacks. There’s no true feeling,” she says. Bernhard loves exposing phonies, especially when they’re celebs.

Still, Bernhard, 59, means it when she says she’s blessed. “I have a great life and continue to do what I love doing — turning culture on its ear and lifting up different carpets and showing the dirt,” she tells Daily News theater critic Joe Dziemianowicz. “We all have things we’ve swept under the rug.”

"Devious Maids" star Roselyn Sanchez mixes naughty with nice in a Pamella Roland suit at the People Magazine Awards in Beverly Hills. (Jon Kopaloff/FilmMagic) Model Suki Waterhouse stays cool in a tiered Burberry dress and sneakers at a Burberry Beauty event in Coex Mall in Seoul. (Han Myung-Gu/WireImage)

The “#blessed” work is a signature mashup of personal observations, barbed zingers and songs performed in Bernhard’s distinct style. “My work is very personal and cathartic. I write material throughout the year,” she says, adding that she folds in topical tidbits and breaking news.

One is Sony’s shelving of the James Franco-Seth Rogen comedy “The Interview.” “There might be references to that, but they’d be through the back door,” she says. “I like to make myself a part of the situation.” She admits she plays fast and loose with reality, noting, “You never know what’s true.”

Beyond North Korea, the region of South Kardashian — as in Kim K’s celebrated caboose — is in Bernhard’s crosshairs. “My take on that is at midterm elections no one voted,” she says. But when it came to Kim K’s “bare ass, people voted and blew up the Internet.” Ice bucket challenges, royal visits and nutty Manhattan real estate are expected talking points. “Never a dull moment is all I can say,” she deadpans.

Bernhard has been described as being more mellow and less corrosive than before. “I never wanted to be hurtful, to take the piss out of people. As you evolve as a person you see things from a different angle. At 22 you don’t see the full picture. At 50 and when you have a child, of course, you change — and have more heft intellectually, spiritually and emotionally.”

Model Nykhor Paul will help start the ball drop in Times Square on New Year’s Eve. (Astrid Stawiarz/Getty Images for Fashion FilmFes)

SUDAN HAS PARTY OF THE YEAR

Model Nykhor Paul will help start the ball drop in Times Square on New Year’s Eve. But from the way the South Sudanese model and refugee describes it, the famous party sounds quite restrained compared to her New Years growing up.

“In South Sudan or in Ethiopia, in the refugee camp where we grew up, (New Year’s Eve is) a huge deal,” she told Confidenti@l. “Especially because we only celebrate Christmas, New Year’s and Easter. We don’t celebrate birthdays or anything.”

“In South Sudan we’d have a huge celebration where we would kill massive animals and have a huge feast,” she said. What have you got to top that, Ryan Seacrest?

Regardless, the model, who moved to the US in 1998 and has walked the runway for Vivienne Westwood and Rick Owens, says her first Times Square experience will be a night to remember. “I lived in Nebraska, so I’ve watched it on TV,” said Paul, who will press the button that starts the ball moving along with fellow representatives from the International Rescue Committee. She adds, “It’s like Cinderella going to the ball.”

Paul added that her wish for 2015 is that, “With the work that they do at IRC, I hope that we all come together to lend more help to the South Sudanese.”

We knew Emily Mortimer would be the kind of girl you want at a party. (Mike Marsland/WireImage)

MORTIMER’S GREAT WRAP SESSION

We knew Emily Mortimer would be the kind of girl you want at a party. A spy at the wrap party at the Leonora for her HBO show, “Doll & Em,” tells Confidenti@l that not only did the English beauty “hand out gifts that she personally crafted with her co-star Dolly Wells to her adoring crew,” but she “danced up a storm to Whitney Houston’s ‘I Wanna Dance With Somebody’ with her gal pals.”

PORN STAR GETS GRILLED

Porn star Christy Mack was spotted entering the Central Park South offices of periodontist Dr. Nicholas Toscano this week with an HBO film crew it tow. Toscano offered to repair Mack’s grill gratis, after seeing the damage allegedly inflicted on her by Ultimate Fighter boyfriend Jonathan “War Machine” Koppenhaver, and estimated the fixes will take six months. He’s also worked with Presidents Bill Clinton and George H.W. Bush.

Miri Ben-Ari was honored at the America-Israel Cultural Foundation’s 75th anniversary gala. (diane l cohen) Guess we know which way Robert De Niro’s leaning for the 2016 primaries. (Mike Pont/FilmMagic)

HIGH NOTE FOR VIOLINIST

Grammy-winning violinist and humanitarian Miri Ben-Ari was honored at the America-Israel Cultural Foundation’s 75th anniversary gala at Jazz at Lincoln Center. Ben-Ari told the crowd: “It was very powerful to come full circle with the foundation that once helped me pay for my violin lessons and also gave me my first violin at the recommendation of legendary violinist Isaac Stern.” Ben Ari called the entire night a “dream come true.”

Ciara sported a risqué look on the streets of Los Angeles. (VIPix / Splash News/VIPix / Splash News) If anyone knows how to create a fan frenzy, it’s Rihanna. (REX USA/REX USA)

DE NIRO: HIL OF A ROLE

Guess we know which way Robert De Niro’s leaning for the 2016 primaries. At the Ripple of Hope event, where the “Good Fellas” star was being honored for human rights work, De Niro got the lefty crowd going when he gave a nod to Hillary Clinton’s much-predicted presidential run.

“When we agree that it’s a human right to have reasonable and responsible medical care, we won’t fight about Obamacare, or whatever it will be called,” he said from the stage, before pausing and adding, “Hillarycare?”

CIARA IS HAIR APPARENT

It looks like Vogue hired an entire beautification army just to design the proper placement of Ciara’s hair for an upcoming shoot. That’s understandable, since there’s so much of it. The singer sported a risqué look on the streets of Los Angeles, but it was hard to tell if she’s gotten rid of the “N” tattoo on her ring finger, which represented ex-fiancé Future’s real name.

A TOWERING FIGURE

If anyone knows how to create a fan frenzy, it’s Rihanna. Wearing a Louis Vuitton jumpsuit, the pop star personally chose a few dozen of her biggest fans for a video alongside her in Paris, next to the Eiffel Tower. A French gossip site noted that the shoot was related to the “R8 Experience,” which could be connected to her upcoming album, rumored to be called “R8.”

Simon Cowell and Lauren Silverman enjoying their holiday in Barbados. (infitmi-04/INFphoto.com)

SIMON SAYS VACATION

As someone who took his first vacation at just 15 days old, Eric Cowell is already a well-traveled baby. Now the 10-month-old can add a Barbados stamp to his passport. Simon Cowell and fiancée Lauren Silverman jetted off to the Caribbean island as a family, and enjoyed jet-skiing around the crystal-blue water. Silverman was also seen showing off her impressive post-pregnancy figure in a tiny white bikini.

Simon Cowell's girlfriend Lauren Silverman and their baby son Eric while on holiday in Barbados. (ABFR/Abaca/AKM-GSI)

MAUI GONE WILDE

Olivia Wilde flaunted her enviable bikini body while spending the day on a beach in Maui. The 30-year-old actress wore a Mara Hoffman “Supernova” print bikini while frolicking in the sand, while fiancé Jason Sudeikis relaxed with what we imagine was a fruity drink.

SEEN & HEARD

Jesse James Decker will lead the Jets’ halftime holiday spectacular, singing her song “Baby, It’s Christmas” during husband Eric Decker’s last home game of the season. … “The Wolf” author Lorenzo Carcaterra dining with son Nick at Bottino. ... Chloe Grace Moretz’s stylist using Oscar Blandi hair products on Chloe at the People Magazine Awards. … “World’s Greatest Storyteller” T. Berry at First Ave. and Fourth St.