Photo

If you have lingering questions about drones — particularly about whether they can take nice pictures of a farm — allow Martha Stewart to reassure you. She recently posted the following on her blog:

“One of my security detail, Dominic Arena, recently purchased a DJI Phantom flying camera. These drone-like, radio controlled aircraft are lots of fun to play with and they take extraordinary photos. However, controlling them takes practice and getting used to. Since my farm has lots of open fields, Dominic thought it would be the best place to get acquainted with his new toy. The results were amazing!”

On Twitter, she offered more thoughts on unmanned aircraft:

#the martha blog has amazing photos of my farm taken by a drone! We love the possibilities and opportunities drones offer. Do you? — Martha Stewart (@MarthaStewart) July 9, 2014

http://t.co/b2YyxhGHbK was a huge hit today- displaying photos of my farm taken by a DRONE! controversial but fabulous, drones do a good job — Martha Stewart (@MarthaStewart) July 10, 2014

To dedicated Martha watchers, her drone allegiance is old news. Rich McCormick of The Verge notes that she was already talking up the technology to Vanity Fair back in May. At an Hermès event (during which she also rode on a mechanical horse), she told the magazine that her drone “flies all over my farm and takes pictures” and that “you can use it inside also, but I don’t, because it can bang into stuff.” Asked if the drone ever frightened her neighbors, she laughed and said: “No. I don’t have any neighbors.”

Also in May, Alyssa Bereznak of Yahoo noticed a mention of the Parrot AR.Drone 2.0 Power Edition in Martha Stewart Living. Ms. Stewart wrote therein:

“Parrot, a French company, makes fantastic high-tech products, like this remote-control drone, or quadricopter. It takes photos and even high-definition video. I operate it from my iPad and can send it out over the farm — I love getting overhead shots of the gardens and livestock.”

This is a different drone from the DJI Phantom Ms. Stewart praised last week — comparing the two at The Verge, Mr. McCormick points out that the Phantom is “more advanced.”

It’s unclear how Ms. Stewart’s livestock feel about their continuing aerial surveillance, but others have some concerns. At The Washington Post, Caitlin Dewey writes:

“There’s something a little jarring about hearing a drone endorsement from Stewart, a lady best-known for her embrace of all things fussy, florid and otherwise unmodern. It’s not a breakthrough moment for the technology, exactly — but it’s certainly a glimpse at how mainstream America might use it.”

And at Time, Medea Benjamin, a cofounder of the peace advocacy group Codepink, writes that many drone companies are in the process of rebranding, publicizing the more peaceable uses of their products and even moving away from the word “drone.” But, she argues, this shouldn’t distract us from the necessity of regulating the technology: “Not even Martha Stewart can sweep aside the important ethical and legal issues that have arisen with President Obama’s killer drones, or the deployment of autonomous drones or the coming use of domestic spy drones.” She says Codepink has tried to work with drone manufacturers on regulation to little avail and concludes: “Rather than ignoring or white-washing the problematic nature of killer drones, spy drones and autonomous killer robots, the industry — and drone enthusiasts — should work with the human rights and peace communities to distinguish between good, the bad and the ugly.”



Others, however, have focused on how drone use will fit into Ms. Stewart’s already-crowded technological life. In May, Ms. Bereznak cited an earlier episode when Ms. Stewart repeatedly tweeted about her broken iPad, apparently hoping that an Apple technician would come to her home and fix it. “If how she dealt with that situation is any indicator of her ability to operate a drone,” wrote Ms. Bereznak, “may god have mercy on us all.”

And Sage Lazzaro of Betabeat reminded readers of Ms. Stewart’s penchant for tweeting pictures of gloppy food: “Your drone pics are alright, but sorry, we’re still not excited about your infamously horrific food photos.”

Perhaps in future Ms. Stewart’s food pictures will be taken by drone.