Under Abe’s leadership, nation shifts from pacifism to militarism with Obama’s apparent blessing.

A Shinto priest leads Japanese Prime Minister Shinzo Abe into the controversial Yasukuni war shrine in Tokyo on Dec. 26. (Photo: Toru Yamanaka, AFP/Getty Images) Story Highlights After World War II Japan's new constitution renounced warfare and offensive military capabilities.

But now the prime minister is making moves to turn country into a militarized national security state.

This direction meshes with Obama's visions for containing China.

At the end of World War II, the world understood the viciousness of Japanese militarism. Japan had left a bloody trail from Korea to China to Southeast Asia and well beyond. Under the guidance of Gen. Douglas MacArthur, postwar occupation authorities drafted a constitution for Japan, which included Article 9 renouncing warfare and offensive military capabilities.

Tribunals across Asia led to thousands of war criminals being jailed and as many as 900 executed. But U.S. authorities pardoned some war prisoners, believing they would be useful to fight against communism. Among those pardoned was Nobusuke Kishi, who became prime minister. A defense pact Kishi struck with the U.S. was so unpopular, he was driven from office.

Today, Kishi's grandson, Shinzo Abe, is prime minister and is doing to Japan what Attorney General John Mitchell predicted Richard Nixon would do to the U.S. — drive the country "so far to the right you're not even going to recognize it."

War on pacifism

Last year, Abe's efforts to tilt Japan rightward began cautiously. His previous stint as prime minister had run aground when he moved too quickly to impose his nationalist agenda. This time, he focused first on reinvigorating Japan's sclerotic economy. The strategy worked, and his approval ratings rose. He also issued shrill warnings about threats posed by a militarily modernizing China and an erratic, blustering North Korea. Only then, in recent weeks, did he and his right-wing allies train their sights on their real quarry — demolishing the last vestiges of Japan's postwar pacifism.

His recent actions speak volumes: increasing defense spending for the first time in a decade; purchasing advanced weapons systems; adopting a new defense posture; meeting Chinese belligerence in the East China Sea with belligerence of his own; pushing constitutional reforms that restrict freedom of assembly and speech; creating a U.S.-style national security council; easing restrictions on Japanese overseas arms sales; and promoting "patriotic" (i.e. false and sanitized) interpretations of history in Japanese schools and textbooks.

There are signs that Abe could be overplaying his hand.

He rammed through a new secrecy law that criminalizes the leaking or reporting of national security information despite opposition by 82% of the public. He infuriated China, South Korea and other Asian nations by visiting Yasukuni Shrine, which honors Japan's war dead, including 14 war criminals. In late December, he pressured Okinawa Gov. Hirokazu Nakaima into authorizing relocation of the large U.S. Marine base from Futenma to Henoko, a pristine area in northern Okinawa. In poll after poll, Okinawans have overwhelmingly opposed this move.

Last month, the people of Nago, where Henoko district is located, voted overwhelming to re-elect Mayor Susumu Inamine, a champion of the anti-base movement.

Stoking nationalism

But Abe's next, and ultimate step, will be even more controversial. He is determined to repeal Article 9 so that Japan can build a full-fledged national army and participate in military adventures alongside the U.S.

President Obama has turned a blind eye to Abe's saber-rattling because Japan's militarization meshes with his own plans to contain China. Obama's Asia "pivot" has heightened tension throughout the region. Obama has pushed China's neighbors to buy more arms, conducted joint military exercises, increased U.S. troop deployments and begun rebalancing the U.S. fleet and Air Force away from Europe and the Middle East toward the Pacific. He has made it clear that the U.S. will come to Japan's aid in any military confrontation with China over the disputed Senkaku/Diaoyu Islands, a largely manufactured crisis.

It is up to the Japanese people to halt their nation's transformation. But as John Mitchell understood, stopping this right-wing juggernaut will not be easy once it gains momentum. Japan's wartime history, much like recent U.S. history, is testament to how dangerous that can be.

Oliver Stone is an award-winning filmmaker. Peter Kuznick is professor of history at American University.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1eKk2CX