A renowned nurse economist who is recognized nationally for his expertise on health care workforce issues will be joining the faculty of the Montana State University College of Nursing.

Peter Buerhaus is currently the Valere Potter Distinguished Professor of Nursing at Vanderbilt University School of Nursing, director of the Center for Interdisciplinary Health Workforce Studies at Vanderbilt’s School of Medicine, and professor in the Department of Health Policy in the Institute for Medicine and Public Health at Vanderbilt University Medical Center. Buerhaus also chairs the National Health Care Workforce Commission, which is charged with identifying barriers limiting health care workforce production and encouraging innovations that can address the current and future personnel requirements of the U.S. health care system. In addition, he maintains an active research program involving studies on the economics of the nursing workforce. Buerhaus was elected into the National Academies’ Institute of Medicine in 2003.

At MSU, Buerhaus will teach graduate and undergraduate nursing courses in addition to continuing his research. He will join the university in the spring.

Buerhaus will bring extraordinary experience and expertise to MSU, said Helen Melland, dean of the MSU College of Nursing.

“We’re delighted to have Dr. Buerhaus join the MSU College of Nursing,” Melland said. “He is the preeminent nurse economist in the country, with an expertise in nurse and physician workforce issues. His contributions will be invaluable, not only to MSU, but to all of Montana. In particular, his knowledge of workforce forecasting will be indispensable as we plan for the future health care needs of our state.”

As a nurse economist, Buerhaus’ research includes forecasting nurse and physician supply, developing and testing measures of the quality of care in hospitals, determining public and provider opinions on issues involving the delivery of health care, and assessing the quantity and quality of health care provided by nurse practitioners.

Renee Reijo Pera, MSU vice president for research and economic development, said Buerhaus’ work is transformative and will advance the university’s mission of teaching, research and outreach.

“Dr. Buerhaus has an extensive and meaningful history of contributing to research, in addition to his significant contributions to teaching, education and health care,” Reijo Pera said. “We are so pleased that he will be joining MSU.”

Buerhaus said he is excited to be a member of MSU College of Nursing faculty and collaborate with others at MSU.

“I am particularly interested in understanding whether and how I can contribute to research on the rural health workforce and figuring out how my research can improve the health of Native Americans,” Buerhaus said. “Both of these topics will present new challenges that, together with enjoying the wonderful environment and culture of Bozeman, promise to make this move to MSU both professionally and personally very rewarding. I am ready to get going!"

Buerhaus’ presence at MSU is expected to have a major impact on healthcare across the state of Montana, according to Kris Juliar, director of the Montana Area Health Education Center and the Office of Rural Health.

“We need a workforce, especially in rural areas, that can deliver high quality care in an increasingly complex healthcare environment,” Juliar said. “Dr. Buerhaus’ knowledge of nursing education, family nurse practitioners and the challenges of creating the nursing workforce of the future is unsurpassed. His research, expertise and commitment to the issues facing Montana will make a major impact on the quality of healthcare delivery across our state.”

Prior to his work at Vanderbilt, Buerhaus was assistant professor of health policy and management at Harvard University’s School of Public Health, where he developed the Harvard Nursing Research Institute and its post-doctoral program in nursing health services research. He also previously served as assistant to the chief executive officer of The University of Michigan Medical Center’s seven teaching hospitals and assistant to the chief executive of the medical center.

In 2010, Buerhaus was appointed chair of the National Health Care Workforce Commission that was established under The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Once funded, and among other responsibilities, the commission will provide advice to the U.S. Congress and the president on national health care workforce policy.

Buerhaus has been a member of the American Academy of Nursing since 1993. He has also served on the Advisory Council of the National Institute of Nursing Research, National Quality Forum Steering Committee on Nursing Quality Performance Measures, Board of Directors of Sigma Theta Tau International and The Joint Commission’s Nursing Advisory Committee. He is currently an expert adviser for the Bipartisan Policy Center’s health care workforce initiative, an expert faculty member for the National Governors Association Policy Academy and a member of the Institute of Medicine Committee on Graduate Medical Education Governance and Transparency.

Buerhaus has a bachelor’s degree in nursing from Mankato State University, a master’s degree in nursing health services administration from The University of Michigan, a master’s degree in community health nursing from Wayne State University and a doctorate in economics of health care and nursing from Wayne State University. He also completed a Robert Wood Johnson Foundation postdoctoral faculty fellowship in health care finance at The Johns Hopkins University.

Contact: Helen Melland, dean, MSU College of Nursing, (406) 994-3784 or helen.melland@montana.edu