By MARI-JANE WILLIAMS

When children with autism are young, one of parents’ biggest jobs is to advocate for them. As they get older, however, it’s important for them to take on some of that responsibility.

So what steps should parents take?

“First, the child needs to be aware,” said Sharon Fuentes, the mom of a boy with Asperger’s syndrome and co-author of “The Don’t Freak Out Guide to Parenting Kids With Asperger’s.”

Once children with autism are armed with information about their specific challenges, they can advocate for themselves. But often, they lack the ability to filter how much they share, and with whom. So in addition to teaching them how to speak up for themselves, it’s important to make sure they know there are times when they might want to keep information private, said Jim Ball, the executive chairman for the national board of the Autism Society.

Here are suggestions from Ball and Fuentes on teaching your child when and how to disclose a diagnosis, and how to express what she needs:

■ Make sure children understand the difference between needs and preferences.

Before she could teach her son to go to teachers or administrators and ask for what he needed, Fuentes had to teach him there is a difference between things he absolutely must have and things he would like.

■ Have older children write a note to their teachers. Fuentes got a template from ImDetermined.org before the school year started, and had her son use it to write a letter to each of his teachers. The letter outlined who he is, what he likes and dislikes, what stresses him out and what he needs to succeed. Jay handed the notes to the teachers himself before the school year started.

“It was huge for teachers to see that,” Fuentes said. “It wasn’t just the mom saying this is what my son needs.”

■ Include the child in IEP meetings.

Fuentes said her son has begun sitting in for parts of his individualized education plan meetings. She said it has helped him understand why he gets certain services or accommodations, but not others.

It also allows him to voice concerns about situations that may be problematic for him. Not every child has the language skills to verbalize needs, but Fuentes said that even a simple yes or no, verbally, through gestures or with an assistive communication device, can boost a child’s self esteem.

■ Talk about “safe people” when it comes to sharing information. Talk to your child about when to share her needs or disclose her diagnosis, Fuentes said. Otherwise she might start telling other students, unnecessarily, and bullies could use the information against her.

■ Turn to a book. Ball likes “Ask and Tell: Self-Advocacy and Disclosure for People on the Autism Spectrum,” edited by Stephen Shore. Ball said it’s great for helping people get a grip on when to tell people about their diagnosis and when to keep the information private.