Topics: Affordable Care Act, Editor's Picks, GOP, Health Care, health insurance, Media Criticism, Megan McArdle, Obamacare, The Right, Politics News

Last week, conservative Bloomberg columnist Megan McArdle and American Enterprise Institute fellow Scott Gottlieb debated New York magazine’s liberal columnist Jonathan Chait and former Assistant Surgeon General Douglas Kamerow over the proposition that Obamacare is “beyond rescue.”

If you have an hour and a half of free time and a nearby brick wall to repeatedly smash your head into, you can watch the whole debate here. In the event that you’re unfamiliar with Salon dot com, suffice to say, I stand with Chait and Kamerow.

I didn’t write about this earlier because, even though McArdle and Gottleib won the debate in the eyes of those in attendance, I thought the proposition (which presumably they didn’t pick) was almost impossibly unfair to them. They had to convincingly argue that Obamacare had fallen into a persistent vegetative state; Chait and Kamerow could win simply by convincing people that it might come out of its coma at some point.

But then on Tuesday, McArdle imported many of the comments and arguments she used on the debate stage into a column called “Resolved: Obamacare Is Now Beyond Rescue,” so if she at any point believed the burdens of proof were stacked unevenly against her, I think it’s fair to assume that like so many conservatives she’s now completely certain that her position is correct and her arguments unassailable. Obamacare is beyond rescue.

I think this is almost definitionally wrong for two reasons, one technical and one philosophical.

Chait addressed the first pretty elegantly in his presentation, so I’ll more or less recapitulate his argument. Obamacare’s an insurance system intended, for now, to patch a large hole in the country’s safety net, which creates healthcare guarantees for most but not all Americans. It could in theory be expanded as other programs are phased out or incorporated in, but that’s a question for future years.

The system works by guaranteeing that uninsured people can buy private, regulated coverage; providing them subsidies on a sliding, so that the plans on the market are relatively affordable; and penalizing them if they opt out. A system like this becomes “beyond rescue” if very few people enter it, or carriers pull out of it en masse, or perhaps a combination of the two, precipitated by an actuarial death spiral, where an unexpectedly ill client base causes insurers to increase premiums, driving more healthy people out of the market until it fails altogether.

Obamacare might also be beyond rescue if its political liabilities are so severe that Congress will ultimately be forced to replace or repeal it, regardless of the system’s functionality.

Anything short of these kinds of critical failures belies McArdles premise.

That obviously doesn’t mean Obamacare hasn’t fallen short of expectations in any way. It obviously has, in many. McArdle’s presentation and follow-up article both include litanies of embarrassing screw-ups that have plagued the rollout. And though we can’t know for sure just yet, it’s likely that the coverage expansion will be smaller in the first year than originally anticipated. There are a lot of reasons for that. Healthcare.gov’s two-month outage is a big one; insufficiently generous subsidies is another. An active and ongoing campaign to discourage enrollment and block the Medicaid expansion in Republican-run states is a third.