The 136 physician practices affiliated with Lehigh Valley Health Network are adopting a standard naming protocol:

Lehigh Valley Physician Group, or LVPG, plus the specialty, followed by location. So, for example, Village Lane Primary Care is becoming LVPG Family Medicine-Macungie.

But the change goes far beyond nomenclature. In 2015, all LVHN physician practices, as well as all LVHN hospitals and other facilities, will be connected by a single, integrated electronic medical record called Epic.

New CEO Brian Nester announced the development at the network's annual meeting Wednesday evening.

"Epic also will help you embrace better care by allowing you to access personal health information, communicate with your doctor, schedule appointments, review and order medication, and pay your medical bills," he said. "And you'll be able to do all this from your smartphone, tablet or laptop."

The annual meeting, in an auditorium at Lehigh Valley Hospital-Cedar Crest, was Nester's first as head of the health network, the largest employer in the Lehigh Valley. The veteran LVH doctor was appointed chief executive and president last month.

Speaking to an audience of about 150 people, Nester said, "You hear a lot about great change in health care these days. …Yet at the heart of it, health care is still about one person helping another.

"Our quest to help you is being guided by a framework that's called the Triple Aim," which he defined as better health, better care and better cost.

LVHN, Nester elaborated, can achieve better health by being "accountable for the overall well-being of our entire population," better care by giving "an exceptional experience at every touch point," and better cost by embracing "the fact that quality care costs less" because it helps to keep people healthy.

The network's 2014 fiscal year — its first full fiscal year under the Affordable Care Act — ended June 30.

Its operating income, or the difference between day-to-day income and expenses, increased by $9 million, to $42 million during the 12-month period. Despite the improvement, the figure was still far less than 2012's $83 million.

Lower operating income is partly the result of a rise in observation care, which is reimbursed at a lower rate than acute care. Even so, acute admissions were up more than 2 percent to 55,000.

Also up were emergency room visits, which increased 7 percent to 190,000.

In 2014, the nonprofit LVHN increased its community benefit — a combination of free care, reduced-cost care, education and other efforts that make up the foundation of the network's nonprofit status — by 8 percent to $354 million.

The community benefit supported more than 11,000 free flu shots distributed at Dorney Park & Wildwater Kingdom in South Whitehall Township and Coca-Cola Park in Allentown, and a dental van that provides free care to more than 1,000 children yearly.

The benefit also helps to cover the growing differential between health care costs and how much Medicaid and Medicare are willing to reimburse, noted William Hecht, chairman of LVHN's board of trustees, who also spoke at the meeting.

Throughout the year, LVHN continued to grow — its payroll increasing to more than 13,000 employees, including 1,200 doctors. Besides its four hospitals, the network now runs 12 health centers, 80 testing and imaging facilities and 140 practice locations across the region.

LVHN expanded in part through consolidation, absorbing, for example, the Greater Hazleton Health Alliance. The network also opened a fitness center at the One City Center building attached to the new downtown Allentown hockey arena. Nester noted that more than 500 people joined the fitness center in its first three months.

"It's one way we're helping people who work and live in downtown Allentown take charge of their health," he said.

skennedy@mcall.com

610-820-6130