Glendale police officers are searching for a suspect who fired shots at them early Saturday morning.

At approximately 6:15 a.m., Glendale police officers heard gunshots fired outside the front of the Gateway patrol police station located at 6261 N. 83rd Avenue.

Officers observed an older blue and white pickup truck with a New Mexico license plate flee the scene at a high rate of speed.

Officers were unable to stop the vehicle but were able to obtain a license plate number.

A short time later, a little after 7 a.m., Glendale police received an anonymous 911 call of a shooting at a local convenience store located at 6300 W. Maryland Avenue. As officers responded to the area, they observed a pickup truck fleeing the area. The pickup truck was abandoned in a nearby apartment complex at 6400 W. Maryland Avenue. The pickup truck matched the description of the pickup truck from the prior incident.

Several minutes after the vehicle was found abandoned, officers were contacted by a witness at a nearby bus stop at 6400 N. 67th Avenue who stated he observed a Hispanic adult male wearing a white, possibly striped shirt at the bus stop. The witness stated he observed the male suspect firing a gun directly at the officers’ vehicles as they responded to the area.

The officers never knew they were being fired upon. A perimeter was established, and Glendale Police utilized all resources available to them to locate the suspect, including air support, SWAT and K9 units. They were unable to locate the suspect.

Glendale detectives have been diligently working this case. They have confirmed that the pickup truck observed by officers at the Gateway patrol police station was the same vehicle observed in the second incident in the area near 6400 W. Maryland Avenue. They have identified the owner of the vehicle as David Romero, an 18-year-old Peoria resident. He also goes by the name of David Herrera.

Detectives were able to contact family members and friends of Herrera. He had reportedly made statements to family earlier today that he wanted to harm himself.

Detectives have information that leads them to believe that Herrera was the driver of the pickup truck observed in both incidents. It is also believed that he may have been the 911 caller. No citizens or officers were injured during these two incidents.

Glendale police have not located Herrera and believe he may be armed. He does not have a criminal history. But police are concerned for his welfare as well as the public’s welfare.

The Glendale Police Department is encouraging Herrera to come forward and speak to detectives. Police are also asking for the public’s assistance in locating Herrera. If you have any information on his whereabouts, please contact Glendale Police at 623-930-3000 or Silent Witness at 480-Witness.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.