Former Israel Prime Minister Ariel Sharon passed away Saturday, eight years after a massive stroke put him into a coma. He was 85.

Known as “Arik” by generations of Israelis, Sharon rose to power as a military leader who led Israeli troops against Arab armies in every war from independence in 1948 until his stroke 58 years later. He was defense minister in 1982, when Israel attacked Lebanon in an attempt to oust the Palestinian Liberation Organization and reduce Syria’s stranglehold over Lebanon.

Sharon was forced to resign after Lebanese Christian militias sent into the Sabra and Shatilla refugee camps to weed out the PLO murdered hundreds of Palestinian civilians. IDF forces stood by and watched as the massacre took place.

Sharon then rebuilt hard-right leader rebuilt a controversial political career in the 1990s by championing the settlement issue. Critics labeled the hard-right leader “the Bulldozer” for his brutal clearing of Palestinian homes to make way for Jewish settlers.

Sharon’s controversial visit to the Temple Mount in east Jerusalem’s Old City on September 28, 2000 sparked the second Palestinian uprising, or Intifada – and catapulted him into the Prime Minister position a year later.

In his first term in office, Sharon spent much of his time trying to crush the second Intifada. He forged a close working relationship with U.S. President George W. Bush, who called Sharon a “man of peace” in 2002.

In 2003, Sharon began building a controversial security fence separating Israel and the West Bank. Supporters credit the fence with ending suicide bombers and other terrorists making their way into Israel. Critics, particularly the Palestinians, condemned it as an “Apartheid Wall” that unilaterally seized Palestinian land and violated their rights.

Sharon had a sudden change of heart in 2005 when he forced the very same Israel settlers he championed out of Gaza, ending 38 years of Jewish rule there and forming the basis of a Palestinian state.

Sharon’s “Hitnatkut,” or disengagement plan, was sharply condemned by both the Israeli right and left. The right saw Sharon as betraying the Israeli settlers and the Jewish state itself, while the left believed the policy was a shell game that emotionally sacrificed Gaza while quietly increasing Israeli control of the West Bank.

This dispute over Gaza prompted Sharon to dramatically leave the conservative Likud party a short time later to form the more centrist Kadima party. He was then hit with a small stroke in December 2005 that prompted doctors to put him on blood thinners. Sharon then had a massive brain hemorrhage on January 4, 2006 that put him into a coma for the last eight years.

After his stroke, Sharon was succeeded as prime minister by Ehud Olmert, who was also his successor as leader of the Kadima party. Pundits who predicted Kadima would reshape the Israeli political landscape were proven wrong as Olmert’s lackluster leadership gave way to the return of Benjamin Netanyahu. Kadima won only two parliamentary seats in last January’s election.

Hope that Sharon might eventually recover came last year, when doctors reported he showed “significant” brain activity in response to pictures of his family and audio recordings of his son’s voice. Those hopes diminished over the new year, when Sharon suffered multiple organ failure. Sharon’s family was at his bedside when he died.