Seemingly, presidential candidates from both parties feel they have the right to incite anger, envy, suspicion, doubt and fear among their constituents but feel no obligation to inform them of facts and reality.

Fact is that technology and cheap foreign labor will reduce the number and change the types of jobs in the U.S. for the foreseeable future. Reality is that capital and labor, not government, must become visionary and imaginative to accommodate the drastic but inevitable changes in foreign and domestic production and consumption.

Fact is that health costs have become inordinately high. Reality is that government legislated the Affordable Care Act when the private sector, for decades, made no serious effort to ameliorate the situation.

Fact is that we have the strongest military force in the world. Reality is that more conventional forces and aircraft carriers do not increase our advantage in asymmetrical warfare prevailing today.

Fact is that there is a gross disparity of income. Reality is that conscience, empathy and philanthropy, not just taxation, are necessary to compensate for the disparity.

Fact is that every country has the right and obligation to act in its own best interest. Reality is that foreign policy is delicate and complex.

Facts are that most Americans don't save, and Social Security is essential to the stability of our economy. Reality is that to ensure the financial stability and permanence of Social Security for future generations, we must gradually increase individual contributions and increase the eligibility age for receiving payments.

Fact is that people are genetically programmed to survive, even at the expense of others. Reality is that religion, regulation and education must combine to make a fair and just society.

Fact is that we have our problems. Reality is that America is great.

Constituents will never agree on the facts, but candidates do have an obligation to present rather than distort them.

William J. "Bill" Oliphant, Knoxville