CHICAGO- Hawthorne Strategy Group, announced today that it has appointed Cynthia McCafferty, former FleishmanHillard Senior Vice President and Senior Partner, as President. She will be co-leading Hawthorne Strategy Group alongside CEO Gene Reineke. For the last year, McCafferty and Reineke co-led Get Covered Illinois, the Affordable Care Act public education and marketing campaign. A longtime Illinois government veteran, Reineke Gene founded Hawthorne Strategy Group three and a half years ago after leaving Hill + Knowlton Strategies as U.S. Chief Operating Officer.

McCafferty's client engagements will extend beyond Chicago from Washington, D.C. on the east coast to California on the west coast where she will support clients with strategic communications council.

"With Cynthia's experience leading and counseling corporate clients across the globe, she will be a great addition to our growing team and add increased depth to our healthcare practice," said Reineke.

"My experience leading integrated public education and marketing campaigns allows me to take a more holistic approach to crafting internal and external communications strategies," McCafferty said. "While moving from a large agency to Hawthorne is a shift, I am excited to be able to provide more individualized attention to clients and support Hawthorne's growth strategy."

Reineke said, "Cynthia has already been an integral member of our team serving local clients such as Metropolitan Pier and Exposition Authority and national clients such as an association based in Washington D.C and a wearable device company in California."

Apart from her work with Get Covered Illinois, during her nearly 18 years at FleishmanHillard, McCafferty led strategic communications efforts for such clients as Home Instead Senior Care, Ascension Health, and Missouri Foundation for Health. Most recently she has worked with a strong focus on the healthcare space co-leading three public education campaigns related to the implementation of the Affordable Care Act in Arkansas, Illinois and Missouri.

McCafferty has a Bachelor's degree in American Studies from Saint Louis University and a Masters in Business Administration from Washington University in St. Louis. She began her career as environmental grassroots organizer and worked for the Missouri Democratic Party, in addition to a number of political action committees and candidates.

To learn more about Hawthorne Strategy Group visit www.hawthornestrategy.com.

This item was posted by a community contributor. To read more about community contributors, click here.