WASHINGTON -- Sen.-elect Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, Monday received four high profile committee assignments -- Energy and Natural Resources, Appropriations, Veterans Affairs and Health, Education Labor and Pensions.

Cassidy had been promised the Energy Committee slot during his Senate campaign. The panel has been chaired for the last nine months by Sen. Mary Landrieu, D-La., whom Cassidy defeated in the Dec. 6 Senate runoff.

"I am pleased with these committees," Cassidy said in a statement. "They provide opportunities to increase the number of energy related jobs, provide alternatives for Obamacare, work on behalf of Veterans and hold the federal government accountable for how taxpayer dollars are spent."

Cassidy has made repeal and replacement of the Affordable Care Act a top priority, and legislation to alter the law would be considered by the Senate Health, Education Labor and Pensions Committee, as well as the Senate Finance Committee.

Louisiana currently does not have any members of the House Appropriations Committee. Landrieu had been a senior member of the Senate Appropriations Committee, and chaired its Homeland Security subcommittee.

The Senate and House committees write major spending bills, but some of their powers have been eroded in recent years with the ban on congressional earmarks. Cassidy was one of four GOP freshman named to the Senate Appropriations Committee.

Sen. David Vitter, R-La., also spoke enthusiastically about his committee assignments when the new Republican-led Senate convenes next month. New for Vitter is a spot on the Senate Judiciary Committee.

As previously announced, he'll take over as chairman of the Senate Small Business Entrepreneurship Committee. He'll continue serving on the Senate Environment and Public Works Committee and the Senate Banking Committee. To conform with the limits on committee assignments, Vitter will give up his post on the Senate Armed Forces Committee.

Regarding Judiciary, Vitter noted that the panel oversees immigration law, as well as all judicial nominations, including for attorney general. It's possible the committee will hold hearings on a new Supreme Court nominee, given the ages of several High Court members.

"Working to secure our borders and prevent the executive amnesty from going through will all be among my top priorities," Vitter said. "We'll have the opportunity to push back on executive amnesty with one of our first major battles: the Attorney General nomination. The Attorney General is one of the lynchpins to Obama's amnesty plan, and I'll be working to get the new Congress to block this nomination."

The president has nominated Loretta Lynch, the top federal prosecutor for parts of New York City who has overseen major terrorism, corruption, and financial fraud cases.

Some Democrats had hoped the Senate would move her nomination during the current lame duck session. But Senate Majority Leader Harry Reid announced last week that he will let the new Republican led Senate take up the nomination early in 2015.

Current Attorney General Eric Holder remains on the job pending confirmation of his replacement.