Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share President Obama delivered his 6th State of the Union address in front of a new GOP dominated Congress. Here are 3 big take aways.

Congressman: Despite what his critics may say, the president leads, even when he's alone.

President Barack Obama delivers his State of the Union address to a joint session of Congress on Capitol Hill on Tuesday, Jan. 20, 2015, in Washington. (Photo: Mandel Ngan/AP)

The State of the Union is about presenting a vision, something at which President Obama excels.

This president has governed through crisis after crisis — successfully, I might add — despite unrelenting attacks from a Republican Party that has grown dramatically more radical during his six years in office.

RELATED: Obama stresses middle class in speech

MORE: Obama largely avoids immigration

He has preached cooperation in an era of division.

He has encouraged investment amid calls for austerity.

And he has consistently aimed for big objectives even when forced to go it alone.

The president remains one of the few leaders in this country who can effectively articulate a vision for America and how we can get there. Despite his opponents' efforts, that vision is what will leave a lasting legacy.

OUR VIEW: Once again, Obama wastes our time

MORE: 5 goals from 2014 State of the Union

There was a lot in the State of the Union for progressives to cheer. Middle-class tax cuts, free community college, immigration reform, extended sick leave for working families and infrastructure investments are all ambitious and just goals.

The president can rightfully claim credit for a successful recovery from the Great Recession. The Affordable Care Act is also a success and growing in popularity. Those facts alone are affirmation of his agenda and the tough choices he has made.

But for progressives watching the president's speech on Tuesday, there was also a longing for what we haven't been able to accomplish in the Obama era. For all the Republican gripes, this is a president who presented a clear progressive vision in two national campaigns and won both, handily.

It's true that campaigning and governing are wholly different exercises, but I don't believe the president is good at one at the expense of the other. The president has an impressive laundry list of accomplishments that will stand up well to the test of history.

Instead, I think progressives feel there has been so much movement in this country that we wish the federal government's policies could keep up.

Despite a vocal minority, public opinion on marriage equality is on our side and victory is increasingly within reach.

Comprehensive immigration reform has bipartisan support by a wide margin, and fewer families are suffering due to unnecessary deportations.

Most Americans are in favor of a woman's right to choose and oppose efforts to limit health-care choices.

There is populist energy on both sides demanding reform from the financial sector.

And, as the president noted in his speech, an increase to the minimum wage was approved by voters in four states in November.

We still have work to do to make sure everyone enjoys the benefits of this economic recovery. But it's telling that even Mitt Romney is talking about running for president as an anti-poverty advocate.

President Obama cited his own 2004 convention speech during this State of the Union as a reminder of how far we've come as a country. The president promised change for America, and he has delivered.

Ruben Gallego (Photo: Michael Schennum / The Republic)

As the president said repeatedly during his State of the Union, we as Americans are turning a page. We're turning a page from the problems and partisan divisions the president inherited. We're also starting to accept the changes brought by the Obama era as the new normal.

This time next year, the country will be in yet another campaign over competing visions for America. But before moving onto that campaign, the president provided a strong reminder of why Americans chose his vision for our country.

U.S. Rep. Ruben Gallego, a Democrat, is a freshman congressman representing central Phoenix.

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1JhCulL