The NFL combine boasts tremendous ratings. It has become a made-for-TV event, drawing on the unquenchable thirsts of college and NFL fans. The combine helps NFL executives verify what they’ve seen on film.

The combine can crush dreams. Pro days can revive them. Broncos general manager John Elway said he understands when quarterbacks only participate in limited drills at the combine.

“Because you can do the rest at your pro day,” Elway said.

For Colorado State players, it arrives on Wednesday. Rams quarterback Garrett Grayson, arguably the highest-rated prospect, is not expected to participate in Fort Collins. According to Colorado State, Grayson will work out for scouts on March 23, allowing time for his hamstring to heal. Grayson suffered the injury on Feb. 10 running a 40-yard dash, preventing him from throwing in Indianapolis.

However, Grayson, the 2014 Mountain West Offensive Player of the Year, continues to climb in mock drafts. ESPN’s Mel Kiper Jr. predicted last week that Grayson could be the third quarterback picked after Florida State’s Jameis Winston and Oregon’s Marcus Mariota. Kiper said that Grayson could be a late first-round selection. Other mock drafts have Grayson pegged as a second-to-third-round pick, ranked fifth behind Baylor’s Bryce Petty and UCLA’s Brett Hundley. ESPN analyst Jon Gruden recently invited Grayson to his quarterback camp, a televised production which features the players breaking down plays.

“We’re all competing to be the (No.) 1 guy. We obviously know, one and two guys are kind of at the top of this class, but as a competitor, you’re always trying to be that No. 1 guy. So every one of us — none of us are working to be the third guy, we’re all working for that No. 1 spot,” said Grayson, who did well in his combine interviews with interested teams. “You set out your goals and every day you go to the gym and every single one of us is working to be that No. 1 guy taken.’’

Even without Grayson, CSU’s pro day will feature seven scheduled participants: offensive lineman Ty Sambrailo, cornerback Bernard Blake, linebacker Aaron Davis, defensive lineman LaRyan King, wide receiver Charles Lovett, linebacker Max Morgan and kicker Jared Roberts.