My campaign experience and continued baseless attacks serve as a lesson as to why many talented people of all ideologies will not run for office.

By Monica C. Wehby, M.D.

As I reenter the world of pediatric neurosurgery after my yearlong Senate campaign and return to treating patients full time, I find myself disconnected from my political sabbatical. The skills that serve me so well as a physician were detrimental in politics, counterintuitive in a process where distortions, embellishments, and outright fabricated personal attacks are the norm.

The significant downside for anyone attempting to serve the public good that I experienced running for office was perfectly embodied by Rachel Maddow on her Feb. 5 MSNBC broadcast attacking Oregon. When I entered the race I knew that everything in my life would be fair game, but her personal attacks lobbed my way were a continuation of just the sort of half-truths, lies, and yellow journalism that political consultants advise not to defend against while campaigning. After all, doing so not only takes you off message, it spins up another news cycle. Despite my physician's instinct to deal in facts and natural desire to get in front of the cameras with the truth, I was forced to watch as distorted tales and character attacks served as the political propaganda that now passes for headline news.

However, unlike the campaign world where emotion, ideology, and - all too often - fictional attacks define daily life, surgeons operate in a world of fact and reality. It's a job where telling parents that if I don't remove a brain tumor their child will die is the norm. Treating patients is logical, not ideological. It's a world where Maddow would seemingly not be at all comfortable.

Now again a private citizen, I'd rather be writing about an important public policy issue, but am compelled to respond to these continued attacks the way I taught my four children to deal with such bullying behaviour: by standing up to it.

Repeating allegations as fact while ignoring the complete public record about a situation may make for an easy hit, but it is cheap and unethical. If anything, Maddow's snide comments about my past personal interactions and family reflect a sad truth about both her brand of feminism and society today: women who stand up for themselves or their children are criticized for it and accused of being "crazy" and "melodramatic."

I certainly understand that the opportunity for a devout liberal to humiliate both a conservative candidate and a GOP donor in one fell swoop was just too titillating to resist. Why let facts get in the way of an effective narrative, even if it has already paid off? But like all mothers I will never regret protecting my children and those I love. I wouldn't hesitate to do the same again.

As to her accusation that I am a plagiarist because staff included party talking points on my campaign website, a supposed public policy and political expert like Maddow should understand how campaigns work. Candidates from all parties spend time meeting voters and actually campaigning, not writing website material or micromanaging the professional staff hired to do so. Nevertheless, it was my campaign, so I took the hits. That's candidate life.

It's her parting blow - the claim that after campaigning against Obamacare I "applied for the job of running Obamacare in the state of Oregon" - that is such a simply obvious and obnoxious lie. Even a kid writing for a high school paper knows how easy this is to fact check.

As I told The Oregonian, I made a personal call to the governor - whom I've known for over a decade as a past president of the Oregon Medical Association - to offer my policy expertise. It was a bipartisan show of my intent to continue to try to change things for the better, election loss or not. No paperwork was involved.

Ultimately, both my campaign experience and these continued baseless attacks serve as a lesson as to why many talented people of all ideologies will not run for office. The more of a threat your ideas are to the powers that be, the more vicious and desperate the attacks become.

I tried to make a difference politically but am happy to be doing so again for my patients and their families. The Maddows of the world ensure that, unlike the medical world, the world of politics and media remain a fact-free zone.

Monica Wehby is a Portland pediatric surgeon and former Republican candidate for U.S. Senate.