Remember when you knew that it was time to “break up” with someone that you once felt something for but no longer shared those same feelings?

That’s how I feel about Speaker of the House John Boehner (R-Ohio).

I believe that this “Dear John” letter speaks for many conservative Republicans who believe that Boehner has lost his way. Having formed that opinion, it’s time for us to go our separate ways.

Dear John:

You are the Speaker of the House. That in and of itself says a lot about how others must have once valued your abilities to nobly carry out the requirements of such an austere office.

Your esteemed position was established in 1789 under the United States Constitution, during a time when the Founding Fathers were highly respected and the Constitution was unquestionably the law of the land. It was created long before President Barack Obama was born and prior to his first “apology tour” around the world.

Your position is the second in the United States presidential line of succession, right after the vice president and ahead of the president pro tempore of the U.S. Senate.

It’s a tremendous position of trust, honor, and power. The American people depend upon you to uphold that office with the dignity set forth in the Constitution and to represent them to the best of your ability.

While I can’t and don’t speak for everyone, I believe that you have failed the American people and have irrevocably lost their trust.

I believe that you have failed the American people and have irrevocably lost their trust. Share:

Several actions that you took have led me to this conclusion.

Who could forget the “Cromnibus” bill and the vote taken under your leadership, in which funding was extended for the Department of Homeland Security until February 2015 and funding for most of the federal government through September 2015, including Obamacare?

The bill did nothing, at the time, to block Obama’s illegal immigration actions which granted quasi-legal status, work permits and provided Social Security numbers to illegal immigrants.

Back in November 2014, right after the Republicans won the majority vote for both the House and Senate, you warned Obama against signing his illegal immigration executive order on amnesty and told him that the House was going to vote to repeal Obamacare.

You said then, “I’ve made clear to the president that if he acts unilaterally on his own, outside of his authority, he will poison the well and there will be no chance for immigration reform moving in this Congress, it’s as simple as that.”

It’s true, you did “vote” to repeal Obamacare, but Obamacare has not been repealed nor has it been defunded.

Additionally, Obama is closer than ever to getting his executive actions on amnesty up and running. You played a part in helping him achieve this goal when you separated the funding of the Department of Homeland Security from the issue of the executive order on amnesty.

Once again, you caved on DHS funding and this in turn gave the Democrats a long-term DHS funding bill with no immigration provisions, just like when you voted for “Cromnibus.”

If it weren’t for the court currently ordering a stay, Obama’s executive order on immigration would be in full-swing right now. Thankfully, we still have a functioning court for the most part, that can be utilized to uphold the Constitutional principles, at least for now.

You are not a leader, John! You are a “caver” and a pawn for the Democratic Party. Your comrades in politics have vowed to protect you from the “big bad” Republican Tea Party who also want to write you a “Dear John” letter but don’t have the votes to do it.

Know this, John: You will go down in political history as the Republican who helped the progressive left achieve their goals while assisting in causing the Republican Party to fail to fulfill its goals. In addition, you will be responsible for the loss of Republican Party members due to those having had enough of your apparent change of heart to represent your own party.

A principled and moral House Speaker would take the high road and admit that he no longer represents the Republican Party ideologies. He would then stepdown and turn over the position to someone who does. If you choose not to stepdown, which is most likely what you will do, then you must take the onus, along with Obama for “fundamentally transforming” this country to a place that Republican constituents do not support.

It seems that the philosophy to which you once aspired in 2013, may no longer hold any significance to you. A plaque on your desk then with words written in Latin, “Don’t let the bastards grind you down,” may be very telling as to what changed a man who came from humble beginnings and once lived a seemingly down-to-earth and blue collar life.

In closing, John, many people of the United States feel as I do and will join with me in no longer supporting the Republican Party financially or otherwise, until you have resigned as Speaker of the House. You have forgotten who you were elected to serve and conservatives have had enough.

Sincerely,

We the People of the United States of America