On Saturday, several community organizations plan to hold a rally at the former location of Piñatas Jumpolín at 1401 East Cesar Chavez Street to protest the demolition of the East Austin piñata store.

Here’s the background: The piñata store stood on the site for eight years before being demolished in February by orders of Jordan French and Darius Fisher, who own the property and wanted to rent the space for an event during the South by Southwest festival. The issue is embroiled in a legal fight, with store owner, Sergio Lejarazu, alleging in a lawsuit that his lease contract, which ran until 2017, was breached when the landowners demolished the business without giving him proper notice. The landowners have said they followed all the steps required to proceed with the demolition.

Organizations that are protesting on Saturday are; People Organized in Defense of Earth and her Resources (PODER), Raza Roundtable, Austin NAACP, Resistencia, El Concilio, LULAC District 12, and Equilibrio. They explain their reasons for doing so below in an open letter to the Austin City Council:

In response to the illegal demolition of Piñatas Jumpolín located at 1401 E. Cesar Chavez by the F&F Real Estate Ventures, owned by Darius Fisher and Jordan French, we call upon the City of Austin and the Austin Police Department to treat this as a serious act and pursue all legal channels against F&F and any others who participated or facilitated this unjustified demolition.

We further call upon the city manager to instruct city staff to deny any outdoor music permit application at this location.

We recognize racism as a driving social force in Austin. People of color have been forcibly removed throughout Austin’s history and continue to be displaced from their longstanding cultural territory in East Austin. We recognize that the black community in East Austin has suffered even a greater rate of displacement than the Latino community, and ask that this recent history be remembered in future planning and development of our city. We ask People of Color to come together to better resist gentrification.

We ask the City of Austin to support low-income, working class communities that are negatively affected through the process of gentrification. Build workforce housing with close proximity to services, including transportation. Invest in the public schools in East Austin. Support locally owned business, people of color, immigrants and ESL communities. Respect our culture, our economy and our right to live well. Austin is ours too.

And we ask all residents of Austin to recognize this act, and these tactics, as connected to the larger pattern of gentrification that people of color have been experiencing for decades. This is not an isolated incident, but part of a familiar pattern, which has been used frequently to displace people-of-color owned businesses by new unscrupulous gentrifying interests.

We urge the people of Austin to come together to support those who have been victims of the forceful displacement of their business, and all peoples who have lost their homes and neighborhoods to similar practices of development. Austin is better than that.