Long before kickoff Sunday Broncos fans began to prepare for Super Bowl XLVIII . Some scored early seats at area bars, others were stocking up on food and booze for parties. Regardless of pregame festivities, one thing was clear, Denver was united in orange Sunday.

A steady stream of customers wearing orange and blue were plying the aisles of Argonaut Wine & Liquor on Colfax Avenue Sunday morning.

Chris Nelson and Casey Roth were loading their double decker cart with “adult sodas” before heading to a friend’s place in Jefferson Park for a party.

Before getting to the checkout line the two had made the rounds through both the liquor and beer sections before deciding that an assortment of Coors, Shock Top, Sol, Tecate and Dos Equis would do.

Nelson’s excitement was bolstered by the hope of a big payday. If Nelson wins his office pool with a prediction of a 28-21 Bronco win, he will pocket $5,300, he said.

Last minute Denver shoppers stocked up Sunday morning for Super Bowl revelry.

Justin Zupancic prepared for a Super Bowl party by picking up fried chicken, queso, avocados and other guacamole makings at a King Soopers in Denver’s Capital Hill neighborhood.

Zupancic was looking ahead to a challenge: whipping up some guac for the party at a friend’s house. “I will feel pretty accomplished after I accomplish that today,” he said.

Linda Hallman, of Evergreen, arrived at the Colorado Symphony Orchestra’s “Young Person’s Guide to the Orchestra” concert at Boettcher Concert Hall, dressed in an orange jersey emblazoned with Peyton Manning’s name and number 18.

Hallman usually dresses more formerly for symphony events, she said. But she wasn’t going to miss the chance to show some love for one of her favorite players. “I love Payton Manning,” she said. ” I even followed him when he played for the Colts. He is a very intelligent athlete and definitely one of the best players in the game.”

Nearly 1,000 people were at the show, which was held at noon rather than the usual 2:30 p.m. starting time to permit people to get home in time for the Super Bowl kick-off, said Sarah Hom, the symphony’s director of sales and patron service. Anyone who wore orange and blue also paid half-price for ticket.

Philadelphia native Emily Clark was sitting in a back booth at Latin-Asian fusion restaurant Zengo, wearing a homemade jersey, one half Broncos, one half Philadelphia Eagles.

Clark’s compound jersey proclaimed her love for both the Philadelphia Eagles and the Broncos, but she said the Eagles remain her favorite team.

Still, she added, “Denver just has great fans, and nice people. I really hope Denver wins.”

Added to Zengo’s usually brunch was the “Orange Crush,” a vodka cocktail mixed with Orange Crush soda.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee