Border Patrol agent shoots, kills rock-throwing suspect - NBC San Diego Investigators say the man, suspected to be crossing the border illegally, was followed by the federal agent up a ravine and a hillside before he began throwing rocks. One rock was "estimated to be the size of a basketball." The agent was reportedly struck in the face before opening fire. The man shot died at the scene, in a rural area about four miles east of the Otay Mesa Port of Entry near San Diego.

For Boehner And GOP, Path To Immigration Reform Is A Muddle - NPR On the "political hot potato" that immigration reform has become for Republicans: "Last year, the Senate passed a bipartisan immigration reform bill, and the House decided not to take it up. But then House Republicans changed their minds briefly until they gave up again."

Stress, emotion affect immigration court judges - Philadephia Inquirer From the story: "With a backlog of 4,901 cases, Philadelphia's Immigration Court, housed on the fifth floor of a federal building in Center City, is chronically overburdened and thinly staffed, and reflects the workload crisis afflicting the nation's 57 other immigration courts. Spend a few mornings there, and see what officials and advocates say is a system at its breaking point."

Undocumented Immigrants Could Get Health Insurance In California - TIME More on the new bill introduced by California state Sen. Ricardo Lara, which would allow unauthorized immigrants to qualify for Medicaid health coverage paid by the state. Immigrants who are in the country illegally don't presently qualify for health insurance under the federal Affordable Care Act.

Living in the Shadows: Detention Centers Deaths Raise Immigrant Rights Questions - New America Media From the story, which examines deaths in immigrant detention including that of a man who died in 2012, after being held in a privately run California facility: "...there have been more than 130 other deaths since 2003 in the 250 detention centers for immigrants in the country. The causes of death range from asphyxia to cardiopulmonary arrest and drowning. More than 400,000 people pass through the national network of detention centers every year."

Arizona lawmaker proposes $30 million U.S.-Mexico border 'virtual fence' - Reuters Arizona state Sen. Bob Worsley has proposed a project with "300 watch towers, complete with the latest technology, to put what he called extra 'eyes on the ground' capable of watching over the roughly 350 miles of border Arizona shares with Mexico." His bill passed a state senate committee on Monday.