Karly Clews figures that once the Josephine Gardens dog park closes, she will have to get creative to exercise her 8-year-old, mixed-breed named Missy.

“I will probably resort to off-leash, at night, throwing the ball” in nearby City Park Golf Course, said Clews, 33.

Sunday was the last day of operation for the dog park located on a 1-acre piece of sandy ground where construction will soon begin on a new recreation center.

The park, on land the city bought to build the Central Denver Recreation Center at East Colfax Avenue and Josephine Street next to Denver East High School, was always planned to be temporary.

Dogs who live nearby run unfettered and socialize with others at the off-leash park. Owners who rely on it are disappointed that the city has rejected a request to replace the dog park in nearby City Park.

Supporters circulated petitions asking the city to replace the facility in City Park and garnered more than 3,000 signatures, said Linda Meunier, 61, who regularly brings her cattle dog mix, Mick Dundee, to the dog park.

“We are not asking them to keep this, we just want somewhere for the dogs to play,” Meunier said.

Denver Parks and Recreation has rejected the idea of providing a replacement in City Park, citing neighborhood opposition and an ongoing effort to have the park designated a landmark.

A smaller dog-play area is planned for the recreation center, but at a quarter of the size of the current dog park.

Fuller Dog Park, at 29th Avenue and Franklin Street, is the closest off-leash park to Josephine Gardens.

Many residents who live near Josephine Gardens don’t have vehicles and can’t easily take their animals out of the neighborhood, said Meunier.

Laura Geiser, 67, lives at 16th Avenue and Steele Street, and brings her gray standard poodle to the Josephine Gardens park. Her home has a very small yard, she said.

“I can’t walk him because I have back and foot problems,” she said.

In the future, she said, she will probably take Hanky to Fuller. “I want the recreation center but I would like to have a closer park. There are a lot of people here that have dogs,” she said.

Dawn Richardson, 43, has been bringing her 1-year-old Labrador mix, Saki, to the park three to four times a week. She was upset when she saw signs on the park fence informing users that it would soon close.

“So many dogs here live in apartments. There is a real need for this, it is one of the densest neighborhoods in the city,” she said.

Local dogs need the park, where they can interact with others, and become socialized with both dogs and people, Meunier said.

“People are going to go renegade and they are going to start letting their dogs off leash in (City) park,” she added.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or @dpmcghee