Click here for full election results

After prevailing in bruising Republican primary Tuesday, Venice doctor Julio Gonzalez is poised to win the Florida House District 74 seat representing most of southern Sarasota County.

Gonzalez edged attorney Richard DeNapoli in a race that was one of the most expensive and negative primaries in the state. The campaigns pounded each other in television ads and campaign mailers that flooded district voters.

“I’m relieved, because it is over,” Gonzalez said Tuesday night from his victory party at Ophelia’s Pasta House in Nokomis. “My family doesn’t have to go through all of this anymore.”

With no major party opposition in November, Gonzalez is expected to easily defeat a pair of write-in candidates on the ballot and replace state Rep. Doug Holder, R-Osprey, who is in his final term.

Gonzalez, 50, campaigned as a conservative Republican who will fight the implementation Common Core education standards, opposes expanding Medicaid in Florida under the Affordable Care Act and would have opposed allowing undocumented immigrants who graduate from Florida high schools to get in-state college tuition rates.

“I’m going to be a representative that is there to honestly try to solve the problems and address the needs of the district to the best of my abilities,” said Gonzalez, an orthopedic surgeon who has lived in Venice for 10 years.

The two candidates combined to spend more than $660,000 in their battle to win a two-year term that pays just over $30,000 a year. In addition, political groups poured in at least another $900,000, for a combined $1.5 million used primarily on attacking ads on TV, in mailers and on the Internet.

Gonzalez had to overcome attacks by DeNapoli about why Gonzalez gave a $500 donation to U.S. Rep. Debbie Wasserman Schultz, a Democrat. Gonzalez said the donations were part of an effort to help get a meeting with Wasserman Schultz and influence her on medical issues. Gonzalez said it didn’t work. Instead the meeting went so badly, it partly inspired him to run for office.

During the campaign, Gonzalez repeatedly stressed that DeNapoli, who moved to Sarasota County in 2013, didn’t know the area well enough to represent it in Tallahassse.

Gonzalez said he believes DeNapoli’s short-time residency played a big role in the race.

“I think it is important that people select people to represent them from their communities,” Gonzalez said.

Gonzalez benefitted from a strong endorsement from U.S. Sen. Marco Rubio, a Miami Republican, down the stretch. Rubio made television ads that blanketed Sarasota in an effort to help Gonzalez.

“I am forever indebted to him,” Gonzalez said.

DeNapoli, who called Gonzalez to concede and endorse him, said he had no regrets. He said he didn’t have the money to overcome the outside political committees that helped Gonzalez.

The Florida Medical Association alone spent more than $375,000 through a pair of political action committees to run ads against DeNapoli.

“We were just outspent,” said DeNapoli, who added he intends to remain in Venice.