Magna International, North America’s largest auto-parts maker by sales, is easing off on acquisitions because potential targets have become too expensive.

“Valuations are pretty high on the M&A side,” said Vincent Galifi, the Canadian firm’s CFO, in an interview with CFO Journal. The company hasn’t done any deals this year, after completing four deals in 2012, including the roughly $380 million purchase of German pump manufacturer ixetic GmbH.

Magna’s hesitation on the M&A front reflects a broader trend. Surging stock markets have pushed up market capitalizations overall, which is one factor behind a 15% drop in M&A activity this year. According to Dealogic, companies have announced 32,746 deals globally so far this year, down from 38,757 at this point last year.

Mr. Galifi said his company is still interested in acquiring new technologies to add to its business, but cautioned that fewer of its competitors feel any pressure to sell, which makes it harder to find deals.

“The level of potential transactions is substantially slower than it would have been a couple of years ago, in part due to the stronger health of the supply base,” he said. “There’s not that desire, or the need, to sell assets to raise cash.”

In lieu of M&A, Magna has been using its cash to make capital expenditures and returning money to shareholders through dividends and share repurchases.

The company has recently opened plants in China, Mexico, Serbia and Turkey and expects to spend $1.3 billion on investments this year. That’s down from the $1.4 billion the company had expected to spend in August, but Mr. Galifi said the reduction is due mainly to moving some costs into 2014, rather than cutting back. Magna spent roughly $1.3 billion on capital expenditures in 2012.

The company has a $0.32 quarterly dividend and its board authorized a one-year 12 million share repurchase program earlier this month.

Magna’s business has been benefitting from the resurgence of the U.S. auto industry. The company ‘s stock has almost doubled this year to C$87.91, from C$49.68 on the Toronto Stock Exchange. However, a restructuring in Europe caused the company to report an 18% decline in its third quarter earnings.