SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

On Saturday, former Alaska Governor Sarah Palin said the impeachment threat is making a lawless President Barack Obama a bit “nervous.”

A week after Palin called for Obama to be impeached over his lawlessness on immigration on the pages of Breitbart News, two-thirds of Republicans believed that impeachment is justified while a majority of independents felt that Obama has overstepped his Constitutional authority. Speaking at the Western Conservative Summit in Colorado, Palin said “considering articles of impeachment is the check” against a lawless executive branch.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Citing Obama’s “dereliction of duty” in enforcing the country’s immigration laws and securing the border, Palin said, “if that’s not impeachable, then nothing is. And if he’s not impeachable, no one is.”

“It takes guts to hold them accountable,” she said. “It takes political will.”

Palin told Republicans to “don’t be afraid to raise” the impeachment issue because Obama is making “himself a ruler and not a president.” Palin said America had a revolution because “we don’t do kings.”

She observed that “these days you hear a lot of politicians denouncing Barack Obama,” saying he’s a lawless and imperial president who ignores court orders, changes laws by executive fiat, and refuses to enforce laws that he just doesn’t like. Palin asked the politicians who are complaining, “what are ya gonna do about it?

“Let’s call their bluff,” Palin said. “I’m calling their bluff because we need a little less talk and a lot more action.”

Declaring that Obama’s lawlessness is “rocking us to our core,” Palin said that “no serious person can deny that team Obama has not violated and abused the public trust and the Constitution.” Palin listed Benghazi, Fast and Furious, NSA spying scandals, Obamacare lies, the IRS’s targeting of conservatives, the administration’s violation of religious rights, and the Department of Justice’s wiretapping of reporters.

“The list of abuses goes on and on,” she said.

Palin also mentioned that “high crimes and misdemeanors” does not refer to today’s ordinary criminal charges. She reiterated that the Framers referred to “a dereliction of duty,” and “the first duty of the president is to enforce our laws and preserve and protect and defend our Constitution.” She said Alexander Hamilton said impeachable offenses refer to “the abuse or violation of some public trust.” Hamilton called them “political offenses” because they relate “chiefly to injuries done immediately to the society itself,” Palin said, noting that impeachment is a check against a lawless executive.

Palin announced in an op-ed on Breitbart.com that Obama’s “many impeachable offenses” can no longer be ignored.

“It’s time to impeach; and on behalf of American workers and legal immigrants of all backgrounds, we should vehemently oppose any politician on the left or right who would hesitate in voting for articles of impeachment,” Palin wrote.

As Breitbart News noted, “Palin specifically said Obama’s lawlessness on illegal immigration was the tipping point because it impacted Americans — native-born and legal immigrants — of all backgrounds”:

The federal government is trillions of dollars in debt; many cities are on the verge of insolvency; our overrun healthcare system, police forces, social services, schools, and our unsustainably generous welfare-state programs are stretched to the max. We average Americans know that. So why has this issue been allowed to be turned upside down with our “leader” creating such unsafe conditions while at the same time obstructing any economic recovery by creating more dependents than he allows producers? His friendly wealthy bipartisan elite, who want cheap foreign labor and can afford for themselves the best “border security” money can buy in their own exclusive communities, do not care that Obama tapped us out. Have faith that average American workers – native-born and wonderful legal immigrants of all races, backgrounds, and political parties – do care because we’re the ones getting screwed as we’re forced to follow all our government’s rules while others are not required to do so. Many now feel like strangers in their own land. It’s the American worker who is forced to deal with Obama’s latest crisis with our hard-earned tax dollars while middle class wages decrease, sustainable jobs get more scarce, and communities become unrecognizable and bankrupted due to Obama’s flood of illegal immigration. Who’s looking out for the American workers? Who has their backs? Who fights for them? We should.

Obama has also been reportedly concerned that his executive actions on immigration can lead to impeachment. He reportedly, in a half-joking manner, told pro-amnesty activists at the White House, “You’re not going to get me impeached, are you?”