WASHINGTON (CBS DC/AP) — Vice President Joe Biden appeared on ABC’s “The View” Wednesday in an effort to promote Obamacare, saying that the controversial health care law gives a “peace of mind” to people.

Questioned by Barbara Walters as to “why it was such a mess coming out,” Biden stated that it takes some time to make such a massive move.

“There’s never been any major fundamental change in social policy in America that’s rolled out without trouble,” Biden said.

Biden told “The View” that the Affordable Care Act gives more freedom to women, saying that health insurance previously caused single mothers to be stuck in dead-end jobs.

“How many of you are single women with children, in a dead-end job? You’re there because of your health insurance,” Biden said. “You would rather have the opportunity to spend the next couple of years with your child until they get — if that was your choice — until they get into primary school.”

Biden said because of Obamacare that women will now be able to make an “independent choice.”

“You’re now trapped in that job because if you leave, you lose your health insurance. Now you’ll be able to … make an independent choice,” Biden told “The View.” “Do you want to stay in that job and still have health insurance, or do you want to … stay in that job, even though you can get health insurance absent that job? And it gives women a great deal more freedom.”

Biden added: “It’s the peace of mind this gives to people.”

Obama said Tuesday that about 4 million people have signed up for health insurance through federal or state marketplaces set up under his health care law.

The White House has set an unofficial goal of 7 million enrollees by the end of March.

(TM and © Copyright 2014 CBS Radio Inc. and its relevant subsidiaries. CBS RADIO and EYE Logo TM and Copyright 2014 CBS Broadcasting Inc. Used under license. All Rights Reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed. The Associated Press contributed to this report.)