Topics: Africa, Disease, ebola, Ebola outbreak, Editor's Picks, healthcare, News

The present Ebola outbreak in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone is the deadliest on record. On June 23, the World Health Organization reported 635 Ebola cases, including 399 deaths. By July 12, the figures were up to 964 cases, including 603 deaths. Doctors Without Borders and the World Health Organization are providing substantial medical personnel and resources on the ground in order to help contain the outbreak.

The United States, according to the CDC, has sent a seven-person team to help in Guinea, and provided protective clothing and equipment for healthcare workers in all three countries. In the grand scheme of things, that is a minimal amount of aid — echoed by the minimal coverage the outbreak has garnered in U.S. media. (Far more attention was afforded GOP Congressman Phil Gingrey’s outlandish and factually implausible comments about refugee children crossing the border bringing Ebola into the United States from Central America.)

There is more than one way to interpret America’s disinterest. One is racism — the sense that the people dying of Ebola are so different from “us” that we really can’t identify with them. Another is compassion fatigue. Isn’t there always some horrible disease afflicting Africa and Africans?

Indeed, many of the English–language articles that have been written about the Ebola outbreak focus on “ignorant” and “superstitious” Africans who give more credence to witchcraft than to modern medicine.

For example:

The key to halting Ebola is isolating the sick, but fear and panic have sent some patients into hiding, complicating efforts to stop its spread. … Preachers are calling for divine intervention, and panicked residents in remote areas have on multiple occasions attacked the very health workers sent to help them. In one town in Sierra Leone, residents partially burned down a treatment centre over fears that the drugs given to victims were actually causing the disease.

This analysis, picked up by several news outlets, simultaneously reveals the kind of xenophobic Western mindset that victims of the Ebola outbreak distrust, and hints at why Western readers do not seem all that interested in learning about or from the outbreak.

The suspicions with which many people in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leona regard Western interventions make sense. Healthcare workers are particularly hard-hit by Ebola, and workers and other patients who hadn’t been infected can return home not knowing they now carry the disease, transmitting the virus to their families and communities. International relief organizations in these countries set up emergency treatment that will be taken down when the immediate threat is over. But family sticks around forever. Refraining from leaving sick relatives in hospitals (that typically utilize isolation as the sole means of containing the Ebola virus) can be a pragmatic and sensible choice to rely on the kinship and community networks that have kept people alive in the past.

From my perch as a medical sociologist, the claim that mobs attacking treatment centers are panicking reveals “troubling truths” regarding the Western track record of medical experiments and geopolitical ambitions in Africa. Distrust of Western medicine may have less to do with superstition than with history: forced sterilizations in Peru; the intentional infection of Guatemalans with gonorrhea and syphilis; marketing campaigns urging mothers in countries lacking safe water supplies to replace breastfeeding with infant formula so that women could work in western-owned factories; the sale in Africa of pharmaceuticals that passed their expiration date for sale in the West; the harvesting of organs in India for transplants to wealthy foreigners.

In sub-Saharan Africa, outbreaks of new diseases such as Ebola (first identified in 1976) echo the spread of industrialization, urbanization, unprecedented militarization (funded by western countries), deforestation and the destruction of eco-systems that have forced communities to expand their search for food into territories that traditionally were not used for that purpose. In reports in the English-language press, however, there is little consideration of the political and economic structural forces that gave rise to the emergence and spread of Ebola. Rather, as Jared Jones writes, “African ‘Otherness’ overpowers the possibility of a non-cultural causality in the dominant discourse, and other factors are left unexamined as potentially causal or exacerbating.” Attention to sorcery rather than the inequalities of globalization obscures the fact that the biggest leaps in life expectancy in the U.S. and Europe came about because of massive government-funded public health measures — sewage systems and clean water supplies – not because we gave up our religious beliefs.