No GOP presidential candidate has won state's electoral votes since 1988

Said state needs to work to help elect a Republican president in 2016

McDaniel, who served as the state representative for the GOP National Committee, was the front-runner for the two-year seat

She defeated a nurse and a former employee of the Reagan administration at the state's Republican Party convention

The niece of Mitt Romney has been elected to lead the Michigan Republicans for two years as the party's next state chairwoman.

Ronna Romney McDaniel, 41, won 55 per cent of the vote on the first ballot at the state's Republican Party convention on Saturday before her selection was made unanimous by delegates.

McDaniel defeated Norm Hughes, who worked in the Ronald Reagan administration, and Kim Shmina, a nurse.

Ronna Romney McDaniel, Mitt Romney's niece, has been elected to lead the Michigan Republicans for two years as the party's next state chairwoman

McDaniel, 41, won 55 per cent of the vote on the first ballot at the state's Republican Party convention on Saturday before her selection was made unanimous by delegates

The married mother-of-two campaigned for her uncle's 2012 presidential campaign and served as the Michigan representative for the Republican National Committee, a position she said she will now step down from, according to the Detroit Free Press.

McDaniel, whose father Scott is Mitt Romney's brother and mother Ronna was a former U.S. Senate candidate, was the front-runner for the chairman seat.

She was endorsed by the party and also supported by a number of tea party activists.

During her acceptance speech, McDaniel said the state needs to work on getting a Republican in the White House in 2016.

'We might not agree on everything, but we can agree that seven years of liberal Obama policies have a destructive effect on our nation,' she said.

McDaniel (pictured here with father Scott, who is Mitt Romney's brother) was serving as the state's representative for the Republican National Committee and was the front-runner for the seat

A Republican presidential candidate hasn't won Michigan's electoral votes in 27 years - including Mitt Romney, a native of the state.

McDaniel added that she hopes she can win the 'support and trust' of the people who did not support her on Saturday.

She later told reporters that the theme of her campaign is 'unity'.

Activist Mike Farage told the Free Press he voted for McDaniel because she wants the party to reach out to minority voters.