HARTFORD — Access Health CT, which has garnered praise from President Barack Obama and federal health care officials, found itself backed into a difficult corner on Friday.

The health exchange has become the object of an increasing number of Facebook and telephone complaints about faulty tax forms and poor customer service. Some customers who received a health insurance subsidy may have to wait to file their taxes. If they received a tax credit or subsidy when buying health insurance from Access Health, they need a 1095-A form that should be filed when filing their taxes. However, some customers have yet to receive forms. Others have received forms with missing or incorrect numbers. Tax deadline is April 15.

On Friday, Access Health’s CEO Jim Wadleigh advised customers with tax form problems to file before midnight April 15 for an extension on their federal taxes, using form 4868.

Wadleigh said the U.S Department of Treasury and IRS intend to release guidance shortly implementing penalty relief for individuals in this situation “as long as they file a return by Oct. 15.

When taxpayers receive their correct 1095-A form, they should file their return using the information on the corrected form. If a taxpayer receives their form 1095-A before April 15 and is able to file using the form before the deadline, they should do so.”

Most customer complaints concern canceled accounts, poor response or never having received the necessary tax forms.

The health exchange has tried to calm discontent with the additional statement that the treasury and IRS have also previously announced that any individual who received an incorrect Form 1095-A, and filed his or her tax return based on that form, does not need to file an amended tax return.

According to Access Health CT, “The IRS will not pursue the collection of any additional taxes from these individuals based on updated information in the corrected forms. Some individuals may choose to file amended returns, and may also want to consult with their tax preparers to determine if they would benefit from amending. If Connecticut consumers have not already filed their tax returns and did not receive a 1095-A from Access Health CT, please contact us at 866-230-8920.”

Access Health CT, Connecticut’s official health insurance marketplace, is a quasi-public agency created by the Connecticut legislature in 2011 to satisfy requirements of the federal Affordable Care Act.

Scott Whipple can be reached at (860) 801-5205, or swhipple@centralctcommunications.com