A coalition of three anti-Iran deal groups will host a rally on Sept. 9 on Capitol Hill, as members of Congress return from recess and prepare to vote on the deal.

The rally, hosted by the Tea Party Patriots, the Center for Security Policy and the Zionist Organization of America, will be staged on the West Lawn of the Capitol, the coalition said in a statement.

ADVERTISEMENT

The rally will include two Republican presidential candidates, Sen.(R-Texas) and business executive

Cruz, the keynote speaker, invited Trump to speak, the statement said.

Congress is back in session on Tuesday, Sept. 8. That same week, the pro-Israel group American Israel Public Affairs Committee (AIPAC) also plans to deploy hundreds of activists to Capitol Hill.

Congress has until Sept. 17 to act on the deal, and Republicans are planning to introduce a resolution of disapproval, which if passed would prevent the deal from being implemented.

If Republicans remain united, they would need six Democrats in the Senate to pass a resolution of disapproval. There are plenty of Republicans in the House to pass the resolution, where there is no filibuster. But its unclear if there are the 60 votes needed to move the resolution in the upper chamber.

If the resolution does pass Congress, President Obama has threatened a veto, forcing the deal's critics to gather two-thirds support to override him. Even Republican leadership says that is unlikely.

Still, deal opponents are hoping to first pass the resolution, while proponents are attempting to prevent them from even getting to that point.

Undecided lawmakers — particularly Democrats — have also been under intense pressure in recent weeks, bombarded by ads, phone calls and activists from both sides.

Tea Party Patriots CEO and co-founder Jenny Beth Martin said the group recently organized protests at 185 different local congressional and senatorial offices across the country on a recent day of activism.

"We look forward to our next round of protests on September 9 on the West Lawn of the Capitol," she said.

"The American people have not forgotten the 444 days their compatriots were held against their will by the Iranian regime," she continued. "Nor have they forgotten that we are only days removed from Ayatollah Khamenei's repeated calls for 'Death to America.'

"This ‘deal’ does not prevent Iran from getting nuclear weapons; it virtually guarantees it," she said. "Congress must reject this terrible deal."