Executive Briefing | by Athena Mandros | August 7, 2015

While the concept of medical homes has been around since the 1960s (see A New Approach for People with Complex Service Needs: The Behaviorally-Focused Medical Home), health homes (or specialty medical homes) are a relatively new creation ushered in by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA). (And if you’re confused about the difference between the two, check out these resources in the OPEN MINDS Industry Library –Medical Home V. Health Home – Confused?, How Are Medicaid Health Homes Reimbursed For Services?, and The OPEN MINDS Medical Home Update).

The uptake of medical homes and health homes has been rather dramatic. According to our recent OPEN MINDS research, there are at least 20 state Medicaid plans that have medical home initiatives. Nineteen states also have Medicaid health home initiatives and another four states plan to implement health homes in the next few years. But the construct is not limited to Medicaid – medical homes are increasingly common in commercial health plans and accountable care organizations (ACOs) (see A Health Home Update – Health Homes Go Private and Health Homes For Children).

Even newer than the proliferation of medical homes and health homes is the accreditation of these program models. There are five organizations – The Accreditation Association for Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC), CARF International, the Joint Commission, the National Committee for Quality Assurance (NCQA), and URAC – that offer some type of accreditation. And, on the payer side, requirements for accreditation are on the increase. For example, of the 20 state Medicaid plans that have medical home initiatives, eight of these states require patient-centered medical home (PCMH) accreditation.

If you’re an organization that is operating a medical home or health home, how do you decide if accreditation is in your future? And if it is, how do you select an accrediting body? Luckily, I got the insider scoop on medical home and health home accreditation at The 2015 OPEN MINDS Strategy and Innovation Institute in New Orleans this year, during the session, Accreditation & Certification Programs For Medical Homes & Health Homes: Where Are We Now, & Where Are We Headed In The Future?. The session featured two accrediting bodies: CARF International, which offers behavioral health home accreditation, and the Joint Commission, which offers both PCMH and behavioral health home certification. Each of the accrediting bodies spoke about their accreditation process. My takeaway? Each certification process is different and what type of certification you choose has to be based on your organizational goals.

CARF certifies programs and service lines, not organizations. Therefore, it is possible to achieve behavioral health home accreditation without being accredited in other programs or having organizational accreditation. The accreditation process involves an application process, self-evaluation, an on-site survey, quality improvement plan, and an annual survey. CARF accredits organizations for three years, but requires organizations to consult with CARF every year. As Lauren Pagel, Ph.D., MS, CAP Chief Executive Officer at Starting Point Behavioral Healthcare (that just became CARF certified) said, “it’s a business model.”

The Joint Commission takes a slightly different approach to PCMH and health home accreditation. The Joint Commission accredits an entire organization; an organization must first receive organization accreditation and then add-on the optional PCMH or behavioral health home certification. The accreditation process involves an application submission, self-evaluation, and on-site assessment. Organizations receive their behavioral health home or PCMH certification for three years. Dimitrios Cavathas, LCSW-C, Vice President, Of Integrated Care People Encouraging People, Inc. described the Joint Commission certification process this way: “When you are sailing on a boat, you have a buoy and it doesn’t matter how you get to the buoy, it’s getting to the buoy that’s important. That is what Joint Commission regulations are like.”

For an overview of all the accrediting bodies that have PCMH and health home accreditation check out, What Accreditation Options Are Available For Medical Homes & Health Homes?: An OPEN MINDS Market Intelligence Report

This report answers a number of questions regarding accreditation processes, costs, standards, and how medical homes and/or health homes are recognized by organizations, including:

What Accreditation Options Are Available For Medical Homes & Health Homes? What State Medicaid Programs Require Medical Home & Health Home Accreditation? What Is The Medical Home Accreditation Process Of The Accreditation Association For Ambulatory Health Care (AAAHC)? What Is The PCMH Accreditation Process Of The National Committee For Quality Assurance (NCQA)? What Is The PCMH & Health Home Accreditation Process of The Joint Commission (JC)? What Is The Behavioral Health Home Accreditation Process of CARF International? What Is The PCMH Accreditation Process Of URAC?

The report is free to all premium members, and can be purchase in the OPEN MINDS e-Store for $495. This report provides a snapshot of the options, standards, and costs of accreditation. And if you have questions or comments on the accreditation issue, don’t hesitate to contact me at amandros@openminds.com.