Last month, pro-life advocates in Michigan submitted more than 315,000 signatures to the Secretary of State’s office to keep their tax dollars and insurance premiums from paying for the destruction of innocent human life. Volunteers across the state circulated petitions throughout the summer to initiate Abortion Insurance Opt-Out legislation.

Now, Right to Life of Michigan is starting phase two of the campaign. As the group notes today in a message LifeNews received.

“Over the summer, prolife volunteers from across the state of Michigan collected more than 315,000 signatures to keep our tax dollars and insurance premiums from paying for abortions,” RLM said. “We turned the signatures in on October 4 to complete Phase 1 but our work is not done. Once the signatures are certified, the bill will presented to the state legislature. A vote by the legislature is expected in early December. ”

“That’s why Phase 2 starts now. Prolife people need to contact their legislators and lobby them to vote in favor of the Abortion Insurance Opt Out Act,” RLM added. “Again, the time to act is now as a vote is expected in early December. ”

Below is a downloadable and printable flyer which can be used to promote lobbying along with links to web page to help you find your state legislators.

FLYER TO PROMOTE LOBBYING

FIND YOUR STATE HOUSE REPRESENTATIVE

FIND YOUR STATE SENATOR



MICHIGAN’S VOICE WEBSITE

Right to Life of Michigan President Barbara Listing said, “Prolife people from every county in Michigan responded to the need to keep our tax dollars and health insurance premiums from paying for abortion. Because of their efforts, the petition drive was cut-off more than 2 months early. Volunteers organized opportunities for people to sign at churches, county fairs, family reunions, athletic events, and we even heard of a bride circulating petitions at her wedding reception. The dedication of people is inspiring.”

Michigan’s Constitution allows the people of the state to initiate legislation through a petition; 258,088 signatures of registered voters needed to be collected in 180 days to initiate the Abortion Insurance Opt-Out Act. Signatures for the NO Taxes for Abortion Insurance petition drive were collected in less than 4 months.

Listing said, “Enthusiastic volunteers are sending a loud and clear message that abortion should not be included as a standard ‘benefit’ in health insurance plans. Well more than the required signatures were submitted today, driving home the point that abortion ends a life and cannot be considered health care.”

After the Board of Canvassers verifies the signatures, the legislature will have 40 calendar days to respond. With a simple majority vote in both the Michigan House and Senate, the Abortion Insurance Opt-Out Act becomes law without the governor’s signature. A majority of the House and Senate have already signed the petition.

Similar Abortion Insurance Opt-Out legislation was passed by Michigan representatives and senators in December 2012; however Governor Rick Snyder vetoed the bill. Because of the governor’s veto, the petition drive was necessary.

Listing said, “Our actions speak volumes. Abortion is not health care and the people of Michigan want to join the other 23 states which have opted-out of abortion coverage in the health plans offered through the Affordable Care Act.”

For more information about the NO Taxes for Abortion Insurance petition drive, visit www.MichigansVoice.com.