There is a show this weekend in Meridian and it isn't your typical show. It was a show where you could discover the world of money.

The 51st annual coin and currency show kicked Saturday morning at Hamilton Inn in Meridian. If you're looking for a rare coin, chances are you can find it in these collections, with the numerous dealers that are on hand to give you their two cents on the rarity of an item.

"The serial numbers and the seals that are missing from the front of the bill is a $450 error," Coin Deal Bob Perna said when describing a dollar bill he had. "The fact that they were inadvertently printed on the reverse side, makes this bills worth $5450."

That's just for a one dollar bill. President of the Meridian Area Coin Club Jim Rickles, says your chance of coming across even rarer coins are possible, with the number of dealers that are on hand.

"They have all kinds of coins dating back to the 1800s and coming on up into the 2015 American Silver Eagle," Rickles said. "You can find just about any coin you want. You can find Indian head pennies, buffalo nickels, Kennedy's, and you can find silver eagles."

Dealers from across the South not only have coins, but sports cards, stamps, civil war relics, and if you are one of those who are looking to sale, dealers will even strike a deal with you.

"They can have them appraised," said Rickles. "We have dealers here that will by them perhaps if they can come to an agreement on a price. They just need to come down and talk to some of our dealers."

If you are looking for a change in hobbies or new venues, the coin show going on in Meridian through the weekend is the place to be.

The coin and currency who was from 9 until 5 pm Saturday. If you would like to take part in the event, the final show will be tomorrow from 9 am until 4 pm. It is being held at Hamilton Inn in the conference room behind the Checkerboard Restaurant. There are over 30 dealers on hand with coins and other rare items. Admission is $1 for adults and free for children 12 and under.