The Derby field passes the twin spires at Churchill Downs after leaving the starting gate for the 133rd Kentucky Derby._(Photo by Arza Barnett, The Courier-Journal)_6 May 2007 (Photo: Arza Barnett)

Local zoning officials are expected Monday to endorse the plan of Churchill Downs to spend about $4.2 million to renovate some of its prime seating to provide more TLC treatment of its top customers, owners of Kentucky Derby and Oaks entries.

The Louisville Metro Board of Zoning Adjustment has scheduled a public meeting for 8:30 a.m. Monday at the Old Jail Building, 514 Liberty St., to consider the track's application to amend its long-held "nonconforming use" permit.

Under an old regulation, Churchill officials must get the zoning board to sign off on all major expansion or improvement plans at the historic track. The plans are usually routinely approved.

Churchill Downs Inc. officials announced the planned improvements a month ago, but new details are contained in a recent letter from Churchill Downs officials to the zoning board.

The track officials said in the letter that the "intent of the project is to provide Oaks and Derby horse owners with a more exclusive VIP experience that will offer them all-inclusive food and beverage, along with both casual and fixed-seating opportunities within the comfort of their own outdoor suite.

"This will be an area to 'be seen,' while attending the Oaks or Derby for them and their guests. Each box will be decorated with each of their respective silks."

The plans call for 20 owner suites, called Winner's Circle Suites, each approximately 10 feet wide by 35 feet deep.

Each owner will have up to 18 seats free — triple what this year's owners had — in that area and also the ability to buy additional boxes.

The so-called "super boxes" will have self-serve drink dispensers, in-venue wagering machines and televisions, the letter said. And guests will have access to expanded hospitality areas and private restrooms located in the Jockey Club behind the suites, it said.

The improvements will displace about 120 box holders and, in all, seating will be reduced by about 1,500, track officials said.

A grassy area to be called the Courtyard will go in front of the suites, with about 600 chairs added and sold for the Derby and Oaks. The Courtyard is envisioned as a parklike area the rest of the year.

In connection with the project, the Downs plans a new audio booth and a new superintendent's office, with some additional box seating at the mezzanine level.

Construction is to begin in December, with the project scheduled to be completed by the spring meet that opens in late April. The project was designed by Populous of Kansas City.

Nearly $180 million has been spent since 2001 on improvements at the track, including luxury suites, the 300-seat finish line Mansion, a new clubhouse, lights and, most recently, the new Grandstand Terrace and giant video board.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Churchill Downs announced a $4.2 million project to add suites for Kentucky Derby and Oaks owners. Gregory A. Hall, The C-J

Reporter Sheldon S. Shafer can be reached at (502) 582-7089. Follow him on Twitter at @sheldonshafer. Staff writer Gregory Hall contributed to this story.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1rBnKvE