The 2014 Santa Claus (Ind.) postmark, drawn by Heritage Hills High School senior Shyann Smith. (Photo: Courtesy of Spencer County Visitors Bureau )

A small Southern Indiana town has the only post office in the world that's named for the legendary big guy from the North Pole.

Postal elves are preparing for the annual December influx of mail, a month when its volume grows nearly 30 times its average in other months to roughly 400,000 pieces of mail, according to the Spencer County Tourism Bureau.

"It's all worth it," said Santa Claus (Ind.) Postmaster Marian Balbach. "It's amazing how happy people are when they come in here."

Balbach believes it shows mailing Christmas cards and gifts through the Santa Claus Post Office — ZIP code 47579 — remains an important tradition for many families.

Many post offices around the country have closed in recent years due to the Postal Service generating more red ink than green cash, including the Bethlehem (Ind.) Post Office that was shuttered two years ago.

INDIANA: New Albany shoots for 2015 sportsplex opening

HOLIDAY: Holiday shopping underway in 'Black November'

The two busiest American post offices with seasonal postmarks during the holiday season are in the Alaskan city named North Pole and Santa Claus.

Other Kentucky post offices with seasonal postmarks include Nazareth, Bethlehem, Elkhorn City, Elkton, Pineknot, Miracle and Pineville, said David Walton, spokesman for the U.S. Postal Service office in Louisville.

The Santa Claus Post Office, Balbach said, gets "bombarded" with packages. Mondays are its the busiest days since its closed on Sundays.

"We open them up, postmark them and put them back in the mail stream," she said.

Balbach urges senders not to add "reindeer food," snowflakes, glitter or stickers to their mail. And USPS Priority Mail is preferred, allowing senders to track the mail on the USPS website.

This year's postmark was drawn by Shyann Smith, a senior at Heritage Hills High School in Spencer County. Balbach selected her drawing and showed it to a few other locals, said Melissa Brockman, a spokeswoman for the tourism bureau.

The postmark, Brockman added, helps promote the county, which also is home to Holiday World Theme Park and former President Abraham Lincoln's Indiana Boyhood Home.

"It's a very important tradition for the town. People all over are wanting the postmark," she said.

Reporter Charlie White can be reached at (812) 949-4026 or on Twitter @c_write.

SANTA CLAUS MAIL TIPS

•Allow at least a 2-inch by 4-inch space in the stamp area for the picture postmark

•Apply postage to cards or letters before bringing or mailing them to the post office

•To mail Christmas cards to the post office, package them — with postage stamps already on them — in a sturdy envelope or box, and mail to: Postmaster, Santa Claus Station, Santa Claus, IN 47579-9998

•The picture postmark is available on working days between December 1 and 24. It's open 9 a.m. until 4 p.m. Monday through Friday and 9:30-11:30 a.m. on Saturdays

•The picture postmark must be requested by the postal customer

•There is no charge for postmarking; however, there is a limit of 50 picture postmarks (hand cancellations) per person per day

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1ucjwcw