In Brief

Alico’s chief operating officer leaves

Alico Inc., a Fort Myers-based agriculture and natural resources company, announced Thursday that Kenneth Smith, its executive vice president and chief operating officer, has stepped down to pursue other personal and professional opportunities. Smith has agreed to provide consulting services to Alico following his departure for up to 36 months.

Alico’s business operations previously managed by Smith will now be managed by Clay Wilson, Alico’s CEO. The company does not expect to appoint an interim or ongoing chief operating officer.

Alico, (NASDAQ: ALCO) closed at $51.05 Thursday, down 0.04 on the day.

Chamber panel to discuss Affordable Care Act

The Chamber of Southwest Florida will host a panel of speakers to offer an update on the Affordable Care Act from 11:3 a.m.-1:30 p.m. on Tuesday at the Hilton Garden Inn/Fort Myers Airport.

Sally Jackson, Director of Government and Community Relations for Lee Memorial Health System, and Gray Davis, Senior Vice-President at BB&T-Oswald Trippe and Company, will discuss how the implementation of the Affordable Care Act has affected businesses and individuals.

The luncheon will be held at the Hilton Garden Inn Airport, 16410 Corporate Commerce Way, in Fort Myers. The cost for the luncheon is $30 for members and $40 for non-members.

For information, call 433-4111, reservations@chamberswfl.com or online at www.chamberswfl.com.

Public speaking skills to be discussed at Women in Business event

The Greater Fort Myers Chamber of Commerce Women in Business Committee will host its April networking meeting from 4–6 p.m. on Wednesday at the Rush Gallery in Building J on the Thomas Edison Campus of Florida SouthWestern State College, 8099 College Parkway Southwest, in Fort Myers.

Dr. Pat Land, FSW’s Charlotte Campus President and Regional Vice President Economic & Community Development, will present on public speaking challenges. Land will share tips and knowledge designed to help attendees build confidence and develop better public speaking skills.

Admission is $10 for Greater Fort Myers Chamber of Commerce members and $20 for guests.

To register, call 332-3624 or visit fortmyers.org.

Kelly Roofing wins national Microsoft award

Kelly Roofing, a family-owned business based in Naples since 1972, is one of 12 companies that received a 2015 Visionary Award during the Microsoft Convergence conference. Kelly Roofing won in the Modern Small or Medium Business category. Ken Kelly, owner of the company with his father Joe, accepted the award.

The awards recognize Microsoft customers who have achieved new levels of excellence with their Microsoft technology. Kelly Roofing has approximately 75 employees working in Collier and Lee counties and did more than $10 million in sales last year.

Hayden & Associates to manage Pine Grove group

Hayden & Associates, Community Association & Commercial Management Services, has been appointed to provide property management and accounting services for Pine Grove Homeowners Association. The association oversees a community of 92 condominium units in 23 buildings in Fort Myers.

Read or Share this story: http://newspr.es/1CeT0lG