Farmington’s Tabers open Liberty Tax Service in Waterville

Farmington natives Derek and Ian Taber have opened a Liberty Tax Service franchise at 341 Main St. in Waterville.

Additional Images SCHUMACHER WARREN Search photos available for purchase: Photo Store →

The Tabers “are very enthusiastic about building a brand and being new to this area, they are looking forward to giving back to their customers and their employees,” according to a press release from the firm.

The business is enrolled for the Affordable Care Act and they can help customers determine if their taxes are affected, according to the release.

The business opened last week.

Pediatrician Schumacher joins Franklin Health Pediatrics

Franklin Health Pediatrics recently announce pediatrician Erika Schumacher, MD, joined its practice. Other providers in the medical practice include Lorien Batt, MD; Gabriel Civiello, MD; Nicole Donahue, CPNP; Iris Silverstein, MD, FAAP (developmental pediatrics only).

Schumacher earned a medical degree from the University of Vermont College of Medicine. She then completed a one-year internship followed by a two-year residency in pediatrics at Yale-New Haven Children’s Hospital in New Haven, Conn.

Before joining Franklin Health Pediatrics, Schumacher practiced at Meriden Pediatric Associates in Meriden, Conn., since 2011. During that time she also served as director of the Yale Pediatric Refugee Clinic. Besides pediatrics, Schumacher has a professional interest in international medicine.

The is on the first floor of the Franklin Health Medical Arts Center on the Franklin Memorial Hospital campus.

Warren named vice president and loan officer at Kennebec Savings Bank

Tracy Warren has been promoted to vice president and loan officer at Kennebec Savings Bank, Sandy Goodwin, senior vice president and chief loan officer announced in a press release.

Warren, who has been in lending at the bank since 2003, will continue to work out of the Waterville branch, according to the release.

“Tracy has a great attitude,” said Goodwin in the release. “It is easy to see she loves her work and will go the extra mile for her customers. The bank is lucky to have such an experienced lender to help our customers reach their goals.”

Dave Grenier, senior vice president and chief commercial lending officer, said Warren is also “active in several community efforts,” including the United Way of Mid-Maine, and has spearheaded the pacesetter campaign for the bank’s Waterville branch, “raising employee participation to 100 percent.

“It’s her well-rounded approach to both her job and her volunteerism in our community that makes her a leader,” he said.

Warren is a graduate of Thomas College with a bachelor of science degree in business management and a graduate of Skowhegan Area High School. She resides in Oakland with her husband, Tom, and their children, Paige and Chase.

Ostrander, who practiced in Winthrop, appointed to CMMC staff

James R. Ostrander, D.O., a family medicine physician, has been appointed to the Central Maine Medical Center Medical staff. He is practicing at Minot Avenue Family Medicine in Auburn.

Ostrander most recently worked for eight years as a family medicine physician at Winthrop Family Practice in Winthrop. For the past seven years he also served as medical director for Heritage Rehabilitation and Living Center in Winthrop, which provides geriatric and long-term care. His experience includes two years as a family medicine physician at St. Mary’s Regional Medical Center in Lewiston, and some 25 years as a paramedic and firefighter on Cape Cod in Massachusetts.

Ostrander earned a doctor of osteopathy from the University of New England College of Osteopathic Medicine in Biddeford. He completed a residency training at the Central Maine Medical Center Family Medicine Residency in Lewiston.

Ostrander holds a bachelor’s degree in biology from the University of Massachusetts in Boston, an associate degree in nursing from Cape Cod Community College in West Barnstable, Mass., and a bachelor’s degree in liberal arts from Amherst College in Amherst, Mass. He was a brother in the Community of Jesus in Orleans, Mass., for 27 years.

He is certified by the American Board of Family Medicine, and is a member of the American Academy of Family Physicians.

Ostrander is practicing in association with Dana W. Little, M.D., Carolyn R. Pece, D.O., and Gerald G. Lachance, D.O. Minot Avenue Family Medicine is at 789 Minot Ave. in Auburn.

Domino’s Pizza holding hiring sessions

Domino’s Pizza stores throughout Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island and Connecticut are looking to hire 1,000 new employees across 235 stores on Wednesday, according to a press release from the company.

New positions offered are delivery drivers, assistant managers, general managers, order takers and pizza makers.

The continued success of Domino’s across the nation, and specifically the growth and success of the stores throughout Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, Vermont, Rhode Island and Connecticut, increases the need for additional support from enthusiastic employees,. according to the release

Those who are interested in applying for a position can visit www.careers.dominos.com or fill out an application at any store in New England. Many locations will conduct on-site interviews on Wednesday. Resumes and references are recommended.

Lucas becomes Jones Financial limited partner

Julie Barter Lucas, an Edward Jones financial advisor in Augusta, has accepted an invitation to become a limited partner in The Jones Financial Cos., the holding company for the St. Louis-based financial services firm.

Edward Jones employs nearly 40,000 in all 50 states and through its affiliate in Canada, according to a press release from the company. This year marks the 40th anniversary of the firm’s first partnership offering, and the company has expanded the partnership to more than 20,000 limited partners, the release said.

James D. Weddle, the firm’s managing partner, said, “Edward Jones is employee-owned. We believe one of the best ways to reward outstanding associates is to offer them an opportunity to share in the ownership of the firm they help build. I’m pleased to say that (Lucas) certainly deserves the limited partnership offering.”