Gov. Dannel Malloy (file)

HARTFORD, Conn. (WTNH)– A new law that will allow people here illegally to get a Connecticut driver’s license is already controversial.

But News 8 has learned that the ‘roll out’ of the first phase of the new program has been postponed until after the election.

‘I certainly had nothing to do with the delay,” said Governor Malloy. “No one in your office, your chief of staff, anyone?” asked Chief Political Correspondent Mark Davis. “You know…not that I know of,” said the governor.

But a highly reliable government source tells News 8 that the delay of the roll out of the immigrant driver’s license program was done because someone in the Malloy administration did not want the adverse publicity that might occur during the campaign.

LINK: Drive Only License Program

“If you’re asking me: ‘Do I want a repeat of the national Obamacare,’ no I want a repeat of the Connecticut Obamacare which was the most successful in the nation,” said the governor.

Applications for appointments for ‘Learner’s Permits’ were scheduled to be available on the DMV website starting next week but that’s been postponed until December 1st, after the election.

“We wanted to do more structural testing of the internet, the website, to make sure it could handle the volume that’s expected,” said DMV. Deputy Commissioner Victor Diaz.

The DMV’s website is already the busiest in state government. Expected requests for ‘Drive Only’ immigrant licenses are estimated to to be somewhere between 50,000 and 200,000.

In addition to the thousands of Connecticut residents that line up at DMV offices around the state each week, starting in January thousands more will be added to mix that’s because the Governor and General Assembly have passed a law allowing those who do not have U.S. Citizenship documentation people here illegally will be able to get what’s called a ‘Drive Only’ driver’s license.

It’s supposed to make driving on the road in Connecticut safer for everyone because those here illegally will be able to legally register their cars and trucks and buy insurance. DMV has been doing some outreach to the immigrant population on this and we’re told that at a meeting in Danbury over the weekend DMV was expecting about 500 people and about 900 showed up.