Donald Trump was looking past the Republican presidential primary on Monday night and right to the general election, taking aim at Democratic front-runner Hillary Clinton.

“We don’t need four more years of Obama,” the billionaire businessman told an audience in Lowell, Mass., according to Politico. Trump even mocked Clinton’s use of a TelePrompTer, a clear reference to Obama’s reliance on the same device. “I watched Hillary,” he said. “She’s got the biggest TelePrompTer I’ve ever seen.” Trump, who is leading national polls for the GOP nomination, also chuckled when a supporter shouted “Obama sucks!” Trump then muttered, “That’s beautiful.”

Bill Clinton on Republicans: ‘Kind of scary’: Hillary Clinton’s husband, Bill, also spoke in New England on Monday, and dubbed the Republican presidential field “kind of scary.” Former President Clinton didn’t mention anyone by name when speaking in New Hampshire, CNN reports. Clinton avoided talking about Trump, but Trump has recently revived the Monica Lewinsky scandal as a way to attack the former president and his wife.

Sanders to warn Wall Street: The Wall Street Journal writes Bernie Sanders, who is challenging Hillary Clinton for the Democratic nomination, will seek to cast himself as Wall Street’s toughest cop on Tuesday. The Vermont senator will give a policy speech in New York City and is expected to lay out more details of his plan to crack down on the investment industry. He will reiterate his calls to break up banks that are too big to fail, and to reinstate the Glass-Steagall Act, which separated commercial and investment banking. Hillary Clinton opposes reinstating the act.

Latest Obamacare repeal vote: The House will vote Wednesday to undo President Obama’s health-care law, the Hill writes. But unlike the other 60-plus Obamacare repeal votes since 2011, the vote will send the legislation to Obama’s desk. The president has said he would veto the measure. Republicans expect to hold votes attempting to override the veto, but they lack the numbers in both the House and Senate to overturn Obama’s expected action.

Presidential candidates pressed: Conservative activists, writes the New York Times, know they won’t see a repeal of Obamacare signed into law with President Obama in the White House. But the group Heritage Action for America wants the current GOP field of presidential candidates to commit to repealing the law if elected to the White House. Among other things, the group said the next Republican administration should agree to use all executive authority at its disposal to halt regulation of the insurance market under the health law.

More from MarketWatch