MANATEE COUNTY — Cailyn Connor can walk her coach through the steps of an air squat.

She knows that her feet need to be under her shoulders, and her toes slightly turned out. She knows she needs to keep her chest up and her heels glued to the floor.

Will she lift weights someday or join a strength and conditioning gym? Who knows. Right now, she is enjoying a new kids fitness class at Fit Crew, the gym on 19th Avenue West in Bradenton where she gets to work out with her best friend Emma, where she gets stronger for her springboard diving team, where her dad and other family friends exercise, too.

At 9, she’s already absorbed important universal truths about living a fit life.

Stretching is important. Exercises like “Spidermans” and “Mountain climbers” are fun. And even though they are good for her, planks are her “worst enemy.”

Since April, Fit Crew, a cross training gym in Bradenton, has hosted a fitness class, where children 6 to 12 engage in body weight exercises and basic gymnastic moves under the direction of trainer and Bradenton resident Amy Royall.

It’s a scaled-down version of Fit Crew’s adult classes, a hybrid of Olympic weightlifting, gymnastics and other strength and conditioning exercises that have made the gym largely successful and boosted membership to 250 since the gym opened in 2010 under co-owners and trainers Niels Renzenbrink and Andrew Terman.

While some debate exists concerning what is the appropriate age for children to start weight-lifting, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services recommends muscle-strengthening activities, such as gymnastics and pull-ups, be incorporated in a 60-minute, five-day-a-week, exercise regimen for children. These recommendations, which also include aerobic activity, are intended in part to decrease the roughly 12.5 million children in America who are considered obese.

In this class, where children only lift their body weight, learn basic movements like squats, push-ups and burpees and listen to lessons about nutrition, there is also a focus on boosting confidence and learning fundamentals that can help sustain healthy lifestyles, whether its through team sports or individual training.

“Teaching them the correct way to do these movements is so important, so that as they age they can train appropriately,” Royall says. “It lays down the foundation for all these basic moves.”

Royall, a longtime speech therapist in Bradenton, has certifications in Crossfit Kids and other training regimens, though her program is developed through Fit Crew.

At an average class, kids can expect to warm up and stretch through drills like jumping jacks and crab walks, work on a skill like squats and jump ropes, participate in a Workout of the Day and play a fun game.

Here, there is a focus on technique and camaraderie, not competition.

“Everything is broken down step-by-step,” Royall said. “They don’t move on until they complete each step.”

The class is also an important alternative for children who haven’t jived with competitive team sports but still want an opportunity to be active.

Fit Crew member and mother Amber Westfall watched her daughter Madison, and niece Hannah Mott participate at a recent class. She and her husband have trained at Fit Crew for almost three years, and she’s watched both girls flourish since starting the class in April.

“Madison’s not athletic sports-wise but she likes activity,” Westfall said, “This is a good fit for her.”

About 80 percent of the kids classes have children whose parents train at Fit Crew, Royall guesses.

Sometimes the motivation is getting to be like Mom and Dad.

“The boys love it because it’s an extension of me,” Michael Terry, of Bradenton said. “They watch me push tires, and they get to push tires.”

Terry’s sons, Austin, 6, and Mitchell, 9, regularly attend the class, sometimes while their dad is working out.

“It’s building a core and a foundation to maybe someday lift weights,” Terry said. “It teaches them discipline, fundamentals and coordination, and it gets them off the couch.”

At a recent class, Royall let Cailen and Emma Laade, 10, demonstrate warm-up stretches. She knelt down in front of Evan Tepfer, 7, and corrected his lunge. Kids pushed small tires across a parking lot, worked on chin-ups on a small metal bar and ended with a giggly game of dodgeball.

They are learning, even if they don’t realize it.

Emma, who also dives with Cailen, understands that developing her core will make her a better diver. She randomly reminds kids to take their weight off their feet and onto their heels during squats.

“We’re learning new stuff all the time,” she said recently before kneeling down for a new exercise with Cailen during class.

The pair had to start in a plank and then lift one arm to hold each other’s hands. It was hard at first to balance, but naturally there were more giggles.

This was a lot of work, but it was also a lot of fun.