Politico this week raised the possibility of a surprise coming just before the November presidential election – double digit health insurance increases as voters are getting ready to go to the polls.

Last week, Iowans with UnitedHealth Group learned that their insurer will not be offering plans in the state next year, saying that they were losing money under the Affordable Care Act also known as Obamacare.

UnitedHealth Group said it anticipates $650 million in losses nationwide this year.

“I think a lot of insurance carriers expected red ink, but they didn’t expect this much red ink,” Politico quoted Greg Scott, a Deloitte health insurance expert.

The Affordable Care Act limits insurers ability to choose who to insure or to adjust rates based on previous medical history.

Those are good aspects of the legislation. People who previously had no insurance now are able to get health insurance no matter what existing conditions they have.

But the legislation does not have stiff enough penalties for those who choose not to carry health insurance. As a result, those signing up for plans are sicker than was anticipated, and there are not enough young, healthy people in plans to balance the costs.

We support the basic concepts of the Affordable Care Act. Everybody should be able to get health insurance. However, the legislation needs an overhaul to address its shortcomings.

Such an overhaul is not going to happen in an election year, when we will hear all of the candidates talking about health insurance reform but will see no action by Congress to address the problems.

At the Journal-Eureka, we know about the problems caused by rising insurance rates. The newspaper had to drop its health insurance coverage for employees after rates went up 66 percent between 2014 and 2015. As a small business, those increases were impossible to incorporate into the budget without drastically reducing our staff.

Other businesses will see similar increases if the Politico report comes to fruition.

That could be bad news for Democrats, most of whom support the Affordable Care Act, albeit with modifications.

Republicans, who have been calling for repeal of the legislation for the past four years, will have an equally challenging time. While repealing the legislation seems like a simple solution, that action will create as many problems as it will solve.

What is needed is a serious discussion about health care costs and the insurance Americans purchase to help pay those costs.

Voters need to demand answers from candidates in this election.