MINNEAPOLIS — Somebody should hire the script writer from this Hollywood baseball movie.

Cut to Derek Jeter, the 40-year-old captain of the New York Yankees, stepping away from his post at shortstop and jogging across the diamond just before the start of the fourth inning Tuesday night. The Target Field crowd of 41,048 serenaded him with a standing ovation.

Cue the music: “New York, New York. … King of the Hill … Top of the Heap … A-No. 1.”

Pan to Rockies shortstop Troy Tulowitzki, who grew up idolizing Jeter, trying to keep his raw, bubbling emotions below the surface.

“I was just trying to take it all in,” Tulowitzki said. “It was a special moment, and I will remember it forever.”

And, oh, yeah, Jeter’s American League team won the 85th All-Star Game, beating the National League 5-3.

That will matter again in October, when the American League champion has home field in the World Series.

The game-changing hits arrived in the fifth inning. All-Star Game MVP Mike Trout of the Angels, quickly emerging as the new face of baseball, hammered a double down the left-field line to score Oakland’s Derek Norris and put the AL in front 4-3. Trout’s double came on the heels of his first-inning triple that scored Jeter.

Houston’s Jose Altuve lifted a sacrifice fly to left, scoring the Chicago White Sox’s Alexei Ramirez to push the American League’s lead to 5-3.

Tulowitzki, batting third, went 1-for-3, hammering a double off the right-field wall in the fifth off Detroit right-hander Max Scherzer. Tulowitzki pulled of a nifty swim move to avoid the tag at second. Tulo, however, was stranded when Arizona’s Paul Goldschmidt struck out.

PHOTOS: 2014 MLB All-Star Game

“It was 3-3 at the time (of his hit),” Tulowitzki said, “and it was a big hit for the team, but it didn’t work out. I thought it might be out when I hit it, but I was happy with the double.”

How about that slide?

“I don’t know what happened there, but it worked out,” Tulowitzki said. “I know the fans got a kick of out it. I was in the dugout when they showed it on the replay, and the fans were oohing and aahing over it. I didn’t know it was that good, but I guess I would have been out if I didn’t do it.”

Tulowitzki started at shortstop and played five innings in the field. He threw out Baltimore’s Nelson Cruz on a routine grounder to end the first. Tulo also snared a hot liner off the bat of Detroit’s Miguel Cabrera to end the third.

Colorado’s Charlie Blackmon entered the game as the center field in the bottom of the sixth. Blackmon struck out on a foul tip in his first at-bat against Kansas City’s Greg Holland.

Blackmon came to the plate with two out in the ninth to face Minnesota lefty Glenn Perkins. Blackmon grounded out to short, ending the game.

“I felt like I was making my debut tonight,” Blackmon said. “I was nervous, until I got into the game. Then I was fine. “

While it was Blackmon’s first All-Star Game. It was Jeter’s 14th and final Midsummer Classic. He went out in style, slashing a double to right and scoring a run in the first inning. He then singled in the third in his final all-star at-bat. He left behind a star-spangled legacy: 13-for-27 (.481), two doubles and a home run. That .481 average ranks fifth all time for players with a minimum 10 at-bats.

Jeter’s first All-Star Game appearance was at Coors Field on July 7, 1998. He was just 24. He went 0-for-1, with a strikeout. He was too scared to talk to Baltimore Orioles legend Cal Ripken Jr.

“You’re afraid to say anything; I mean, it’s Cal Ripken,” Jeter said. “Even though I’d played against him, I hadn’t really had a chance to talk to him. There are a lot of stories like that when you come to your first one.”

But there didn’t appear to be a scared bone in Jeter’s body Tuesday night, just the calm classiness that has exemplified his career. In his final appearance in the Midsummer Classic, Jeter wrote a near-perfect ending.