Loveland student Patrick Canny wins first place in championship

Shinnosuke Ishizuka of Arvada competes in the 1A Freestyle round of the NoCo Yoyo Contest on Sunday at Embassy Suites. ( Amanda Sutherland / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

You may think you know everything there is to know about yo-yos, and there's a good chance you know the basics, but there's an even better chance there is a bigger, more fascinating world of the yo-yo out there than you imagined.

The state YoYo Championship for Colorado brought top-tiered yo-yoers from around the state, and even across state lines, to Loveland for a disc-flinging, string-swinging time. The competition, hosted by Loveland's YoYo Club began at noon Sunday at Embassy Suites.

"All the kids in the club work so hard to put this on. We put it on with 30 sponsors last year but managed to pull it off with only 12 this year," said Loveland's club founder, Cody Schneider.

The competition consisted of five divisions: 1A freestyle, 2A looping with two yo-yos, 3A double yo-yo tricks, 4A offstring and 5A counterweight. The competitors had one minute to impress judges by doing non-repetitive tricks without fumbling. Stage presence was also a factor.

"We have a few of the top yo-yoers here and as a judge Jon Gates is here," Schneider said.

Gates of Denver is a well-known yo-yo enthusiast and performer. He invented the binding that makes possible the technique "offstring," where the yo-yo actually detaches from the string, making it possible to launch the spinning discs high into the air and landing back on the string, attaching and returning to the yo-yoer like a normal yo-yo.

Advertisement

"It's a combination of simplicity and complexity. It's both a toy and a highly scientific tool that some are even taking to a spiritual level," Gates said, without looking down at his spinning yo-yo flipping around while he talked.

The way Gates speaks about his passion makes it seem more like a philosophy than a toy. He said his favorite trick is one that most people are familiar with — flipping the yo-yo to the end of the string and recalling it back into the hand — saying he takes pleasure in the basics.

Shinnosuke Ishizuka, of Arvada, competes in the 1A Freestyle round of the NoCo Yoyo Contest on Sunday at Embassy Suites. (Amanda Sutherland / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"One of my favorite things is watching someone trying it for the first time," Gates said. "I'm all about helping bring people up to their potential level. It's more about supporting people."

The judges score based on a trick, which is any combination of string bend, direction change and bringing it back into the performer's hand — the success of this is a positive score and failure is a count against their score.

Technically though, a yo-yoer might spend his whole set doing a single drawn out trick. In this case, the judges awarded points based on how complex they believe the trick to be, splitting it up into segments.

The scores are 80 percent technique and 20 percent performance. The competing yo-yoer is encouraged to make use of the stage and interact with the music selection they have chosen for their set. Those who make the finals of each division have scored over 100 points in their one-minute allotment.

"There's a lot of strategy in how you perform to get into the next round," Gates said. "These are the people who will be running the world in 10 to 15 years and ... they're learning those lessons today."

"It's fun. It keeps you doing stuff. It helps with hand-eye coordination. I think I did pretty good," said Dominic Gordon, 11, of Loveland who has been playing for one year. He said his best division is the 1A freestyle.

The top three or four of each division will move on to the regional competition in Denver in July. But the top two performers of 1A qualify for the regional finals. The top five of regionals will qualify for the national competition.

Jon Best of Denver won second place. And Patrick Canny, 17, took home first place for the championship. He lives in south Fort Collins and attends Thompson Valley High School. This was the first time he'd taken home trophies for first place in two divisions, getting 1A and 5A.

"I wasn't expecting it because I just put my freestyle together in the last couple days," said Canny, who was ranked 29th in the world in 2013.

Canny's yo-yo passed under his legs and then flung up behind his back where he weaved it in and out meticulously through a complex cat's cradle of string, with him spinning and bouncing to the music.

"This is pulling people together. We got teachers and ex-cons here," Gates said. "We're just playing with this simple toy, but it's a more than that to a lot of people."

Schneider will also be representing his yo-yo club, consisting of 15 members in Loveland, by taking home first in the 3A division. For details on the competition, visit YoYoContest.com.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com.