Florida Gov. Rick Scott had been mentioned as a possible vice presidential candidate for Donald Trump. AP photo

Florida Gov. Rick Scott heads to Washington Wednesday where he intends to get Congress to focus on Zika. Florida leads the nation in the number of Zika infections and that is making Scott an unlikely ally of President Obama's request for $1.9 billion to fight the mosquito-borne virus.

Congressional leaders are refusing to meet Obama’s request. They say there is enough money left over from the effort to fight an Ebola outbreak to fill the need until the next budget cycle. The dispute puts Scott in an unusual position, advocating for more federal government spending. Scott first ventured into politics as the head of a group opposed to Obamacare. As a fiscal conservative, he generally believes government spending distorts market forces and has an overall negative impact on the economy.

But Florida health officials warn a wet rainy summer could lead to an explosion in the mosquito population and ignite a Zika outbreak along the Gulf Coast like a powder keg. Scott told reporters Tuesday his job is to keep Florida's 20 million residents safe.

“My goal is to get the money here,” said Scott. “I’m going to Washington and I’m going to talk to congressional men and women and senators. Some of our mosquito control boards are (also) going up there and they’re going to tell them what additional resources they need.”

The Zika virus can cause birth defects and leave adults with the paralyzing Guillain-Barre syndrome. Scientists have identified the yellow fever mosquito and the Asian tiger mosquito as potential carriers. The virus can also be transmitted through sexual relations.

All Florida cases have been traveled related, none has been linked to a Florida mosquito.

Zika symptoms are usually mild, including an itchy rash, fever, joint pain and pink eye. About 80% of patients have no symptoms at all, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.

Scott and representatives of Florida mosquito control boards will meet with Congressional leaders Wednesday and Thursday. Scott said he intends to tell Congress that the state is preparing for Zika like it is a hurricane, but his focus was clearly on getting money from Washington.

“We got to have a federal plan,” said Scott. “Whether it is more money for mosquito boards. Whether it is to make sure we have the right testing kits, make sure we have all the resources. All of these things. The federal government needs to come together, work together and provide the funds for the things that are necessary to our state.”