By Staff

Now that more Americans have health insurance due to the Affordable Care Act (ACA), the nation’s healthcare system requires more health professionals at a time of rapid and diverse population growth. A new academic and community partnership – The North Carolina Alliance to Transform the Health Professions – aims to tackle this crisis by directly addressing the state’s growing healthcare needs while providing a working model for other states also committed to expanding and diversifying their health workforces.

Representatives from North Carolina’s Academic Health Centers, Historically Black Colleges and Universities, and Area Health Education Centers (AHEC) will come together for a formal signing of a Memorandum of Understanding which will mark the official formation of the North Carolina Alliance for Health Professionals Diversity. Former Secretary, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services and Chairman of The Sullivan Alliance to Transform the Health Professions Louis W. Sullivan, M.D., will serve as keynote speaker during the March 27, 2015 ceremony at Winston-Salem State University.

“To give North Carolinians greater access to care and better health outcomes, we need more health professionals who are culturally-competent, racially- and ethnically-diverse, and who will embrace the interprofessional training needed to thrive in today’s healthcare environment. Enhancing community access to healthcare will give us a stronger nation overall,” said Sullivan.

Over the past 25 years, America’s increasingly diverse population has been growing at a faster rate than its population of trained health personnel. The Association of American Medical Colleges recently reported that America would have a doctor shortage of 46,000-90,000 by the year 2025. The Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates that America will need 1.05 million additional registered nurses by 2022. And according to HRSA, there are: 6,100 U.S. communities designated as primary care health profession shortage areas (HPSAs); 4,900 designated as dental HPSAs; and 4,000 designated mental health HPSAs.

The formal signing ceremony will take place on March 27th at 2pm in the Dillard Auditorium on the campus of WSSU.

The following participating colleges, universities and state agencies joining with WSSU in this effort:

Bennett College, Campbell University, Davidson Community College, East Carolina University, Elon University, University of North Carolina Greensboro, High Point University, Elizabeth City State University, Fayetteville State University, Johnson C. Smith University, Western Carolina University, N.C. Area Health Education Center, N.C. Department of Health and Human Services, Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center, and the Forsyth County Department of Public Health.