Rep. Kevin Brady Kevin BradyIRS doubted legality of ObamaCare payments, former official says Report: Pacific trade pact would boost growth, jobs and incomes Puerto Rico debt becomes constitutional fight on the right MORE, the Texas Republican who chairs the tax-writing House Ways and Means Committee, narrowly prevailed in a primary race on Tuesday.

The 10-term lawmaker eked out a projected win with 53 percent of the vote, according to The Associated Press, just barely above the minimum of 50.1 percent to avoid a May runoff.

Tea Party-backed former Texas state Rep. Steve Toth finished in second place with 38 percent of the vote.

ADVERTISEMENT

Brady went up against three primary challengers after serving as the House Ways and Means Committee chairman only since November. In addition to Toth, he faced Craig McMichael, who challenged him in 2014, and Andre Dean, a retired lieutenant colonel.

Brady won the Ways and Means gavel last year after his predecessor, Rep. Paul Ryan Paul RyanPuerto Rico debt relief faces serious challenges in Senate Overnight Finance: GOP faces dilemma on spending bills | CEOs push Congress on tax rules | Trump talks energy Overnight Energy: Trump outlines 'America First' energy plan in North Dakota MORE (R-Wis.), resigned to become Speaker. Brady had previously sought the post in 2014 but lost to Ryan at the time.

Tuesday was a good night for incumbent House Republicans in Texas, all of whom are projected to win and avoid runoffs.

House Rules Committee Chairman Pete Sessions and House Science Committee Chairman Lamar Smith, along with Republican Study Committee Chairman Bill Flores Bill FloresRyan secures big win with bipartisan Puerto Rico deal Overnight Finance: GOP's budget 'SWAT' team | What to watch at IRS impeachment hearing | Sanders bucks Dem leaders on Puerto Rico bill House GOP budget 'SWAT' team is formed MORE, all edged out primary challengers.

Other longtime incumbents including Reps. Joe Barton, Sam Johnson Sam JohnsonOvernight Finance: House votes to rein in IRS; Ryan won't set Puerto Rico timeline House GOP grills IRS head on illegal immigrants' tax returns House GOP chairman narrowly survives primary challenge MORE, John Culberson and Louie Gohmert Louie GohmertOvernight Finance: Puerto Rico bill clears panel | IRS chief vows to finish term | Bill would require nominees to release tax returns House panel approves Puerto Rico debt relief GOP rep on Clinton: 'They'll never indict her' MORE also easily fended off their GOP opponents.

In Alabama, Republican Reps. Martha Roby Martha RobyOvernight Healthcare: Momentum on mental health? | Zika bills head to conference | Only 10 ObamaCare co-ops left Trump video shows Clinton laughing over Benghazi footage Tea Party group backs challenge to House Transportation chairman MORE and Bradley Byrne both successfully avoided runoffs against their primary challengers.