Topics: News, Politics News

Right-wing Turkish President Recep Tayyip Erdoğan cited “Hitler’s Germany” as an example after which he hopes to model his government.

Erdoğan hopes to replace the parliamentary system of government of Turkey, a NATO member and close western ally, with a less democratic presidential system — like that of the U.S. or Russia — that will give him more power and less oversight from other branches.

Asked at a press conference in Turkey whether such a system could maintain the unitary structure of the Turkish state, Erdoğan replied “Yes. There is nothing to say that you can’t have a presidential system in a unitary state.”

“There are already some examples in the world today, and also some from the past,” he added. “You see it when you look at Hitler’s Germany. Later you see the example again in various other counties.”

Later, Erdoğan’s administration rolled back on his statement, claiming it was misunderstood. “Erdogan’s ‘Hitler’s Germany’ metaphor has been distorted by some news sources and has been used in the opposite sense,” it said. “If the system is abused it may lead to bad management resulting in disasters as in Hitler’s Germany … The important thing is to pursue fair management that serves the nation,” the statement added, insisting Erdoğan did not mean to speak positively of Hitler.

Critics of the Turkish government, however, have characterized Erdoğan as increasingly authoritarian. His government has clamped down on journalists, the Kurdish minority, and activists, especially from left-wing and pro-Kurdish groups.

Although Erdoğan has claimed Turkey has the world’s freest press, the New York Times reported in 2013 that, for two years in a row, Turkey imprisoned more journalists than any other country, according to the Committee to Protect Journalists.

Reporters Without Borders dubbed Turkey the 149th-worst country for press freedoms, out of 180. And, under Erdoğan, Turkey has made more requests for content removal from social media than any other country in the world.

In December 2014, a 16-year-old Turkish student was arrested at school and thrown in jail for “insulting” Erdoğan, whom he called the “thieving owner of the illegal palace.”

Before Turkey’s election in October, police violently shut down the offices of critical media outlets. The offices of Turkish newspapers that have criticized the government or fairly portrayed the Kurds have also been attacked by ultra-nationalists sympathetic to the extreme-right Nationalist Movement Party or Erdoğan’s ruling Justice and Development Party. Erdoğan’s government did virtually nothing to punish these acts of political terror.