President Barack Obama presented his executive actions on immigration reform Thursday to the American public, unveiling a plan expected to protect up to 5 million people in the country illegally from deportation.



"Kids can go to school without worrying that their parents will be deported and not be there when they get home," says Angel Padilla, a health policy analyst with the National Immigration Law Center.

[READ MORE: The Supreme Court to Tackle Subsidy Portion of Obamacare]

However, the privilege of working legally without the threat of removal by the federal government does not come with all the health care benefits available to American citizens. Under Obama's plan, newly protected immigrants will not be eligible for public health benefits such as Medicaid, the government's program for poor or disabled Americans, or Medicare, the government's health care program for seniors.

But immigrants will be paying taxes into those programs.

"These individuals' eligibility for programs will not change," Padilla says.

Private health care options, however, are available, and may become more accessible. Coverage can be provided through an employer, through becoming a dependent on a spouse's plan or bought directly from an insurance company.

Under the executive action, work permits will be available for 4 million immigrants who have lived in the U.S. for over five years and have children who are citizens or lawful permanent residents. Once they pass a background check, they will get work authorizations and Social Security numbers and will be required to pay taxes. Those who obtain jobs that come with health insurance coverage would have the same employer-sponsored benefits as others, which also could include dental or vision coverage.

The move is likely to result in coverage for only a small number of uninsured immigrants living in the country illegally, says Steven P. Wallace, associate director of the UCLA Center for Health Policy Research and professor at the UCLA Fielding School of Public Health.

"It will help, but it's on the margin because of the types of industries people are in," he says, adding that a lot of service or construction jobs that immigrants tend to work in do not typically come with health insurance.

Some newly shielded immigrants may choose to go after new jobs, however. "If you have a paper that says you can work here legally, then the breadth of employers likely to hire you is much wider, so you are more likely to find employer-sponsored health insurance," Wallace says.

There are an estimated 11 million immigrants living in the U.S. without legal permission, according to the Pew Research Center. Through the executive action plan, the Department of Homeland Security will focus its efforts on deporting serious criminals and immigrants who recently entered the U.S.

Critics of Obama's immigration action have been concerned that new protections would allow immigrants in the U.S. illegally to take part in benefits provided by the Affordable Care Act – the president's health care reform bill – which last year provided citizens with $36 billion in health savings.

[READ: Obamacare Enrollment Estimates Reduced]

Under the law, Americans are required to buy health insurance or pay a penalty. Newly protected citizens would, as before, not have to pay the tax, but they also could not access more affordable health insurance subsidized by the government.

Also under Obamacare, Americans who do not qualify for Medicaid, who do not have an employer-sponsored insurance plan or cannot afford their own health coverage can receive government-funded subsidies allowing them to buy plans at a reduced price through federal and state online marketplaces. The marketplaces help people shop for health plans in their areas at different benefit levels.

The subsidies, however, specifically are not extended to people who do not have legal immigration status, and would not include newly protected immigrants. In September, the Obama administration cut off health insurance coverage for 112,000 people who, after multiple outreach efforts from federal health officials, did not provide proof of their citizenship or immigration status, according to the most recent figures provided by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.

The subsidies also are not expected to apply to younger people protected under Obama's executive action plan. The Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals program, originally launched in 2012, will be extended under the plan to allow more immigrants who arrived in the U.S. illegally as children – so-called Dreamers – to be shielded from deportation. Shortly after the 2012 program was put in place, health officials issued regulations saying Dreamers would not be eligible to take part in federal health care programs like Medicaid or sign up for insurance through the marketplaces – rules expected to continue under the new executive action plan.

And while immigrants do have the option of purchasing health insurance directly through an insurance company or a broker, Padilla doesn't think many will avail themselves of such an option. "A lot of [plans] are unaffordable," he says. "Without access [to the marketplaces], it will probably be out of reach."

Under federally facilitated marketplace plans, customers receiving Obamacare tax credit subsidies were paying an average monthly premium of $82 after receiving an average credit amount of $264.

[READ: Obamacare Hasn't Propelled Mental Health Treatment]

There are other ways newly protected immigrants can receive coverage or care, though. Even before Obamacare or the announcement of Thursday's executive action, the government was funding some health care for immigrants in the U.S. illegally.

Under the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act, for example, hospitals are reimbursed when they provide emergency and maternity care for low-income people who need it, regardless of immigration status. The federal government paid out $1.3 billion under the program in 2011, according to The Washington Post, and states paid hundreds of millions more. Immigrants in the country illegally also can receive medical care through community health clinics.

"It's good to have that safety net, but we think it's better to get them enrolled so they can have access to affordable health insurance," Padilla says.

Coverage also varies by location. The District of Columbia, Massachusetts, Minnesota, New York and Washington state offer health insurance through state funds to low-income people granted deferred status, and more people could be added to those rolls under the expanded categories. In California, Dreamers can get coverage paid for by Medi-Cal, the state's Medicaid program, and emergency Medicaid also is available to pregnant women delivering their babies.



Reducing the threat of deportation will not just help immigrants' health through providing access to better jobs that can offer health insurance, Wallace says, but people also will be less afraid to seek medical care when they need it.

"It's a step in the right direction for people who contribute to our economy … but just one," he says.

Padilla, who advocates for greater health care access for immigrants, says he has to keep in perspective how much the president's plan means for immigrants despite the lack of health care access.

"This is such a huge deal for a lot of families. There are things we wish were included. But in reality, this is transformative for a lot of people," he says.