An armed, off-duty police officer in uniform shot and killed a bank robbery suspect after the man pointed what appeared to be a gun at the officer Saturday morning, police say.

A person covered completely with a blanket was wheeled out of a U.S. Bank on a stretcher on East Colfax Avenue after the shooting, witnesses say. The name of the dead person has not been released.

“We heard three shots — boom, boom, boom,” said Jeff Leib, a passerby and former Denver Post staff writer.

Within a minute or so, fire engines and police cars descended on the scene.

“Within minutes, they were wheeling someone away from the bank on a stretcher,” Leib said.

The alleged robber had taken money from a teller and was leaving the bank in the 6300 block of East Colfax when the off-duty officer fatally shot him at about 10:43 a.m., Denver police spokesman Sonny Jackson said.

Police Chief Robert White said the suspect “pointed a weapon” at the officer. Jackson said the weapon appeared to be a gun.

White said the officer, whose name has not been released, has been placed on administrative leave pending an investigation.

Paramedics pushed a stretcher up to an ambulance parked outside the bank, which is located in a residential neighborhood, Leib said. It appeared that there was a person on the stretcher beneath a blanket, he added.

Westbound Colfax Avenue was blocked at Leyden Street and Monaco Parkway during the investigation.

About a dozen police cars and the police department’s crime lab responded to the scene. They put crime tape around the scene and across Colfax Avenue.

The officer was not injured. Another police officer was going door to door, speaking to residents.

“All I can tell you is that officers are OK and there are no suspects on the loose,” a police officer said, according to Leib.

Leib said the same bank has been robbed repeatedly and that the bank hired off-duty police officers to guard the bank. They would stand in the corner of the bank wearing their uniforms, Leib said.