CONTACTS:

Carla Clunis, Coburn Communication, 646-633-4971, carla.clunis@coburnww.com

Paola Torres, AARP, 202-434-2555, ptorres@aarp.org



The Most Livable Places at 50-plus: In an exclusive feature, the May issue of AARP Bulletin uses the AARP Livability Index, a new online tool that measures the livability of communities across the U.S., to identify the most livable places for the 50-plus. To create the index, the AARP Public Policy Institute surveyed 4,500 Americans 50 and older to determine the aspects of community most important to them. Crunching the numbers some more, AARP Bulletin created a series of six lists that detail the “Most Livable Neighborhoods,” “Most Livable Cities,” “Best Cities for Date Night,” “Best Cities for Staying Healthy,” “Easiest Cities to Get Around,” and the “Best Cities for Making New Friends.” (Page 18)

Lasting Mental Effects of the Vietnam War: For many older combat veterans who served during the Vietnam War, symptoms of post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) still haunt their lives. This issue of AARP Bulletin shares the story of Dave Dillard, an infantryman in Vietnam, about how he faced coming home to a country that he felt didn’t understand where he’d been or how the war had mentally affected him. (Page 10)

Six Game-Changing Diagnostic Tests in 2015: The May issue of AARP Bulletin takes a look at six game-changing medical tests backed by real science that are making diagnosing diseases easier and less troublesome. From less-guess prostate tests to a new PillCam that provides a less-invasive colonoscopy experience, the latest generation of diagnostic tests better identify who may be at risk for certain diseases and the best treatment options for patients. (Page 8)

Disrupt Aging through a Collective Voice: Looking ahead to the White House Conference on Aging (WHCoA), AARP CEO Jo Ann Jenkins discusses how older Americans, united behind a collective purpose, are leading the charge towards important innovations in technology, health care, and retirement. Continuing the push for older Americans to help influence public policies, Jo Ann Jenkins urges those 50-plus to visit whitehouseconferenceonagaing.gov to find how they can use their voices to further disrupt the stereotypes of aging. (Page 30)

Don’t Let Savings Bonds Cost You Money: In this issue of AARP Bulletin, AARP financial columnist Jane Bryant Quinn shares tips on avoiding the four biggest mistakes that Americans make when purchasing or redeeming savings bonds. From redeeming bonds too early to miscalculating interest, Jane explains the fundamental dos and don’ts of investing in savings bonds. (Page 26)

Scam Alert: Watch Out for Vacation Rental Scams: With rental property owners being the latest target in vacation rental scams, Scam Alert columnist Sid Kirchheimer discusses ways that both property owners and renters can protect themselves from fraud and phony applications in this issue of AARP Bulletin. (Page 24)

Rita Rudner’s Case of Mistaken Identity: In this issue of AARP Bulletin, American comedian Rita Rudner shares the time she once tried to do a good deed but instead managed to disturb a lost cat owner and a sleeping raccoon. (Page 42)

A Conversation with Neil deGrasse Tyson: In this issue of AARP Bulletin, famed astrophysicist, author and science superstar, Neil deGrasse Tyson, discusses his new TV talk show, his thoughts about Mars exploration, and why he looks forward to aging. (Page 6)

For exclusive online features and original daily content, visit the AARP Bulletin (www.aarp.org/bulletin) website, the only daily, go-to news source for people 50-plus. Features include exclusive online columns such as Ask Ms. Medicare, Financially Speaking, Scam Alert, Save a Buck and more.

To schedule interviews with an editor from AARP Bulletin or to receive a complimentary issue, please contact Carla Clunis at 646-633-4971 or carla.clunis@coburnww.com or Paola Torres at 202-434-2555 or ptorres@aarp.org.

# # #

About AARP Bulletin

The definitive news source for AARP’s members, AARP Bulletin (www.aarp.org/bulletin) reaches more than 23.5 million households each month in print, with additional news and in-depth coverage online. Covering health and health policy, Medicare, Social Security, consumer protection, personal finance, and AARP state and national news developments, AARP Bulletin delivers the story behind the key issues confronting 50+ America. The monthly consumer-oriented news publication has become a must-read for congressional lawmakers and Washington opinion leaders, and it provides AARP members with pertinent information they need to know.