Rows of people crowded into the Capitol Rotunda Wednesday, some of them clutching signs, to push for a change that could help prevent brain injuries.

The Brain Injury Alliance of Kentucky is pushing legislation to make people aware of the dangers of children not wearing helmets.

Gov. Matt Bevin declared March 9 Brain Injury Awareness Day. Bevin was not there, but Lt. Gov. Jenean Hampton spoke on his behalf. She read off several gripping statistics about brain injuries.

"Bicycle injuries are the fourth leading cause for brain injury in Kentucky's children ages 14 and under," Hampton said.

House Bill 254 also known as T.J.’s Bill is inspired by 13-year-old, T.J. Floyd, who suffered a traumatic brain injury five years ago when he was riding his bicycle – something all children love.

T.J. recently returned to school part-time. His bill was introduced to the Transportation Committee in January and has not been brought up for a vote yet.

Now, leaders of Brain Injury Alliance of Kentucky are trying to prevent that from happening to another child.

"Sometimes we take for granted that everybody knows you need to wear a bicycle helmet,” BIAK spokesperson Eddie Reynolds said. “It's the parent’s responsibility, but not everyone does know."

Brain injury victim Bille Blevins says she knows first-hand what it's like to live with a brain injury after falling off her motorcycle and not having a helmet on.

"You know when we were growing up we didn't have to wear our helmets and so I think that you’re just not educated. You fall and you hurt your head, you don't know what's going to happen in a few years down the road when those injuries really start to show up." Billie Blevins Brain injury victim said.

According to a 2014 statewide trauma registry, 40 percent of bicycle-related injuries for children under the age of 12 involved traumatic brain injuries, and in 100 percent of those cases the victims were not wearing helmets.

"I don't know that a helmet would have stopped the injury because of the impact they thought he was hit by a car, it was that severe just from riding a bike. I do believe it would have lessened the severity of it," T.J.'s mom Heather Floyd said.