Former New York Gov. George Pataki speaks during the Iowa Agriculture Summit, Saturday, March 7, 2015, in Des Moines, Iowa. (AP Photo/Charlie Neibergall) (Photo: AP)

Former New York Gov. George Pataki says he favors rewriting the federal tax code to eliminate most tax deductions while lowering the tax rates on all Americans.

While he would permit a few tax deductions like one for home mortgage interest, he said he would make everyone pay their fair share of taxes. "It would put the lobbyists out of business," he said at Saturday's Iowa Agriculture Summit.

Pataki, who was New York's chief executive from 1995 until 2006, spoke fondly of growing up on a farm, picking up berry baskets when he was youngster to help his family. He said farming teaches character and the value of hard work and he talked about how he still owns a 412-acre farm where he raises Angus cattle

Pataki also discussed how he worked as governor to help farmers by cutting their property taxes and supporting initiatives to protect the environment. But he said the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency has engaged in "classic overreach" on rules affecting streams and wetlands.

MORE:Full Ag Summit Coverage|Coverage by candidate

OTHER ISSUES: Pataki said he is opposed to the federal Renewable Fuels Standard, which requires transportation fuel sold in the U.S. to contain a minimum volume of renewable fuels. He also said it is "utterly ridiculous" to treat the Internet as a public utility, but he support efforts to expand broadband in rural areas. He said Cuba is a "Stalinist state" and he opposes opening up U.S. trade with the island nation.

QUOTE: "I honestly don't think that the federal government should require anybody in America to buy anything, whether it is ethanol or Obamacare."

BEST MOMENT: His remarks on reforming the federal tax system got warm applause from the audience.

AUDIENCE REACTION: Iowans listened politely and attentively as Pataki spoke. For many, this the first time they had heard the former New York governor, and it was clear most people wanted to hear the details of his policy stances.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Gcs5Yc