As he prepares to enter the 2016 presidential race on July 21, Ohio Gov. John Kasich is dusting off the playbook of failed 2012 presidential contender Jon Huntsman, the former Utah governor who tried to secure the GOP nomination by badmouthing his own party’s voters. Like Huntsman, Kasich is setting himself up to win the media and lose the primary.

Liberal commentator Ed Kilgore recently argued that, despite a gigantic GOP field with more than a dozen credible candidates, the contenders are all essentially trying to get to the right of one another. “You’d have to say that the shadow of Huntsman ‘12 is pretty big; nobody wants to go there at all, even if the minority of self-identified GOP moderates—and there are even some who self-identify as liberals—is a tempting target for someone trying to get into the mid-single-digits in polls.”

Story Continued Below

According to Henry Olsen of the Ethics and Public Policy Center, a conservative commentator whose “Four Faces of the Republican Party” is required reading for anyone covering the 2016 contest, roughly 25 percent to 30 percent of GOP primary voters fall into the moderate or liberal category, and they like candidates who are only moderately fiscally conservative and eschew Bible-thumping. New Hampshire, the first primary state, is filled with such voters. It was Huntsman’s main target, and it appears to be Kasich’s as well.

That’s one similarity. Another is former Huntsman aides John Weaver and Fred Davis, who are now on Team Kasich. Weaver, in particular, is an infamously moderate Republican operative. During one 2011 debate, Politico editor-in-chief John Harris confronted Huntsman about comments from Weaver, who had described the Republican Party as “a bunch of cranks” and Huntsman’s fellow GOP presidential contenders as producing “a buffet of crazy and inane comments.” Weaver is so far from the GOP mainstream that he consulted for a time with the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.

That connects to yet another Kasich-Huntsman commonality: Conservative apostasy. Huntsman criticized Republicans for refusing to accept scientific consensus on climate change and being too far to the right on other issues. He tweeted: "To be clear, I believe in evolution and trust scientists on global warming. Call me crazy." Kasich did not actually work for President Barack Obama, unlike former Ambassador to China Huntsman, but he will be painted as a supporter of Obama’s signature achievement, the Affordable Care Act.

Kasich entered office as perhaps the most conservative person elected governor of Ohio in a half century, but it’s doubtful his supporters or his critics (at least on the right) would argue that he’s governed that way. Kasich’s boldest policy proposals have been to raise and broaden the Ohio sales tax and raise taxes on fracking. After a rocky gubernatorial start in 2011, where his party’s bid to roll back collective-bargaining rights for public employees was soundly rejected by voters, Kasich seemed to take on the persona of former four-term Ohio Gov. James A. Rhodes, a Republican who emphasized “jobs and progress,” and whose “aversion to public conflict [became] legendary,” according to Ohio Colossus, a recent biography of Rhodes by veteran Ohio political reporters Tom Diemer, Lee Leonard and the late Richard Zimmerman. Though Kasich has adopted much of Rhodes’ governing style, avoiding conflict and controversy has been a challenge for him at times, thanks in part to his off-the-cuff, sometimes rambling style. It can get him in trouble, like when he called a police officer an “ idiot” during a 2011 speech.

Whatever Kasich is doing, it’s working back home: He destroyed a lousy 2014 Democratic party opponent by 30 points and his approval ratings are high. Given his popularity, it’s no surprise that early horse race polling shows Kasich doing significantly better than other Republicans in Ohio against Hillary Clinton. Partially due to that strength in a key swing state, there is a case to be made that Kasich is the GOP’s strongest general election candidate.

But it’s worth noting that such early polling is not predictive and that winning Ohio, historically, is a necessary but not sufficient condition for a Republican presidential victory. And Kasich will need to win the primary first, a difficult task that his embrace of Obamacare makes even harder.

In 2013, Kasich went around the state Legislature and used the state’s Controlling Board—a powerful, Republican-controlled body made up of the state budget director and members of the state House and Senate—to expand Medicaid, an option made available to the state through the Affordable Care Act .

Kasich hasn’t just defended this decision: He’s stridently called out his critics, which might be committing the error that Jon Huntsman made in the 2012 cycle: provoking his base instead of playing to it.