Ignorance may lead to bliss, but it surely leads to obesity: Americans are fat in part because they have absolutely no idea how many calories they are eating. They are guessing, and guessing very badly.



As much as a third of the calories we consume come from outside our homes – often in jumbo portions loaded with butter and sugar. The average person underestimates the calorie content of these meals by 175-250, although more than a quarter of people under-count by at least 500 calories, Harvard researchers say.



And when it comes to the least healthy foods, we are the most delusional. We will under-estimate the calories in a dish like cheese fries covered in ranch dressing by as much as 600 calories, a survey by the American Journal of Public Health found – about third of what our entire caloric intake is supposed to be in a day.



Thankfully, as part of the Affordable Care Act, the FDA has finally approved sweeping new rules that will require calories to be posted wherever we eat out; including vending machines, chain restaurants, amusement parks and movie theaters. The new mandate even includes the alcohol sold at these places (with the unfortunate exception of mixed drinks, which tend to be the most caloric).



Granted, the FDA blew the timing on this, issuing this new policy two days before a national holiday centered on overeating. But let’s hope it means the end of jumbo-sizing as we know it.



The new rules, set to take effect a year from now, have stirred outrage from the food industry, grousing from the nanny state crowd and doubt from skeptics who say it may not change behavior anyway.



The pizza and movie theater chains are screaming about it, the conservative Heritage Foundation calls it “a shocking power grab,” and Republicans backed by powerful lobbyists are claiming it will impose unnecessary costs on businesses and – of course – kill jobs.



Others rightly point out that there is no definitive research that shows that posting calorie counts will cause people to make healthier choices, although at least one study of Starbucks-goers showed promising results: a 6 percent decrease in average calories purchased after their posting.



But here’s the bottom line, people: More than a dozen states are doing this already, with no reported ill effects. So are a number of national chains, like McDonald’s. Customers generally appreciate having more information about their food choices. Even if it doesn't change their lunch order, who's to say they won't do the arithmetic and cut back on dinner?



And isn’t it better to have one national standard for posting calorie counts, rather than a patchwork of state laws? That inconsistency can be even more onerous on businesses, which is why the the National Restaurant Association has grudgingly teamed up with consumer health advocates in an attempt to get a federal policy.



To those who say this is government overreach: Nonsense. It is still entirely up to us to act on this calorie information – and granted, not everyone will do so by making healthier choices.



But Americans have every right to know the potency of the food that we are eating, just as we know the proper dosage of the medicine we are taking. Keeping this information secret doesn't give us more freedom; it just leaves us waddling around in the dark.

FOLLOW THE STAR-LEDGER: TWITTER • FACEBOOK