Sunset yoga on a Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability health & wellness retreat Employee wellness programs offer opportunity for increasing efficiency, saving money, and building employee loyalty.

Are healthy and happy employees more profitable? The answer may seem intuitively simple, yet many corporations are only starting to see their employees’ health and wellness as an opportunity for increasing efficiency, saving money, and not least of all, building employee loyalty.

In an interview at Davos this year AETNA CEO Mark Bertolini credited AETNA’s employee wellness program with a 7.5% reduction in annual health care costs and an average increase of 69 minutes of work per month per participating employee. According to a study by ADP, a majority of mid-sized and large companies report that their wellness programs, “met or exceeded expectations in regards to reducing overall healthcare costs.” Based on estimates from ABI Research, 13 million wearable activity-tracking devices such as Fitbit will be integrated into employee wellness programs by 2018.

“Company wellness programs are one of our favorite sustainability success stories, which is why we developed our Wellness Retreat.” says Corey Klemmer, J.D., CEO of Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability Retreats. “Our clients support sustainable, healthy lifestyles for their employees and can reap the rewards on countless fronts, from productivity and health care costs to talent acquisition and retention.”

The Affordable Healthcare Act, also known as Obamacare, has in many cases, resulted in increased insurance costs for employees. In order to reduce costs, companies are looking for fresh health and wellness solutions that deliver long-term benefits.

“Wellness Retreats don’t just support the bottom line,” says Ken Remsen, M.D., President of Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability Retreats, “they also demonstrate to employees that their employer has a stake in their person well being. What better way to cultivate employee loyalty then to show you care? It's a win-win. We even provide each with a fitness tracker to monitor their progress on the retreat and stay motivated when they get back, for sustained benefits to both the company and the employee.”

Whether providing retreats for executives, employees, incentive travel or teams within company departments, Metamorphosis Retreats aspires to add to the bottom line while providing services that build personal, communal, and environmental sustainability.

About Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability Retreats

Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability Retreats (Metamorphosis Retreats) was formed in 2013 to offer sustainable corporate travel opportunities ranging from health and wellness incentive trips to executive corporate social responsibility educational retreats. Metamorphosis Retreats are held in the beautiful eco-luxury of Costa Rica, where myriad opportunities exist for first-hand engagement with today’s top sustainability issues. The Metamorphosis executive team’s extensive skill sets span medicine, nutrition, fitness, corporate social responsibility, sustainability, ecotourism, environmental law, human rights law and policy, corporate governance, business and financial law, with extensive travel experience in Central America.

For more information:

Corey Klemmer, CEO

Metamorphosis Corporate Sustainability Retreats

corey.klemmer(at)metaretreats(dot)com

917-933-8009

MetaRetreats.com