On the Late Show this Wednesday, host Stephen Colbert had, as his guests, actress Julianna Margulies from The Good Wife, author Jonathan Franzen, who discussed his novel, Purity: A Novel, and music group, Alabama Shakes, who performed a song from their latest album, Sound & Color. In addition, Colbert dished about the plot of the new Star Wars movie, and skewered Ben Carson and Donald Trump.

Stephen Colbert started the Late Show off by coming out onto the stage of the Ed Sullivan Theater and dancing as Jon Batiste, the band leader of the house band, Stay Human, played his mellophone. The studio audience, who had been standing the entire time, kept chanting Colbert’s first name, over and over again.

Colbert thanked his audience, and then he said, “It’s hard to believe, it’s already fall of 2015, and we’re counting down to the event that all civic-minded Americans need to take part in, and that’s the new Star Wars movie.” Colbert said that the trailer for it came out last week when he was on vacation, so he did not get the chance to talk about it then.

“This was a real trailer with actual chunks of movie flavor crystals in it. Seeing the Millennium Falcon again, I got this combination of weeping and giggling, that I call ‘geepling,’ which is also, I believe, the name of one of the new Star Wars characters. And, how great was it to see Chewbacca reunited with Han Solo’s grandfather — it was incredible.”

Colbert continued talking about the movie, saying that he and J.J. Abrams were “good friends,” but he said that Abrams has told him “nothing, including what J.J. stands for and what his phone number is — very good friends.”

Stephen Colbert Dishes About the Plot of the Star Wars Movie

Colbert dished about what he thought that the entire plot of the new Star Wars movie will be, based upon only his having seen the trailer. He said, “It has been three decades since the telling of the first Trilogy. The dark and mysterious First Order has stepped into the power vacuum once held by the Empire, and the newly named Resistance fights in place of the Rebel Alliance, which has begun a tragic shift towards the Dark Side.”

Colbert continued, saying that “But Jon Boyega’s character is in a Storm Trooper suit, so it follows that the new hope has come from the very enemy we have been trained to hate. Remember, the Dark Side has never been exclusively tied to the Empire. The Force, itself, exists outside of mere temporal structures So, I predict, the Dark becomes Light, the Light becomes Dark, the very fabric of the Force is stretched to its limit as a new generation emerges to tear down the false distinctions of the past and unite all of us, old and new, Moisture farmers and Nerd Herders, Stars and Wars, once and for all, bringing peace to the galaxy. Yes, indeed!”

He went on, saying, “The only problem is now I’ve spoiled the movie for myself, and I really wanted to see it. Luckily, we have a good show for you tonight.” He said that his guests will be actress Julianna Margulies from The Good Wife, who recently got a star on the Hollywood Walk of Fame.

Colbert said, “That’s good news, for the one guy in Hollywood who still walks.”

Stephen Colbert said that his second guest will be bestselling author, Jonathan Franzen. “He doesn’t like Twitter,” Colbert said, “So, if you don’t either, show your support with the hashtag, #ImaFranzen. Then, we will have music by Alabama Shakes. Their new album is called Sound & Color. I’ve been a fan of both of those things since I was a baby. If they dangle a shiny set of keys in front of me, I’m good for the evening.”

Colbert said, “Scientists looking for a cure for baldness have successfully regrown hair on lab rats. So, great new, bald men — now you can wear a lab rat on your head.”

Jon Batiste and Stay Human played Colbert to his desk. The studio audience chanted Colbert’s first name over and over again, and he said, “Like a lot of New Yorkers, I’m tired and a little pissed off this morning.”

Stephen Colbert Talks About Donald Trump Looking Like a Golden Calf

Colbert talked about the last Republican debate. He said that he was “excited about the retired neurosurgeon, and current tired person, Ben Carson, who is surging in the polls, ahead 26 percent of Republican Primary Voters, to Donald Trump’s 22 percent. The other 52 percent, of course, is going to the other 52 candidates.”

Then, Colbert said, “Carson’s strongest support comes from Evangelical Christians, a group that Donald Trump has had a lot of trouble with getting. Apparently, a lot of people who read the Bible don’t want to follow someone who looks so much like a golden calf.

“Plus,” Stephen Colbert said, “While Trump has spent months turning off people with his loud and outrageous comments, Carson’s outrageous comments have been quieter.” He played a clip of Carson talking about ObamaCare.

“ObamaCare is… really I think the worst thing to happen to this nation since slavery,” Carson said.

In another clip, Carson said that “a lot of people go into prison straight, and when they come out, they’re gay.”

Wolf Blitzer, from CNN asked Ben Carson about his take on guns, asking him if it was true what he said about the Holocaust and guns. Blitzer asked Carson, “If there had been guns in Germany, you are saying that there might not have been a Holocaust?”

“I think that the likelihood of Hitler being able to accomplish his goals would have been greatly diminished if the people had been armed.”

Colbert said, “You can’t argue with his logic. These days, a lot of people have guns, and where’s Hitler? Dead!”

Stephen Colbert then talked about Trump now questioning Carson’s religion. Carson is a Seventh Day Adventist, and Trump is a Presbyterian. “That’s down the middle of the road, folks, in all fairness. Now, Seventh Day Adventists, I just don’t know about, I don’t know about.”

“Now,” Colbert said, “Some people say this was an attack, as everything that Trump says about anyone is an attack; but, he clarified what he said.” Colbert played audio of Trump saying, again, “I just don’t know about them, that particular religion. I didn’t say anything bad about them, I just don’t know about it.”

Stephen Colbert said, “I’ll take him at his word for it. It’s like your aunt at Thanksgiving who has a couple too many cocktails, who says, ‘I just don’t know about these Jews.’ She probably means — she probably means that she just has a deep-seated curiosity about their religion, and is very eager to learn what she ‘just doesn’t know’ about them. I’ll see you at Thanksgiving, Aunt Rita.”

Colbert said, “Donald did attack Ben Carson on something that he holds more sacred to someone’s religion — their level of ‘pep.'” Colbert played another audio clip of Trump, this time saying “Ben Carson is super-low energy, right? Super-low energy!”

“Yes, super-high energy is the number one prerequisite to being a good president. Who can forget President Lincoln’s Gettysburg Work-out tape, ‘The Abs-solutionist of Steel.'” He showed an old-fashioned looking poster of Lincoln wearing gym shorts and showing off his rock-hard abs.

“Look at those stove-pipe shorts!” Colbert joked. “It looks like he’s smuggling something in those shorts! He’s the ‘Rail Splitter!’

Colbert continued, saying “But, Carson didn’t take Trump’s insult lying down. He half-way stood up.” Colbert then played a clip of Carson saying “As a teenager, I would go after people with rocks, baseball bats, bricks and hammers. Of course, many people know the story of when I was 14 and tried to stab someone.”

Stephen Colbert mentioned that “Sure, 14 — that is when you’re in your stabbing prime. when I was 14, I was on my high school’s ‘Stabbing Team.’ Behind Colbert, was a black-and-white photo of him as a teenager, holding up a bloody knife.

“I gotta say, that’s impressive. He managed to harness his youthful passion for stabbing someone in the stomach to use if for something more positive, stabbing people in the brain. Donald Trump better watch himself, or Dr. Carson will write him a prescription for 20ccs of ‘Vitamin Knife.'”

Following another commercial break on the Late Show, host Stephen Colbert talked a bit more about Ben Carson pulling ahead of Trump in the most recent polls. He said that Trump was the first “white male billionaire in history to be the underdog.” He said that Trump really has been an underdog his entire life. In another video clip Colbert played, Trump said it has not been easy for him, “My father gave me a small loan of $1 million dollars. I had to pay him that back, with interest.” Colbert said that Trump also thinks that “three is a small number of wives.”

Matt Lauer pointed out to Trump that $1 million dollars was a lot of money to most people. Trump told him, “You’re right,” but he argued that it was not very much compared to what he made using the money.

“These days, he’s worth billions of dollars,” Colbert said, “so to him, a million dollars is garbage. So, let’s talk this moment to say to him, ‘Mr. Trump, you look like a million dollars!’ Clearly, this is an inspiring story of a young man making good. A classic story of ‘Riches to richer.’ Donald was just a humble boy from the outer boroughs, and he wanted nothing more than to escape that provincial life and make his way in the Big City. But, his Old Man stood in his way, and said, quote, ‘You don’t want to go to Manhattan. That’s not our territory.'”

Colbert went on, saying, “But Donald dared to head out into a territory that he did not own. He dared to travel from Queens to Manhattan, leaving his old life blocks behind. The young Donald took pass across the stormy seas of the East River with nothing more than $1 million in his pocket and a shirt on his back. His other shirts were at the tailor’s. And, like so many immigrants before him, when he cast his eyes on the Statue of Liberty, he thought, ‘Eh, she’s a six or a seven, maybe, if she had a bigger rack.’ And, through hard work, perseverance, and an accountant well-versed in the loopholes of bankruptcy, he became the magnanimous billionaire we know and love today, a man who’s proud to say that to him $1 million is ‘a small amount of money.'”

Then, Stephen Colbert announce that tonight, he was “taking the liberty of writing a million dollar check from Donald Trump to the charity of my choice, the Harlem children’s Fund. Oh, yeah — it’s all filled out, even the memo line, ‘It’s no big deal.’ Now, Mr. Trump, all you have to do is come here, sign it, and prove that $1 million really is a small amount of money — especially when it’s helping other people get a start in Manhattan. Who knows? Maybe the kids you help may one day be so rich, they can one day blow their cash on a presidential campaign.”

After another break on the Late Show, Stephen Colbert introduced his first guest, actress Julianna Margulies. She came out wearing a nice-looking red-and-white dress. She said that she had a youth program, and she believed that there were young people there that night.

Colbert told her she “was wearing a beautiful dress.” He added that he was “wearing a suit, because legally, I can’t be naked on the air.”

They both then talked about The Good Wife, and the character that Margulies plays, Alicia. Colbert mentioned that she had a scandal last season, “When,” as Margulies mentioned, “the Democratic Committee threw her under the bus for voter fraud.”

Stephen Colbert asked her about “Bond Court,” and how that played a part in last season and this season. she told him that “Bond Court was something we will have to take a look at seriously, and I didn’t know about Bond Court until we started shooting this, and we started shooting the whole Bond Court series this July.” She talked about the New York Times having written about “just how unjust Bond Court is.”

Margulies said, “You get just 10 minutes to plead your case, that’s it, in Bond Court.”

“How much of this have you had to learn?” Colbert asked her. “Could you go into court right now and plead a case, say, ‘I object!'”

“I wish I could,” she replied. “I’m not smart enough to.”

“Oh, come on!” Colbert said. ”

“I’m not! I hate to read the small print. I can’t,” she told Colbert.

Stephen Colbert said that he “came from a family of lawyers.” He said, “I kind of wanted to be a lawyer, until I found out, it’s not just about saying ‘I object!’ all day long and saying things like, ‘I’m going to tear him a new one!’ It’s actually a lot of work and reading involved.”

Margulies told Colbert that her grandmother had been a lawyer, and had graduated in NYU Law School in 1924. She said that her grandmother had been among the first women admitted to the law school, and four of them had graduated. Margulies said, “When she graduated, women were allowed to take the Bar, but they weren’t allowed to join the Bar Association. she and a great-aunt formed the Woman’s Bar Association in the Bronx. I always thought, ‘I should be a lawyer.’ She was a suffragette — she fought the fight, and walked the walk. But, when I found out about all the things you had to read, that’s hard.”

Stephen Colbert mentioned that the show, The Good Wife, is “part law, part politics.” He talked about her husband in the show, who is about to declare for running for president.

She told Colbert that he is now going to run against Hillary for president. They talked about Hillary’s emails, asking what time Parks and Rec and The Good Wife was on TV. Colbert asked her, “Would you do that? Would you stand by your man?”

“You mean, if he slept with hookers?” she said, “In a weird way, it might be better, because you don’t fall in love with hookers.”

Colbert told her, “That’s a positive way of thinking.”

“The truth is, Alicia didn’t really stand by him. She sees the gain that she has, in the court room and with the law firm. And, it’s fun to watch Alicia fall to the bottom again, and see it escalate again. They give each other power.”

Colbert said, “And in a public situation like that, only the other person knows what’s right.”

Margulies talked more about what she loved about Hillary and President Obama apparently watching. She said that Obama had written her a letter. She said that they had “done a story on driverless cars. To her way of thinking, driverless cars should be used only by handicapped people.

Back on the Late Show, Stephen Colbert then introduced author, Jonathan Franzen. Colbert asked him about “sprinting” when he came out. Franzen said, “I always sprint when I come out.”

They talked about Franzen’s book, Purity: A Novel, and Colbert said that he was “one of those people who are serious writers. You say that you want ‘a serious reader.’ What are serious readers, people who enjoy the book but doesn’t act like it?”

Franzen gave Colbert an example of when he had driven out of his way to meet with a “serious reader,” of his books who was in prison, and had been since he was 22, “for consensual sex with an underage boy, a 20-year sentence. And, he is somebody who..it’s not good to be a gay guy in the Texas prison system.” Franzen told Colbert that the man told him that reading books in the prison library helped him to stay sane. He said that was “a serious reader.”

Stephen Colbert said, “It sounds as if when you mention serious readers, it is one who has a serious need.”

Franzen said, “Yes, exactly.”

“I mean, you don’t have to be a snob to be a serious reader,” Franzen said.

“I’m not saying that there is a God, but if there is a God, His book is doing very well,” Colbert said. He asked Franzen if he cared about the state of the American reader, and how so few adults are now reading novels.

Franzen told him that he had “mistaken him for someone who cares about what people read and do.” He admitted that he liked people to read his books, but he said, “I’m not going to tell them what to do. They have so little free time.”

“Well, you don’t like Twitter,” Stephen Colbert said.

Franzen said that was true, because he did not think many people could express worthwhile sentences and things to say using only 140 characters. Colbert took that as a challenge, and said, “Jonathan Franzen said it’s hard to use the word ‘although,’ although I just did.”

One hundred forty characters or less, I promise you,” Colbert said. He said he had always thought that the worse name ever for a clown was “although.” He said, If I tweeted that I liked the book, would you be okay with that? To my 10 million Followers?”

Franzen said that he would “be okay with that.” Colbert asked him if he ever read any “trash literature.” Franzen said he did, but he said, “It’s called NFL Sunday,” which is not exactly, technically, really “literature.”

“You don’t have to read that anymore. It’ available on television,” Colbert said. He added, “You can take the day off,” more frequently now, since he had become a successful author.

“I did that, basically, with the year 2002,” Franzen said.

Colbert asked him how he wrote, or how often…Franzen said he wrote only maybe a dozen words most mornings, but more later in the day. He said that other than that question, most of Colbert’s other questions “had been original and fresh.”

After more commercials, Stephen Colbert introduced the group, Alabama Shakes, performing the song Joe, for their latest album, Sound 7 Color. It was an AMAZING song, with an almost Gospel tone to it, as the lead singer put so much passion into the song, saying, “I still ain’t got what I want ’cause I ain’t got you.”

The Late Show ended with Franzen reading Stephen Colbert a “Goodnight story.” He called it, “Little Red Reading Hood.” It was a pretty interesting short story, with the Wolf being a big company like Amazon.

Colbert was great on the Late Show, ripping into both Donald Trump and Ben Carson with barely concealed glee, joking about Star Wars, and other sacred cows. His two main guests, actress Juliana Margulies and author Jonathan Franzen, were entertaining, also. The musical artists, Alabama Shakes, closed out the Late Show with a fantastic song, Joe, off of Sound & Color, their latest album.

By John Samuels

Photo by

Share On