Mesa police detectives are investigating the apparent murder-suicide of a mother and her son on the campus of Banner Desert Medical Center.

Hospital staff found a 5-year-old child and his mother dead inside the child’s room at Cardon Children's Medical Center shortly after 2 a.m. Saturday.

The child has been identified as Helious Griffith. The child's mother has been identified as 27-year-old Lola T. Griffith, or "Tammy."

No motive has been determined at this time.

"It appears that the mother for unknown reasons took the life of the child and then took her own life there in the room.” Mesa Police Detective Steve Berry said.

Berry said the woman suffered a fatal gunshot wound.

“I cannot describe the injury to the child,” Berry told reporters.

No one else in the hospital was threatened or harmed.

The hospital released the following statement:

"Investigators from the Mesa Police Department have been at Cardon Children's Medical Center looking into what they're calling an apparent murder/suicide that occurred this morning in one of our patient rooms. Because of the nature of the investigation, we can't comment on the situation or of those involved.

"The safety of our patients, associates and visitors is paramount to us and is our top priority at this time. At no time were others impacted by this incident and we remain vigil in the safety of all we're treating and seeing at Cardon Children's Medical Center.

"Banner Health does have a policy in place that prohibits firearms and weapons at all of our hospitals, health centers, and clinics that's posted at our entry ways.

"Our thoughts are with the family and their loss at this time. We're directing all questions to the Mesa Police Department for any further comment related to this case."

Police have been trying to determine what led to the shooting.

Police say the mother has an open case with the Arizona Department of Child Safety, but she was the boy's legal guardian.

"I can tell you this family was actively involved with DCS (Arizona Department of Child Safety) and that it was an open case and that they were actively working on that as recently as two days ago," Berry said. "I’m told they had a family member with the mom, child and all the family members that were involved.”

The DCS released this statement:

"This incident was an awful tragedy. As with any death of a child there will be a full review by a DCS Multi Disciplinary Team. DCS will also lend any assistance needed to local law enforcement as this investigation proceeds."

A caller had notified police that someone had been injured in a room.

“We had an off-duty police officer who was already working here on the campus, which is standard for the hospital system," Berry said. "When he responded to the room, he quickly spoke to the nurses.”

Berry said the child had been hospitalized for about one week.

“The mother is the legal guardian of the child and primary caregiver,” Berry said.

The hospital is located at 1400 S. Dobson Rd.

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.