MIKE PIPER: A mistake many people make with corporate benefits is to assume that the disability and life-insurance coverage that they get automatically through their work is sufficient. In most cases, at least one of the two types of insurance should be supplemented. (And, no, I do not make money from the sale of insurance products.)

There are exceptions of course. For example, if nobody else in the world is dependent upon you financially, you have no need for life insurance at all–and therefore any life insurance through your work is more than enough.

Is Your Disability Coverage Sufficient? Anybody who is financially dependent upon their job for income (as opposed to somebody who is still working despite being financially able to retire) has a need for disability insurance. And the total amount of coverage necessary is not particularly difficult to calculate: You need (at least) enough coverage to be able to continue to pay your bills if you become disabled.

Simply being covered by Social Security does provide you with some disability insurance, but typically only a very modest amount. (The amount you could receive per month varies based on your work history, but the average monthly Social Security disability check is estimated to be just $1,165 in 2015.)

According to a 2010 survey from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, employer-provided long-term disability coverage would replace, on average, approximately 60% of the employee’s annual earnings. Combined with Social Security, that might be a sufficient amount of coverage (especially when you consider that at least a portion of the benefits will be nontaxable).

However, it’s critical to note that the 60% figure is just an average. The amount of coverage you get automatically through work may be less. In addition, there are many important characteristics about a disability policy other than just the amount of coverage. As just one example: Does your policy through work cover partial disability at all? If not, you may want to look into supplemental coverage.

Is Your Life Coverage Sufficient? According to the same BLS survey mentioned above, the average amount of employer-provided life insurance in the private sector is just 1.3-times the employee’s annual compensation. In case it is not obvious, if your family depends on you for income, such amounts of life insurance will only be able to provide for your family for a brief period of time.

The amount of life insurance that you need depends on several factors. For example, if you’re in your late 50s, your children are financially independent adults, and you have almost accumulated enough money to be able to retire, a modest amount of life insurance should be sufficient to provide for your spouse. In contrast, if you’re 28 years old with a mortgage, little savings, and two young children, you’re going to need quite a bit more coverage.

Rather than assuming that the coverage through your work is sufficient, it’s best to take the time to do a detailed needs analysis (or, if you prefer, pay a financial planner to do such an analysis for you).

Mike Piper (@michaelrpiper) is the author of the blog ObliviousInvestor.com and personal-finance books, including his latest, “Social Security Made Simple.”

Read the latest Wealth Management Report.