Affordable Care Act navigator Phoebe Kasdin (left) helps Francisca Lopez sign up for insurance. She went over tax forms to help the Lopez family answer questions on income required to sign up for health plans on the federal marketplace. Credit: Michael Sears

SHARE Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Phoebe Kasdin, a 26-year-old graduate of the University of Wisconsin-Madison interested in law or public policy, is on the front lines of an event historic and controversial.

Kasdin is one of the state's few "navigators" — a job created by the Affordable Care Act to help people sign up for health plans sold on the federal marketplace. For the past five months, she has seen firsthand the setbacks and successes in the push to reduce the number of people without health insurance.

"It's important work," Kasdin said. "It's a big step forward in getting people access to coverage."

Kasdin works for SeniorLAW, which provides legal assistance to people who are 60 and older. SeniorLAW, an affiliate of Legal Action of Wisconsin, received a $70,000 grant to help enroll people who are 55 to 64 for coverage in southeastern Wisconsin.

"I've seen a lot of people who have lost their jobs in the last few years," she said.

Others are working in low-wage jobs or have several part-time jobs. Many of them once had middle-class lives.

The job requires patience, from helping people understand the complex law to fielding the occasional call, often peppered with profanity, from someone who felt compelled to share his or her opinion of the law with her.

The law is not perfect, Kasdin said. But for many people, it's the first time they have had health insurance.

"That's a huge relief," she said.

Hiring navigators

Kasdin, a California native recruited by UW-Madison to be a coxswain on the crew team, worked for OneJustice in San Francisco for two years coordinating pro bono projects. She was planning to join her boyfriend in Milwaukee when she saw the job at SeniorLAW posted on the JobsThatServe website for nonprofits.

She arrived in Milwaukee on Saturday, Oct. 12, and started her new job on Monday.

Getting through the required federal and state training took about a week. State regulations also required her to be fingerprinted, bonded and take a state exam at a testing center.

Under the law, a state had to set up its own marketplace to receive a large federal grant for consumer assistance.

Gov. Scott Walker opted to let the federal government handle the complex task — a decision that may have proved wise given the problems that have marked the state marketplaces in Oregon and Maryland.

In all, Wisconsin received $1 million in grants to hire navigators.

In Milwaukee County, the Black Health Coalition of Wisconsin received a $191,667 grant through the National Healthy Start Association.

The Black Health Coalition has been among the most active groups in organizing community events to encourage people to understand the law and sign up for health insurance. But its navigators did not complete the required state training and register with the state until late January or early February.

The coalition did not return phone calls in the past month. But Patricia McManus, its president and chief executive officer, said in October that one obstacle was the state requirement that navigators be bonded.

The Gerald L. Ignace Indian Health Center in Milwaukee received a $35,000 grant through the National Council of Urban Indian Health.

Community health centers also have received federal grants to hire additional staff to help people sign up for coverage. The federal government has contracted with two organizations that are providing consumer assistance in the state. And insurance brokers and agents are signing up people.

But much of the work in Wisconsin is being done by coalitions, such as the Milwaukee Enrollment Network, that include health systems and community and advocacy groups.

Confusion, surprise

The number of people who have sought help in signing up for coverage has ramped up slowly. As of the end of January, 56,436 people had enrolled in health plans sold on the marketplace, according to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.

"With any new program, it is going to take time," Kasdin said.

Many people still don't understand the law, and they often are surprised when she explains it to them.

A few have met with her because they were told they have to get health insurance, Kasdin said. Their attitude changed when they learned more about the law and saw their options.

Others have found the health plans to be too expensive even with federal subsidies available for people with incomes below 400% of the federal poverty threshold, or $46,680 for one person this year. The subsidies drop sharply for people with incomes above 250% of the poverty threshold, or $29,175 for an individual.

People often focus only on the premiums, Kasdin said, and she has to explain deductibles and other out-of-pocket expenses.

Many are drawn to plans in the bronze tier, which can have no monthly premium but will have high deductibles for people on limited incomes, she said. The plans also are not eligible for additional cost-sharing subsidies available to people with incomes below 250% of the federal poverty threshold.

Almost all of the plans have limited networks of doctors and hospitals. Only one plan, for instance, includes Froedtert Health and Columbia St. Mary's in its network.

That's a potential problem for some people who have doctors. Kasdin estimates that roughly half of her clients are insured, including those now covered by BadgerCare Plus, the state's largest Medicaid program.

The narrow networks typically are not a problem for people who are uninsured.

"Most people are happy to get covered," Kasdin said.

Adults with incomes below the federal poverty threshold — $11,670 for one person — will be eligible for BadgerCare Plus starting April 1. But Kasdin said some people are reluctant to sign up for the program.

"They want to feel they are contributing to their own insurance," she said. "I can respect that."

With roughly one month remaining before the March 31 deadline to sign up for coverage on the federal marketplace, Kasdin could have a busy month before her. But she said that she has liked the interaction with her clients, has learned much and finds the work rewarding.

"It really will make a difference in people's lives," she said.

GETTING HELP

For information on the Affordable Care Act, or to make an appointment to get help signing up for a health plan, call SeniorLAW at (414) 274-3455.