Buy Photo Renown Hospital on Mill Street in Reno. (Photo: Hilary Swift/RGJ)Buy Photo

With experience as a nurse, doctor and teacher, new Renown Health president and CEO Anthony Slonim said he brings a more patient- and community-centered approach to the top position at Northern Nevada's largest health care provider.

The Reno Gazette-Journal talked with the former executive vice president and chief medical officer of Barnabas Health in New Jersey about his new job and the health care industry. Here is a Q&A, edited by the RGJ:

Question: Why Renown Health?

Answer: You want to come to a place where your career path and the organization's intersect, and I thought I had several experiences that would be of value to Renown. One of the issues (Renown) is focused on, for example, is children's health care. As a former executive at a children's hospital, I know what it means to deliver health care to kids in the community. I'm also trained as an adult intensive care practitioner, which gives me perspective on the adult community as well.

Q: What are your key goals for Renown?

A: The focus for us is threefold: How to improve the quality of care for patients, how to reduce the cost of care and making sure that the patient experience is the best that it can be. Part of that is to make sure we're engaging patients in making those health care decisions.

Q: How are you dealing with the impact of the Affordable Care Act?

A: Many health care providers are trained to care for one patient and one family at a time. Now, there's a more public health approach that involves taking care of a population of patients, and that's where accountability comes into place. Of course, while we understand that there are a lot of broad strokes about health care and health care reform on a national level, it's also important to understand that health care is a local phenomenon and context matters. We need to make sure the programs and services we're developing meet the needs of our community. And I'm not just talking about acute care but help with things like nutrition advice or losing weight — things that are important to a community-based health care organization like Renown, regardless of the ACA.

Q: What are your thoughts about improving access for rural health?

A: This issue is very, very important for us, and we want to be a resource and partner for those rural hospitals. We want to let them know that when the care needs of a patient outstrip what they are able to provide that we are ready to help them and their patient succeed.

Q: How do you plan to address the doctor shortage in rural areas and the state as a whole?

A: Our new partnership with the University of Nevada School of Medicine is a very important piece of that, and the reason why is we're trying to create a legacy around making sure we have adequate physician staffing for the next series of decades. There's no better way to keep doctors local than educating and training them (in the area). The biggest role of education is influencing those young physicians and I've seen these kinds of public-private partnerships work well.

Q: What's the plan for Renown moving forward?

A: We're currently working on a strategic plan that will carry us over the next three to five years, and we'll share more details about it as we accomplish our goals. I think there are opportunities to address issues like cost, for example, and make sure health care is the most efficient it can be while providing better access. Health care across the country is changing quickly and in dynamic fashion, hopefully for the benefit of patients and families.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rgj.com/1mlL9MP