Tony Acevedo stands outside the barracks where he slept when he was captured by Nazis and forced to work nearly to death at a concentration camp. A documentary featuring Acevedo, "Hitler s G.I. Death Camp," will show at the Boedecker Theater on Veterans Day. (Courtesy photo)

If you go What: Veterans Day screening of National Geographic's film "Hitler's G.I. Death Camp," produced by Boulder-based Hoggard Films. Followed by a Skype talk-back with American veteran and Holocaust survivor Norman Fellman, who is featured in the film When: 7 p.m. Monday, Nov. 11 Where: Boedecker Theater at The Dairy Center for the Arts, 2590 Walnut St., Boulder Cost: $6-$9; $7 for seniors and students Info: 303-998-1021, thedairy.org or email menorah@boulderjcc.org. The event is sponsored by Menorah, the arts and cultural programming series from Boulder's Jewish Community Center

A worn diary rested on a coffee table at the end of the hallway in young Fernando Acevedo's California house. He knew it had something to do with the war.

Sometimes Fernando would curiously flip through the pages. Names. Hundreds of names. His older brother had doodled on a few of the back pages. More names.

Sometimes Fernando would notice a distant blackness in his father's eyes, as if he were somewhere else. Sometimes his father, Tony Acevedo, would collapse into tears. And sometimes, he would share flickers of sharp memories, and his youngest son would understand the tears.

Tony Acevedo is American.

He was raised Catholic.

He grew up in California and Mexico.

He was a soldier in World War II.

And he was a victim of the Holocaust.

When most Americans think of GIs during World War II, they think of the liberators. Young soldiers defeating the Germans to liberate Jewish prisoners from death camps.

But that's not Acevedo's story.

Hundreds of American soldiers, of various ethnicities and religions, were also captured by Nazis and forced to work, often to death, in one of the most secretive concentration camps in Berga.

An archival photo shows American soldiers being taken prisoner by the Germans during the Battle of the Bulge. (Courtesy photo)

Hitler's G.I. death camp.

Until decades after the war ended, this slice of history was not widely known, as most American soldiers who survived didn't speak about it after they returned.

Some, such as Acevedo, say they were ashamed or embarrassed. He remembers someone telling him, "Only cowards are captured," and he locked his lips.

Others refer to a document they say the government made them sign that swore them to not speak publicly; there's debate among survivors about whether it was standard wartime protocol or some conspiracy to keep this story hidden from the American public. Historians say it was standard.

Regardless of the theories and personal reasons, this story was untold.

That is, until Acevedo's son grew older and began compiling the stories his father had told him into a yet-to-be-published book. Then in 2005, Fernando Acevedo read a CNN report about Berga's liberation.

"When I read the story online, it was incomplete," he says. "I said, 'You have a story about a tank liberator liberating the camp from the outside, but if you want to know the other half, about a man on the inside wanting to get out, contact me.' "

The article that evolved from that email caught the eyes of the Holocaust Memorial Museum and a pair of Boulder filmmakers, Steven Hoggard and Daphna Rubin. They pitched the idea to National Geographic.

On Monday, Veterans Day 2013, The Dairy Center for the Arts in Boulder will screen that documentary, which follows the story of Tony Acevedo and other American Holocaust survivors. The 50-minute film, National Geographic's "Hitler's G.I. Death Camp," starts at 7 p.m. Monday in the Boedecker Theater.

After the screening, survivor and veteran Norman Fellman, who is also featured in the film, will answer questions from the audience via Skype.

Tony Acevedo's diary

The reveal started with Tony Acevedo's diary.

Acevedo, a military medic, kept a list of all of the soldiers he met in Berga, as well as their health conditions.

This quickly turned into a death log, as about 20 percent of the concentration camp prisoners would die. By comparison, 3-4 percent of other prisoners-of-war didn't make it out alive, experts say.

Acevedo says he kept his journal tucked in his waistline, under his shirt, so Nazis would not confiscate it. He didn't know what he would do with the journal when he got out, but he knew he didn't want to forget the names and faces of the soldiers. Or their health issues.

Dysentery. Gangrene. Diarrhea.

Acevedo's health was crumbling, too, with only one-tenth of a loaf of bread to eat per 10-hour workday of grueling manual labor. The prisoners in Berga hauled wheelbarrows of rocks out of a mountainside in which the Germans were digging to create an underground facility.

Emphysema from the dust.

Most concentration-camp victims lost about half their body weight, survivors say. And as Acevedo turned into bones, it became more difficult for him to conceal his diary in his waistline. He remembers it falling out in front of a group of Nazis. Fear.

Starvation.

But the physical torture was nothing compared with the mental, he says. He gave soldiers placebo "pills" when his supplies thinned out.

"It wasn't true, but it was something to maintain life support to make them believe, so they would psychologically survive," Acevedo says.

Maybe that's what the journal was to him -- a vow to himself that he would escape and someday share the names of those who did not. And he did.

It took decades, but he moved the journal from his coffee table to the United States Holocaust Memorial Museum in Washington, D.C. It was the first original artifact from Berga in the museum, says Kyra Schuster, museum curator.

"Then it snowballed," she says. "Other people came forward."

Norman Fellman's tough choice

Norman Fellman, 89, remembers the faces.

"The skinniest people I'd ever seen in my life, in blue-striped pajamas," he recalls. "Their eyes were huge, faces were thin and they just stared at us. To this day, I can't forget what they looked like. That picture stays with me."

But what really struck him was what he heard.

Nothing. It was deathly silent.

When Fellman's 200-man company in the 70th Infantry Division, were ambushed by Germans in January 1945, he says, the Americans had to choose: freeze or starve to death, or surrender.

And later, when the Nazis asked all Jews to step forward, Fellman says he had another impossible choice to make: offer himself up or be discovered; his dog tag had been marked "H" for Hebrew.

He stepped forward.

"I had no idea. I had no idea," Fellman says. "I didn't think what would happen would be pleasant, but I had no idea."

In less than 100 days, he had wasted from 178 pounds to 82. Fellman had been turned into one of those faces in the blue-striped pajamas.

He shares stories from the camp. Dead bodies in a stack that prisoners had to walk past to get their food. Eighty men packed in boxcars designed to hold 40, freezing to death with no toilets or food. Residents spitting on them, throwing rocks at them.

After liberation, Fellman says, he enrolled directly into school.

"I just got busy. I tried to put it all behind me," he says. "I met my wife and went into business and began raising a family."

One night, he says, he sat in the car with his wife and shared the whole story.

"I told her that I was broken. Damaged goods. And I asked her to never bring it up again," he says. "She didn't."

Fellman did the same with his parents and brother. After that, until his father died at age 95, Fellman says no one spoke of his experiences again, save for a birthday card his father sent him every April 20, the day of his release from prison camp -- and also Hitler's birthday. Not even Fellman's employees at his men's shoes store knew he was in the service.

Until the 50th reunion of the war.

Fellman attended his first and last POW gathering. And he walked out with a new plan: It was time to share his story with the world. As he reads the news, stories about torturing prisoners in Iraq, he says it seems people still have not learned.

"Every time I tell the story, it gets a little bit easier," he says.

He thinks of the motto, "Never again."

He wonders if "Never again" is possible.

Contact Staff Writer Aimee Heckel at 303-473-1359, heckela@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/aimeemay.