McALLEN — Francisca Hernandez was munching on popcorn with her daughter Lenenna Hernandez, 13, while they both enjoyed a flamenco dancer on a stage at the McAllen Convention Center on Sunday afternoon. They had just finished eating a plate of Thanksgiving comfort food that included turkey, cornbread dressing, mashed potatoes with gravy and a pumpkin pie — all courtesy of H-E-B.

“The food was delicious,” Hernandez said in Spanish. “We come every year to this and it’s always very good. We like coming because of the free food and then we can watch performances as a family. We’re having a very fun Sunday afternoon.”

H-E-B played host to its 23rd annual Feast of Sharing celebration on Sunday, handing out 12,000 plates of food to families in the McAllen area. The celebration’s next stop is Wednesday in Brownsville, then Friday in Harlingen.

Sunday, people waited in line outside the Convention Center for 20 to 30 minutes for the next group of diners to be seated. After eating, guests were invited to a separate room of the Convention Center to watch various performances depending on the hour, including flamenco dancers or a tejano band, and were offered free popcorn and were invited to visit various booths.

“This is our way of giving back to the community,” said Linda Tovar, the regional manager of public affairs for H-E-B. “We’re supporters for helping hunger across the state and in Mexico … and we’re hoping to grow every year.”

Blue Cross Blue Shield had a booth at the event to provide information about the Affordable Care Act and another booth organized by H-E-B was handing out free children’s books to parents.

“We do that because we want to encourage parents to read a book to their kids at least three times a week,” Tovar said. “We want to send the message about the importance of children literacy and education.”

The event had about 800 volunteers who came to earn community service hours by serving the food and helping direct people to the different sections of the Convention Center, Tovar said.

Luis Maldonado, 17, came with PSJA High School JROTC to help out at the opening ceremony of the event. Maldonado donned his JROTC uniform proudly, explaining that helping out at enough events like Feast of Sharing could earn him a ribbon for his commitment to community service.

“We like to help out in what we can,” he said. “We try to help in whatever is needed, (whether) it’s serving plates or being part of the ceremony. It’s nice to give back.”

Sabrina Flores, 21, waited about 30 minutes in line outside the Convention Center with her daughter Makayla Hernandez, 5. Flores and her good friend, Yasmin Moreno, 21, said they were looking forward to the Feast of Sharing this year because it is always enjoyable for their family.

“Who doesn’t like free food?” she said with a smile. “I like the surroundings. The food was delicious and the entertainment makes it fun.

“Things like this really bring the family together.”

ddiaz@themonitor.com