Mitch Perry Report: Rick Scott bemoans those losing health insurance, forgets his own culpability

Republicans in the Florida Legislature have their reasons for rejecting the federal government's money to expand Medicaid as part of the Affordable Care Act. Though the argument that the feds don't live up to their obligations always seemed like a flimsy one, you could argue (as Pinellas Representative Kathleen Peters has) that the system currently is struggling, with many doctors refusing to see such patients already. Add 800,000 more to the rolls, they say, and the infrastructure won't be able to support it.

But Rick Scott disagreed. That's why in February he announced that he wanted the state to take the feds money. In that regard, he was like several other Republican governors throughout the country who faced resistance to buying into the ACA. But unlike Arizona's Jan Brewer, Ohio's John Kasich and Pennsylvania's Tom Corbett, Scott failed to lift a finger in advocating that his legislature support it this past spring. That's not a criticism, per se. That's simply a fact.

But the governor doesn't want to talk about that these days, though he will continue to bash Obamacare. Yes, it's an old story, but it's still a very relevant one. The fact is that 800,000 people or so had the opportunity to get health insurance this coming year, with no cost to the state of Florida. Yesterday in Tampa the governor focused on those who will be losing their insurance due to Obamacare. But those people in Florida who can't qualify for Medicaid right now? They don't have anything either. Too bad he doesn't pity them.

We'll find out today how what the Tampa Bay area House delegation thinks about the budget proposal announced Tuesday by Republican Paul Ryan and Democrat Patty Murray. Last night on a telephone town hall meeting, Polk County Congressman Dennis Ross said he didn't love the plan, but was inclined to support it.

Hey did you know today was Bob Barker's 90th birthday? He's not laying low today, appearing later today on an episode of The Price is Right that was taped last month. During that show this ad he cut for David Jolly will air - Barker and Beverly Young, Bill Young's widow, are allies in the animal rights movement.

When discussing distracted driving, often the focus is on teen drivers. But a new survey by AAA says that it's actually their elders (those between the ages of 25-39) who do more texting while driving.

And TIME magazine announced Pope Francis as their Person of the Year yesterday. Our choice, NSA leaker Edward Snowden, did come in second.