More Video...

Marianna, FL --- Imagine getting personal instruction from Michael Jordan on how to fix your jump shot. Have Wayne Gretzky to teach you how to go top shelf on the goalie. Or Tiger Woods help you worki on your swing at the driving range. Learning how to improve at your sport from the greatest athlete to ever play it. Too good to be true, right? Well, not for some very lucky softball players Saturday at Chipola College.

In a clinic hosted by the Lady Indians softball team, the iconic and legendary Jennie Finch herself worked with campers as they learned from the best of all time.

Not only did Finch provide hands on instruction along with other Team USA softball members like Kat Dodson and Lauren Gibson, along with fellow pro players Ivy Renfroe and Raven Chavanne, along with current Chipola players, but gave tutorials and motivational speeches to all the kids and signed autographs after.

While she's stepped away from the mound for good, Finch now is able to help the next wave of softball greats while still enjoying her passion.

"Well there's nothing better then getting out there and sharing what you love," said Finch. "And I've been able to do a lot and I've been blessed to have a lot of experience under my belt and there's no place better than being able to share that with young, excited campers that love the same sport that you do. It's just something that I've been able to continue to do which has been super exciting for me to still be able to get out there on the softball field."

Since she retired from the game in 2010, the star pitcher has held clinics all over the country giving back to the next generation.

"That's what it's all about. There's no place I'd rather be than on a softball field with the future of our sport. That's the biggest thing that I want to share with them is encouraging them along their journey and letting them know that it's not all about trophies and gold medals and the red carpets. It's about the journey and the failures and the building of character. There's so many life lessons that this game has taught me that I hope to share with them and encourage them along their way."

The camp began at 8 AM Saturday morning, running till 4 PM. Day two begins Sunday and will run from 8 AM-12 PM.

Finch finished working with the camp at the end of day one, as day two will be run by Dodson, Renfroe, Gibson and Chavanne, along with the Chipola Lady Indians and coaches Belinda and Jimmy Hendrix.