Two recent news items deserve additional attention because of how they relate to our declining middle class. The one is the sharp increase in suicides; and the other is the tremendous jump in prices for the 10 most popular drugs — four of which have more than doubled in price.

A Washington Post article a few days ago cited federal data that revealed the U.S. suicide rate has increased sharply the past 15 years — led by an even greater rise among middle-aged white people, particularly women.

The data cited a 1 percent annual increase in suicides between 1999 and 2006, and then a jump to 2 percent during 2007 through the first half of 2015 — “as the economy deteriorated, unemployment skyrocketed and millions lost their homes.” Among white women ages 45 to 64, for example, the suicide rate jumped 80 percent, from 7 per 100,000 in 1999 to 12.6 per 100,000 in 2014.

Reasons cited included severe recession, more drug addiction, “gray divorce,” and increased social isolation. The report added that economic distress — and dashed hopes generally — likely is responsible for a portion of the increase, particularly for middle-aged white people.

The report noted suicides continue as one of the top 10 causes of U.S. deaths — with more than two for every homicide. And among whites, there are more than seven suicides for each killing.

The study results were issued by the National Center for Health Statistics, which also noted an alarming jump in suffocation — mostly hangings — as a suicide method. Use of suffocation rose by 89 percent, after adjusting for growth in population, and by 157 percent for white women. Use of firearms and pills declined as a share of the increasing numbers.

Sally C. Curtain, a lead author of the new study, observed “the internet can be a double-edged sword” with its effects on suicide. It offers broad dissemination of information on prevention materials, but also gives detailed advice on how to commit suicide, including the use of plastic bags for suffocation.

Both Google and Yahoo were cited as saying they have policies against such ads and block them whenever they are noticed.

What struck me as most significant is how the doubling of the suicide rate corresponded with the recession — another indication of Americans dropping from the middle class into poverty.

Soaring drug prices

And middle class buying power may decline more as a result of increases in drug prices announced a few weeks ago in a story by Reuters.

Prices on four of our nation’s top 10 drugs have been more than doubled over prices posted only five years ago. And prices for the other six of the top 10 were increased more than 50 percent.

“Together, the price increases on drugs for arthritis, high cholesterol, asthma and other common problems added billions in costs for consumers, employers and government health programs,” the Reuters story reported.

At the top of the list was AbbVie Inc., which raised the price of arthritis drug Humira more than 126 percent, Reuters found. Next were Amgen Inc. and Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd., which raised prices for arthritis treatment Enbrel and multiple sclerosis drug Copaxone by 118 percent.

One company – Turing Pharmaceuticals – admitted it expects to received $200 million more just by raising the price on one drug used for a rare infection.

The drug price increases help explain federal data that shows why overall spending on drugs has risen faster than doctor visits and hospitalization over the past five years. Drug makers claim the hikes are necessary because they pay an average of 20 percent of their revenues on research and “development.”

But what they don’t tell us is what percent of their revenues are spent on marketing. Is any of their expensive advertising considered to be “development?”

The fact that pharmaceutical “companies have complete control over pricing in the U.S.” is a major part of the problem, according to Peter Bach, oncologist at Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center.

For the past several years, I have been asking these questions:

Have you noticed all the advertising for pills and other drugs that are on the television channels day and night? Those ads cost millions of dollars daily. Who do you think pays for those ads?

And why aren’t pharmaceutical companies subject to restrictions similar to those applied to health insurance companies? I’m sure that would reduce the outrageous cost of many drugs.

The Affordable Care Act — commonly known as Obamacare — restricts how much health insurance companies may budget for profits, administration and marketing. The act sets the limits at 15 percent for large companies and 20 percent for individual and small group insurers.

It’s an exceptionally good regulation that gets little attention; yet it is saving millions of dollars in premiums for insurance company clients.

The critics of the Affordable Care Act have been quite vocal about temporary problems with the act. But they have ignored the permanent benefits Americans will continue to realize year after year simply because of that one regulation alone.

Pharmaceuticals are not a luxury, they’re a necessity. We can only imagine how many millions of dollars Americans might save on health care if similar restrictions on profits, administration and marketing were placed on the pharmaceuticals industry.

Such restrictions are needed and long overdue.

Darrell Berkheimer, who lives in Grass Valley, writes a biweekly column published Saturdays by The Union. Contact him at mtmrnut@yahoo.com.