UPDATE: Former state GOP chairman Dick Wadhams weighs in.

If you want to know just how good political analyst Eric Sondermann is, think about his comment when Gov. John Hickenlooper last year stunned Colorado with his death-penalty decision and then apply it to the firestorm this week with the governor’s comments to the sheriffs association over gun measures.

“I think that Hickenlooper’s gift is to try to find that sweet spot in between two polar positions, but I’m not convinced that this was a decision that lent itself to that approach,” Sondermann said. “I think he runs the risk of seeming too cute by half and of really leaving both sides feeling unfulfilled.”

Wow.

Sondermann recently announced a major life decision: He sold his ownership interest in SE2 to his long-time business partners, Eric Anderson and Susan Morrisey. (My first question: Will we still get nifty Christmas swag from the consulting/communications/policy firm?)

He’ll still be in the limelight as he plans to develop his role as political analyst, commentator, writer and speaker.

When I worked at the late, great Rocky Mountain News, Sondermann was incredibly patient. “Lynn, again, it’s Sondermann with two ‘n’s.”

In 2008, Sondermann became the story when U.S. Rep. Marilyn Musgrave’s campaign wouldn’t appear before the Rocky/CBS/KBDI debate panel because Sondermann was on it and he supposedly was some sort of known radical liberal.

Yes, he had once worked for Gov. Dick Lamm, but Sondermann fought the Democratic establishment in 1995 when he worked on Denver City Councilwoman Mary DeGroot’s mayoral campaign. She stunned Mayor Wellington Webb by winning top line in the first vote — most Webb supporters thought there would be no need for a runoff — but lost in the runoff.

Musgrave’s demand was universally panned because Sondermann was unaffiliated by then and anyone familiar with his analysis on TV or in print knew he equally skewered both sides. (Musgrave lost, by the way.)

At the GOP’s Political Scandals Halloween party in 2009, he came dressed as a hiker, complete with maps of the Appalachian Trail stuffed in his pockets while his wife Tracy wore a flamenco dancer’s outfit. What? You’ve already forgotten about South Carolina Gov. Mark Sanford?

Sondermann wasn’t always right, as Pat Waak, the former Democratic Party chairwoman, noted. Her chairwomanship was over by 2012, but she recalls Sondermann saying at some event that Mitt Romney was going to carry Colorado. She explained all the reasons she thought he was wrong. “He looked at me in disbelief,” she recalled.

Sondermann is a regular on the weekly news program Colorado Inside Out. Here’s what some fellow panelists and other politicos had to say about him:

Dominic Dezutti, producer and host of Colorado Inside Out: “On one of our live shows many years ago, I was in charge of the graphics and under his name, we meant to put ‘Political Consultant’ but for most of the hour, I didn’t notice an embarrassing typo. We had identified him as a ‘Political Conslutant.'”

Dan Haley, former Denver Post editorial page editor: “Sondermann has been a trusted, Tim Russert-like political analyst because he’s a straight-shooter and spears sacred cows on both sides of the aisle. He’s a throwback of sorts too because he does it such a gentlemanly manner.”

Dave Kopel, with the Independence Institute: “Eric is the most extremely moderate person in the state of Colorado.”

Pat Waak, former Democratic party chair: “There were a lot of things I didn’t agree with him on, but I did believe that he was sincere and honest. That is hard to say about people in the political world. We speak so often of authenticity. Well, Eric Sondermann is an authentic person. He believes deeply in so many things, especially education.”

Dick Wadhams, former Republican Party chair: “After I initially decided to seek a third term as state chairman, I immediately started having doubts. While I wanted to vindicate my tenure by being re-elected … I knew I really didn’t want to spend another two years presiding over a fractured nomination process. So while watching Colorado Inside Out one Friday evening when they were discussing my decision to run again, I heard my friend Eric say something to the effect that he had no idea why I wanted to run again, that it was a waste of my time and energy because the job of state chairman is so limited in its ability to be effective given the political and financial restraints on the position and the state party. I thought to myself, Eric is absolutely right, and I announced the following Monday I would not run after all. Beyond that, Eric is a terribly insightful analyst.”

Here’s Sondermann’s announcement: