In the matter of Timmy v. Lassie…

In the matter of Gotham v. Batman…



In the matter of Holland v. The Little Dutch Boy With His Finger In the Dike…



…the Honorable Thomas C. Wheeler of the U.S. Court of Federal Claims finds for the plaintiffs.

Well, it seems fair to assume he would after his wacky ruling Monday that shareholders of the insurance giant AIG were illegally harmed by the $185 billion federal bailout that saved the company in 2008.

It was a stunning victory for chutzpah over common sense. Judge Wheeler concluded that the U.S. government exceeded its authority when it rescued AIG at the height of the financial crisis, that its moves to seize a 79.9 percent stake in the imploding firm and replace its hapless CEO were “unduly harsh.” The legal theory seems to be that if you set your own house on fire, you can sue the firefighters if they get your furniture wet while putting it out. It’s nice you saved the kid from the well, Lassie, but you shouldn’t have torn his collar.

The good news is that Judge Wheeler was rational enough to deny the AIG investors any monetary damages for the dilution of their shares, for the obvious reason that their shares would have been worth nothing if the bailout hadn’t saved the company from bankruptcy.

Still, Americans hate bailouts, and the ruling that the AIG bailout was illegal has been heralded as a final insult to the Wall Street bailouts, and perhaps a shot across the bow of future bailouts. But even though Judge Wheeler’s 75-page opinion reeks with disdain for the government, Americans might feel better about the bailouts if they actually read it.

The general perception is that federal crisis managers bent over backwards to help Wall Street financiers at the expense of taxpayers, a belief that helped fuel the Tea Party as well as the Occupy Wall Street movement. But the judge found the opposite was true: The feds imposed unfairly “draconian” terms on AIG because they wanted to “maximize the benefits to the government and to the taxpaying public.” To the judge, this approach was “misguided,” but to the taxpaying public—which mostly has no idea that Uncle Sam ended up making $22 billion in profits on the deal to save AIG—it ought to be a reassuring sign that the government was there to help.

I should mention that I’m not an unbiased observer of this case. I helped former Treasury Secretary Timothy Geithner, who helped engineer the AIG rescue when he was president of the New York Fed, with his memoir about the crisis. He had to hand the transcripts of our private interviews over to the plaintiffs, so our potty mouths are now a matter of public record. I have written that this lawsuit is “precisely as asinine and insane as it sounds,” though also that it could end up producing an inadvertent public service.

And so it has. It’s outrageous that former AIG chief executive Hank Greenberg and his fellow shareholders blamed the government for their losses, when the firm’s own recklessness—most of it by a hedge-fund-like subsidiary—had shredded its stock price by more than 95 percent before the government rode to the rescue. Gotham didn't expect Batman to reimburse it for the damage it suffered before he could defeat the Joker and save the city.

But the surprising results in Starr v. U.S. do provide a nice reminder that Wall Street did absorb some breathtaking losses during the crisis. The bailouts did help limit some of those losses—Greenberg managed to unload some AIG stock in 2010 for $278 million, a bit more than the $0 it would have fetched if the government hadn’t saved the company—but the notion that Wall Street escaped without pain is a pernicious myth. Investors in Bear Stearns, Lehman Brothers, Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, Washington Mutual, Wachovia, Countrywide, GMAC, and any of the other firms that collapsed during the panic all took beatings. Their CEO’s all lost their jobs, and so did most of their other executives.

Judge Wheeler pointed out that the Federal Reserve had never before used its emergency powers to take an equity stake in a company before AIG. That’s true, but the Fed had never before faced an emergency like the imminent collapse of AIG; the failure of Lehman Brothers had just triggered a global panic, and AIG provided insurance for toxic financial assets held by every other major financial institution in the world. The Fed had also never before provided aid to a failing insurer; it didn’t even regulate insurers, and it’s remarkable that the judge concluded the unprecedented aid was insufficiently generous. The judge also blasted the government for imposing more onerous terms on AIG than on other bailed-out institutions, but AIG had gotten itself into deeper trouble, and its status as an insurer made its situation unique. Its shareholders certainly did better than Lehman’s, who were wiped out along with the firm.

The key point about the AIG bailout, easy to lose in all the hindcasting, is that it worked better than anyone dared to imagine at the time. It helped salvage a massive company that provided insurance to millions of ordinary people. It helped prevent a cataclysm that might have crushed the global financial system, which would have launched a depression and put millions of ordinary people out of work. And yes, its success in stabilizing the system helped it make money for taxpayers, which was appropriate, because it certainly took risks on their behalf.

I’m not a lawyer, so I’m not qualified to say whether the bailout was perfectly legal. It seems odd that the government would be allowed to save private firms from disaster but not to exert any control over those firms, but hey, sometimes laws are odd. We can only hope that the next time the financial system spins out of control, crisis managers won’t worry too much about whether a judge might chide them for excessive fiscal responsibility after the fact.

It’s much more likely that they will worry too much about politics, about the inevitable backlash to government-funded bailouts. It’s too bad that the “Judge Rules Bailout Illegal” headlines on the AIG verdict will only reinforce the myth that the government was too loose with the public's money in 2008. It wasn't. Just ask Judge Wheeler.