The rising popularity of employer-sponsored wellness programs raises questions about whether they are truly voluntary, and privacy.

The notices arrived in employee mailboxes: Provide us with your weight, cholesterol levels and other sensitive medical details, or pay up to $2,250 in health-insurance penalties — and up to $4,000 if you’re married.

The packets were delivered to workers at Honeywell, a manufacturing conglomerate based in New Jersey, as part of its annual health-plan enrollment. It started levying the hefty surcharges two years ago, although it has eased the penalties for the coming year: They are now capped at $1,500.

Federal regulations require that such wellness programs be voluntary. But for some workers, it may not feel that way.

On the surface, the programs seem a win-win: encouraging workers to get up and move or submit to annual blood tests to prevent future problems appears to help both workers and their employers.

But the program’s biggest critics say they are yet another way to push more costs onto employees, and even worse, potentially a backdoor way to discriminate against less healthy workers by making them pay more if, for instance, they fail to meet a goal of lower cholesterol. For lower-income employees, who may feel more pressure to participate, there is the potential for another type of discrimination.

“Even if the program fails to improve employee health or lower costs overall, they can come out ahead by shifting more of the responsibility to employees in the form of larger contributions,” said Matt Lamkin, a professor at the University of Tulsa College of Law who specializes in bioethics and medical consumerism.

Privacy is another concern. Many workers may fear their sensitive medical information — like their blood pressure or data collected by a wearable device — could end up in the wrong hands or become exposed in a data breach.

Consider the questions in a typical health assessment: Do you feel so stressed that nothing can cheer you up? Have people annoyed you by criticizing your drinking? And don’t forget to include your waist circumference.

While most large employers — with 500 workers or more — ask employees to complete some sort of health assessment to identify potential risk factors, nearly 60 percent also ask them to prick their fingers for biometric screening, according to a 2015 report by consulting firm Mercer.

And the number of employers offering financial incentives to complete any of these wellness-related tasks has inched higher: About 56 percent of large employers dangled an incentive in front of their workers last year, the most common being a premium reduction.

The programs may have become more prevalent, at least in part, because of the Affordable Care Act. That law expanded existing rules for a certain type of wellness program where incentives are contingent on a specific health outcome (like reducing blood pressure) or an activity (like walking).

Most significantly, the law said employers could provide more rewards — or levy more surcharges, depending on how it’s framed — than they could previously: Maximum rewards or penalties now cannot exceed 30 percent of the total cost of the worker’s insurance, up from 20 percent, including both the employee’s and employer’s shares.

And if a tobacco-cessation program is included, the figure rises to 50 percent.

So for a family with coverage valued at $17,545 — the annual average total cost in 2015, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation — it would be fine for the employer to charge up to about $5,264 more, or 30 percent, for not fulfilling a goal like filling out a health-risk assessment form or completing a biometric screening. That is a significant chunk of most families’ budgets.

“Some employers are really pushing the envelope with the 30 percent; some are coming close,” said Amy M. Gordon, a partner at McDermott Will & Emery in Chicago, who helps employers construct the plans.

But plenty of other employers may offer different incentives, she added, like gift cards or the chance to win a piece of exercise equipment.

The financial incentives — and the whole notion of whether a program is truly voluntary — have received a lot of attention the past year, particularly after the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission tried to stop Honeywell in October 2014 from penalizing employees who did not take medical tests. The commission claimed the penalties made the testing involuntary and so violated the Americans with Disabilities Act.

A federaljudge denied the commission’s motion for a temporary restraining order that November and let Honeywell’s policy stand.

Last April, however, the commission proposed its own rules for wellness programs, which are similar to those in the Affordable Care Act. Honeywell said it capped its penalties at $1,500 for 2016 — they can be avoided by completing biometric screening — to try to comply with the commission’s proposed rules, which have not yet been completed.

The commission further clarified its position on wellness incentives recently. It proposed to amend another rule, the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act, which generally prohibits employers from requesting or collecting a worker’s genetics or family history.

Those rules still stand, but the proposed update would permit employers to provide rewards to or impose penalties on workers’ spouses in exchange for data on their current or past health status, though not their family history or genetic information.

So where does all of this leave employees?

For individuals concerned about privacy, this is yet another case of caveat emptor; workers need to fully understand what they are signing up for.

Medical information collected through a wellness program that is part of a group health plan should have better protections, including safeguards provided by the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (known as HIPAA). Details collected by wellness programs may be disclosed to employers only in aggregate form — anonymously — except when they are needed to administer the health plan. And the wellness program must disclose who will receive the data and how it will be used.

But here’s the catch: Many wellness programs require participants to sign up on their website, where workers must agree to the wellness vendor’s policies.

“You have to consent to the privacy policy and terms of service, which basically says we are going to use your data in all of these ways and tell all of these people,” said Anna Slomovic, lead research scientist at the Cyber Security Policy and Research Institute at George Washington University and a former chief privacy officer at Equifax and Revolution Health. “It’s basically take it or leave it.”

And if you have a Fitbit or another type of wearable technology, the data may not have any special protections, particularly if an employer bought the devices for its workers outside its formal health plan.

“The details very much matter in this case,” Slomovic said.

Then there is the continuing debate about whether wellness programs are actually helping. It’s hard to argue with the value of on-site gyms, help with smoking cessation and an overarching goal to adopt a more healthful lifestyle. But while some wellness programs said they followed national guidelines set out by groups like the American Medical Association, critics argue that some take screenings too far.

“Wellness vendors screen everyone every year to maximize profits, even if harms exceed benefits,” said Al Lewis, a health consultant and a frequent critic of the $7.2 billion corporate wellness-services industry.

He said they routinely ignored screening guidelines set out by the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force, a well-known authority on the issue.

For now, only a minority of companies are levying penalties on people who don’t meet specific health goals. And exceptions must be made for people with medical issues who cannot participate or meet specific targets.

Still, critics have concerns about a policy that requires already stressed workers to pay extra if they miss the mark.

”If you can’t make yourself well, you have to pay more,” said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit group focusing on health policy. “Some people ask, ‘How is that different from medical underwriting?’ ”