Two of Capitol Hill's biggest Republican Party players are reportedly meeting and looking for alternatives to Obamacare and the ramifications of their mind meld could reach far beyond the ballot box in 2014.

Sen. Marco Rubio, R-Fla., and Rep. Paul Ryan, R-Wis., are far from announcing any concrete legislative proposals and both of their offices declined to comment further on their plans. Yet, the two Republican starlets have attracted some attention since news broke they were collaborating this week.

[READ: A Republican Alternative to Obamacare Is a Risky Proposition]

When asked about the plan, Rubio reportedly told the Washington Examiner, which first broke the story, “I don’t have anything to announce today.”

Clues have been dropping for a few weeks now, however, that Republicans are getting more and more serious about crafting their own plan.

Ryan told Bloomberg in an interview last week that it was not too late to repeal Obamacare even as the program reached an enrollment of more than 7 million. He did admit, however, that Republicans had to come up with a serious alternative sooner rather than later.

“The architecture of this law is so fundamentally flawed that I think it’s going to collapse under its own weight,” Ryan said during a television interview. “And the sooner those of us who want true, real reform can show a better way forward, the faster we can repeal.”

Polls have long showed that as unpopular as Obamacare is in its current form, voters are still looking for an alternative choice, not just repeal. In the House of Representatives where lawmakers have voted more than 50 times to get rid of the president’s signature accomplishment, some Republicans are pressuring leadership to bring its own blueprint to the floor.

The trouble has been finding a plan that can satisfy lawmakers across the Republican caucus and not reveal a schism in the party before GOP voters head to the polls in the fall. The Republican ideas circulating around Capitol Hill have centered on expanding health savings accounts and high-risk insurance pools for individuals with pre-existing conditions. Republicans have also touted proposals to allow customers to buy insurance across state lines, something even moderate Democrats have signaled they could support. But the devil has been in the details. Rubio and Ryan’s injection into the debate may give the Republicans the best chance they have had in years to put their ideas down on paper.

[OPINION: 5 Reasons the GOP Needs an Obamacare Alternative]

Both Ryan and Rubio have a reputation as playing ambassadors between their parties two major factions. They have been known to straddle the line between the tea party wing of the GOP and still take on projects for the more moderate dealmakers in their party. Both lawmakers have proven themselves adept at crossing the aisle and hammering out deals with Democrats only to turn around and bolster their conservative credentials on other issues. Rubio might have taken some heat for his role in negotiating the bipartisan immigration bill that passed the Senate last summer, but he is still embraced among anti-establishment groups for his vote against the bipartisan spending bill that reopened the government last fall. For Ryan, a bipartisan budget bill irked some on his right in December, but even those who voted against his bill remained positive about the work Ryan had done.

If Rubio and Ryan do manage to produce legislation and it is adopted by their party, it could have a major impact on their reputation as serious policy makers come 2016.

“Voters tend to give politicians credit for offering serious, thoughtful solutions to the nation's problems. So I think a credible and detailed health care plan will help Rubio and Ryan should they decide to run for President,” says Dan Judy, a Republican pollster.

Rich Meade, the managing director and health policy expert at Prime Policy Group, says that Rubio and Ryan are smart to get ahead of the issue before 2016 especially now that Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, has released his own plan to replace Obamacare.