The great coach, creeping up on 84 in a few weeks, was in one of his nostalgic moods yesterday, so the raconteur in him started dropping names as iconic as his own.

Yes, there was a point to Pete Carril’s story: "Whenever I went to Boston, I would always sit with Red Auerbach, the man I would call the affable despot," he said.

"And he said something that always stayed with me: If you’ve got a really good guy leading your team, a guy who cares about winning much as you do, you can’t have more fun in any other business than coaching basketball. But if your best player is a (jerk) with his own agenda, forget it."

The Hall of Famer paused on the phone. You could almost picture him making That Face.

"That’s something that new coaches learn late sometimes — especially on (the NBA) level," he concluded. "I think David knows that. I hope he does, anyway."

We rang him up to talk about one of his basketball protégés, David Blatt, just to hear him give the perfunctory stamp of Princeton approval. He went on as he always does, sounding equal parts mad scientist and basketball Buddha as he discussed the new coach of the Cleveland Cavaliers, but it dovetailed into a treatise about the game itself.

It strikes you as something that Blatt has heard countless times, but needs to hear again, because he’s entering some unfamiliar territory. Since graduating from Princeton in ’81 — his backcourt mate was Knicks GM Steve Mills — Blatt, 55, has spent his entire coaching career overseas, in Turkey, Russia, Greece, Italy, and then Israel the last four seasons.

So this is an extraordinary leap of faith by Cleveland GM David Griffin, plucking a guy from the other side of the globe and putting him in charge of an NBA team that has won 31 percent of its games in the four years since LeBron vamoosed.

"Sometimes you find gold," Carril suggested. "Look at (Gregg) Popovich. He came out of the Air Force and Division 3 when Larry Brown put him on his (1988-89 Spurs) staff. And now he’s won five titles there as the head coach.

"When you’re allowed to put in things that you believe in, and you have leaders who have an understanding of what you’re trying to do, you fill out the roster with guys who want to follow that leadership."

He hasn’t seen Blatt in a while, but Carril knows he runs the offense he invented (or modified from Red Holzman’s Knicks, as he says). He helped Blatt bring it to Israel some years ago, but they haven’t spoken lately.

Still, Carril knows where the potholes are: "He knows the game. He knows how to teach it," the coach said. "Now let’s hope he has the kind of guys who understand what he’s selling."

Blatt is nothing if not a salesman — most great coaches are. Does he come on a little strong with self-promotion? Sure. Does he have a peculiar sense of entitlement? Judging by our last conversation about 21 months ago ("With my personality, I feel I need to be a head coach"), you bet.

But he speaks with the theatrical gusto of a faith-healer who is convinced he has been sanctified by some force he can’t explain.

And the results are often magical. We saw them as he led the Russian national team to the bronze in London. And this spring provided more proof that there’s something eerie about this coach’s talent for getting teams to believe.

His success at Maccabi Tel Aviv is known throughout the world, and this season’s run to the Euroleague championship was Hollywood stuff. Blatt’s team barely snuck into the playoffs with an 8-6 record in its group, but it upset an Italian team in the best-of-five first round; shocked CSKA Moscow in the semifinals with a steal and a score with five seconds left; and, then stunned a Real Madrid powerhouse in overtime in the May 18 title game behind Final Four MVP Tyrese Rice, the former Boston College pocket rocket.

As Mills put it a few years ago, "David’s skill is bringing people together. It’s a gift."

So here comes Blatt, a product of Framingham, Mass. — schooled in the most exquisite form of Carrilian chemistry — who needed 30 years to find his way back home. It’s one of the most fascinating NBA stories we’ve had in a while.

Especially if the stars align, so to speak.

"Kyrie Irving is a devastating one-on-one player," Carril said of Blatt’s lone star. "But if you’re trying to build a team, I don’t know if that’s the best way to do it. Again, go back to Popovich: A lot of this is about getting it organized and finding players who complement each other.

"How many players in Cleveland have those characteristics? I guess we’re going to find out."