ST. LOUIS, Jan. 23, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Advanced ICU Care®, the nation's largest provider of tele-ICU services, has announced 60 percent growth in the number of ICU beds monitored in 2013, indicating the value of the solution. The company's continued growth demonstrates the increasing need for tele-ICU support as a result of a rapidly aging population, shortage of ICU intensivists and staff, and the need to achieve strong clinical outcomes.

Advanced ICU Care established 25 new tele-ICU partnerships in 2013 with hospitals in six new states, including St. Elizabeth Healthcare, a three hospital system (Ky.); Shore Medical Center (N.J.); and Mercy Medical Center (Calif.). In addition, Advanced ICU Care formed a first-of-its-kind telemedicine partnership with the Medical University of South Carolina (MUSC), creating a new model of providing ICU care to patients across South Carolina. The MUSC partnership aims to provide the same standard of care to community hospitals that is available in leading national hospitals by providing 24/7 intensivist monitoring via telemedicine for the most critical patients. It will offer an easy-to-implement, cost-effective entry into tele-ICU care to community and rural hospitals.

These new partnerships increase the total number of hospitals that Advanced ICU Care supports and increases the number of ICU beds supported by 60 percent. Since its establishment in 2005, the Advanced ICU Care team has cared for nearly 100,000 patients nationwide.

"Since we began our first partnership in 2006, Advanced ICU Care has seen exceptional growth every year, and 2013 was a milestone year as we achieved the largest installed base in the country," said Mary Jo Gorman, M.D., MBA, chief executive officer of Advanced ICU Care. "However, more important than the business outcomes are the clinical achievements that positively impact our partner hospitals, their patients and families, such as a reduction in mortality rates."

Advanced ICU Care provides each of its hospital clients with centralized ICU patient monitoring services to ensure an extra layer of support for ICU intensivists and nurses. On average, hospitals that incorporate Advanced ICU Care's solution into their ICUs achieve 40% improvement in mortality rates. The company works in collaboration with hospital staff to enhance ICU clinical and operational outcomes and best practices. In 2013, Advanced ICU Care:

Cared for more than 27,000 patients

Conducted more than 61,000 patient interventions

Saved 18,562 ICU days

Saved 55,189 total hospital days

The improved clinical outcomes lead to decreased time, or length of stay, in the ICU. With an average cost of $1,200 per day, saving patient days in the ICU results in direct saving to the hospital and healthcare system. In 2013 Advanced ICU Care saved 18,562 ICU days across its partner hospitals, resulting in an estimated savings of more than $23 million. Additionally, decreased time in the ICU often leads to decreased time in the total hospital stay, resulting in approximately $15 million in additional savings.

"We know that hospitals today are under increasing pressure to reduce costs while meeting a growing ICU demand and improving patient outcomes. This pressure will only continue to grow in the coming year as the Affordable Care Act reaches full implementation, the Boomer population ages and our healthcare provider shortage continues," said Dr. Gorman. "Advanced ICU Care is proud to be part of addressing this challenge with our partner hospitals."

About Advanced ICU Care

Advanced ICU Care helps improve ICU patient care. As the largest provider of tele-ICU services, Advanced ICU Care has a proven track record of improving the clinical and financial performance of its hospital partners. Advanced ICU Care's tele-ICU programs combine experienced intensivist-led care teams, sophisticated technology and collaborative programs with hospital staff to achieve a rigorous focus on evidence-based best practices that improve patient care and safety. Our team brings insights gained from decades of nationally recognized ICU leadership and expertise in both bedside ICU and tele-ICU environments. For more information, visit www.icumedicine.com.

SOURCE Advanced ICU Care