Sometimes paying for a loved one’s health care expenses literally takes a crowd.

Norm Breyfogle, a comic book artist known for his work on Batman, found himself struggling after a stroke in December. He had no health insurance. He was partly paralyzed on his left side, unable to use his valuable drawing hand. And Breyfogle, 54, was in a nursing home in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, facing months of physical therapy.

Worried about his brother’s rapidly rising bills, Kevin Breyfogle decided to step in. He started a crowdfunding campaign, which raises small donations from donors, on the site YouCaring.

“We had to come up with something really quick,” Kevin Breyfogle said, adding that crowdfunding worked better than he imagined. His crowdfunding team set a goal of $200,000 to pay for his brother’s continuing care, raising $20,000 in the first day.

As more caregivers face paying for loved ones’ unexpected out-of-pocket health care costs, they are turning to crowdfunding sites that focus on personal causes like Breyfogle’s. Sites like GiveForward, Go-Fund Me and Fundly have devoted sections to health expenses, including specific diseases like cancer.

Even the crowdfunding powerhouse Indiegogo has stepped into the personal crowdfunding arena with its introduction of Indiegogo Life, which includes medical fundraising, in December.

Out-of-pocket health expenses can quickly deplete a sick person’s financial resources. According to a 2014 Commonwealth Fund survey, 87 percent of people age 65 or older in the United States have at least one chronic illness. Despite Medicare coverage, though, older adults in the United States have more difficulty paying for their care than peers in other developed countries, mostly because of out-of-pocket costs and limits to care, the survey found.

To fill the void, crowdfunding sites are stepping in, with people posting requests for donations to pay for funerals, out-of-pocket medical expenses and, sometimes, interim nursing home care.

The Chicago-based GiveForward, for example, has helped raise $149 million for crowdfunding campaigns since starting in 2008, said Ethan Austin, the organization’s president and co-founder. And most of the money goes to meet unexpected medical expenses, he said.

“No one should have to go through a difficult illness alone,” he said, adding that more baby boomers are using it for parents’ care. “And giving someone the opportunity to help is a big gift.

“Five years ago, no one would have crowdfunded expenses,” Austin said. “But there’s a tidal shift coming as health care expenses rise.”

Caregivers worry most about financial concerns, said Brooks Kenny, executive vice president at Lotsa Helping Hands, an organization that offers resources to caregivers and volunteers in the Washington area. So crowdfunding can be a powerful solution, she added.

Fundraising for unusual expenses works best, said Buckley Fricker, a geriatric care manager and president of Buckley’s for Seniors, which offers nonmedical care to older people.

People want to visualize the difference they’re making, such as outfitting a home with an elevator or buying a new wheelchair.