Terminally ill mother writes cards for children's future birthdays after thinking she was cancer free just weeks ago

Debra McNaughton, 39, thought she had beaten appendix cancer



Disease returned and doctors have told her she has just three months left

She has prepared memory boxes and cards for her children



Connor, 17, Courtney, 16, and Oliver, two, will get cards at major landmarks



A mother-of-three who was told she had beaten a rare form of cancer is now preparing memory boxes and birthday cards for her children after being given the devastating news she has just three months to live.

Debra McNaughton, from Waltham, Lincolnshire has prepared three memory boxes for each of her children, and has hand-written cards congratulating them on their future birthdays, weddings and first jobs.

Just 21 days ago the 39-year-old believed she was cancer-free after beating a rare form of appendix cancer in June 2013.

Heartbreaking: Debra McNaughton and her husband Jamie with son Oliver, two and Connor, 17. She has prepared mementos for the boys as her cancer has returned

However, the mother-of-three was devastated to be told her cancer had returned - and it was terminal - after her latest scan just three weeks ago.

Mrs McNaughton, mother to Connor, 17, Courtney, 16, and Oliver, two, said: 'I just want to spend as much time as I can with my children and I want them to always remember me.

'I don't want them to miss out on not having a mum so I have hand-written cards for each of their birthdays, weddings and first jobs. I want them to know how proud of them I am - even if I'm not here.'

She has saved £2,000 which will be divided up between her three children in each of their birthday cards.

Scans revealed two growths on Debra's ovaries. At first doctors believed they were benign cysts, but further tests suggested she was in the early stages of ovarian cancer



Mrs McNaughton has also created memory boxes which contain letters to each child, telling them about the day they were born, how proud she is of them and words of wisdom for the future.

She said: 'I am determined stay positive for my children. I want them to remember me as a loving mum, who would do anything for them.'

She was first diagnosed with a rare form of appendix cancer in 2012 and she underwent a 14-hour operation to remove her bowel, parts of her intestine, gall bladder, spleen and diaphragm.

Several lymph nodes were removed, and she also underwent a 90-minute treatment with heated chemotherapy drugs.

After six months of gruelling treatment, Mrs McNaughton and her husband Jamie, 30, were overjoyed to find out the cancer had gone.



For eight months Debra began to rebuild her life, after having three more scans which came back as clear.

The family were on a ten-day family holiday to Egypt in February 2012 when Debra began to feel sharp pains on the right side of her abdomen

She said: 'I had even applied for a new job and I was due to start in January.'

But when Mrs McNaughton went for a scan on January 4, she was devastated to find out the cancer has returned, and this time there was nothing that could be done.

She said: 'The cancer has spread to my lymph nodes and the doctors told me there is nothing more they can do. Even if I went through chemo again it would only give me a small amount of time.

'I am now determined to make the most of the time with my children and by creating memory boxes and writing cards I hope that they will be able to remember me when I am gone.'

Debra and Jamie pictured at their wedding in June 2012

Debra was terrified that Oliver wouldn't have any memories of her before she passed away

The mother has located three cancer specialists in Belgium, Germany and Switzerland - who she hopes may be able to perform life saving surgery on her.

'It will cost around £30,000 for the surgery- if they can help. I am hopeful but it isn't the sort of money I have lying around,' she said.



'I can't afford to waste time being low or negative - I have a family to care for.

'Every time I look at my little boy, it gives me the strength to try harder.'

She is now hoping she will be able to raise the money she needs so she can have another shot at life.

With the help of St Andrew's Hospice volunteers, Grimsby, Mrs McNaughton also hopes to make lasting video messages for her children.