Dick Stenson is retiring as President and CEO of Tuality Healthcare, which operates hospitals and medical centers in Hillsboro and Forest Grove, after 22 years.

"After discussions with my family and the board of directors, I have decided this is probably the best time to plan my retirement and let someone else lead the next charge," Stenson, 66, said in a letter to staff and volunteers.



He will be replaced in November by Administrator and Chief Operating Officer Manny Berman. Berman, who joined Tuality in 1983, rises to lead the company as it launches an "aggressive new long-range strategic plan focused on growth." That growth includes a major expansion of its Forest Grove hospital, with plans to double the number of employees there.



Stenson will stay with the company through February as a special advisor to the board of directors.



Tuality Healthcare operates its main hospital in Hillsboro with smaller service centers and clinics in its downtown campus and in Forest Grove.



In a press release, the company praised Stenson for spearheading employee and facility growth while building partnerships with groups including Virginia Garcia Memorial Health Center and Pacific University.

"The Tuality Healthcare board is grateful for the leadership Dick Stenson has provided and his unwavering commitment to the special role we play as a Community Hospital in the health and wellness of our entire community, including our most vulnerable members," said Darell Lumaco, the board chair.





Stenson leaves as CEO in an uncertain environment for the future of community hospitals.

Under the Affordable Care Act, federal government payments to hospitals have been cut and hospitals with high readmission rates are penalized. The hospital industry is undergoing a big wave of mergers where smaller hospitals are gobbled up into larger systems.

Tuality had entered "affiliation" discussions with Providence Health & Services in 2012, although it would have remained an independent hospital.

Tuality posted a net loss of $5.8 million in 2011 after an accounting, non-cash adjustment of about $10 million for a pension plan change, according to data gathered by The Lund Report, an Oregon health news site, and Tuality.

And on a local level, Kaiser Permanente opened its Westside Medical Center in August, Washington County's first new hospital in 40 years. The emergency room competes with Tuality Community Hospital's. Stenson told The Lund Report in October that he feared the upcoming Kaiser hospital might poach employees.

--Fenit Nirappil: 503-294-4029; fnirappil@oregonian.com