CPAC Panel on Donald Trump: The 'Fiction of Electability' Is Gone

NATIONAL HARBOR, Md. -- 2016 may go down in history as the year which definitively disproved the notion of "electability" in presidential primaries, according to Kellyanne Conway, president of The Polling Company. At a panel at the Conservative Political Action Conference (CPAC), three out of four moderators agreed that electability as an issue is dead.

Conway argued that "if you are a conservative, this is the presidential race that you have dreamed of for years."

This fiction of electability -- who can win, who can't win -- that has killed conservative candidates for years at the presidential level and elsewhere, is completely gone this cycle. The people who were supposed to win, and were electable, they are running off the stage. They are not even running for president anymore."

She compared this result to the 2010 and 2014 midterm elections, where "conservatives won everything." But candidates in those years did not just win, Conway argued, they won by championing conservative values. They achieved victory at the polls "by running as free market, individual liberty, limited government, fiscally and socially conservative candidates." The 2016 nomination race has favored conservatives because the 2010 and 2014 elections proved -- beyond a shadow of a doubt -- that Republicans do not have to run to the center in order to win.

Brittany Kaiser, director of program development at Cambridge Analytica, agreed. She declared that "the traditional wisdom is being completely shattered," and that candidates like Donald Trump are remaking the electoral map. The people groups who can be generally relied upon to vote for certain candidates are no longer falling in line, and candidates have to find new ways of connecting with voters.

"This cycle has taught us that, no matter how strong the opinions of our candidates are, they are resonating with large portions of the population," Kaiser declared. "Keeping consistent with those strong conservative positions will drive turnout," rather than adopting moderate positions for the general election.

Fred Barnes, executive editor of The Weekly Standard, also agreed that electability means less in this election. He argued that Trump "has brought out a level of enthusiasm on the Republican side that we haven't seen in a long time." Due to this enthusiasm, Barnes predicted that Cruz, Rubio, or even Trump would likely defeat Hillary Clinton in the November election.

The lone dissenting voice came from Charles Hurt, a political columnist for the Washington Times. Hurt said that "you need the center right to be elected president, and that includes the center." For that reason, he said Trump is not electable, because The Donald has alienated too many people, particularly Hispanics and many conservatives. Ted Cruz, however, has not alienated these groups, and while it would be difficult for Cruz to win in November, it is nevertheless "achievable." Hurt said that Rubio is more electable, but not likely to win the nomination.

Next Page: Learning From Democrats -- To Reject Electability?