Many Americans are living without a proper health care these days. A trip to the hospital is already a burden to them and the GOP plan to abandon the Affordable Care Act may put a lot of people in suffering including many Hispanics.

The federal housing secretary, Julián Castro, said that many Latinos are currently depending on the health law that provides Americans better security. He believes that, if the Republican is serious about cancelling the law, there must be some sort of a replacement that is equal or better than the current one or millions will add up to the already alarming numbers of Americans without health care, as reported by the New York Times.

Castro said that a huge percentage of the Latino population in the U.S. have benefited from this health law, also known as Obamacare. His concern came after many of the Republican candidates pledged their support to reverse the Affordable Care Act.

According to a report by MSNBC, the GOP is planning to replace Obamacare with their alternative health care law. However, when asked about information with regard to their alternative law, Republican House Speaker Paul Ryan told reporters, "just wait."

There are concerns about GOP's plan to cancel Obamacare and replace it with their own because they have been trying to come up with an alternative since 2009. After 6 years, they still have not been able to finalize their plan.

The republicans are also planning to create better planning that will have huge impacts in the 2016 election cycle. Their plan is to "go big on ideas." However, most of them have not been unveiled yet except for the abolition of the Obamacare. They also believe that none of the bills they plan to pass will be signed by President Obama.

Meanwhile, Castro, who could be a potential running mate for Democratic presidential aspirant Hillary Clinton, said that the two Hispanic Republican presidential candidates, Senator Ted Cruz of Texas and Senator Marco Rubio of Florida must make sure to protect the interest of the Latino community. Nevertheless, he believes that politics today are more than just race.

"Rubio and Cruz, I believe that they're running the race they believe they have to run in order to win the Republican primary," he mentioned in a statement as relayed by the New York Times.

"So, in that sense, I don't begrudge Senator Rubio or Senator Cruz for not always reminding people that they're Hispanic. You need to represent the whole country," he added.