Black teenagers were hit harder by the recession than any other group, but there may have been an unexpected benefit for boys, according to a new study. They spent more time with their parents.

While the U.S. unemployment rate reached its peak in October 2009 at 10%, joblessness among blacks kept soaring before hitting 16.9% in March 2010, according to the Labor Department.

Getty Images

A study conducted by Sabrina Wulff Pabilonia of the U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics looked at the recession’s effects on teenagers’ risky health behaviors, and found a correlation between time spent with parents and change in behaviors.

Ms. Pabilonia found that during the recession black teen boys had an additional nine minutes of parental supervision per day for every one point increase in the unemployment rate.

That wasn’t the experience of other teenagers. For non-black teenage boys, a one-percentage-point unemployment increase resulted in 10-11 minutes less per day with a parent. During the recession unemployment surged five percentage points on average, which resulted in a significant decrease in parental supervision.

“It is possible that these results differ by race/ethnicity because the Great Recession disproportionately affected the unemployment rate of black adults, potentially giving them more time for parental supervision,” Ms. Pabilonia wrote in the paper.

Ms. Pabilonia also found black teenagers saw their sexual activity decrease compared with their non-black non-Hispanic peers. She said the findings imply that more parental supervision led to less sex among black teen boys.

The paper tracked teenagers’ sexual activity during the years of the economic overturn. Some 29.6% of non-black non-Hispanic boys, who spent less time with parents, said they participated in sexual activities in 2011, an increase from 28.7% in 2009. About 44.5 % of non-Hispanic black teen boys engaged in sexual activities down from 49% during the same period of time. While the percentage of sexual activity among black teenagers is still significantly higher than the other groups, the report focuses on the decreases and the increases in sexual activities during the downturn.

The pattern of engagement in sexual activity was the same among girls. The share of non-black non-Hispanic teen girls who engaged in sexual activity edged up to 34.8% in 2011 from 34.1% in 2009, while the share of their black peers dropped to 37.2% in 2011 from 45% in 2009. Ms. Pabilonia found no correlation between the time spent with parents and female teenagers’ risky behavior.