A consortium of advisers has scheduled several health insurance marketplace enrollment events where applicants can meet with navigators. Included here is a phone number to set up an appointment. Applicants can also call 813-995-1066 for help. To enroll online, go to www.healthcare.gov .

— America's reliance on employer-sponsored health care means job loss can be doubly damaging.

That issue was addressed by the Affordable Care Act, President Obama's signature legislation, which went into effect this year. And it is what led folks like Ashley Brunson of Land O'Lakes into an Affordable Care Act navigator's office last week to re-up for a policy on the national marketplace.

“For our situation, I'm not sure what we would have done without it, to be honest,” said Brunson, who works as an outreach specialist with the Florida KidCare insurance program. When her husband lost his job in industrial sales this year — and the cost to continue his employer-sponsored benefits went through the roof — Brunson found a policy for her family through what has come to be called “Obamacare.”

Last week, she began doing what advisers hope millions more will do: getting some advice, re-evaluating her policy and her family's needs, and selecting a different plan if necessary.

Open enrollment for the program begins today and runs through Feb. 15. The deadline to be covered on Jan. 1 is Dec. 15.

“We're really encouraging everyone to go back into their account to make sure they've updated their information, to look at new plans that are available that might actually better meet their family's needs, and make sure they have the best coverage that fits their budget and their family's health needs for the second year,” said Melanie Hall, executive director of the Family Healthcare Foundation, the lead agency in the Tampa Bay area providing navigator services.

Those advisers — specially trained to help consumers, small businesses and their employees as they look for coverage options through the marketplace — will have their work cut out for them.

According to a recent Kaiser Family Foundation poll, 89 percent of the uninsured aren't aware of the open enrollment dates; 66 percent said they know “only a little” or “nothing at all” about the marketplace where people who aren't covered through work can get a policy; and 53 percent aren't aware of financial assistance available to help low- and moderate income individuals purchase insurance.

❖ ❖ ❖

The Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act became law in March 2010, and the first policies were provided this year. Its aim was to make health care more affordable, accessible and of a higher quality, especially for the 45 million uninsured Americans.

The government set up a marketplace of insurance plans, subsidized by income level, and provided a tax penalty for those who don't enroll.

Although it has been a partisan powderkeg, the law has so far held up under numerous court challenges and legislative attempts to overturn it.

“For me it's never been about the politics of this,” said Bob Buckhorn, Tampa's mayor and a major booster of the Affordable Care Act. “What I care about is that hundreds of thousands of people that I represent now have a shot at a better quality of life, that they are healthier, that their kids are healthier, and as a result of that, this community is healthier.”

The program's architects did themselves no favors when inaugural enrollment began in November 2013. The roll-out was a disaster, with the healthcare.gov website crashing under demand that many say the government should have planned for.

This year, navigators say the kinks have been worked out and participation in Florida has been significant. The state had more enrollees than any other on the federal exchange, and Buckhorn was invited to the White House as Obama lauded individuals who helped drive health-insurance participation.

In a state with one of the highest rates of uninsured in the nation, nearly 1 million signed up for health care for 2014. In the Tampa Bay area, 230,000 previously uninsured people received coverage.

Advisers said 91 percent of Floridians who gained coverage received financial help and paid an average premium of $68 a month.

Nationally, 7 million Americans were insured under Obamacare.

Many of those people, as long as they indicated that the information they provided upon original enrollment could be verified by the government, will be automatically enrolled this year.

Advisers caution against standing pat, though.

Details of policies can and do change year-to-year; insurers enter and drop out of the market; doctors are dropped or picked up under various plans; and personal circumstances, whether that be a change in income, pregnancy or any other change in health or medication, might mean a different policy is in order.

“All of those things being possible, we're encouraging consumers to look at the information carefully, to go back into their account and make sure their information is current and updated,” said Jodi Ray, project director for the Florida Covering Kids and Families program at the University of South Florida.

❖ ❖ ❖

It may seem a daunting process to enroll on the national health insurance marketplace, but advisers say healthcare.gov has become much easier to navigate.

And plenty of help is out there.

“To say I had a few questions was an understatement,” said Mattilon Dubose-Rock, who was downsized out of her media-buyer job and is now pursuing a career as an independent insurance agent.

Dubose-Rock last year turned to a navigator.

“I wanted to make sure that all of my needs were met,” Dubose-Rock said. “I wanted to make sure that everything was sent in within the deadline, and I wanted to make sure that I got whatever assistance I could get at this point in my life, having to restart my career.”

She found she was eligible for an appropriate Humana Silver plan for less than $2 a month.

“It was really beneficial to me,” she said.

Navigators are holding events throughout the Tampa Bay area during open enrollment. Or call 813-995-1066 to make an appointment.

Among the changes to the health care program this year:

♦ There is a window- shopping feature that allows enrollees to check out plans available in their area. Last year, a consumer had to answer nine questions viewing plan options; this year, all it takes is a ZIP code.

♦ Enrollees had to plow through 76 online screens to complete the application; that's been reduced to 16 screens for the basic application.

♦ Open enrollment season lasts three months, to Feb. 15. Last year, the original deadline was March 31, but that was pushed back to April 19 because of the problems with the original website.

♦ This year, applicants will have to show the government they received the proper subsidy for 2014, and their tax refund will be adjusted whether they received too much or not enough.

jstockfisch@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7834