istockphoto.com

By Chris Cumming

When Chicago-based The Banc Funds closed its eighth fund back in 2008, the bank-focused private equity firm quickly found plenty of deal flow in banks that collapsed during the crisis that followed the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers Holdings.

Eight years later and armed with $536 million for its ninth fund, the firm is taking a different approach, according to Charles Moore, who founded The Banc Funds back in 1986.

Although bank failures have almost entirely dried up, the firm can still take advantage of generally lower valuations in financial services than in other sectors, he said.

“There are still broadly opportunities among what we would call undervalued banks, because financial services as a whole have been out of favor since around 2008,” Mr. Moore said.

Banc Fund IX will also invest in consolidation opportunities. So-called open-bank mergers and acquisitions, or mergers between healthy banks, ground to a halt during the crisis but have started again in recent years.

“Industry consolidation has resumed, so I think there will be opportunities to invest in banks that have done what they can to take advantage of their local markets, but are at the point where it’s sensible to partner with a larger bank,” Mr. Moore said.

The Banc Funds will also selectively provide capital to banks that have a good economic outlook, but are undercapitalized or burdened with bad loans.

The firm’s investments range from as little as $500,000 to roughly $10 million, and it has investments in dozens of banks at any time, Mr. Moore said. The firm has already made about 50 investments from the new fund totaling 40% of the new capital, thanks to money raised through earlier closings.

One successful consolidation-themed investment from the new fund was Valley Financial Corp. in Roanoke, Va. The firm provided capital to improve operations before it sold last year to BNC Bancorp, the parent of Bank of North Carolina.

At the end of last year the firm also recapitalized a Midwestern bank with about $1 billion in assets, which had been well-managed but still found itself overextended due to the legacy of the financial crisis. The Banc Funds provided a $6 million recapitalization and worked with the bank to help reduce its overextended branch network.

“The company adopted our franchise-reduction suggestions, we provided additional capital, and we think the company is now in a position to grow in a responsible and careful way,” said Mr. Moore.

Write to Chris Cumming at chris.cumming@wsj.com