The state Board of Education on Thursday rejected a revised plan spelling out what Colorado students must do to earn a high school diploma, leaving in place a blueprint adopted two years ago while making clear the discussion isn’t over.

In May 2013, the state board signed off on a “menu” of tests, tasks and other options districts can give to students to demonstrate competency in English, math, science and social studies to graduate.

State education department staffers — after consulting with district representatives and others — came back with a proposal to slash two subject areas, lower the minimum scores on certain tests and give local districts more control over how students can prove themselves.

The board rejected that, not over concerns that it might lower the bar but after hearing rural districts are concerned about costs and limited options for them. The board suggested that the staff try again, but until then the 2013 guidelines remain in place.

Education reform groups criticized the proposed changes as watering down the state’s first common set of graduation standards, which will go into effect for the class of 2021.

The revised plan would have removed competency in science and social studies a requirement, to line up with college admissions requirements that include only math and English.

Minimum scores in Advanced Placement courses and International Baccalaureate programs also would have been lowered.

The menu of options for districts includes ACT and SAT scores, military entrance tests, industry certificates and “capstone projects,” college thesis-like assignments that typically involve a presentation.

The revised list roughly doubled the options, including the addition of locally developed assessments that would first need state approval.

Under either scenario, Colorado is positioned to make a significant change, shifting from making high school graduation about racking up course credits to requiring students to prove their competency.

At one point Thursday, Republican board member Steve Durham made a motion to revoke the board’s approval of the 2013 guidelines.

He withdrew that after the assistant attorney general advising the board pointed out that the board was required by statute to have them in place by 2013.

Responding to criticism about lowering the bar, Democratic board member Angelika Schroeder emphasized districts can set higher standards.

She said it’s the community’s job to set “aspirational goals.”