The Ferguson Mansion/Pearson Funeral Home at 1310 S. Third St. is shown in 1976. By Rick Perry, The Courier-Journal. Dec. 29, 1976

The recent commencement of work on the Filson Historical Society's $11.75 million expansion project in Old Louisville signals the organization's long-term commitment to stay at its headquarters at 1310 S. Third St.

The society, founded in 1884, is housed in the Ferguson Mansion, the "most expensive" home in Louisville when it was built for businessman Edwin Hite Ferguson (1852-1924) between 1902 and 1905, a state highway historical marker in front says.

It's also called the finest example of Beaux Arts architecture in the city.

To David Pearson, a member of the family that owned and operated Pearson Funeral Home in the building from 1924 to 1977, it was home. He lived there from the time he was born in 1941 until after he married and had children and moved to a home of his own. "I loved this building," he said this week. "I still do."

History

The Filson Society — formerly called the Filson Club Historical Society — moved to the Ferguson Mansion in 1986, after meeting in its earliest days at the home of Reuben T. Durrett (1824-1913) at Brook and Chestnut streets.

The society had then purchased a building at 118 W. Breckinridge St., under the leadership of Rogers Clark Ballard Thruston (1858-1946), before moving to the Ferguson Mansion.

Pearson history

David Pearson said his grandfather and other family members "jumped at the chance" to buy the mansion when "Mrs. Ferguson" (Sophie Fullerton Marfield Ferguson) called in 1924 and said she wanted to sell it. Pearson's had been at three other downtown locations, since the formal business started in 1848. Three generations lived in the Ferguson Mansion on the second and third floors.

The Fergusons had spent $100,000 on it, Pearson said.

Pearson sang in the men's and boys' choir at Christ Church Cathedral on South Second Street, and as a boy, "they all thought I was rich," he said. But the proceeds were split among many family members.

"I grew up living on the third floor with my parents, two older brothers and a younger sister," Pearson said in a story written by public relations professional Susan McNeese Lynch for the Filson Society. "I wasn't born when the 1937 flood hit, but I do know that my parents brought my brother Bo home from the hospital in a rowboat. Sorry I missed that."

While still at the Ferguson site, the Pearson family built a new Pearson Funeral Home on Breckenridge Lane in 1951, and David Pearson joined the family business in 1964. Pearson has since joined the Filson Society and is a contributor to its capital campaign for the expansion.

Auction

In 1979, the mansion was sold at auction for $230,000 to real estate developer Frank Metts.

Metts said at the time he intended to preserve it, in the event that it could ever be used again for living quarters, according to a Courier-Journal story. The story described the ornate interior, including a "walnut paneled living room" and "a huge fireplace cut from a piece of white stone imported from Italy."

A few large pieces of furniture remain from the Ferguson family days.

While Metts owned it, John Y. Brown used it for a campaign headquarters site when he was running for Kentucky governor, Pearson said.

Life in a funeral home

Pearson said the family made some alterations to the house, including moving part of a staircase and installing a long, narrow elevator that could hold a casket.

"(A)s children, we were a bit restricted when there were funerals going on," he recalled. "We had to be quiet and respectful and we were frequently reminded that our behavior would reflect on the reputation of the family and . . . the business."

"But we had plenty of fun, too," he said. "I can still remember playing 'Murder in the Dark' in the casket room." When he was in high school, his father allowed him and his brothers to have parties and dances with a band on the third floor, until a stray beer can was found in the "preparation" room.

Today, a pipe organ is gone, and a program room with chairs used to be the "casket selection" room. Although the funeral home was not welcomed by all the neighbors initially, having it there saved the building from being chopped up into apartments, he said.

Pearson said he had a good life there: "I still dream about it."

Future

The society plans a 20,000-square-foot building with a 250-seat event space at the corner of Fourth Street and Ormsby Avenue, connected by elevated glass walkways to the Ferguson Mansion and the society's museum in a carriage house.

The project, which will include renovations to the mansion, is expected to be completed by early 2016, Judy Miller, a society spokeswoman, said. The site also has a library and gallery containing nearly two million items, including books, photos, manuscripts, portraits, letters, artifacts and artworks.

Self-guided tours

Anyone may visit and take a free, self-guided tour, aided by a printed guide booklet. Hours are Mondays through Fridays 9 a.. to 5 p.m., and 9 to 4 the first Saturday of each month.

The booklet says that the second floor, where the Fergusons lived, is now the society's library and that their lavish marriage, when he was 48, is depicted in the original hand-carved stone chimneypiece in the lobby.

The cost per visit to do historical research for non-members is $3 for students with an ID and $10 for others. Memberships are available. Information: 635-5083

Reporter Martha Elson can be reached at (502) 582-7061, melson@courier-journal.com and on Facebook. Follow her on Twitter at @MarthaElson_cj.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1vG6VhP