October 8, 2015 / Features / Standing O NYU Lutheran Family Health Center is three for three Brooklyn Daily

Share on Twitter Tweet Share on Facebook Share

Sunset Park

Fire up the presses, NYU Lutheran Family Health Center has been awarded $575,220 in Affordable Care Act funds to expand its high-quality, comprehensive care. The award came from the United States Department of Health and Human Services, and was part of an $18 million initiative provided to 57 New York State health center networks, with NYU Lutheran getting the biggest share.

“These funds will enable more people to receive the great, affordable services patients have come to expect from our health centers,” said Larry McReynolds, president at NYU Lutheran Family Health Centers.

The award comes on the heels of the center being named to the Community Value Index for the 10th year in a row. The hospital is in the “Top 100 Hospitals in the Country,” scoring in the top 20 percent, and has also been designated a five-star facility.

Claudia Caine, executive vice president, shared her excitement at receiving the designation.

“These awards just go to show how efficient we are as an institution and speaks to the quality of our operations team,” she said.

The funding, part of a nationwide allocation of $500 million, is intended to expand access to affordable care to the millions of Americans now insured under the Affordable Care Act. Health centers around the nation have assisted in the effort to enroll more than 12 million Americans in insurance plans since 2013. The $18 million awarded to New York State health centers will provide comprehensive health services to more than 46,000 new patients.

Now NYU Lutheran has the funds, the designation, and a Standing O!

NYU Lutheran Family Health Centers [150 55th St. at First Avenue in Sunset Park, (718) 630–7000].

Bensonhurst

New chairman

Congratulations to former Assemblyman Arnaldo A. Ferraro on his being elected as chairman of the Kings County Republican Party at its convention on Sept. 30.

Ferraro was born in Italy, completed his education, and studied law. He came to the U.S.A. in 1961, and became a U.S. citizen in July 1964. In America, he continued his education and became an educator and college instructor.

He was elected to the New York State Assembly in 1984, and later appointed coordinator of Election Day Operations of the New York City Board of Elections. While pursuing his career, he remained very active in politics, becoming Republican District Leader, and Vice-Chairman of the Kings County Republican Party.

In 1993, he founded the Fiorello LaGuardia Republican Organization, and remains its chairman to this day.

Fiorello LaGuardia Republican Organization [8024 17th Ave. at 80th Street in Bensonhurst, (718) 256–4414].

Bay Ridge

A-paws, a-paws!

Three woofs and a bark to Assemblywoman Nicole Malliotakis (R–Bay Ridge) and volunteers from Pluto Animal Rescue of Richmond County. Standing O pal Nicole is a big advocate for our four-pawed friends, and was thrilled to be on hand to promote the event.

“There are many animals in our communities that are in dire need of companionship and a forever home,” she said. “I know firsthand how special the bond is between owners and pets, and I am hopeful that, as we continue to host these adoption events, we will be able to connect many of these lovable pets with families.”

The animal-loving group hosted its annual pet adoption initiative at the Third Avenue Festival in Bay Ridge on Oct. 4.

Pooches Sadie, Zoey, and Gucci, and their human friends welcomed visitors, who checked out potential adoptees.

PLUTO promotes humane education designed to increase awareness, compassion and responsible pet ownership, states its website:

“We are a no kill animal rescue group started by people who have a special place in their hearts for the homeless, abandoned, sick and unwanted animals.” The canine cuddlies are all available for adoption.

If you are interested in adopting, contact Pluto at (718) 227–0553 or pluto rescu e@aol.com .

Malliotakis district office [7408 Fifth Ave. at 74th Street in Bay Ridge, (718) 987–0863].

Read Standing O every Thursday on Brook lynDa ily.com !

©2015 Community News Group