Larry Simmons paid $58 a month in 2014 and $118 a month this year for an Obamacare insurance policy to cover his family of three in Summerville.

For more information Compare health insurance plans or purchase a policy through the Affordable Care Act marketplace, HealthCare.gov. You may reach a federal marketplace representative by phone, 1-800-318-2596. Shoppers must select a plan by Dec. 15 for coverage to begin on Jan. 1. Open enrollment ends on Jan. 31. For additional information about Affordable Care Act plans in South Carolina, go to the Department of Insurance’s website, doi.sc.gov.

Next year, staring down a steep price hike, 63-year-old Simmons wonders if he’ll be able to afford health insurance at all. “I might just have to drop myself off completely and not have any coverage,” he said.

It’s decision-making season for Affordable Care Act customers. Open enrollment for 2016 health plans on HealthCare.gov started this month and runs through Jan. 31, but shoppers looking for coverage on Jan. 1 must pick a plan by mid-December. In South Carolina, they’re facing higher prices, fewer options and narrow networks.

Simmons, who owns a small appliance shop, said his relatively low income qualifies his family for a generous federal subsidy to offset the price they pay. But the amount they’ll be expected to contribute in 2016 will still increase considerably. Next year, a comparable plan will cost them more than $600 a month.

“What a jump! I could not believe it,” Simmons said. “I’m not good at math, but I think that’s a 500 percent increase.”

In 2014 and 2015, Simmons picked an insurance plan sold by Consumers’ Choice Health Plan, which offered some of the lowest prices for South Carolina customers on HealthCare.gov. Consumers’ Choice announced last month it will not sell 2016 plans. Several other similar health insurance co-ops across the country also recently closed as they faced a sharp cut in federal reimbursement.

Four companies will continue selling policies to South Carolina customers, but only BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina and its subsidiary, Blue Choice Health Plan, offer plans in every county.

Shelli Quenga works for the nonprofit Palmetto Project in Mount Pleasant. Her group won a federal grant to help residents enroll in health insurance plans through the federal marketplace. The Consumers’ Choice announcement took them all by surprise, she said.

“A lot of people were really worried about affordability,” she said. Consumers’ Choice offered lower prices than most of its competitors, she said, but it also diversified South Carolina’s insurance industry, long dominated by BlueCross BlueShield.

Now, she said, “For most of the state, it is ‘Blue’ or ‘Blue.’ ”

Access to MUSC

But higher prices aren’t the only problem former Consumers’ Choice customers are confronting.

Some of them are also struggling to find a plan that covers services at Medical University Hospital. The Medical University of South Carolina and its 1,500 physicians aren’t considered “in-network” for BlueCross BlueShield or Blue Choice plans sold on HealthCare.gov.

Aetna-Coventry, which previously prioritized Roper St. Francis providers in its network, now offers a handful of plans that include MUSC as a preferred provider.

BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina and Blue Choice patients who purchase policies on the Affordable Care Act exchange may use MUSC doctors, but they should expect to pay much higher out-of-network prices.

MUSC spokeswoman Heather Woolwine said the hospital wants to work with BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina so that they may be included in the “Blue” network.

So far, they haven’t reached an agreement.

Patti Embry-Tautenhan, a spokeswoman for BlueCross BlueShield of South Carolina, pointed out that its Affordable Care Act plans include access to three other hospital systems in the Charleston area: Trident Health, Roper St. Francis and East Cooper Medical Center. “There are currently no plans to include MUSC in the 2016 individual ACA (Affordable Care Act) product network at this time,” she said.

These restrictions do not affect BlueCross BlueShield customers insured through their employer or who qualify for the low-income Medicaid program or Medicare.

‘All about money’

More than 165,000 South Carolinians purchased Obamacare policies last year. S.C. Department of Insurance Director Ray Farmer said 67,000 of them were insured through Consumers’ Choice.

“We would encourage people to continue to shop, either on the exchange or through their local insurance agent,” Farmer said. “There are plenty of plans, plenty of options.”

Next year, adults who don’t enroll in an insurance plan must pay the federal government $695 or 2.5 percent of their household income, whichever amount is greater. Premiums for most Affordable Care Act plans in South Carolina will increase by about 10 percent next year.

Part of the problem, some experts say, is that Consumers’ Choice priced its policies too low all along.

Simmons hasn’t decided what he’ll do. He qualifies for a Medicare card in less than two years and doesn’t have any pressing health problems. He may buy a policy for his 59-year-old wife and risk it himself without health insurance until he turns 65.

“It’s all about money, of course,” he said. “We’re barely able to cover things. We’re not starving to death, but we don’t have a slush fund.”

Reach Lauren Sausser at (843) 937-5598.