Medicaid advocates had every right to be terrified this year when the Obama administration, siding with a number of states, successfully urged the U.S. Supreme Court to deny any private right of action by providers or beneficiaries for Medicaid payment shortfalls.

The March opinion in Armstrong vs. Exceptional Care Center was perhaps the biggest case no one really noticed. Medicaid is a huge part of state budgets. Had a similar setback been administered to the Medicare program seniors would have been rioting in the streets. Yet any indignity inflicted upon the medically indigent, and those who care for them, generally goes without public notice.



Concurring in the 5-4 Armstrong decision, Justice Stephen Breyer, an administrative law aficionado, rhapsodized about the states’ “time-consuming efforts to obtain public input” on Medicaid cuts submitted to the federal government for approval. That’s an ivory tower view of reality. As the former head of a statewide long-term care association, I can not only attest no such efforts were made, but observe that one had to file a public records request to even find out what a state had submitted in the way of rationale for draconian, budget-driven cuts made by its legislature. Nor were such cuts, however objectively immoral, ever rejected by the federal government Medicaid partner that pays no less than half of a state’s Medicaid costs.



Recently, in finalizing a 2011 proposed rule, the U.S. Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services (CMS) adopted changes that it pledged will “allow us to make informed data-driven decisions and document our decisions when considering proposed rate reductions and other methodology changes that may reduce beneficiaries’ abilities to receive needed care.” This is a welcome development for those who feared the Social Security Act’s guarantee of access to efficient, quality care had been read out of the Act by the Court’s denial of any remedy to enforce it.



The rulemaking, focusing so exclusively on access to care, is not perfect. Access can be divorced from care quality, even if CMS suggests its quality initiatives will bear fruit. Surely quality requires adequate funding. Facing penalties that include closure, no nursing home provider, for example, could ever admit that Medicaid payment shortfalls for, say, two-thirds of patients on Medicaid degrade overall facility care quality – even if such a nexus would seem inevitable. Yet quality cannot simply be flogged out of an underpaid caregiving staff by the government that underpays them. Still, it is encouraging to see the federal government finally committing to apply metrics, and transparency, in assessing the ravages that the states’ budget-driven cuts inflict upon our nation’s most vulnerable citizens.



Consider a state like Wisconsin, where a report this year found Medicaid falling $35.99 per patient, per day short of covering care costs in nursing homes. With very strict state enforcement, it’s a testament to providers that care facilities are even open, let alone providing good care in a state with one of the nation’s 15-most disabled patient populations. Let’s hope that CMS becomes a more demanding Medicaid partner going forward, which can only help providers like those in Wisconsin. Medicaid payment adequacy needs policing, not an absentee landlord.



Brendan Williams is an Olympia, WA attorney writing frequently on health care issues.