Topics: AlterNet, Ann Coulter, Donald Trump, Mike Huckabee, Rand Paul, Politics News

This article originally appeared on AlterNet

1. There’s a reason Rand Paul has become completely irrelevant.

The fact that Rand Paul was once touted as the savior of the Republican Party does not speak well of either of them. But just to drive the point home that Paul is definitely not suited to play the role of level-headed grownup in the room, the Kentucky libertarian got a little hysterical this week about Bernie Sanders.

Just a tad.

The word “socialist” can do that to right-wing libertarian types, sending them into paroxysms of wild-eyed terror. On a conservative South Carolina radio show, Paul suggested that a Bernie Sanders presidency might set off “mass genocide.” In his view, that’s what happens when you try socialism. Apparently, he has never heard of Scandinavia, where genocide really hasn’t been a thing.

“It amazes me and it actually kind of scares me,” Paul told radio host Vince Coakley. “I think it’s not an accident of history that most of the times when socialism has been tried that attendant with that has been mass genocide of people or any of those who object to it. Stalin killed tens of millions of people. Mao killed tens of millions of people. Pol Pot killed tens of millions of people.”

Granted, Paul is not the only Republican who is confused about Sanders’ use of the word socialism, and certainly not the only one using ridiculous rhetoric to scare people to death. Texas state Rep. Jason Villalba compared Sanders to Hitler on Tuesday, later backing off, and going the other way to Stalin.

So clearly, we can expect a lot more of this nonsense.

2. Trump tries to have it both ways with healthcare.

Republican frontrunner Donald Trump (yes, still) is working on a healthcare plan to replace Obamacare and it’s the most beautiful, wonderful healthcare plan ever, because it is Donald Trump’s. It just is. Believe him. It’s a “great plan.” He was discussing this proposal in his usual vague, word-salady way this week with talk radio host Simon Conway, saying he would cut “great deals” with healthcare providers, because that is what he does. He cuts great deals.

The Donald, as the great president he so clearly is going to be, would cut such great deals that everyone would want to choose private insurance. And the rest would go to hospitals “because you make a deal with these hospitals so that they can’t rip off the country.”

So, that’s his fix. And by the way, this universal healthcare system is in no way socialism, “it’s just not,” he said, because he, the Great One, does not “put a label on it.”

There, fixed.

3. Huckabee. Just. Does. Not. Get. It. At. All.

Mr. Guns, Grits and Gravy hides a mighty racism behind that folksy style, but it sneaks out from time to time. Mike Huckabee won the award for most offensive, out-of-touch, clueless tweet during this week’s Democratic debate, hands down, when he said to his followers: “I trust @BernieSanders with my tax dollars like I trust A North Korean chef with my labrador!” #DemDebate

Oh, hahahahahahaha. The Huckster. Such a colorful way with words.

The backlash confused Huckabee. Or really, it did not confuse him, because absolutely nothing, no new information and certainly none of ‘dem newfangled, politically correct ideas, like it’s not such a good idea to repeat tired racist stereotypes, penetrate his skull.