Despite progress, some events are still considered too dangerous for women.

Jessica Jerome jumps to a first place finish during the Olympic trials for U.S. women ski jumpers on Dec. 29 in Park City, Utah. (Photo: Harry How, Getty Images) Story Highlights Sochi Games to include women's ski jumping for first time.

Yet a look through history shows that addition of events for women have come grudgingly.

The reasons for the unequal treatment of women is sexist.

The upcoming Winter Olympics in Russia will include women's ski jumping for the first time. Not only is this an important milestone for women ski jumpers, it is a measure of progress for elite female athletes in all winter sports.

This Olympics marks the 90th anniversary of the first Winter Games, held in Chamonix, France, in 1924. At those Games, the only sport women could compete in was figure skating. The other events, such as ski jumping and bobsledding, were considered too dangerous for them.

While the Sochi Games offer the most opportunities for women of any Winter Olympics yet, there still is not parity: 14 of 15 sports include competition for women; Nordic combined, in which athletes compete in both cross-country skiing and ski jumping, remains the only holdout. Of the 93 individual events in Sochi, 43 are for women while 50 are for men.

The reasons for the unequal treatment of women, like concern over women's health, are anachronistic and sexist.

When I competed in the luge in the 1976 Olympics in Austria, only half of the sports had competition for women. Ice hockey, biathlon, ski jumping, Nordic combined and bobsled remained the sole domain of men. Women's biathlon was added to the 1992 Winter Olympics, women's ice hockey in 1998 and two-woman bobsled in 2002.

In addition to this persistent gender gap, many events treat women and men athletes differently. For example, in cross-country skiing and the luge, women have shorter distances than those for men. Women are allowed to drive two-women bobsleds, but not four-women ones. Men can compete in both disciplines.

One reason given for excluding women from competing in the same sports and at the same distances as men is concern for their safety. For example, some people feared ski jumping would damage a woman's uterus. There is no medical proof of this. Virtually every Olympic sport is dangerous.

Another excuse has been that the field of high-caliber female competitors in a given sport is low. That can be a self-fulfilling prophesy, because sports without Olympic recognition suffer from a lack of investment and visibility by their country and thus lower participation. Unfortunately, it is all too often that the sports treated as second-class citizens are those in which women compete.

I am extremely grateful that luge included women from the time it became an Olympic sport in 1964. The privilege of donning the USA uniform and competing with other young people from across the globe is an experience I always will cherish.

And while I cheer, I will also hope that it's not too much longer before we see women driving a four-women bobsled, or ski jumping off the big hill, just like the men.

Maura Grogan also was a competitive figure skater, and on the inaugural varsity women's ice hockey team at Yale University. She consults non-profit organizations on policy, strategic planning and financial management.

In addition to its own editorials, USA TODAY publishes diverse opinions from outside writers, including our Board of Contributors. To read more columns like this, go to the opinion front page or follow us on twitter @USATopinion or Facebook.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1aTBSYS