A screenshot shows a promotional video for Yummi Media’s WeDong app. YouTube

Chinese cinema chains are rolling out the latest technology to attract the country’s lucrative movie-goers. First it was IMAX and 3D, and now it’s WeDong.

Wanda Cinema Line Corporation, China’s largest cinema operator, is teaming up with Singaporean company Yummi Media Group to expand use of the interactive mobile app WeDong in its theaters across China, according to a Yummi statement Monday.

WeDong, called “Cinime” outside of China, is mobile technology that enables users to play with the big screen, taking quizzes and playing movie-related games with other viewers, according to Yummi. The company says movie goers can also use the app to buy tickets and get promotional deals, like popcorn from the concession.

Entertainment and property conglomerate Dalian Wanda Group Co, said in a statement that the WeDong effort “reflects the entertainment and enjoyment of movie media.”

WeDong comes as companies look for ways to make movie-going more interactive. Some theaters launched earlier this year a pop-up commenting section on screen, enabling viewers to chat about the films while they watch them. That sparked a debate about whether it detracted from movies — or actually made watching bad movies more enjoyable.

While WeDong isn’t geared to the pop-up film critics, viewers can use it to scan movie posters to see movie trailers and reward frequent-viewers with prizes, according to information on Yummi’s cinime website.

The move also reflects Wanda’s push to connect the online world with its offline business. The company, which runs more than 100 shopping malls across the country, joined with e-commerce giants Baidu Inc. and Tencent Holdings Ltd. in August to create a 5 billion yuan ($810 million) e-commerce venture. The venture is set to link Baidu and Tencent’s online maps and search functions with Wanda’s luxury hotels, shopping malls and movie theaters and will also give customers new ways to pay on their mobile for offline goods.

– Laurie Burkitt. Follow her on Twitter @lburkitt