Questions on harbor maintenance and Coast Guard health care have popped up in New Hampshire town hall meetings during the primary campaign, as with Chris Christie in Ashland on July 1.

ASHLAND, N.H. — Jobs and the economy, national security and foreign affairs, the budget and national debt — all are issues that New Hampshire voters quiz presidential candidates on. But then, well, there is the unexpected.

How do you stop any president from trampling on the United States Constitution?

What health care reforms would you enact for active US Coast Guard members and their families?

Would you support 100 percent funding of the federal Harbor Maintenance Trust Fund?

While so much of presidential campaigning is about super PACs and national polls, media buys and televised debates, in New Hampshire, with its first-in-the-nation primary, candidates are still expected to open themselves up to unscreened questions of all types — questions that can lead to some unlikely conversations.

Advertisement

And candidates go out of their way to let voters know they are not afraid to participate.

“I want to leave a lot of time for questions ’cause I want to hear from you,” Bobby Jindal, the Republican governor of Louisiana, told an audience in Manchester late last month.

More than anyone else, Chris Christie, the Republican governor of New Jersey, has made himself available for unscripted questions from the public. Last Wednesday’s town hall meeting in Ashland — his 12th in New Hampshire since January — was no different, providing a microcosm of what is on the minds of voters.

“Not a lot of rules here,” Christie told a standing-room-only crowd at the American Legion post. “You raise your hands, and I’ll call on you.”

And one after another, for more than an hour, Christie did just that, answering about a dozen questions. There were the anticipated queries — those often cited in polls as the most important issues to primary voters — about paying down the national debt and reforming the Affordable Care Act. Then there were the unforeseen.

Advertisement

“This is a little bit more on a personal note, a family note,” Janet Moorehead, 75, of Plymouth, began her question to Christie. “For the past seven years or so we’ve been protecting a house in a Chicago that’s just sitting there. And this Father’s Day, the president was off in California while his wife and two kids were over in Europe. How would your family life be different?”

“So here’s an answer to your question, by giving you an example of what Mary Pat and I did when I became governor,” Christie said. “We had a young family back then, and the promise I made to her was if I won, we wouldn’t move to the governor’s mansion.”

That way, he said, his children wouldn’t have to change schools and could keep a sense normalcy in their lives.

A move to the White House is inevitable, should he win the presidency. Still, Christie said: “Our family will remain as normal as we can possibly remain if this happens. We sat and talked about it as a family. This was a family decision to do this.”

Dominick Reuter/Reuters/File 2015 “I want to leave a lot of time for questions ’cause I want to hear from you,” Bobby Jindal, the Republican governor of Louisiana, told an audience in Manchester late last month.

Kameron Theos had a hard-hitting follow-up.

“If you become president of the United States,” the 6-year-old from Belmont said as Christie stooped over so the little boy could talk into a microphone. “Would you invite me to the White House?”

“Kameron, here’s the deal,” Christie started, as the room erupted in laughter and applause. “When I was running for governor for the first time in 2009, I had a young man who said to me: ‘If you get elected governor, will you invite me to the governor’s office and let me sit at your desk?’ And I said ‘yes.’ ”

‘Not a lot of rules here. You raise your hands, and I’ll call on you.’ Chris Christie, GOP presidential candidate, addressing a crowd at an American Legion post in Ashland, N.H.

Christie said he made good on that promise and promised to do the same if elected president.

“Now,” he said, “I’m not encouraging every child who comes to a town hall meeting to ask this question. However, Kameron, there is something special about being the first.”

Next came Caitlin Patenaude, who read her question from a piece of paper, having given the topic much thought beforehand.

“Affordable housing and health care are very strongly linked, and studies show that stable housing can lead to a healthier America,” said the law student and intern at J. Ronald Terwilliger Foundation for Housing America’s Families. “As president, what policies would you implement to make housing more affordable to allow Americans to live healthier lives?”

States and the federal government must work together to rehabilitate the available housing stock to make it more affordable, Christie responded.

“The second thing we have to do is have a growing economy,” he continued.

Courtney Pelletier of Belmont told Christie — and the crowd — that when she turned 18 last year, “I voted at the first opportunity that I could.” But, she continued, many of her friends did not.

“I wondered if you have an idea of how you can begin to pique young people’s interest in their civic duty?” she asked.

It’s simple, Christie said: “Candidates have to excite people.”