Scott Gottlieb, American Enterprise Institute, and Kavita Patel, Brookings Institution, handicap the implications of a potential repeal of a key part of the Affordable Care Act.

There are some eye-popping proposed Obamacare rate increases for next year. But whether they turn out to be the norm or the exception won't be known until October.

The federal agency in charge of Obamacare revealed on Monday afternoon details of many of the Obamacare insurance plans requesting premium rate hikes of 10 percent or more for 2016.

(Tweet this)

The data, which can be accessed at RateReview.HealthCare.gov. includes exactly how much more an insurer wants to charge next year, and the justification for that increase.

But information about lesser price increases being proposed, or even proposed price decreases, were not released. That makes it impossible, for the moment, to determine just how much insurers want to raise their premiums overall in the United States for 2016.

The Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services released the proposed hikes of 10 percent or more in 37 states using the federal HealthCare.gov insurance platform, as well as several other states using their own Obamacare insurance exchanges. Two of the biggest states, California and New York, do not have proposed rates on RateReview.HealthCare.gov yet.

Both plans sold on government-run Obamacare exchanges and ones sold off those exchange are included on RateReview.HealthCare.gov.

Read MoreGOP Obamacare 'fix' has big risks



A check of the site for Georgia found that Aetna HMO plan sold on HealthCare.gov is seeking a 15.57 percent increase in its monthly premiums. And Alliance Health Plans in Georgia is asking for a whopping 37.85 percent premium hike for its SoloCare individual plan sold on that same federal insurance exchange.

In the Midwest, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Illinois asked for price increases of 12.83 percent for one plan, but also wants a 29.09 percent hike for another plan, and a 38.24 percent bump for a third plan. More than 329,000 current Blue Cross Blue Shield Customers are in those or similar plans now.

Blue Cross Blue Shield, in its rate filing wrote, "The main driver of the increase in the proposed rates is that the actual claims experience of the members in these individual ... policies is significantly higher than expected."