CHICAGO, July 21, 2015 /PRNewswire/ -- Health care organizations are under increasing pressure to improve quality and efficiency. A key strategy is to improve the way physicians and other practitioners provide care. For these organizations, the challenge lies in tracking and monitoring practitioner performance across a health care enterprise and then reporting it to regulatory agencies.

Morrisey Practitioner Performance Reporting™ (MPPR™) from Morrisey Associates addresses this challenge. It gives physician leaders and other health care executives a complete picture of their practitioners' performance at an enterprise level. They can identify opportunities for improvement quickly in aggregate, as well as by practitioner, department, facility, specialty and system, using the MPPR Dashboard.

"Health care leaders need sophisticated tools that will help them detect trends and identify areas that require intervention," says Dr. Mark Smith, vice president and chief medical officer at Morrisey Associates. "MPPR gives them real-time insights that help them measure outcomes against quality, efficiency and patient satisfaction goals."

MPPR also enables health care leaders to view comparative national benchmarks, when they're available, so they can see how their practitioners' performance stacks up against that of other practitioners. In addition, the software provides recommended performance targets and implementation guidelines.

"Traditional patient care and business models tie insurance reimbursement to the volume and price of services," Smith says. "That's changing, largely due to the Affordable Care Act, which emphasizes payment for improved quality and patient outcomes."

MPPR enables health care organizations to assess and track practitioner competence and report the results using an intuitive drag-and-drop interface. The software includes clinically vetted proprietary indicator content and specialty-specific report templates. Morrisey Associates works with health care organizations to map data from existing hospital systems, so they're able to run performance reports automatically and then review them online.

MPPR includes an online directory of best-practice, specialty-specific indicator definitions for more than 100 adult, pediatric and allied health specialties. Indicators cover inpatient and outpatient settings and link to clinical privileges.

About Morrisey Associates

Based in Chicago, Illinois, Morrisey Associates is a world-class health care solutions provider that offers enterprise-level applications for practitioner credentialing and privileging, care management, and practitioner performance reporting. Morrisey also offers industry-leading consulting services and flexible licensing options. Learn more at www.morriseyonline.com.

SOURCE Morrisey Associates