$4.2M remodel includes skylights, updated heating and air conditioning system

If you go What: Glenn Miller Ballroom grand reopening When: 1 p.m. Jan. 27 Where: University Memorial Center at the University of Colorado More info: bit.ly/1yF486M

The Glenn Miller Ballroom at the University of Colorado is versatile.

Each year, it switches between hosting panelists during the Conference on World Affairs to Supreme Court justices such as Sandra Day O'Connor to career fairs. It's home to wide-eyed incoming freshmen one day, and Chancellor Phil DiStefano the next.

In January, the campus will unveil a fresh, newly renovated version of the beloved ballroom, complete with skylights, a new heating and cooling system and other upgrades.

The University of Colorado is preparing to unveil the newly renovated Glenn Miller Ballroom inside the University Memorial Center. As part of the renovation, crews installed skylights to bring more light into the space. For a video of the ballroom, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"We kid about it; it's everything from laser tag to Supreme Court justices," said University Memorial Center executive director Carlos Garcia.

After 61 years, the highly trafficked ballroom deserved a break and an overhaul.

The $4.2 million renovation put the room out of commission for roughly eight months starting in May. That meant finding other spaces for guests, events, conferences and other programs — a challenge that Garcia said he's happy to put behind him.

The ballroom hosts an average of 350 events a year.

"When the space was down, you really noticed it," he said. "That speaks to how important it is to the campus. We have quite a few events already scheduled in there, so it'll be back-to-back-to-back as soon as we open it up."

Advertisement

Gone are the heavy drapes that once blocked natural light from entering through the ballroom's arched windows. Skylights and a new color palette also helped to lighten up the space, Garcia said.

Crews lowered the stage, installed LED lighting and permanent projector screens that can be raised or lowered depending on the event.

They also remodeled the nearby catering kitchen and added soundproofing features to help muffle the noise.

The ballroom's partitions also were replaced with soundproof dividers so that all three wings of the room can be used simultaneously, and crews added an extra set of doors between the lobby and the ballroom to help keep out hallway noises.

Crews renovated the nearby Aspen Room, installed a gender-neutral restroom and updated the heating and air conditioning system to make the ballroom more comfortable in cool winters and hot summers.

The ballroom opened at the same time as the University Memorial Center in 1953 and has had a few minor facelifts since then, Garcia said. It's named for Glenn Miller, who attended CU in 1923 and went on to pursue a career as a trombonist.

Some new photos of Miller, whose plane disappeared on the way to perform for U.S. troops during World War II, will adorn the hallway walls outside the ballroom.

"It is the feature space of the campus," Garcia said. "This is where a lot of people who have never been to the campus come. This is the first place they stop, so the ballroom is your first peek at the University of Colorado. We wanted to make sure it represents the university well."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta