BOULDER — For Colorado, this spring was about more than finding a replacement for departed Paul Richardson, the all-conference wide receiver. Coach Mike MacIntyre hoped to identify several playmakers who could help the Buffaloes keep up in the high-scoring Pac-12.

After watching freshman wideouts Bryce Bobo and Lee Walker flash their speed and score touchdowns Saturday in the “Black and Gold” spring game, MacIntyre could not help but be encouraged.

“I think they have the speed and the athleticism to be able to make plays,” Mac Intyre said. “Of course, they’re young. They’ll have their ups and downs. But I definitely think they have the athletic ability to do it.

“To be on a ‘stage’ like this and make plays, that will make them more comfortable (in the Aug. 29 opener) against Colorado State.”

The Buffs, 4-8 overall and 1-8 in conference play last fall in MacIntyre’s first season, averaged 25.4 points. That wasn’t nearly enough offense. Five Pac-12 teams averaged 35 or more points, and eight scored 31 or more.

If Bobo, Walker and perhaps other young receivers can stretch the field and complement dependable junior Nelson Spruce, Buffs sophomore starting quarterback Sefo Liufau will begin to have the threats he needs.

A Folsom Field crowd of 6,350 watched Bobo (6-foot-2, 190 pounds) break away for a 67-yard touchdown on a pass from Jordan Gehrke. Walker (6-0, 180) caught an 18-yard TD in tight coverage from Liufau.

WATCH: CU Buffs coach Mike MacIntyre talks Saturday after CU’s spring game

Gehrke helped lead the Black team to a 21-17 victory over the Liufau-led Gold. But from a coaching perspective, spring games are about individual performances and evaluation. Californians Bobo (five catches for 132 yards) and Walker (three for 41) are sure to grade highly.

“I think I did pretty good out here,” Bobo said. “I think I just need to keep working on my route running. But I think I made a statement that I can be a wide receiver on this team. This is a confidence booster for me.”

Liufau went 19-of-31 for 238 yards and two touchdowns with an interception, He connected with Spruce eight times for 110 yards. Gehrke, a junior college transfer who redshirted at CU in 2013, was 5-of-11 passing for 113 yards and one TD.

MacIntyre reiterated that Liufau “is our starter and Gerhke is the backup. But I feel great about putting Jordan in there if something happens to Sefo.”

Liufau said young receivers have been impressive all spring.

“Walker is a special talent, and I think he showed that,” Liufau said. “He will continue to get better as he learns the playbook. He’s someone to watch out for.”

Added Liufau: “Bobo is really long and athletic. He’s able to get off routes easily and get away from defensive backs with his long strides. Along with Spruce, there’s some playmakers right there.”

On defense, Ahkello Witherspoon (6-3, 185), a junior college transfer from Sacramento, Calif., intercepted a Liufau pass and made several big hits.

Footnote. Colorado announced that groundbreaking will be May 12 for the $143 million athletics facilities upgrade.

Tom Kensler: tkensler@denverpost.com or twitter.com/tomkensler

Good and bad from CU’s spring drills

POSITIVES ON OFFENSE — 1. Freshman WR Bryce Bobo, a standout in spring game, could replace Paul Richardson; 2. solid backup QB in JC transfer Jordan Gehrke; 3. redshirt freshman TB Phillip Lindsay, a former Denver South star, is a favorite of coaches.

NEGATIVES ON OFFENSE — 1. Offensive line still a work in progress and needs soph LT Jeromy Irwin (foot) to get healthy; 2. CU is banged up in the backfield with returnees Christian Powell and Michael Adkins missing time in the spring; 3. lack of big-play TE.

POSITIVES ON DEFENSE — 1. Deep linebacker corps is the strength of the defense; 2. soph CB Ahkello Witherspoon (6-3, 180) was all over field in the spring game; 3. redshirt freshman DE Derek McCartney, grandson of CU legend Bill, bulked up to 6-3, 235.

NEGATIVES ON DEFENSE — 1. Academic issues on DL as 2013 starters Justin Solis, Samson Kafovalu were kept out of spring drills; 2. no proven pass rusher, but junior Tyler Henington had sack and two hurries in spring game; 3. CB Kenneth Crawley (hand) would have helped spring competition.

Tom Kensler, The Post