Lila Rose appeared recently on FoxNews’ The O’Reilly Factor to discuss the latest installment in Live Action’s newest undercover investigation. The investigation exposes Planned Parenthood’s wide-spread propensity to give dangerous sex advice to young teenagers.

In the investigation, an actress posing as a 15-year-old tells various Planned Parenthood workers across the country that “her boyfriend” wants to “try new things” sexually. In all three videos that have been released so far (there is more to come), Planned Parenthood sex counselors barely wait for the young girl to finish explaining her situation before excitedly jumping in with a slew of inappropriate — and sometimes illegal — advice.

The installment featured on The O’Reilly Factor was filmed at a Planned Parenthood in Oregon, where the young girl relayed that her boyfriend wanted to try role-playing. The counselor quips that there are “educational pornos” that they can watch to get ideas, and in segments that were not shown on last night’s episode she continues Planned Parenthood’s popular trend of promoting dangerous bondage sex practices to the young girl.

This sex trend, popularized to some degree by the explosive popularity of the book 50 Shades of Grey, includes sadomasochistic behavior that can be extremely dangerous (to the point of death) to the partner taking on the submissive “role.”

Lila stressed to O’Reilly the fact that this behavior on Planned Parenthood’s part is possible in large part due to the fact that the abortion business receives massive amounts of tax funding. Lila also explained that, in addition to this tax funding, Obamacare is lining Planned Parenthood’s coffers via a $75 million allocation towards sex ed. However, thanks to the confusing nature of ObamaCare, it is unclear exactly how much of this amount is going directly to Planned Parenthood affiliates across the country.

Unlike Planned Parenthood, Live Action doesn’t get hundreds of millions of dollars in forced taxpayer funding to keep us going. We rely completely on the generosity of our donors. Please give to Live Action today!