Why Noerdlinger must be fired

Brooklyn: Voicer Hazel Dukes of the NAACP New York State Conference and her 16 compatriots completely missed the mark with their support of Rachel Noerdlinger. The fact is that public servants are held to a higher standard, sometimes unfairly — as any police officer can attest. Personal decisions — such as allowing a convicted killer, drug trafficker and frequent user of marijuana to be in close proximity to your teenage son — are troubling. These decisions highlight a lack of credibility, sound judgment and the intestinal fortitude to end a relationship with a man who is unapologetically racist and anti-police. The truly disturbing aspect of this debacle has been Mayor de Blasio’s reaction, or lack thereof. An employee whose actions call into question his office’s ability to make fair, unbiased decisions must be removed. Unless the mayor is prepared to issue equally staunch defenses of city teachers accused of wrongdoing or police officers acting in good faith during split-second decisions, Noerdlinger must go. Gerard Collins

No to Noerdlinger

Bronx: Voicer Hazel Dukes and 16 other women feel that Rachel Noerdinger is an upstanding citizen and an exemplary employee who is being singled out because she is a woman of color. It’s sad that they, as strong African-Americans who have achieved so much, feel that Noerdinger is a role model. She has no regard for anyone but her boyfriend and her son. She clearly has proven that she feels that the three of them are above the law and can do whatever they want. It’s not anyone’s business who people choose to live with or how they raise their children, but it is the business of the citizens of New York — and especially the NYPD — when people laugh in our faces and are protected by the likes of Bill de Blasio and Al Sharpton. Lucille Martines

Forgotten heroes

Forest Hills: On Wednesday, members of the NYPD Emergency Service Unit said their farewells to Detective Louis Fernandez, known to those who loved and worked with him as Louie. His death is considered to be in the line of duty. Yet there was no mention in the news, no dignitaries making speeches. He died of cancer caused by 9/11. Louie, the men and women he worked with and hundreds of other first responders are becoming the new victims of 9/11. To Louie, you will never be forgotten. To all the first responders, you are still our heroes. Thank you! Candy Valenti

Let him have it

Beachwood, N.J.: Thanks to the Daily News for holding New Jersey Gov. Chris Christie accountable for his despicable and condescending comments on the minimum wage (“The real Chris Christie,” editorial, Oct. 24). In addition to vetoing the minimum wage and slashing the homestead rebate, Christie’s spending habits — funneling tax dollars to political cronies and supporting casinos with huge tax breaks, only to see them fold — are extremely harmful to the vast majority of New Jerseyans. Helen E. Fitzsimmons

Make them care

Manhattan: Gov. Christie is unfortunately not the only politician who is tired of hearing about the minimum wage (“Christie the cruel,” editorial, Oct. 22). Perhaps our leaders would pay more attention to what the voters need if all governors, senators and representatives were paid the minimum wage. Our leaders should also carry the same Obamacare insurance that so many minimum-wage earners use. Louis Phillips

Below the belt

Rockaway Point: Why does the Daily News find it necessary to mock Gov. Christie about his weight in an article about the minimum wage (“Hey, Chris, you really think you can feed yourself on $17G a year?” Oct. 22)? I’ve encouraged my children to read the paper since they were young, and also taught them that bullying is wrong . In the future, please try to refrain from the fat jokes. It sets a bad example for readers of any age. Rosie Boxer

Coffee crisis

Yonkers: The minimum wage wouldn’t even keep Fatso Christie in lattes! Suzanne Hayes Kelly

Wage maximization

Bloomfield, N.J.: Like Gov. Christie, I, too, am tired of hearing about the minimum wage. That’s where I started years ago, and I decided it just didn’t work for me. Being poor wasn’t fun. So I worked hard and earned a promotion. That didn’t work for me either, so I racked up some serious debt and earned a degree. It was a lot of work, but now I have control of my destiny. You see, I don’t want politicians and the uninformed voters who put them in office deciding what my compensation will be. I want to decide. With hard work and a lot of perseverance through rough times, I don’t have to wait for handouts. I earn my keep and I’m proud of it. Michael Patracuolla

Murder at the Met

Brooklyn: Re Linda Stasi (“Drama starts before Act 1,” column, Oct. 22): So in her opinion, two wrongs do make a right. “The Death of Klinghoffer” justifies the murder of an elderly, wheelchair-bound Jew, but that’s okay because it’s artistic expression. I’m sure she’d feel the same if it were her father. If John Adams’ next opera justifies beheadings by that noble group ISIS, will that be okay, too? Evelyn Zelmanowitz

A no vote for O’Malley

Akron, Ohio: Democratic Maryland Gov. Martin O’Malley is considering a run for the Oval Office. But his brand of political correctness comes at the expense of others’ rights. No citizen’s rights should be suppressed, especially for the financial gain of others. That is slavery. I moved to Maryland in 2006, thinking it was a great state for opportunity. But with the high taxes and extreme liberalism, I left. Veronica Sanders

Wait till next year

Brooklyn: Now that a Palestinian driver has plowed into a crowd of Israelis, killing a months-old baby, how long until we have a new opera? F.M. Gallagher

Close the curtain

Brooklyn: Whether the Metropolitan Opera’s “The Death of Klinghoffer” is protected by the First Amendment is not in question. It is a despicable and disgusting story that glorifies terror and is also anti-Semitic. This garbage should in no way get to play at the Met, which receives public funds. The Met should be boycotted for showing such disrespect to so many people. Sidney Morganstein

Beastly conditions

Woodbridge, N.J.: A shout-out to Bill Maher for his commentary on inhumane gestation crates (“Maher: Is N.J. fit for pigs?” Oct. 20). Sows are kept in crates so tiny they cannot move for their entire miserable lives, until they are slaughtered. As Maher states, it would be illegal to do this to a dog. New Jersey would be the 10th state to ban this cruel industry . New Jersey residents, please call Gov. Christie and encourage him to sign the bill. Laurie Jordan

Sammy Hagar had it easy

Jamaica: I can’t drive 25! Francis Stephens

No pleasing some people

Tobyhanna, Pa.: To Voicer Adeline M. Hoffmann: It appears this President cannot please everyone. If he does put “boots on the ground” to fight ISIS, people will complain that our men and women are dying for nothing. Now, he has decided to put “boots on the ground” to help with Ebola, and that’s a problem for some people. I would rather have him do that than to continue having this disease come to American soil. Gelena Morrison

Lessons of history

Massapequa, L.I.: The “wrong” Middle Easterners were airlifted our weapons? Who are the good guys again in this one? The U.S. should stay out and let the regional powers sort it out. We did that in the Iran-Iraq War, and it worked for us. We didn’t with Saddam Hussein. How’s that working for us? Paul Pepe

All of Alston

Monroe, N.J.: I enjoyed reading your article on the matchups between the Giants and Royals (“S.F. treats for 1st-timers,” Oct. 21). One little correction: Walter Alston is the only NL manager who has won four World Series titles: 1955 with the Brooklyn Dodgers; 1959, 1963 and 1965 with the Los Angeles Dodgers. Howard Davidoff

Short end of the stick

East Islip, L.I.: Hundreds of billions of dollars wasted on foreign countries that do not like us, welfare and Medicaid fraud, illegal immigrants and anchor babies. A $20-a-month raise from Social Security for the elderly who have paid taxes for numerous years and disabled vets who have fought for this country. What’s wrong with this picture? Useless government, that’s what. James Ness