All of this came from a sniveling little twerp who counseled Barack Obama to lie about Obamacare in order to fool people into accepting it.

Advertisement - story continues below

Thanks to some careful research by Matt Palumbo who writes for the Foundation for Economic Education, a series of lies and half-truths being promulgated by Obamacare mouthpiece Jonathan Gruber have been uncovered.

The first lie cited is the bogus analogy Gruber makes between a mandate forcing Americans to buy Obamacare and one forcing drivers to buy auto insurance. This completely pushes aside the fact that no one is required to drive a car and thus carry auto crash liability insurance. Asserting that the burden to carry Obamacare is no different than the mandate of auto liability insurance is a lie.

Another of Gruber’s false claims focuses on the Emergency Medical Treatment and Active Labor Act (EMTALA), which mandates hospitals to provide emergency medical treatment for anyone without regard for their ability to pay. He insists that the EMTALA causes an appreciable increase in the cost of medical care for everyone else, which is equally bogus. The truth is that emergency room costs for both insured and uninsured Americans represent only about 2% of what is spent on healthcare.

Advertisement – story continues below

Moreover, no evidence can be found that supports Gruber’s allegation that medical bills are the number one reason for individuals having to file for personal bankruptcy protection. In fact, a Department of Justice study found that among those seeking bankruptcy protections, although 54% had no medical insurance, 90% reported debt under $5,000.00–which indicates a lack of medical insurance was not the primary cause for their bankruptcy.

One of the more disingenuous of Gruber’s claims is that 20,000 people a year die for want of medical insurance.

This claim was likely based on a 21 year old American Medical Association study that used suspect, estimated mortality rates. A recent study done in Oregon revealed that mortality rates remained relatively constant without regard for whether those studied did or did not have health insurance.

Advertisement – story continues below

Yet another of Gruber’s lies holds that the largest group of people without insurance is the “working poor.” A study found that 17 million uninsured people had incomes exceeding $50,000, and another 8 million made more than $75,000. The uninsured are not the “working poor”; they are the middle class, upper middle class, and illegal aliens.

Gruber also said Obamacare would not increase our health insurance premiums; we could keep our current policy and keep our doctors.

All of this came from a sniveling little twerp who counseled Barack Obama to lie about Obamacare in order to fool people into accepting it.

Get your free PDF of Coach’s book “Crooks Thugs & Bigots: the lost, hidden and changed history of the Democrat Party.” If you don’t know the truth, all you’ll have are Democrat lies. Just ask: [email protected]

Advertisement – story continues below

The views expressed in this opinion article are solely those of their author and are not necessarily either shared or endorsed by the owners of this website.