For the first time in two years, more Granite Staters approve than disapprove of the job President Barack Obama is doing, although it’s a close call.

Yet, New Hampshire still has a negative view of the president’s handling of the economy and foreign policy.

It is far too early to try to predict the effect of the president’s popularity on the November 2016 general election, but the overall improvement in his standing is a bit of good news for Democrats.

A new WMUR Granite State Poll, released Friday evening, shows that 48 percent approve of the president’s job performance, and 47 percent disapprove. The last time his job approval rating was “above water” in New Hampshire was July 2013, when 49 percent approved and 45 percent disapproved.

The view of the president personally has also improved, the poll showed, with 47 percent holding a favorable view of him and 45 percent viewing him unfavorably. New Hampshire’s view of Obama had been “underwater” for a year. The last time it was positive was July 2014, when it was 48 percent favorable and 46 percent unfavorable.

The University of New Hampshire Survey Center polled 532 New Hampshire adults, including 472 self-described likely voters, from July 7-20. The margin of error for the overall sample of adults is plus or minus 4.2 percent. It is plus or minus 4.5 percent for the likely voters sample.

Click here for the full poll results.

Despite the uptick in Granite Staters’ overall view of the president, the poll shows negative ratings of the president's handling of the economy and foreign policy. On the economy, 45 percent of those polled approve, while 51 percent disapprove. On foreign policy, 41 percent approve and 53 percent disapprove. Those ratings have been consistenly “underwater” for more than two years.

Obama’s overall job approval rating remains sharply split along party lines, with independents divided. He gets positive grades from 88 percent of Democrats and 43 percent of independents, but only 11 percent of Republicans.

The Affordable Care Act has been unpopular in New Hampshire for the past five years, and the new poll shows that the negative view has not changed. But the gap has narrowed since the spring, with 41 percent currently favoring it and 48 percent opposing it. In May, 34 percent favored and 55 percent opposed the health care law.

This week’s poll also showed that Granite Staters are much more optimistic about the direction of the state than the nation as a whole. While 57 percent said the state is moving in the right direction, 42 percent said the same about the nation. And 33 percent said the state is on the wrong track, while 51 percent said the nation is headed in the wrong direction.