A fully-insured Wisconsin woman may soon have to file for bankruptcy after she suffered cardiac arrest and was taken, while unconscious, to an emergency room that wasn't in her healthcare network.

Though Madison's St. Mary's Hospital was just three blocks away from where Megan Rothbauer was in September 2013 when she had a heart attack at just 29, it's not part of her Blue Cross-Blue Shield network.

Now, as Rothbauer recovers from the 10 days she spent in a medically-induced coma and the other six days she spent in a cardiac unit, she must also contend with whether she'll ever recover from its $50,000 price tag.

Scroll down for video

Megan Rothbauer was just 29 when her heart stopped beating last year in September and she had to be rushed to the hospital. Her life was saved but she's taken a massive hit to the wallet because of the hospital where paramedics chose to take her

Rothbauer was taken to St. Mary's, the closest hospital to where her heart stopped at Weir Minerals, where she works. That proximity, versus the Meriter Hospital 4/10 of a mile away, cost her $50,000--and it could have been even more

WHAT IS BALANCE BILLING? When a provider bills you for the difference between the provider’s charge and the allowed amount. For example, if the provider’s charge is $100 and the allowed amount is $70, the provider may bill you for the remaining $30. A preferred provider may not balance bill you for covered services. Balance billing is expressly permitted under the Affordable Care Act. Source: Healthcare.gov

What seems most pointedly absurd to Rothbauer, a project manager, is that she wasn't even able to stop the ambulance drivers as they rushed her to St. Mary's instead of her in-network Meriter Hospital up the road.

Four tenths of a mile up the road, exactly, where her maximum co-pay would have been $1,500.

'I was in a coma. I couldn't very well wake up and say, "Hey, take me to the next hospital." It was the closet hospital to where I had my event, so naturally the ambulance took me there. No fault to them,' the now 30-year-old told WISCTV.

But this is not to say that Blue Cross-Blue Shield paid nothing toward Rothbauer's care.

The company says it paid its maximum for in-network care--$156,000 of the original $254,000 charged by St. Mary's.

It's called balance billing and its 100 percent legal, even specifically allowed under the Obamacare.

That left $98,000, which Rothbauer successfully negotiated down to $9,800. However, as WISCTV points out, that doesn't cover bills from specific doctors, for the ambulance, the therapist, etc.

Now the fully-insured professional is stuck with a $50,000 bill because of some bad timing and a few blocks.

Blue Cross Blue Shield says they've done their part by covering the maximum they'd cover for anyone and pointed to the prices at St. Mary's.

St. Mary's says they've knocked off such a large amount from Rothbauer's bill that they don't plan to negotiate further.

'It's unfortunate that Meriter is in network and was only three blocks away from St. Mary's,' said Rothbauer, who is now desperately researching ways she might stave off bankruptcy and live the life she sees friends her age leading instead of grappling to get out of medical debt.