Reprinted from REPORT ON MEDICARE COMPLIANCE , the nation's leading source of news and strategic information on Medicare compliance, Stark and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers. Sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today .

Observation services are the latest domino to fall into CMS’s grand plan to package as many outpatient services as possible, according to the proposed 2016 outpatient prospective payment system (OPPS) regulation, which was published in the July 8 Federal Register. In a surprise move, CMS created a new observation “comprehensive ambulatory payment classification” (C-APC) and deposited into the payment pretty much all associated services, including the emergency room visit, labs and radiology.

How it affects hospitals’ finances depends on their ability to manage utilization and control costs, says William Malm, director of revenue integrity at Wake Forest Baptist Medical Center in Winston-Salem, N.C. But they have no choice except to get on board with packaging specifically and fee-for-value generally if they want to survive, he says. “We can’t solve problems by using the same kind of thinking we used when we created them,” Malm says, quoting Albert Einstein.

The proposed C-APC for observation fits into the packaging that’s been underway for two years. Packaging refers to all-inclusive Medicare payments for some of the most common tests and procedures instead of paying for the components separately (RMC 11/10/14, p. 3). There are two major prongs in the march toward a true prospective payment system on the outpatient side: (1) packaged payments for 25 C-APCs within 12 “clinical families,” and (2) packaged payments for certain ancillary services that are integral, supportive, dependent or adjunctive to a primary service. In the proposed 2016 OPPS regulation, which, when finalized, takes effect Jan. 1, CMS added nine C-APCs. Some are surgical, but there’s also the new observation C-APC, with a proposed payment of $2,111.

Most C-APCs are for device-driven or device-dependent procedures, in which the device dominates the cost of the procedure. They are identified with a J1 status indicator. Because observation services are not usually related to device-driven or device-dependent procedures — recovery time is built in — CMS has created a new status indicator, J2. The new C-APC 8011 (comprehensive observation services) would replace the existing observation APC, 8009. C-APC 8011 would be billed on a claim when “there’s a specific combination of services performed in combination with each other, as opposed to the presence of a single primary service identified by status indicator J1,” the OPPS rule states. In terms of the services CMS refers to, patients must spend eight hours in observation, and it also includes everything from the emergency department visit to lab and radiology to high-level evaluation and management services.

“Hospitals used to be able to expect additional reimbursement for infusions and injections, but in observation, that will package now,” Malm says. “Every single service not designated as ‘excluded from this C-APC’ will be combined on the claim with one singular payment.”

Hospitals will have to double down on their efficiency initiatives and reduce overutilization because some of their observation cases are very expensive, he says. “Most of your high-dollar testing will be at risk, so now we have a cost-management issue,” Malm says. But that’s part of the larger picture of fee-for-value reimbursement codified in the Affordable Care Act. Already many large systems, such as the Cleveland Clinic and Intermountain Healthcare, have begun testing utilization committees. Assuming the observation C-APC is finalized, Malm thinks it will reinforce this movement.

Read the rule at http://tinyurl.com/npbzwf5.

© 2015 by Atlantic Information Services, Inc. All Rights Reserved.

Read insightful articles and strategies on inpatient and outpatient billing, Stark, physician documentation, and other big-dollar issues of concern to health care compliance officers each week with your own subscription to Report on Medicare Compliance. Get more information and sign up for a $92 two-month trial subscription today!