SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

“We need to do everything we can to protect” Planned Parenthood, Chelsea Clinton told voters in Rochester, Minn.

“It’s important that we all care about Planned Parenthood,” she said in advance of the Super Tuesday votes, reports the Post-Bulletin.

SIGN UP FOR OUR NEWSLETTER

Chelsea Clinton was responding to a question by a 17 year-old girl, who said she is a peer educator at Planned Parenthood and was concerned about the future of the organization.

This month, Planned Parenthood said they would spend millions of dollars to help Chelsea’s mother, Hillary Clinton, get elected in November.

Planned Parenthood was recently exposed in undercover videos for its apparent practice of selling the body parts of aborted babies on the open market and altering the position of babies during abortion in order to harvest the most intact body parts. The organization is currently under congressional investigation for potentially criminal activity.

Under suspicion of bias, Harris County, Texas District Attorney Devon Anderson convened a grand jury that cleared Planned Parenthood of any wrongdoing in the video exposé and, instead, indicted Center for Medical Progress project lead David Daleiden and his colleague Sandra Merrit. Two pro-choice law professors wrote that the indictment of Daleiden and Merrit amounted to “a stunning act of legal jujitsu” and was a “deeply disturbing” outcome both for the First Amendment and undercover citizen journalists attempting to expose corruption.

Though Planned Parenthood has denied any wrongdoing in its sale of body parts, the abortion business also released a statement in October announcing it will no longer accept payments for aborted fetal tissue.

The organization and its leftwing media supporters continue to insist the videos produced by CMP were “deceptively edited.” However, a Democrat opposition research firm named Fusion – hired by Planned Parenthood to review the videos — said that while their analysts observed the videos had been edited, “the analysis did not reveal widespread evidence of substantive video manipulation.”

Additionally, Fusion noted, “[A]nalysts found no evidence that CMP inserted dialogue not spoken by Planned Parenthood staff.”

An analysis by Coalfire, a third-party forensics company hired by Alliance Defending Freedom, found that the videos were “not manipulated” and that they are “authentic.”

“I believe this is the most important election of my lifetime,” Clinton added. “And this is my first election as a mom. I worry everything I care about is at risk.”

Clinton discussed the GOP candidates during the recent debate in Texas.

“They are almost normalizing hate speech,” she said. “I find it profoundly disturbing,” and added that rhetoric about keeping a list of Muslims and building a wall at the Mexican border is “horrifying.”

Clinton also discussed the future of the Supreme Court as an important issue for voters. She reportedly told her listeners the next president will likely choose one or two Supreme Court justices who will make important decisions about gun control, discrimination, and corporate money in politics.

Finally, Clinton addressed healthcare by saying Obamacare – which she said was once called Hillarycare – is under continued attack by the GOP-led Congress.

“We need to defend the Affordable Care Act,” Clinton said. “And then we need to do more…to get to 100 percent coverage.”