If Smokers Pay Higher Premiums, So Should the Obese

This month marks the 50th anniversary of the first-ever U.S. Surgeon General report on the health hazards of smoking. According to a study published in last week’s Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), the number of American smokers has plummeted from 42 percent in 1965 to 18 percent today, saving an estimated 8 million lives in the process.

What has made the anti-smoking campaign successful?

Regulation: We’ve seen legislation which requires health warnings on cigarette packages; bans on cigarette advertising thru broadcast media and on smoking in public areas; and state and federal excise taxes on cigarettes.

Education: Federal, state, and local government organizations have educated Americans about the ill effects of smoking.

Counsel: Physicians now regularly talk to their patients about smoking. The Center for Disease Control’s (CDC) “Talk With Your Doctor” campaign shows that smokers are twice as likely to quit if they receive counsel from their physicians.

Medications and technologies: People trying to quit have more options, including drugs like Wellbutrin and the nicotine patch or gum. Though not without controversy, e-cigarettes may also help make quitting easier.

Accountability: The health system doesn’t treat smokers like victims, but as people who must take responsibility to change. Under the Affordable Care Act (ACA), smokers pay higher health insurance premiums than non-smokers.

As the nation addresses the obesity epidemic, they should look to the smoking cessation campaign for guidance.

Today, more than one-third of the American adult population is obese and approximately 20 percent of Americans ages 5-18 are obese, defined as having a body mass index (BMI) of 30 or greater. Like smoking, the healthcare/financial costs of obesity are well-known, documented, and indisputable.

The ACA has a chance to make a big impact:

Education: The ACA created the Prevention and Public Health fund to prevent/reduce obesity and other chronic illnesses. Unfortunately, billions of dollars have already been removed from the fund to be used for other purposes. Nonetheless, the fund still exists and will have billions of dollars to spend over the next 5 years.

Counsel: Under ACA-compliant plans, physicians must provide free “obesity screening and counseling” for all adults. Hopefully, this service will have a similar impact on obesity as it did on smoking cessation (see above-mentioned CDC program). Grandfathered plans don’t have to offer free obesity screening.

Surgery: In most states, ACA-compliant plans cover bariatric surgeries. Unfortunately, some states with the worst obesity problems – Texas, Alabama, Arkansas, and Mississippi – don’t offer bariatric surgery coverage. This is because the Department of Health and Human Services (HHS) allowed each state to use its most popular small group health plan to define its 10 essential health benefits.

Technology: The food industry continues developing technology to reduce the calorie count of processed foods, such as low fat fries and fake meat.

Accountability: As with cigarettes smokers, ACA-compliant plans should hold the obese patient responsible for their weight. Increase their premiums, co-pays, co-insurance, and deductibles. Reward them, and other enrollees, if they keep their BMI under 25, which is considered a healthy weight.

Patients with obesity-causing diseases (e.g. Cushing’s Syndrome or hypothyroidism) would be exempt from such penalties. But the majority of obese Americans would not, since most of them are obese because of poor lifestyle choices.

Remember to send me your thoughts and questions via email, follow me on Twitter, or post your comments and questions directly on this page.

I look forward to hearing from you.

Ben