If you watch TV, you may have seen a recent surge in advertising geared toward driving lower-to middle-class taxpayers to the offices of tax preparing specialists, who — so the ads tell us — are armed with expertise on how the Affordable Care Act will affect the tax-filing process — a process that, in years past, was relatively simple for millions of wage earners.

That’s because of Obamacare’s reliance on the tax code to enforce its mandatory-insurance requirement (and on the IRS to assess penalties). The law’s complex rules and conditions mean that people accustomed to doing their own taxes will face a lot of new questions on their 1040 forms.

Bloomberg’s Megan McArdle sees a cottage industry emerging from Obamacare’s new, labyrinthine rules:

If you [had] no income outside a modest salary, and not much in the way of potential deductions such as huge mortgage interest or state tax bills, then there was really no reason to use a tax preparer. Even the mathematically challenged should, with the aid of a calculator, be able to fill out their 1040EZ forms just fine. But Obamacare has introduced a significant level of complexity into the taxes of lower-middle-class wage earners. More of them are going to need an accountant to negotiate the process — or risk owing the government hundreds of dollars because they didn’t fill out the forms correctly. The money doesn’t go to the government, of course, but in many ways this looks like a tax: Suddenly, people with simple incomes are going to need to pay a significant sum to keep themselves out of trouble with the IRS.

But for many, tax-preparing services may become harbingers of bad news: informing a lot of people who received Obamacare subsidies last year that they’ll have to pay some of that money back to the government.

“[T]he big Obamacare event of this year will not be the exchange enrollments, but tax season, when people who got too much in subsidies find out how much money they owe the government,” McArdle speculates. “Tax preparers, to judge from my Twitter feed, have been panicking for months. But now they face the Herculean job of communicating that panic to the public.”

This is the first tax year in which Obamacare’s penalties will be assessed; it’s also the first year for the IRS to step in as the enforcer of the healthcare law. The relative ease or difficulty of the tax season — especially for the many Americans who have been accustomed to taking the path of least resistance in filing their taxes and receiving refunds — may play a significant role in shaping the reform politics of GOP leaders in the new Republican-controlled Congress, who have vowed to overhaul and/or repeal the law.