Holy Cross Hospital in Fort Lauderdale will partner with the University of Miami Miller School of Medicine to start a residency program to train doctors in internal medicine — a move that could help address a shortage of physicians in South Florida.

It will be the first residency program for the 557-bed nonprofit Catholic hospital and will be expanded over the next three years to train 42 medical school graduates, said UM's Dr. Lisa Martinez, the hospital's residency program director.

The Holy Cross-UM internal medicine residency training will include instruction on helping patients manage chronic diseases such as diabetes, Martinez said. It will emphasize a team approach.

"We need to train more primary care physicians, and we need to keep them in the community," said Dr. Kenneth Homer, chief medical officer of Holy Cross Hospital.

South Florida already has begun to see an increase in patients as more people now have health insurance thanks to the U.S. Affordable Care Act, he said. "We know more are coming."

The residency program also is needed to help graduating medical students fulfill training requirements to become doctors, Homer said. More universities, such as Florida International, Florida State and Florida Atlantic, have created new medical schools, but residency programs have not grown at a pace to keep up, Homer said.

In Palm Beach County, UM helped create residency programs at West Palm Beach's John F. Kennedy Medical Center. FAU's Charles E. Schmidt College of Medicine started a residency program in internal medicine at Boca Raton Regional Hospital. Bethesda Hospital East and Delray Medical Center also participate in the residency program. But there needs to be more residency programs — a lot more, Homer said.

Already, more than 1,100 future doctors have applied for the 18 Holy Cross slots for the three-year training that will begin in July, Homer said. He expects more to apply before the inaugural class of residents are chosen this spring.

Meanwhile, 4,637 have applied for 36 slots at FAU's residency program, according to university records.

Florida ranks 42nd of the 50 states in residence programs — with 19 physicians-in-training per 100,000 population, according to the Association of American Medical Colleges. By comparison, New York has 82 medical residents and Massachusetts 84 per 100,000 population.

In addition to the internal medicine residency, Holy Cross and UM have applied to create a residency program in emergency medicine, Homer said.

Meanwhile, Weston-based Cleveland Clinic has 10 residency programs, including programs in internal medicine, plastic surgery, general surgery and cardiology. It also has 11 fellowship programs for physicians to obtain additional training after completing a residency program.

Broward Health has residencies for graduates of osteopathic medical school such as Nova Southeastern University's College of Osteopathic Medicine. Osteopaths differ from medical doctors by taking a holistic approach to treating patients while medical doctors tend to focus on symptoms.

Broward Health now wants to partner with FIU to add a separate residency program to train medical doctors in internal medicine and general surgery.

Plantation General Hospital has submitted a request to the Chicago-based Agency for Health Care Administration to transfer 200 beds to what will become a new medical campus that would include a teaching hospital and research facilities at Nova Southeastern University in Davie.

And in South Broward, the Memorial HealthCare System has been considering applying to add more residency programs. It now partners with Cleveland Clinic to offer a residency program in general surgery.

But it's a long process to win approval.

It took Holy Cross and UM nearly two years to earn final approval from the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education to start the MD residency program.

dgehrke@sunsentinel.com or Twitter @donnagehrke