The Springfield-based insurer Health New England is appealing a $2.6 million fee that it was charged under the federal Affordable Care Act. The fee is based on the health of the population an insurer covers, and Health New England says the formula used for setting the fee is unfair because it does not account for regional differences between Western Massachusetts and the rest of the state.

"We think the formula is inaccurate and unfair," said Jim Kessler, vice president and general counsel for Health New England.

The risk adjustment fee was imposed by the national health care reform law as a way for insurers that cover healthier populations to reimburse insurers that cover sicker populations. This year, the state's 16 health insurers transferred around $61 million between insurers. Blue Cross Blue Shield, the state's largest insurance company, received around $50 million of that. Health New England, which is owned by Baystate Health, was required to pay $2.6 million, which was one of the smallest payments made by an insurer.

The payment size is based on a formula used by the Massachusetts Health Connector that calculates the average health risk of the average consumer in the insurance market that covers individuals and small businesses. It then compares each insurer's members to the average, and insurers with lower-than-average risk must compensate insurers with higher-than-average risk.

But Health New England hired a consultant to do a study and used that data to argue that the formula is not fair because it does not consider regional discrepancies. In particular, Health New England says the formula is based on medical diagnoses and the amount of medical care provided. The formula finds that Western Massachusetts patients appear to be healthier than the statewide average.

But other data show that the population in Western Massachusetts is actually less healthy than the statewide average – for example, the region has higher rates of obesity, smoking, strokes and hip fractures, in addition to higher poverty rates, which often correlates to health status.

"If the Connector's application of the Massachusetts methodology is correct, Western Massachusetts is significantly healthier as a region than the rest of the Commonwealth," wrote Francis Dibble, an attorney for Health New England, in a letter to Louis Gutierrez, the executive director of the Massachusetts Health Connector. "This conclusion stands in opposition to every available health status metric comparing Western Massachusetts with the rest of the Commonwealth."

The insurer argues that the difference is that there are fewer doctors in Western Massachusetts and fewer individuals who are hospitalized. So people get fewer diagnoses and less treatment.

As a result, the insurer argues that the population it covers is incorrectly being labeled as more healthy, when in fact the population is less healthy.

"Compared with plans that operate all across the state, they have many people who are not sicker than the people we cover but who just see the doctor more often and have more diagnoses, so on paper they look sicker," Kessler said.

Health New England is asking for the return of $1.3 million, or half of the total fee.

Jason Lefferts, a spokesman for the Health Connector, said the methodology used for risk adjustment was approved by the federal government and is consistent with the methodology used nationally. The state, the federal government and insurance carriers all agreed on the formula, Lefferts said.

Lefferts said the Health New England appeal is currently under consideration and its claims are being evaluated. If the Connector rules against Health New England, the insurer can request a hearing and present evidence to a hearings officer.

If the state ultimately decides to change the payment methodology, it would happen at the earliest for plans issued for 2017. However, Lefferts said there is a larger question facing Massachusetts, which is whether the state wants to continue using its own formula for risk adjustment. Every other state has the payments calculated by the federal government, but the Massachusetts Legislature voted in 2012 to authorize the Health Connector to establish its own formula.

"One of the principal questions for us right now is whether Massachusetts should remain the only state performing independent risk adjustment, and we continue to look into how we go forward on risk adjustment in the future," Lefferts said.