Vice President Joe Biden on "The Rachael Ray Show" March 31. (Photo: The Rachael Ray Show)

If VH1's "Best Week Ever" had a politics edition, Vice President Biden would be a leading candidate this week, if not just for his ubiquitousness.

Over the past week or so, Biden talked moisturizer with Rachael Ray, made an audience blush with sex talk and snagged a couple of gigs as a commencement speaker.

As chatter surrounding a possible 2016 run for president continues to build, Biden has proven he can draw plenty of attention as the country's No. 2.

When he appeared on "The Rachael Ray Show" March 31 to make a closing pitch for the Affordable Care Act, he made a hard sell. Ray even choked up as she recounted how her brother, who had been diagnosed with an auto-immune disease, used the government health care website as a resource to find health care after being dropped by his insurance company.

But Ray's first question was one Biden couldn't have possibly anticipated: "What kind of moisturizer do you use?"

The celebrity chef and television personality set up the question by fawning over the 71-year old's skin, saying, "You have the most glowing, perfect skin of any person I've ever seen."

Biden didn't flinch, revealing that Jill Biden put him on a regimen of Clinique moisturizer for men with sunscreen. "I do whatever Jill tells me," he told her. (Thankfully, Ray didn't ask how he gets his hair to look like that. After all, it's only an hour-long show.)

Biden also revealed to Ray that Jill is a top-notch April Fools' Day prankster.

One year, she hid in the overhead compartment on Air Force Two and jumped out when Biden opened it, scaring the bejesus out of him.

Vice President Joe Biden at the U.S. Hispanic Chamber of Commerce's 2014 Legislative Summit on March 27. (Photo: Carolyn Kaster/AP)

"I mean, this is the Second Lady of the United States of America jumping out of the overhead baggage compartment," he said, still seeming a bit shocked that she actually went through with it.

In this age of Instagram and Vine, we should all feel cheated no video of the moment has surfaced.

Apparently, it's not the first time Jill got Joe.

"What I worry about when I wake up on April Fools' Day is, 'What in the hell is Jill going to do this time?'" he said, detailing her family's history of high jinx. "I am not joking. And I feel so stupid."

That inner stupid feeling might have had a resurgence on Monday when a Biden-being-Biden moment spun out of control.

He was speaking to the 94th annual convention of American Association of Community Colleges and spoke about how Jill is a community college professor at Northern Virginia Community College.

So far, so good.

But then he got cheeky, saying he sleeps "with a community college professor every night."

Uh oh.

As the laughs began, he made a very important clarification, adding, "The same one. The same one."

Vice President Joe Biden gives his Jill Biden a kiss before speaking at the American Association of Community Colleges' 94th Annual Convention on Monday. (Photo: Susan Walsh/AP)

The funny moment was immediately added to the growing list of Bidenisms we've come to expect from the vice president and garnered some lighthearted (and humanizing) media coverage.

It was a college-themed week for Biden as it was announced Monday he would be the speaker at the University of Delaware's 165th commencement on May 31. It's the fourth time the 1965 UD graduate has been the school's speaker, dating back to 1978.

Two days after the announcement, the University of South Carolina revealed Biden is also its May 9 commencement speaker.

The location of the second speech – the early primary state of South Carolina – was quickly pointed out by political watchers, already handicapping possible 2016 presidential candidates.

It was in that arena where Biden's high-profile week took a bumpy turn.

On Tuesday, a Suffolk University poll showed Biden coming in third with only 10 percent of Iowa caucus-goers favoring him over former Secretary of State Hillary Clinton, who scored 63 percent, and Sen. Elizabeth Warren, who pulled in 12 percent.

It had to sting the sitting vice president a little, especially since even "undecided" earned 12 percent, beating him by two percentage points.

Even after the poor showing, the poll helped re-ignite discussion of a possible Biden run. And by Wednesday morning, Chuck Todd, NBC News' chief White House correspondent, was on "Morning Joe" warning against selling Delaware Joe short.

"Don't underestimate Joe Biden if Hillary Clinton doesn't run. There is a lot of Democratic establishment vote that is with Hillary Clinton in a lot of these polls," Todd said. "If she were out of the race, I guarantee you Biden would be up 15 points in Elizabeth Warren in that same poll."

All in all, when Biden's head hits the pillow at Number One Observatory Circle tonight, he just might have a satisfied smile on his face as he thinks, "Best Biden Week Ever."

Vice President Joe Biden in Lithuania on March 19. (Photo: Mindaugas Kulbis/AP)

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1ncrDA5