James 'Otis' Mellenbruch talks with his daughter, Betsy Morgan, as they celebrate his 100th birthday Sunday at the Bruce McCandless Colorado State Veterans Home. Mellenbruch turns 100 today. ( Brandon Hopper / Daily Record )

Florence — Family and friends gathered Sunday at Bruce McCandless Colorado State Veterans Home to celebrate with and wish James "Otis" Mellenbruch a happy 100th birthday.

Mellenbruch's birthday is today. He was born July 7, 1914, in Walnut Township, Kan.

He was presented with many letters from politicians, including President Barack Obama, United States Sen. Michael Bennet, United States Sen. Mark Udall, Fremont County Commissioner Debbie Bell and Florence Mayor Keith Ore, who proclaimed today as Otis Mellenbruch Day in Florence.

When asked the secret to living to be 100, Mellenbruch said: "Take things as they go. Don't be pushy. Don't try to force it. My father was a great example of that. He had a dozen brothers and sisters who forced everything to happen. My father just kind of waited and let it happen. That's kind of my story."

Betsy Morgan gives her father, James 'Otis' Mellenbruch, a kiss as they celebrate his 100th birthday Sunday at the Bruce McCandless Colorado State Veterans Home. Mellenbruch turns 100 today. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record)

Mellenbruch is a father of two. His daughter, Betsy Morgan of Pueblo, and son, John Grant Mellenbruch of Golden, were both in attendance. Otis Mellenbruch has four grandsons and five great-grandchildren. He and his late wife, Virginia Mellenbruch, spent most of their 74 years of marriage living in Rye.

He said he always has enjoyed singing with his church and family and even did so on the radio.

Mellenbruch joined the Army in 1945 and served for about 19 months, according to a press release. Among his public services, Mellenbruch was the district chairman with the Fountain Boy Scouts (1960), Greater Pueblo Chamber of Commerce Board of Directors (1962), President of Pueblo Kiwanis Club (1964) and the President of Rye Chamber of Commerce (1976).

Advertisement

He also was a founding member of the American Legion in Fairview, Kan.

The press release states that Mellenbruch is proud of his grandfather, Henry Mellenbruch, who served in the Civil War with the Indiana Volunteers.

As the party went on, Mellenbruch asked his daughter: "So what happens next?"

"You're going to have cake," Morgan answered him.

"No, I mean in life," he said with a slight chuckle.

"Well," she said, "we just keep going along every day, and then next year, we have another party."