A group of caregivers, social workers, clergy and patients recently engaged in a lively but friendly exercise in downtown Allentown about how they'd like to improve wellness in a city filled with top-ranked health-care providers and untold numbers of worn-out, sick people.

Using markers and poster paper, Mike Briggs of Allentown gently scolded physicians in general, saying they too often overlook patients' needs beyond prescribing medications.

"It's easy to sit back and say, here," Briggs said, as if spilling a handful of pills on the table. If the patient is a shut-in and just needs social interaction, he added, "you're perpetuating the problem, not solving it."

Briggs, on crutches and wearing a protective boot on one foot, was there not as a policy leader or medical professional, but as a patient.

A participant in the Lehigh Valley Super-Utilizer Partnership, Briggs is one of 86 patients enrolled in a program designed to address the needs of people who constantly use the health-care system. The recent session was integral to his care, part of a program to surround patients with medical, social and spiritual support as a way to restore stability and independence to their lives. Funded largely with a three-year, $1.7 million grant through the federal Affordable Care Act, the partnership is trying to improve patients' health while reducing medical spending.

Meet some of the super-utilizers we talked with for this special report, as well as the people in the medical field working to solve the problem. (THE MORNING CALL)

As the partnership sees it, health care means more than managing diseases and fixing damaged body parts. It's also a way of helping individuals become the best they can be, no matter their health or age. For those who are chronically ill, alone and with limited incomes — a portrait of many in the super-utilizer program — that may take the medical skills of a trained health-care professional, but also the listening, counseling and supporting that can be done by social workers and clergy.

"The point is that these patients have … become so isolated in their illness, their identity is fixed upon their chronic illnesses," said Janelle Zelko, the partnership's liaison to a community talent-sharing program called Community Exchange. "They have sort of forgotten who they are, and forgotten how to have relationships and forgotten that they too have something to contribute to society."

So when Zelko met with Dennis Kreisher of Allentown recently, she saw that the patient had an unusual skill that might interest others: He makes fine miniature dollhouse furniture out of Popsicle sticks and could share that talent in the community exchange, which a few dozen super-utilizer patients have joined. Kreisher could teach a patient the art of miniature carpentry and in return, receive an equal amount of time from someone who might drive Kreisher to his appointments.

Sharing a skill would help Kreisher feel something other than beaten down by his chronic obstructive pulmonary disease.

"It would give me a good feeling to teach somebody to do something like this," he said.

That exchange of skills and services, or time-banking, works, particularly for the types of people in a super-utilizer program, Judith Lasker, of the Department of Sociology and Anthropology at Lehigh University, found in a study of Community Exchange a few years ago.

"We conclude that a sense of belonging, a dimension of social capital, is key to improved well-being and that time-banking may be particularly valuable in promoting health and belonging among older and lower-income individuals and those who live alone," Lasker and her associates wrote in the January 2011 edition of the Journal Health Promotion Practice. The key finding, she said, was that many Community Exchange members reported that their health improved as a result of their participation.

Programs such as Community Exchange do two things that would benefit anyone, not just super-utilizers, she said: They show that each person has something to offer and that others value that.

"We make the mistake of thinking that the way to improve people's health is to provide more medical services," Lasker said. "And that is only half the story."

Upbringing, environment, social networks and family connections are all important factors that shape health, she added. Medical care is important, although not the most important element to good health, she added.

"It is," she said, "the most expensive."

'Before, I felt alone'

The socialization side of health care is part of the plan developed over the past 10 years by Camden, N.J., family physician Dr. Jeffrey Brenner, the leading proponent of care for super-utilizer patients. Working with data provided by Camden hospitals, Brenner found patterns in health-care use and realized that medical care alone was not enough to bring order to the patients' lives.

To help with that, Brenner sought out people who could develop trusting relationships with patients and see them as unique individuals.

"When we put our teams together, we look for someone who is willing to go out, find someone in crisis, build a healthy relationship with them and follow through on what they say they're going to do and not enable" the patient's negative behaviors, he said.

The Lehigh Valley program, which received the grant to emulate Brenner's work in 2012, has put a premium on that side of Brenner's care model. The local partnership team includes Lehigh Valley Hospital's Community Exchange program with which Zelko works; Pennsylvanians Organized to Witness, Empower and Rebuild or POWER, a faith-based community organizing program in Allentown; Sacred Heart's parish nurses as well as Neighborhood Health Centers of the Lehigh Valley.

Hasshan Batts, a social worker who visits patients in their homes, said it's common sense to address patients' social and spiritual needs in their health care. Providing for those needs, he said, is "foundational" to patients' overall well-being.

But getting a patient like Kreisher to the point where he could participate in Community Exchange would be challenging. Kreisher has his health issues and neither a car nor a phone. His case highlights the extra steps that would have to be taken to get some patients more involved in a healthier setting.

When they do get it, some patients say this after-care is beneficial.