NEW YORK--(BUSINESS WIRE)--As the annual enrollment period for health insurance approaches, consumers facing rising prescription drug co-pays can significantly lower their out-of-pocket costs with the new app OneRx, the most robust prescription drug savings tool on the market. Launched in August, OneRx is the first tool to let Americans price shop medications at nearby pharmacies using drug- and insurer-specific pricing information across carriers. It is also the only tool that automatically amasses prescription drug coupons for immediate redemption, freeing consumers from having to search them out.

OneRx is free, HIPAA-compliant and currently available for download on iTunes and in the Google Play store. The app displays the best price for consumers with and without insurance.

“With more and more covered employees shifting to high-deductible plans with elevated co-pays, and prescription medication costs continuing their double digit increases, consumers are quickly realizing the onus is on them to find savings,” said Bryan Birch, Chairman, President and CEO of Truveris, the independent drug pricing and benefits analytics company that developed the app. “We’ve designed OneRx with these consumers in mind, creating an easy-to-use tool that not only reduces costs, but enhances transparency as prescription drug coverage becomes increasingly complex.”

Mr. Birch points to the greater prevalence of complicated hurdles imposed by insurance companies, including pricing tiers, prior authorizations and step therapies, which have all made it even more difficult for consumers to manage prescription drug benefits. OneRx helps counter this by providing automatic alerts when such restrictions surface – another unique feature – ensuring patients have the opportunity to troubleshoot such issues and understand their drug’s cost in the healthcare provider’s office, in advance of making the trip to the pharmacy. This increases adherence to treatment plans, helps patients stay healthy and lowers overall medical expenses.

OneRx is not only relevant to consumers; Truveris is seeing employers actively encourage workers to use the app to save on prescriptions. This will become increasingly urgent with the Affordable Care Act’s looming “Cadillac tax” set to penalize public and private organizations with high-cost health plans starting in 2018.

OneRx also helps uninsured and under-insured Americans by providing a prescription benefit option specifically for those paying the majority of prescription costs. The option averages $750 in savings per user annually.

About Truveris

Truveris is a leading prescription drug software and analytics company, on a mission to democratize data and access through technology. Our proprietary Software-as-a-Service platforms drive transparency and lower costs across the prescription drug ecosystem; solutions include OneRx®, RxChoice®, TruBid® and COMPSM. Based in New York, Truveris is backed by Canaan Partners, First Round Capital, New Atlantic Ventures, New Leaf Venture Partners and Tribeca Venture Partners. For more information, go to Truveris.com or LinkedIn, or contact us via Twitter or info@truveris.com.

© 2015 Truveris, Inc. All rights reserved.

All trademarks indicated above are owned by Truveris.