Topics: healthcare, Kathryn Knott, LGBT, online privacy, Philadelphia, Privacy, Social Media, Life News

When Kathryn Knott turned herself in to Philadelphia authorities earlier this week in connection with the brutal beating of two gay men, it didn’t take long for her social media trail to attract widespread attention. Aside from its casual homophobia and relentless references to drunkenness, there were also an unnerving number of disdainful references – and photographs – relating to her job as an E.R. technician.

Over the course of her timeline – which, interestingly, was deleted Friday morning as I was reading through it — Knott revealed herself to be a woman with a propensity for sharing scenes from her job. “Why would you clean your gutters in the rain?” she asked in one tweet, accompanied by an X-ray of a pelvis. “Got to pop this back in,” she bragged, regarding an X-ray of a dislocated finger. She shared images she described with, “Ya know when u put a hotdog in the microwave too long? That’s what his finger looked like,” and in which she decided, “Kid had way too much fun at lacosta last night. Swallowed a pen spring.” She admitted, “Its sick i laughed at this” [sic] over a story about an ambulance stolen with a patient inside, and confessed, “I can handle blood and vomit I CAN’T HANDLE when someone tells me they have fleas and bed bugs #disgusting #itchingfordayzzzz” and “the locals of lansdale are gross come to the ER & see for urself.”

After a brief suspension, Knox has now been officially fired from her job at Lansdale Hospital-Abington Health. The facility has also announced an investigation “related to this employee’s Twitter account for potential violations of patient privacy and our organization’s social media policy.” If that policy is similar to the posted one for Mass General, the one telling employees to “be aware that existing hospital policies apply, in particular, those pertaining to patient privacy,” the violations should be pretty clear. But how did no one at Knox’s job know what she was doing till now — and who at that hospital still is?