The evolving PA landscape presents numerous challenges for physicians and their practice managers, including: an increase in the number of medications requiring PA; PA request forms that change over time and are different by plan; patients who change insurance plans due to a change in employment or due to the ACA (Affordable Care Act) may find they need PA for long-term medications; and PA requirements that have become overall more stringent and complex. Furthermore, pharmacy data shows that when a prescription is rejected, requiring a PA, a high percentage of patients abandon therapy altogether.

Primary among physician practice concerns regarding the PA process is the sheer volume of time required of practice staff (and sometimes the physicians themselves) to manage the PA process. In addition to completing an initial PA submission, health plans often require additional information (and sometimes a resubmission on a second form), and contacting a health plan can entail long hold times and poor responsiveness. Many staff – in one study, more than 94 percent of Medical Group Practice Managers1 - find it to be a complex and frustrating experience, and highly disruptive to workflow.

"I would recommend PARx to other practices because of time – not having to be on the phone on hold, while a patient in front of me waits for my help," said Lien Liang, Medical Assistant, Bingjing Roberts, MD, PLLC, New York, NY. "Even when I would be on the phone 30 minutes to 1 hour, it didn't mean the insurance company would say yes. Often, I would wait 15 to 20 minutes just to talk to a live person. With PARx, it takes less time than that to enter the information online, knowing it is complete, and we'll often have our answer within 48 hours. During that time, I can track the progress of the PA through the Status page – all together, a very easy system to use."

PARx provides online training for physician practice staff, backed up by a customer service center staffed with health care professionals including pharmacy techs and nurses. Notes Dan Rubin, President and CEO of PARx Solutions: "Our easy to use technology is just the first step; we provide a high-touch service, with quality assurance that includes speaking directly with insurance companies on behalf of the physician practices and by so doing, saving time and resources for those practices. This is vital to improving PA approval rates; on average, up to 70 percent of PA denials are based on administrative reasons before they are even considered for a medical review.2"

PARx Solutions executives are available to media to discuss the current and future Prior Authorization landscape – and what physician practices and pharmaceutical companies need to know to meet the PA challenge. Please contact Ariane Doud, Warner Communications, (978) 283-2674, ariane@warnerpr.com.

1PARx Survey, New England Medical Group Managers Association Conference, March, 2013

2Source: Trivium Health, Inc.

About PARx Solutions

PARx Solutions helps physician practices meet a growing challenge: medications requiring prior authorization in order to be covered by their patients' insurance plans. PARx provides practices with the ability to submit prior authorization requests quickly and accurately, leading to higher approval rates for the medications physicians believe best for their patients. The PARx Prior Authorization Support System ('PASS') is free to prescribers, and incorporates a secure, "easy to use" web portal, with a call center staffed with healthcare professionals and reimbursement specialists to interact with managed care plans on prescribers' behalf, supporting all of their PA needs.

For more information, please visit www.parxsolutions.com

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20160420/357891LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/meeting-the-growing-prior-authorization-challenge-for-physician-practices-parx-solutions-300254741.html

SOURCE PARx Solutions

Related Links

http://www.parxsolutions.com