A Federal New Jersey Judge has ruled that, PHH Mortgage Corporation must face a proposed class action lawsuit accusing it of racketeering by charging excessive amounts for insurance homeowners were forced to buy.

U.S. District Court Judge, Noel Hillman, rejected an argument by PHH that the lawsuit was barred by the “filed-rate” doctrine, which prohibits legal challenges to insurance rates that have been filed with and approved by state regulators.

“While courts in some circuits have dismissed similar lawsuits based on the filed-rate doctrine, the principle should not be used to shelter mortgage servicers from liability for provable fraud,” Hillman said.

The lawsuit is one of several across the country accusing mortgage servicers of forcing insurance on homeowners, which increases the servicer’s profits, if a homeowner’s own policy lapses.

The lawsuit said Mount Laurel, New Jersy based PHH entered into an agreement in 1999 to exclusively use New York based Assurant Inc. and its affiliates for force-placed hazard and wind insurance for PHH customers.

“In return, Assurant agreed to pay PHH an “expense reimbursement” which purported to cover expenses incurred by PHH in connection with the force-placed insurance,” the lawsuit said. The payments covered salaries and benefits for PHH employees and served no other purpose other than to provide kickbacks.

The lawsuit said homeowners were charged excessive insurance premiums because they included the costs of PHH’s unwarranted profits. Mortgage contracts only allow servicers to pass on actual costs of insurance provided.

Assurant’s expense payments attracted the scrutiny of New York state regulators in 2011. In a 2013 consent order with the New York Department of Financial Services, Assurant agreed to stop the payments and pay a $14 million penalty to resolve claims of conflicts of interest in its force-placed insurance business.

Assurant settled without admitting or denying the charges.

The New Jersey lawsuit sought damages for breach of contract and violations of the U.S. Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act. It accused PHH of using the mails and wires to mislead borrowers and defraud them into paying inflated insurance charges.

In a motion to dismiss filed in October 2015, lawyers for PHH claim that numerous courts are dismissing cases based on the filed-rate doctrine.

“In a long line of cases, courts have found that consumers have no legal right to dispute rates that have been approved by a government agency,” the lawyers said.

Judge Hillman rejected that argument.

“While other circuits have accepted the filed-rate defense, courts in the 3rd Circuit have found it does not apply because plaintiffs are not challenging rates but rather the lenders alleged scheme of profiting from unjustified charges,” Hillman said.

The case is Burroughs et al v. PHH Mortgage Corp, U.S. District Court, New Jersey District, No. 15-cv-6122.

Source: Case against mortgage lender over excessive insurance fees moves

Join the Discussion