Buy Photo Samuel Jedo, then a first grader at Edmunds Elementary, receives a bag of food through the BackPack Program to take home on Thursday, Oct. 11, 2012. (Photo: Rodney White/Register file photo)Buy Photo

This month, the Food Bank of Iowa will open new school pantries at Lincoln and East high schools here in Des Moines, plus four others outside Polk County, helping kids feed themselves and their families. We will expand our BackPack Program™ to seven new schools, providing kids with the food they need over the weekend. These new programs add to 14 school pantries, 139 BackPack™ schools, and 10 summer meal sites, which began this past summer. We’re working diligently to end childhood hunger in Iowa, but we cannot do it alone.

Still, one in five Iowa kids does not have enough food.

During this holiday season, each of us must consider how we can work together to solve hunger. Our nation has plenty of food with which to feed people in need. Do we have the will to make that food count?

Hunger persists in our cities, suburbs, small towns and rural communities. The new programs we add this month are a small part of a continuing effort across Iowa and America. The Food Bank of Iowa works with about 400 partner agencies in our service area: soup kitchens, food pantries, homeless shelters and more. We are connected with seven other food banks in the state, serving all 99 counties. The Feeding America network serves all 50 states through 200 member food banks, including the Food Bank of Iowa. Our collaborative efforts are not enough.

The ball is rolling. A coalition of nonprofit and government leaders has created the Partnership for a Hunger Free Polk County. The nationwide Vote to End Hunger campaign launched here in Des Moines in October.

The spending bill Congress passed in December includes multiple items that help us do our jobs: tax deductions for food donations, support for a USDA program that distributes American-made foods to providers like us, expanded funding for summer electronic benefits transfer programs, and tax credits that help the working poor. These measures are not enough.

Our children are the most vulnerable members of our society, and it is our responsibility to ensure their most essential needs are met. We must feed our kids. The Food Bank of Iowa, our partners and our collaborators are all dedicated to this mission. We cannot succeed without your support.

Jeff Rommel (Photo: Special to the Register)

Join me in calling for expanded support for government and nonprofit action to end childhood hunger in Iowa in 2016. Visit www.foodbankiowa.org to get involved.

JEFF ROMMELL is chair of the board of directors for Food Bank of Iowa. Contact: jrommel@foodbankiowa.org.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1R2Feft