For Lubna Ismail, president of a Cliffside Park home health aide business, time is crucial. If she can't set up potential recruits with a client right away, they might sign on with someone else.

Don smith/staff photographer Arlinda Cocoro, a home health aide with the Right at Home agency, helping Bob and Rosa Cameron in their Edgewater apartment.

"When you're ready to hire, sometimes they've already taken a position with another agency," said Ismail, a Leonia resident who has been running a Right at Home franchise for three years. "It's like, who can get to them first?"

Home health aides work with the elderly and the disabled, assisting them with basic tasks like bathing and dressing and performing limited clinical duties, including checking vital signs. In New Jersey and across the country, an aging population means that home health aides are in greater demand than ever.

But unlike compensation for other sought-after workers, wages for home health aides are underwhelming, making it difficult to attract new talent. Although there are more than 30,000 health aides working in the Garden State, agency owners like Ismail are always hustling to keep their rosters filled.

"You can never have enough caregivers," Ismail said.

While Ismail says she is able to meet her clients' needs, other local agency owners aren't as lucky. In the New York metropolitan area, there are more than 9,000 unfilled home health aide positions, according to research provided to Bergen Community College by Economic Modeling Specialists International. The gap is expected only to worsen, as the elderly population grows and aides themselves age. Experts are worried that there simply won't be enough younger aides — especially women, who make up the bulk of the industry — to replace those who retire.

"With workers aging out of being able to provide care and not enough women going into this field, it's a real concern because this is what is making it harder and harder for agencies as well as consumers to find workers," said Deane Beebe, public education and media director for PHI, formerly the Paraprofessional Healthcare Institute, based in the Bronx.

And once agencies do find workers, it can be hard to keep them. Beebe said turnover is high, with about one in two aides leaving the industry each year.

Ismail said that she works hard to prevent turnover by making "perfect matches" between caregivers and clients, taking account of language skills, cultural backgrounds and caregiver expertise.

One of the first caregivers Ismail hired is still with her company. Bertha Abreau, 53, said she really enjoys her job because she loves talking with people. The elderly she cares for, she said, "have good stories." She marvels at the things they remember, even the patients with dementia.

"I find myself transported to their time," she said.

Plenty of assignments

Abreau, a single mother, also likes her flexible schedule, which allows her to spend time with her two teenage children after school. And, as you'd expect with an in-demand profession, she never worries about being out of work.

"Even if you don't make a lot of money," she said, "you always have work."

But not everyone shares Abreau's emphasis on fulfillment and flexibility over compensation. The relatively low pay earned by health aides — $10.70 is their median hourly wage in New Jersey — is a major reason they don't stay in their jobs.

"You hear time and time again aides saying they love their work, they love their clients, but they just can't afford it because they can't afford to feed their own families," Beebe said.

Abreau's hourly compensation is 80 cents higher than the state median, and she said that is enough, at least when combined with child support payments from her ex-husband.

She also relies on Medicaid for health insurance, which makes her part of a telling trend. According to PHI, nearly half of direct care workers — higher-paid nursing assistants in addition to home health aides — are on some type of public assistance, including Medicaid as well as nutrition assistance, in New Jersey, New York and Pennsylvania.

Why don't New Jersey agencies scrambling for workers just increase compensation to attract and retain more recruits? Industry leaders say they'd like to, but their hands are often tied because thousands of clients rely on Medicaid to pay for home health services.

"Home health has historically been treated like the poor stepchild in health care. It has not traditionally received sufficient reimbursement," said Todd Brower, a partner with the Newark law firm of McCarter & English. Brower is counsel to the Home Care Association of New Jersey, which represents home care and hospice agencies in the state. Leaders of the group say Medicaid reimbursements have become a bigger problem in recent years, dropping below the once-standard $15.50 an hour as the state moved Medicaid beneficiaries into managed care plans run by companies like Aetna and UnitedHealthcare.

"We would love to be able to offer our aides more compensation. That's one of our largest concerns right now... [but] those reimbursement rates are low, which then creates the inability for the agency to have a lot of discretion in terms of reimbursement and payroll," said Chrissy Buteas, president and CEO of the Home Care Association.

In an email, Ward Sanders, a spokesman for the New Jersey Association of Health Plans, played down the impact of Medicaid reimbursements on home health aide wages.

Sanders said it's important to look at "how much of the managed care payment is passed along to the home health aide by the agency," adding that an agency's efficiency and other factors affect caregivers' compensation.

Home health aide agencies that don't rely on Medicaid reimbursements face their own hurdles increasing pay.

Chris Capobianco, owner of a Teaneck-based franchise of the Home Instead Senior Care network, says he pays his caregivers significantly more than the state average, but he can go only so high. The customers Capobianco serves typically pay $20 to $23 an hour for a health aide's assistance.

"The margins with which we work off are very small. That's reality," Capobianco said. He added that he worries about how to keep rates affordable to clients, when future requirements under the Affordable Care Act may force him to offer health insurance to some employees, increasing his costs.

What happens under ACA isn't something Capobianco and other agency owners can control. But Buteas said her organization is working on at least one way to ease headaches for agency owners and attract more potential recruits: speeding up the certification process.

In New Jersey, home health aides must have more than 70 hours of training and be certified by the state Board of Nursing before they are assigned to clients through an agency. While plenty of organizations and schools offer home health aide training, including Bergen Community College, Buteas said that once candidates are up for state certification, they hit a bottleneck. It can take up to three months for the board to grant certification.

Delayed paydays

For prospective health aides, "to wait even weeks to have a paycheck coming in is too long when they could go somewhere else and start working immediately," Buteas said.

Buteas said her group is "working collaboratively" with the state board to address the certification delays, and a spokesman for the New Jersey Division of Consumer Affairs said some improvements have already been made in the certification process. That includes, he said, a change allowing the Board of Nursing to accept applications and request information directly from individuals applying for licenses. Until last spring, the board communicated only with school training programs, not individual applicants.

Overall, the staffing problems haven't kept national chains from moving forward with expansion plans to meet growing demand.

Interim Healthcare, a Florida-based national home care network that has seven offices in New Jersey, is scheduled to open a new branch in Ridgewood later this month. Right at Home, the chain that Ismail franchises with, plans to open eight new offices in New Jersey, including branches in Clifton and West Milford.

Despite the talent squeeze, Right at Home's top executives say they're confident the chain will attract new workers, thanks to incentives like professional development opportunities and recognition for great work.

"We've surveyed the caregivers to see what's important to them," said Eric Little, vice president for franchise development. "Pay is important, [but] the most important thing to them is to do something that makes them feel like they're making a difference."

Offering training and recognition is a strategy stressed by Right at Home's competitor, Home Instead, as well. Andrea Sussman, who owns franchises in Passaic and Morris counties, gives her workers rewards for everything from taking last-minute shifts to getting unsolicited praise from clients' families.

What some health aides appreciate most, however, is a personal touch.

Amanda LaStella, 29, who works for Sussman, received a gift card and a handwritten note from the company after LaStella's mother received a breast-cancer diagnosis.

"They're good about caring for you," LaStella said. "It's not a fake thing. ... They make you want to work for them. They treat you like family."

New Jersey home health aides, by the numbers

Total in the state: 30,930 (as of 2013)

Minimum hours of training required: 76

Median hourly wage: $10.70

Average annual wages: $22,680

Source: PHI

Fewer women, more jobs

Home health aides are part of a larger group known as direct care workers, which also includes nursing assistants as well as personal care assistants who don’t perform clinical tasks. The majority of these workers are women age 25 to 54, but the current growth of this labor pool, experts say, isn’t enough to meet industry demand.

The number of new direct care workers needed from 2010 to 2020 is expected to increase by 1.6 million, a jump of 48 percent.

The number of women age 25 to 54 projected to enter the workforce in that period is fewer than 613,000, an increase of just 1 percent.

In the past, the women’s labor pool experienced far greater growth, surging 14 percent from 1988 to 1998.

Source: PHI