As more people make the switch to gluten-free over false claims the diet will make them healthier, those who are forced to eat gluten-free may soon be able to switch to a normal diet. That’s because researchers from the University of Alberta in Canada have developed a supplement people with celiac disease can take to counter the effects of their condition. In other words, someday soon, they’ll be able to emphatically tell their server, “Bring me the pasta! And can I please have more bread?”

Made from the yolk of chicken eggs, the supplement was developed by Hoon Sunwoo, an associate professor in the Faculty of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical Sciences. It works by preventing the absorption of the protein gliadin, which is found in wheat, oats, rye, and other grains, and is a component of gluten. “This protein binds with gluten in the stomach and helps to neutralize it, therefore providing defense to the small intestine, limiting the damage gliadin causes, ” Sunwoo said in a statement. “It is our hope that this supplement will improve the quality of life for those who have celiac disease and gluten intolerance.”

Celiac disease is an autoimmune disorder that causes the immune system to respond to gluten and subsequently attack the villi that line the small intestine, according to the Celiac Disease Foundation. These small, fingerlike projections are responsible for absorbing nutrients from food, but can be damaged or destroyed by the immune response to gluten — resulting in overall poor nutrient absorption. Other symptoms of the hereditary disease include nausea, bloating, and loose bowel movements.

One in 100 people worldwide have celiac disease, and over 2.5 million Americans go about their day without knowing they have the condition. Without treatment, people with celiac disease put themselves at risk of developing other autoimmune disorders, such as type 1 diabetes and multiple sclerosis.

The supplement, which Sunwoo created with Jeong Sim, a retired professor from the Faculty of Agricultural, Life, and Environmental Sciences, is expected to undergo efficacy trials within a year. If it proves effective, it could be brought to the Canadian market within three years. “Our groundbreaking new health product has the potential to offer more dietary freedom, and overall, a better quality of life for gluten-intolerant people,” said Claire Perry, communications director for Vetanda Group, which is partnering with the scientists to produce the supplement.

While people with celiac disease have more gluten-free options than ever before, there really isn’t anything better than biting into a hot slice of pizza loaded with gluten. People with celiac disease may soon discover what it’s like.