Aspen Meadows residents complain federal rules ignored near Magnolia Road

David Bahr finds bullets in a tree cut down by gunshots near a trail he, his wife and many others use in the Roosevelt National Forest near their Aspen Meadows subdivision off Magnolia Road. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Shooting on national forest lands is permissible if you: Are at least 150 yards from a residence, building, campsite, developed recreation area or occupied area. Are not shooting across or on a national forest system road or adjacent body of water. Are not shooting in any manner or place where any person or property is exposed to injury or damage as a result of such discharge. Are not firing any tracer bullet or incendiary ammunition. Also banned is using explosives, including exploding targets. Violations are punishable by fines up to $5,000 for an individual or $10,000 for a legal entity, or up to six months in jail. For more info: http://1.usa.gov/1n7Uo0r

Summer is almost here, and the hills are alive -- with the sound of gunfire. And some high country residents have had enough already.

People in the Aspen Meadows subdivision of unincorporated Boulder County, east of Magnolia Road, say recreational shooting on nearby U.S. Forest Service land is becoming at the very least a serious nuisance. And they believe it now poses a significant safety issue.

"Every time we run into people shooting, they are not following the Forest Service guidelines on safe shooting, such as shooting across trails, not shooting at targets, shooting at trees, shooting into the air, shooting either explosive or incendiary targets," said Howard Kaushansky, a software entrepreneur who lives in the Aspen Meadows area.

Advertisement

Anecdotal reports that the issue is heating up are supported by data from the Boulder County Sheriff's Office. Its dispatch records show that complaints in District 2, the southwestern mountain district of the county, were up to 49 in May, from just 11 in May 2013.

Tales of near-misses, told by hikers, runners in training and others trying to enjoy recreating at altitude, are common. Particularly on weekends, gunfire regularly echoes off rocky outcrops. Trees are used as target practice — until they're shot in half.

On May 4, the 3.6-acre Peewink Fire off Forest Service Road 332 near Nederland was sparked by someone shooting at a homemade exploding target, which is not permitted on Forest Service land.

"I am sure -— I am certainly hopeful -— that those shooting certainly don't intend to have bullets come near anybody," Kaushansky said. "I do believe it's inadvertent. But it does happen. I have seen elderly couples on the ground, because they hear shooting and believe it to be close. They are afraid to move, are afraid to hike any further."

A couple of weeks ago, his wife, Colleen Cannon, was riding one of her horses, the second trailing behind, in the area of Forest Service Road 359 when her leisurely equine meditation was shattered by nearby gunfire.

"I hear shooting and think, 'I better get off this trail,' but by the time I get off — I couldn't get off fast enough," Cannon said. "I can hear things flying through the trees. One horse takes off, and I was wondering how this was happening."

Bullets whizzing so close, she said, is "a weird feeling; it goes really fast and cuts through the air and it's a really weird sound; the horse hears it before I do."

Cannon, who agrees with neighbors that the problem is becoming worse, said she knows recreational shooters have their rights, that many she has met are "nice people," but that those who don't follow Forest Service shooting guidelines are putting lives at risk, "and that blows it, for everybody."

"The shooters have deadly weapons, but my horse is not going to kill anybody and the hikers aren't going to kill anybody," she added.

'The only choice is to back away'

David Bahr, a climate scientist and photographer who lives in Aspen Meadows, said the shooting is endangering people trying to use the Forsythe Canyon Trail leading to Gross Reservoir, that it imperils mountain bikers on the popular Blue Dot trail, and that shooters are also firing across other roads and trails. Unlike Cannon, he admits he hasn't tried talking to any whom he might encounter.

"In all honesty, I feel a little bullied," Bahr said. "I'm not the one holding the guns."

Because target shooters typically wear mufflers to protect their ears, Bahr said, "It doesn't matter how loud you yell. They can't hear you, so the only choice is to back away."

Sensing "a certain amount of cluelessness" to the fact that people are recreating — and make their homes — in the area where they are shooting, Bahr said, "Some people clearly don't know, and others just don't care."

The Boulder Rifle Club didn't return a call seeking comment.

Those complaining about the issue theorize that their area is increasingly popular for shooting because the Forest Service has closed down several other areas in the county, compressing the available territory where it is still permissible. Just one month ago, the Forest Service closed areas in James Canyon, Lefthand Canyon, Mount Alto and Sugarloaf due to safety concerns linked to flood damage.

And in October 2012, shooting was banned in the vicinity of West Magnolia Road, west of the Peak to Peak highway and along western Magnolia Road south of Nederland.

Heidi Prentup, a spokeswoman for the Boulder County Sheriff's Office, acknowledged receiving several emails from residents in that area, and she said deputies have responded to numerous calls.

"If we contact somebody who is shooting in an area that is closed, they are receiving summonses for violating the closure," Prentup said. As for people shooting in allowed areas but in violation of Forest Service regulations, she said that would be addressed by the Forest Service.

Officials seeking solutions

Tammy Williams, a spokeswoman for the Forest Service's Boulder Ranger District, said, "We're investigating the concerns with our law enforcement and the Boulder County sheriff.

"And, in addition to the investigation of the concerns, we're evaluating the situation and options for addressing the conflict, such as increased signing around enclosed areas, doing more education efforts to make sure all users are aware of the rules and regulations, and they are also out there patrolling."

She agreed that flood-related closures have forced many outdoor recreationalists into closer proximity with one another in Front Range forest lands. In the Boulder Ranger District, she said, there are 39 roads and 14 trails now closed.

The Roosevelt National Forest, she said, "is one of the most visited national forests in the nation, and since we're so close the Denver area and Boulder County area, and we have the wildland-urban interface, we are kind of prone to conflicts like this, especially when closures occur."

Williams said the Forest Service does its best to respond to calls as quickly as possible, and she admitted that due to factors such as travel time, mountainous terrain and windy roads, "Some days that is adequate, and some days it is not."

Kaushansky said he believes the interests of area residents should be given high priority.

"That's something that I certainly want to chat with the commissioners about, this notion of why doesn't the safety of Boulder County residents take precedence over the desires of those who want to shoot?

"We're simply not living in the same county we were living in 40 or 50 years ago."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327 or brennanc@dailycamera.com.