<p>CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR The Old Kranks Bicycle Club formed in 1986. The members gather five days a week and ride distances of five to 25 miles.</p>

SHARE CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Michael Lohnberg (left) talks with members of the Old Kranks Bicycle Club. The members gather five days a week and ride distances of five to 25 miles. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Otto Sanders wears a rearview mirror as Old Kranks Bicycle Club members prepare for a ride. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR Nancy Weiss and Carl Lustig, wearing a club jersey, of the Old Kranks Bicycle Club, listen to the plan for a bicycle ride. CHUCK KIRMAN/THE STAR The Old Kranks Bicycle Club formed in 1986. The members gather five days a week and ride distances of five to 25 miles.

By Alicia Doyle

When Carl Lustig joined the Old Kranks Bicycle Club in his mid-70s to lose weight, he dropped 25 pounds while building camaraderie with fellow members.

They gather several days a week for morning rides followed by coffee and conversation.

"I wasn't a cyclist," recalled Lustig, 77, a member for three years who discovered the club through a newsletter published by the Goebel Adult Community Center in Thousand Oaks.

"I lost 25 pounds just riding," continued Lustig, of Westlake Village, who rides about 65 miles a week with the club. "I do it because it's a great group of people and I love riding. I encourage anybody to start cycling. I did it when I was 75 ... and it's really a lot of fun."

Lustig was among about 25 riders who recently gathered in the Gelson's parking lot on Townsgate Road in Westlake Village, where members meet at 8:30 a.m. on Mondays, Wednesdays, Fridays, Saturdays and Sundays.

"There are lots of different levels of ability," said Leni Field, 70, of Westlake, who joined the club 17 years ago.

The cyclists leave the parking lot as a group and split up into smaller groups as the ride goes on.

"There are people that like to ride in a casual pace and there are the guys who used to do some racing that like to get in a pace line," said Field, adding that some prefer endurance rides where speed isn't an issue. "Most of the people here like to ride at a moderate pace of 11 to 13 miles per hour."

The rides vary from 5 to 25 miles, mostly on paved roads, throughout Westlake Village.

Members on Wednesdays also participate in "away rides" that take several hours, such as a recent ride from the Camarillo Airport to Neptune's Net on Pacific Coast Highway toward Malibu.

"For someone who hasn't been on a bike in a while, there's somebody who can usually ride with them," Field said. "And if they make known the fact that they're not experienced or they want someone to ride with them, we will always find someone to ride with them."

After rides in Westlake Village, members meet for coffee and conversation at Gelson's.

"Gelson's is very good to us because we meet outside after rides for coffee under their umbrellas," said George Garris, 68, of Westlake Village, a member for four years.

Steve Forman, a member for seven years, said he especially enjoys the socializing aspect.

"We're all a similar age with similar problems ? family and medical," said Forman, 70, of Newbury Park.

Jim Husk, 66, agreed the camaraderie is a draw.

"It's really a nice bunch of people. We're also getting together for a picnic this month and having a holiday dinner in December," said Husk, of Newbury Park.

The Old Kranks began in 1986 with two members: Herb Berger, of Thousand Oaks, and Jules Meisler, a local resident who died last year.

The two rode together until word of mouth grew the club to about 100 members.

"The aim of the club was to get seniors out exercising with a group," said Berger, who is now in his 80s.

The club is open to those 50 and older, although there have been some members in their 40s.

"The idea was that we'd ride together as a group and take care of one another," Berger said. "That was really the driving force behind the club ? to get exercise and make sure they're out there with other seniors and enjoy the fresh air and the riding experience."

Membership dues are $10 a year. Call 381-2744 for more information.