Flimp Communications, http://www.flimpcommunications.net/, a leader in digital HR and employee benefits communications announced today the availability of a complimentary explainer video to help organizations educate their employees about the new IRS 1095 tax regulations mandated by the Affordable Care Act (ACA). The 1095-C animated educational video is being offered free of charge to interested employers and benefits consultants with the option to distribute it by email within a mobile-compatible interactive video postcard. Flimp is also making available a detailed 1095 FAQ document, which answers most of the questions employees may have about the 1095-C form and tax-reporting requirements.

The complimentary 1095-C employee video, FAQ and video postcard example can be accessed here: http://www.flimpcommunications.net/form-1095-c-video-instructions.

“We specialize in creating affordable employee communications video content and digital solutions for employers and benefits consultants. For employee benefits, our video postcard email campaigns generate over 75 percent engagement rates,” observed Wayne Wall, CEO of Flimp Media. “The 1095-C video and video postcards are an easy-to-implement solution for employers to address the many questions and concerns that employees will undoubtedly have about the new IRS 1095 forms and reporting requirements.”

The free 1095-C employee overview video and FAQ are available to employers and benefits brokers for a limited time with options available to license an unbranded version and/or to implement a trackable video email postcard campaign to educate employees.

About Flimp Media and Flimp Communications

Flimp Media, Inc., is a video and multimedia communications company with offices in Boston, MA, Denver, CO, New York, NY, and Manchester, UK. Flimp Communications, a division of Flimp Media, provides employee benefits and HR video communications solutions to employers, benefits brokers and carriers. Customers include many Fortune 500 companies, SMBs, technology startups, healthcare and financial services companies, universities and nonprofits. Our award-winning content communications software platform enables users to create, distribute and track interactive video players, postcards and microsites without any programming or IT resources for marketing, communications and online training. For more information please visit flimp.net and flimpcommunications.net.