First-term MT State Representative Matthew Monforton (R - Bozeman) says he's not running for a second term.

Monforton championed several conservative causes at the 2015 Legislature, carrying bills to prevent the implementation of the federal Affordable Care Act (also known as ObamaCare) and to call for a federal Constitutional Convention to add an amendment to the U.S. Constitution to mandate a balanced federal budget, among others.

Monforton is a also lawyer who has aggressively fought campaign finance restrictions.

He said Friday his work representing Republican groups in a federal lawsuit to eliminate Montana's open primary system is taking a lot of his time.

But he also said people nominated and elected in the party don't share Republican stances. He said -- and has argued in the court case -- that Democrats are crossing over into Republican primaries, helping to nominate liberals instead of the candidates actual Republicans would want.

"Until we fix our unconstitutional primary system, Democrats are going to continue to corrupt our primary election and elect nominees who purport to be Republicans who really don't represent the majority of people in the party," he said. "Some people refer to them as liberal Republicans. The reality is many of them are not Republicans to begin with. They're people who identify as Democrats and consider themselves Democrats, but it's during times in which they can influence Republican primaries, they often cross over and do exactly that."

Asked for examples of such wayward Republicans, Monforton named U.S. Rep. Ryan Zinke and Attorney General Tim Fox.

He cited their support for the Flathead Water Compact.

Zinke told MTN Friday that he wished Monforton "fair winds and following seas in his retirement."

Zinke did not directly offer support for the compact Friday. He said legislation to implement the compact (supported this year by the Montana Legislature in a bill signed by Gov. Steve Bullock) is a long way from the House floor. He acknowledged that the compact is a contentious issue, pitting neighbor against neighbor, and Montanans should continue to work toward a solution.

Zinke also said that he'd welcome a challenge from Monforton in his re-election to the U.S. house next year.

Monforton is the second Montana House Republican this week to forgo re-election. Three-term MT Rep. Christy Clark (R-Choteau) is taking a position with the Montana Department of Agriculture and not seeking re-election.