Prepare yourself. Pop sensation Miley Cyrus is turning 21, and MTV is observing the occasion by programming an eight-hour celebration with Cyrus as host.

The programming schedule, which will include the original special "21 Candles: MTV Moments," kicks off at 11 a.m. Saturday on cable 39. At 11:30 a.m., the cable channel will re-air the docu-film "Miley: The Movement Deluxe Edition" featuring new commentary from the "What will she do next?" birthday girl before she introduces and hosts two of her favorite MTV shows, "Awkward" and "Snooki and JWOWW." The "21 Candles" special will repeat at 6:30 p.m.

Login required We have used your information to see if you have a subscription with us. So far we have not found one. If you feel you are currently subscribed please click on the button to attempt to find your account. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now. Back Thank you for reading and relying on TulsaWorld.com for your news and information. You have now viewed your allowance of free articles. Login

You must login to view the full content on this page. Screen Name or Email Password Forgot? Remember me on this computer Login Screen Name or Email Now I remember! Need an account? Create one now.

Throughout the day, Smilers who tweet birthday wishes to #HappyBirthdayMiley or post Instagram video messages will have the chance to appear on the network throughout the celebration.

Fans will also see the recording artist perform on Sunday's "American Music Awards" airing live at 7 p.m. on ABC, channel 8.

And she launches her 38-city "Bangerz" tour on Feb. 14, 2014, including a stop in Tulsa on March 13.

Tickets for the March 13 show went on sale recently at bokcenter.com.

Fans join Underwood for 'Do Re Mi' singalong video

Mike Tompkins and Chester See join Oklahoma's country music star Carrie Underwood and the cast of "The Sound of Music Live" in an a cappella version of "Do Re Mi" that includes video submitted by fans around the world. And it's really good.

NBC conducted the contest to promote NBC's upcoming special airing live 7-10 p.m. Dec. 5 on channel 2, cable 9. Checotah's multi-award-winning recording artist Underwood stars as Maria in the role originated by Julie Andrews with "True Blood's" Stephen Moyer playing Capt. Georg Von Trapp (originally played by Christopher Plummer).

You can get a preview when the network airs "The Making of the Sound of Music Live" at 8 p.m. Wednesday, also on channel 2, cable 9.

'Biggest Loser' helps Moore tornado victims

"The Biggest Loser" contestants pay it forward for Moore tornado victims on Tuesday.

The contestants, including Oklahoma's David Jones on the Red Team, will compete in a special food drive challenge that will benefit tornado victims in the Oklahoma City suburb struck by tornados May 20. One unnamed contestant has a special connection to that town, according to NBC, which airs the reality weight-loss series.

For the challenge, the contestants have to race to load boxes of Thanksgiving turkeys, cranberries, green beans and yams into trucks. The winning team gets a holiday dinner shared at the ranch with loved ones flown in for the celebration.

One player also gets encouragement from his trainer to talk to his family about a long-kept secret, and the show catches up with one of season 14's child ambassadors, Sunny, plus one contestant finds a special way to honor a loved one who is no longer here. Two players hit milestones, including being the first to lose 100 pounds at the ranch.

On last Tuesday's episode, Jones, a 43-year-old from Edmond, lost a 17 pounds, dropping from 334 to 317 pounds.

From the blogs

TVtype