Editorial: Round 2 for NY SAFE Act

THE ISSUE:

New York's strong gun control law has a few kinks that need fixing.

THE STAKES:

This won't happen if the only thing opponents of the NY SAFE Act will accept is repeal.

The legal and political battles over New York's SAFE Act aren't over. Gun rights activists plan to press on with a lawsuit that mostly lost in the first round, while their allies in the Legislature are itching for another vote.

This all might make for fine election year political theater and lucrative fund-raising pitches. But unless the legal appeals play out unexpectedly, this is all going to be a waste of time — and a waste of an opportunity.

More Information To comment: tuletters@timesunion.com or at http://blog.timesunion.com/opinion

We're reminded of the ongoing battle in Congress over the Affordable Care Act. Republicans have waged a ceaseless campaign against it, putting Democrats so much on the defensive that there is little hope of revisiting the law with an eye toward fixing any flaws and improving it.

The fight over the NY SAFE Act threatens to become New York's version of that farce. Gov. Andrew Cuomo isn't about to give up on one of his signature accomplishments. Nor are Democrats, with a solid Assembly majority, likely to reopen the overall discussion on the law.

Nor should they. The NY SAFE Act's goal was fundamentally right — to stem the proliferation in New York of semiautomatic weapons and high-capacity magazines that can turn an individual into a one-man killing machine. The law in many ways could be a model nationally, if the country was serious about wanting to try to prevent another Columbine or Sandy Hook Elementary.

That's not to say the law doesn't have its problems. U.S. District Court Judge William M. Skretny, ruling last week in a case brought by the New York State Rifle & Pistol Association, various sportsmen's groups and individuals, largely upheld the law but found the limit on how many bullets can legally be loaded into a gun — seven — to be arbitrary.

That's also one of the law's thornier points among gun owners, many of whom possess firearms that don't qualify in any way as assault weapons but hold more than seven rounds as standard issue. Critics make a fair point in saying that only law-abiding people are going to honor the seven-round limit; criminals will use all the bullets they can in the exactly same guns. Nor are those who break the law likely to be held accountable until after they've committed some far worse crime. So this provision isn't really about effective gun control; it's about punishing people a little more after the fact.

And the absurdity of the provision only encourages disdain for the law.

As we have said before, the law also allows excessive government secrecy, putting such a tight lid on public information about registrations that the public has no meaningful way to tell if the law is working or not.

The Legislature can fix these flaws in 2014 — and not rush the legislation through like it did a year ago. That, too, only fostered disrespect for the act.

But this is only likely to happen if gun activists and their allies in the Legislature acknowledge that the NY SAFE Act is, by and large, here to stay. If not — if this is really about engaging in political theater — then the debate will be nothing more than a lot of sound and fury, accomplishing nothing.