Urgent:

Do You Support Dennis Michael Lynch for the GOP Nomination? Vote Here Now

Vote Now:

Which Potential GOP Candidate Would You Support in 2016?

Urgent:

Who Should the GOP Nominate in 2016? Vote Here Now

The presidential campaign of 2016 will have a fresh face with Dennis Michael Lynch. At age 45, at least one publication said Lynch brought the looks and youth of a John Kennedy-like candidate to the race. Many may not recognize the name, but generally will know the face. Here are eight facts about the political background of potential 2016 GOP presidential hopeful Dennis Michael Lynch.His presidential bid website makes no pretense: "Lynch is a strong believer and advocate of the free enterprise system. He entered the computer industry in his 20s and was named an Ernst & Young Entrepreneur of the Year in 2000 . He is the first to add that he has created more jobs than Rand Paul, Ted Cruz, or Ben Carson office combined."On why he would like the nation's top job: As Lynch told Fox News Channel , "I'm absolutely in love with my country, I'm in love with the American people."Lynch's father, a Vietnam veteran, suffered from post-traumatic stress disorder and alcoholism. His father's plight made Lynch a staunch supporter of veterans' rights.Lynch believes his leadership, in business, as well as a accomplished filmmaker makes him uniquely qualified to lead a nation threatened by illegal immigration and a national debt approaching what he calls "economically damaging levels."His family lost health care insurance because of Obamacare. "I will work tirelessly to repeal Obamacare and replace it with healthcare reform that moves toward less government control and more individual empowerment," Lynch said. From Lynch’s Facebook page , his thoughts on Martin Luther King Day, 2015: "Today is Martin Luther King Jr. Day and I have to believe the man is rolling over in his grave. He was a brave man who did brave things at a time when being brave was not easy. Having recently visited Chicago and Detroit, it's hard for me to believe that MLK would approve of President Obama."Lynch plans to cut waste in the government: "I will hand pick a group of accountants, CFOs, and COOs from the private sector," Lynch said, according to Communities Digital News . "Together, they will conduct an extensive, unbiased analysis of the federal agencies that perform the weakest but cost the most. Their final report will offer an action plan for cutting the wasteful spending and eliminating superfluous agencies and jobs. I will push for these actions to take place.On the threat of ISIS coming to America, Lynch is convinced they’re here. As he said on “Fox & Friends,” during the summer of 2014. "I would guarantee you, in fact I would bet my life on the fact — your last guest just said about ISIS coming into America — I would guarantee you, they're already here. I have worked in the desert and I have caught these people before and I've seen Qurans, prayer rugs, you name it. They're already here."