ENGLEWOOD CLIFFS — The cold weather on Saturday morning would have tempted many other 8-year-olds to stay home and watch TV. But Brandon Best – wrapped in a scarf, hat and ski gloves — was there in the parking lot of CNBC on Sylvan Avenue, wrapping his arms around a pile of coats and dropping them in bags his parents held up.

Don Smith / staff photographer Volunteers collecting and sorting coats that have been donated by individuals and companies for the 19th Annual Jersey Cares coat drive.

The Bests, who live in Paramus, were among a dozen volunteers who gathered outside the cable TV business network headquarters on Saturday morning sorting coats as part of the 19th annual Jersey Cares coat drive.

Since Nov. 1, tens of thousands of coats have been collected throughout the state to give out to those in need, organizers said.

At one point, Brandon scooped up a pile of coats but missed the bag his parents held open.

“We missed the whole bag,” David Best, his father, said as the coats fell to the ground.

Brandon tried again. “Finally,” he said.

He bit his gloves to take them off. Gloves in mouth, he tied a knot around the bag using a yellow ribbon, which indicated it contained children’s coats.

To be sure, it was cold out there. The bags and a blue tarp laid on the ground to offer a clean surface flapped in the wind. But Brandon and the other volunteers pressed on, emptying bags of coats received from Bergen County residents and businesses, and categorized them for men, women and children.

The coats they sorted were picked up later in the day by the Greater Assembly Holy House of Prayer in Paterson, one of the non-profits that distributes them to the poor.

Though many of the coats donated in Bergen County end up in Passaic County, Bergen County also has residents in need who benefit. The homeless population in the county was estimated at 369 in a survey conducted earlier this year, according to results released in June by Monarch Housing, a non-profit based in Cranford.

“There’s a need everywhere,” said Sherry Lynn Fazio, senior director of external affairs at Jersey Cares. “Some counties just have it more covered up than others.”

The number of coats Jersey Cares was asked to provide this year was 55,000, a 67-percent rise from last year, Fazio said. She attributes the increase to harsh winter last year and the publicity the organization generated from an extended coat drive last year, when Jersey Cares partnered with the 2014 NY/NJ Super Bowl Host Committee.

“A lot more agencies found out about the coat drive,” she said.

Brandon was aware of the mission on Saturday. “I wonder what it feels like not to have coats,” he said. “Like, you really want coats in this freezing weather.”

All he needed Saturday morning was a bagel from Starbucks and he was ready to go, his mother, Leshawn Best, said. Brandon has joined his parents in volunteering since he was 3, she said.

“Hopefully for many years to come, he’ll see it as a fun mission and he’ll see the results,” she said. “I told him, ‘You do good, you feel good.’”

“Right?” she said, turning to Brandon. He nodded.

Email: parkm@northjersey.com