Wednesday, February 18, 2015

Timothy Andrew Garren has been charged in a Feb. 3 break-in in which the burglar's car was trapped by the homeowner, who arrived back home after a brief errand.

Garren, 27, of 40 Ridgeway Circle, Ringgld, Ga., is charged with aggravated burglary, aggravated assault, vandalism, theft over $1,000 and theft over $10,000.

Michael Ledford of Skyline Drive said he left his house around 11:05 a.m. and returned at 12:56 p.m.

He said his garage door was open and a gold Kia was backed into the garage.

He then saw a slender white male enter the garage from the kitchen door. He said the man was about 5'10" with facial hair and possibly in his 30s. He was wearing a tan jacket.

The burglar jumped into the driver's side of the Kia and began ramming the Ledford vehicle, which had him hemmed in. The Kia was finally able to get out by knocking over a brick wall and tearing up the garage door. Both vehicles had significant damage.

Mr. Ledford gave chase as the Kia went down N. Concord Road and struck another vehicle. The Kia continued on, and got away after apparently turning onto North Hickory Valley Road.

The victim said he could not see the tag of the Kia, but there was writing on the windshield.

Police said on the same day there was a burglary on Meadow Trace Lane in which a woman at the residence said the burglar was in a gold Kia with "Frankenstein" written on the windshield. She was able to get the tag number.

In that case, the man left after he could not get either the front door or the back door open.

Police said the Kia tag was registered to Andrea Seimer of Hickory Trace Lane, which is near Hickory Valley Road. A man at the Hickory Trace Lane address asked, "You're not looking for Andrew, are you?"

He said Andrew was his grandson and Andrea Seimer was his girlfriend. He said they drove a gold Kia with Frankenstein on the windshield.

When police interviewed Ms. Seimer, she said her Kia was gone.

Garren denied having the car or being involved in the burglary.

Mr. Ledford was shown a lineup and immediately picked Timothy Andrew Garren.

In 2011, Garren was charged in a $30,000 Brainerd burglary. He got a five-year suspended sentence.

Garren, who was then living in Chickamauga, Ga., was charged with stealing the items from the James Hicks residence on Marlboro Avenue in Brainerd.

Police said some of the items taken in the burglary were sold at Rick Davis Gold on Brainerd Road. Store officials notified the owner that his items had been pawned.

Police sought to track down Kathleen Cole, who sold the items. She was found at her apartment on Vance Avenue along with Garren.

She said Garren was a former friend she had not seen in a long time until he came by asking her to sell some items for him. She got $2,200 cash for jewelry.

Police said they found the rest of the stolen items in bags belonging to Garren at the apartment.

He had $1,600 in $100 bills in his wallet, which police said came from the sale of the jewelry.

Officers also found a needle/syringe and a plastic baggie of oxycodone on a dresser.

Garren was charged with aggravated burglary, theft of property over $10,000 and possession of a controlled substance in that case.