A Papa John's employee who was shot and killed in a cold-blooded stickup inside a Tennessee restaurant was laid to rest Saturday in a moving ceremony attended by the national pizza chain's very own founder and CEO, his family said.

John Schnatter flew out to Spring Hill to pay his respects to 22-year-old Gordon Schaffer's family along with about 25 cars packed with other Papa John's employees, his grieving sister said.

"We never once imagined that this would touch anyone high up in the Papa John's corporate office, let alone, John Schnatter," his sister, Devan Cronin, posted on Facebook Sunday.

Papa John's founder and CEO John Schnatter attended Saturday's memorial service and has offered to pay for the slain employee's funeral and medical costs, according to family. (Rob Kim/Getty Images for DirecTV)

"He was visibly distraught when speaking to my family about the tragic loss of my brother and it was apparent that he didn't come just to pay lip service," she added.

The gracious CEO went one step further, she said, by generously offering to pay for Schaffer's funeral and medical costs in what Cronin described as a touching display of support that "was so much more meaningful than any monetary donation."

Darious A. Fitzpatrick, 17, was arrested Wednesday and charged with first-degree murder, felony murder and aggravated robbery, among other charges in previous robberies. (WSMV)

The young staffer was working the late shift alone inside of a Colombia restaurant on Oct. 20 when police say two thugs held him up at gunpoint and then shot him in the chest, after Schaffer obediently handed over the cash.

The 22-year-old was rushed to a nearby hospital but died from his wounds.

Two masked men are seen entering the Papa John's restaurant on Oct. 20. After emptying the register, one of the two fatally shoots 22-year-old employee, Gordon Schaffer. (Columbia Police) One of two armed men is seen at the register with 22-year-old Gordon Schaffer on the night he was killed. (Columbia Police)

Darious A. Fitzpatrick, 17, was arrested Wednesday and charged with first-degree murder, felony murder and aggravated robbery in the morbid slaying.

He also faces charges related to two gunpoint robberies at Dollar General stores earlier this month.

A second suspect is still wanted by police.

Schnatter’s touching gesture to the slain man’s family follows the CEO coming under fire for threatening to up pizza prices and cut employees’ hours to avoid having to pay for their health care, as required under President Obama’s Affordable Care Act.

The multimillionaire, who runs the third-largest pizza chain in the U.S., later backtracked and announced in an op-ed piece in November that he will honor Obamacare and give health insurance to all employees after all.

ON A MOBILE DEVICE? CLICK HERE TO WATCH THE VIDEO.

ngolgowski@nydailynews.com