Anadarko has cleared this portion of forest near Mocimboa da Praia, Mozambique, as part of preparations for a new onshore drilling site. Mustafah Abdulaziz for The Wall Street Journal

Few roads lead to this fishing village on the eastern shores of Africa. Drinking water and electricity are in short supply. Hazards include venomous snakes, malaria-bearing mosquitoes and gun-toting antigovernment rebels.

But this is where Anadarko Petroleum wants to build one of the biggest projects ever attempted by a Western energy company. It has pledged to install acres of air-conditioned housing, an airstrip and a port—and to relocate almost 3,000 villagers currently living in mud huts.

WSJ Frontiers Newsletter Enter your email to be notified when we launch the new WSJ Frontiers weekly email newsletter

The search for oil has drawn companies to remote locations throughout the petroleum industry’s history. But Anadarko isn’t here for black gold. The American company is after something more abundant, albeit less lucrative: natural gas located about 30 miles offshore.

There is more than just one catch, though, with one of the largest energy discoveries in decades. The nearest viable customers are a hemisphere away. And it may cost tens of billions of dollars to tap the gas. Deep-pocketed buyers have expressed interest in the project, but some have yet to commit.

“Oil is probably easier,” concedes Don MacLiver, the executive in charge of the Mozambique project’s development. But like many major oil companies, Texas-based Anadarko has to go with the opportunities available. These, he says, include “large gas discoveries in remote locations.”

This is the challenge for many of the biggest energy companies operating around the globe: Natural gas, not oil, accounts for two-thirds of the petroleum reserves discovered over the last decade, according to data from consulting firm IHS. And many of the largest finds are nowhere near homes and businesses that can burn the fuel.

The Mozambique project, which has run up about $1 billion in costs for Anadarko thus far, is among the most extreme efforts to convert such huge discoveries into marketable energy. With customers so far away, Anadarko plans to build giant freezer-like devices to chill the gas to the temperature of the ice-encrusted moon that orbits Jupiter. The process converts gas into a liquid state so that it can be loaded onto refrigerated tankers and shipped by sea, like oil.

Exporting this fuel can provide companies with a longer, steadier stream of cash flow than pumping oil, but without crude’s heftier profit margin.

Other big energy outfits are working on similar projects. Italy’s Eni, for instance, is planning one adjacent to Anadarko’s.

Companies including the U.K.’s BG Group and Norway’s Statoil are planning another such venture to capitalize on gas they’ve struck off the coast of Tanzania, Mozambique’s neighbor to the north.

Many analysts estimate the global demand for liquid natural gas, or LNG, will double in 20 years, led by fast-growing economies in Asia. Europe’s demand for ocean-borne gas imports may also rise as countries look for alternatives to gas piped in from Russia.

Read the full story at wsj.com.