WINNERS AND LOSERS IN HEALTH CARE MERGERS | About a year and a half after the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, an analyst asked Mark T. Bertolini, Aetna’s chief executive, about possible mergers in the health care industry. Mr. Bertolini said, “I expect and we expect that consolidation will continue going forward here as health reform shakes out winners and losers in the process.” In the latest DealBook column, Andrew Ross Sorkin takes a look at the possible winners and losers as the health care industry moves toward consolidation on a large scale, especially as the country’s biggest health insurers, like Anthem and Aetna, set their sights on smaller rivals. It’s not surprising that the Affordable Care Act would drive mergers in the health care industry, as the law is designed to encourage health care companies to cut costs. “The question, of course, remains whether the savings that might come from consolidation will trickle down to the consumer or will simply wind up in the pocket of shareholders,” Mr. Sorkin writes. The American Academy of Family Physicians urged the Federal Trade Commission earlier this month to block the latest series of deals, arguing that “more often than not, consolidation increases costs and reduces options for consumers, and we believe this would hold true in the health insurance market.” Mr. Sorkin also cites a study of the 2007 merger of the UnitedHealth Group and Sierra Health Services that found that consumers in Nevada saw their premiums rise after the two companies combined. One group of people who stand to benefit from all this takeover activity are the chief executives. “Virtually every one of them has planned large golden parachutes in anticipation that their companies could be taken over,” Mr. Sorkin writes. According to data compiled by Bloomberg, Mr. Bertolini of Aetna stands to make $131.3 million in a takeover if he were pushed out; David Cordani of Cigna would make $58.7 million; and Bruce D. Broussard of Humana would receive $26.1 million. “Mr. Bertolini was probably right about winners and losers,” Mr. Sorkin writes. “The big health insurers could win. Their shareholders could win. Their executives could win. On the other side, however, may very well be the consumers.”



THE LONELY SHORT-SELLER | After six years into a bull market run, the short-sellers have all but lost their voice, Alexandra Stevenson writes in DealBook. William A. Ackman, who has yet to prevail in a billion-dollar bet against Herbalife, said he would “think very hard” before making another short bet. “Short-selling is an incredibly lonely proposition,” Mr. Ackman said in an interview. As investors rush into the market for fear of missing out on the rally, hedge funds have abandoned, or pared back, their short positions. Overall exposure to long positions by hedge funds has reached a high not seen since 2007, a year before the financial crisis, Ms. Stevenson writes. Short positions, meanwhile, are much lower than they were at that time, according to research by Bank of America Merrill Lynch. Much of investors’ optimism stems from their confidence in the Federal Reserve to save the day. “Every market has its own characteristics, they all have a story and narrative, and this one really is all about the central bank,” said James S. Chanos, founder of the hedge fund Kynikos Associates. The narrative, he added, is that “the central bank has your back and that’s embedded in everybody’s psyche and portfolio.” However, it would be a mistake to write off the short-sellers, Ms. Stevenson writes. Some, like Whitney Tilson and his bet against Lumber Liquidators, have been proved right on occasion. And others, like Bill Fleckenstein, are just waiting for the right time to jump back in. He had planned to start a short fund last year, but later decided it was not possible to do successfully while the central bank continued to pump money into the financial system. “You can keep the party going, but there is going to be a hangover,” Mr. Fleckenstein said.



SIGNS OF PROGRESS IN GREEK DEBT TALKS | Optimism appears to have taken hold of markets outside of the United States as well, as Greece and its creditors show signs of edging closer to a deal on a bailout, James Kanter writes in The New York Times. Although eurozone finance ministers said after a short meeting in Brussels on Monday that they would need to reconvene this week to fully assess the new proposals Greece had submitted, the head of the group, Jeroen Dijsselbloem, sounded more positive than he had after previous meetings, Mr. Kanter writes. Mr. Dijsselbloem said at a news conference that the Greek proposal appeared to be “broad and comprehensive” and a “basis to really restart the talks.” Also, the European Commission president, Jean-Claude Juncker, said that he was aiming for a deal with Greece by the end of the week. Global stock markets have been on the rise since Monday’s developments, but the euro fell against the dollar in early trading in Europe on Tuesday. However, The Financial Times says that’s a good sign: “When investors are feeling generally relaxed and happy about the world, they sell currencies that are cheap to borrow and go in search of higher-yielding/more exciting bets elsewhere. So, good news for the euro’s survival as a union of countries including Greece is bad news for the euro’s value.”



ON THE AGENDA | The Commerce Department will report on orders for durable goods for May at 8:30 a.m. and new home sales for May at 10 a.m. Markit releases its preliminary manufacturing purchasing managers’ index for June at 9:45 a.m. Companies reporting earnings today include Darden Restaurants, Carnival Corporation, IHS and BlackBerry. In Washington, Jerome H. Powell, a Federal Reserve governor, participates in a discussion on monetary policy and the economic outlook at 8:30 a.m. Doug McMillon, Walmart’s chief executive, is on the Fox Business Network at 8 a.m. and on Bloomberg Television at 9 a.m.