Buy Photo Buy Photo

Founded in 1988, the Natividad Medical Foundation has continued to provide innovative and necessary interpretive and medical resources and equipment to our underserved community.

President/CEO Linda Ford says one of the main goals at the foundation is ... “is to see a need, and we fix it. We don’t stop to think about it.”

According to a report by Natividad Medical Center CEO Harry Weis, Monterey County is home to nearly 80,000 uninsured residents. Natividad Hospital is a “safety net” hospital providing care to nearly 80 percent of the population that is under or uninsured in our community. Thanks to an ongoing partnership with Natividad Medical Foundation, these local residents are able to seek quality medical care at little or no cost and in their native language.

The Natividad Medical Foundation continues to find ways to improve the quality of healthcare of patients that seek care within Natividad Medical Center. I must highlight the positive and extensive resources used within the foundation for women’s health.

Many years, time, and funds have been allocated through the foundation’s Onyx Fund to insure that women unable to pay for necessary medical procedures specifically affecting women get the care they need. The Natividad Medical Foundation currently works closely with the clinics and doctors within the county to pay and provide mammograms for high-risk woman who are unable to pay for the testing on their own.

Within the past few years, the Foundation gained the support of John D’Arrigo. D’Arrigo was soon joined by many of the largest Ag companies to form The Agriculture Leadership Council (TALC) as part of the Natividad Foundation. TALC was formed specifically for the purchase of necessary medical and diagnostic equipment for the hospital, NICU and upcoming trauma needs. This clearly was a natural partnership between the Ag industry and the Natividad Foundation.

In addition to TALC providing medical equipment, the Natividad Medical Foundation has recently integrated the Indigenous Interpreting+, a cost-free interpreting service available to all patients of Natividad Medical Center. (This service is available to the public on a fee-per-use basis) Young people may take advantage of the intensive training offered by the foundation and gain an invaluable lifetime career skill by becoming an indigenous interpreter.

I have to admit before this week, I believed the most spoken alternate languages in the Salinas Valley was Spanish. According to Ford, there are nearly 65 indigenous languages spoken and more than 25,000 residents that speak a language other than Spanish or English. One out of two people coming into the US with the intention to work in our Ag industries speak an indigenous language that is not Spanish.

Ford said she believes the innovation of the Indigenous Interpreting+ program will be a platform for all others to learn from and has the potential to make a worldwide impact. The impact of each dollar here changes lives.

If you are in need of any services mentioned herein, you are encouraged to contact the Natividad Medical Foundation at 831-755-4187 or visit Natividad Medical Center for more information.

The foundation is always seeking individuals who may be qualified to enter the indigenous interpreting program as a career. If you wish to be a donor, the foundation works with you to find the best fit for your contribution within the needs of the hospital. If you would like to become a contributor, visit http://www.natividadfoundation.org/home/

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1hSOVwM