Three decades after he left office, former Colorado Gov. Dick Lamm remains consumed by the issues that challenge the state and nation. As co-director of the Institute for Public Policy Studies at the University of Denver, Lamm continues to challenge the norms when it comes to issues such as health care, channeling his often outspoken tenure in public service, first in the Colorado House and then as the three-term governor from 1975 to 1987.

Lamm, who turned 80 in August, recently sat down with The Denver Post in his campus office for a conversation that reflected on his tenure, the problem with TABOR, and the wild 2016 presidential race. An edited version follows:

Lamm: I’m working on a big project right now. I am trying to make the case that there is a certain part of medical ethics that are unethical public policy. The medical ethics that look only at an individual patient drives spending that is so marginal compared to other important needs in our society. If I can get it together, it will offend a lot of people. What’s new?

Health care and controversy were certainly a part of your terms as governor, particularly the speech in which you suggested that we all have a “duty to die and get out of the way” — comments you believe were taken out of context. It’s still an issue that interests you, obviously.

Yeah, it does. … I’m actually glad it happened. It started a wonderful conversation on this whole question, even though it was misquoted. All over the country there were dialogues and I was invited to speak and defend myself in a number of places. It was hell at the time, but I’m glad it happened.

What are some of these new ideas that you think would offend people?

Well, that you can’t build a modern health care system an individual at a time. It just drives me crazy to hear people say, “We don’t want to ration health care.” The United States rations more health care than any other developed country in the world. I would say that I’m trying to take health care from “me” to “we.”

What ethical considerations need to change to get to that point?

Medical ethics were developed over the last 500 years or even more, when there was no government funding and there were not that many things we could do for people as they got sick.

So the nature of health care, or the delivery of health care, has dramatically changed. It’s gone from a private issue, where you call the doctor and you pay the doctor to come out — which was essentially what health care was when I was born — to a social and political institution. But we still have this hangover from the starting days of health care. Doctors take their ethical duties with no lateral vision — they don’t look at other needs of society, and now health care seems to have a trump.

About 50 percent of health care now is paid for by taxpayers, but yet there’s no way to compare the spending on health care with other public policy needs. … It’s highly technical, lots of “miracle medicine,” at great cost. We’ve got to find a way to compare other needs — our roads, our education system and other things — with this health care spending.

In 1960, we spent 6 percent of gross national product on education, 6 percent on defense, 6 percent on health care. Today, we spend about 6 percent on education, about 5 percent on defense, 17.2 percent on health care. It’s been the explosive issue. Never has a society put as much money outside a war in one area as we’ve put into health care.

Another issue from your tenure is the Olympics. Boston recently rejected the Olympics, decades after you fought the 1976 Winter Games after Denver won the bid. What did you think of Boston’s move?

I went to the Olympics in 1960 when I was in law school in Berkeley, California. I love the Olympics — I don’t want to do it any harm. But i think it’s doing itself harm. …

I voted to invite the Olympics here. But in 1969 or 1970, I started looking at the figures: Sapporo, Japan, had just lost $1 billion, Montreal has just lost $1 billion. And I started asking questions. I wish the Olympics good luck, but their real enemy is themselves. They demand all of these new facilities at such expense. It’s grown to become such a fiscal burden that very few places want to invite it.

How much do you look back on these issues from your tenure?

What an embarrassing question. In high school, I read a story about a guy who intercepted a pass behind his own goal line and ran 100 yards for a touchdown and won the game. He’s feted in the town. But the further he got away from that run, the less of a big deal it became. But he couldn’t let go of it. So pretty soon he was saying, “Remember what I did?,” instead of people slapping him on the back and saying, “Great job.”

I think of that often. I look back with great fondness and pride. The governorship is the biggest thing that ever happened in my life. It was an honor of a hundred lifetimes. But I try not to think of that.

The Taxpayer’s Bill of Rights went into the constitution years after you left office, but a new group called Building a Better Colorado wants the state to take another look at it and other fiscal issues. Do you think TABOR needs an overhaul?

It’s absolutely needed. I don’t know how they are going to thread the needle, but I hope they do. The real gubernatorial hero in my mind on the TABOR issue was Bill Owens. National Review listed him as America’s most conservative governor, and he had the guts to support Referendum C and D, which were exemptions to TABOR. He did it. Every political adviser would be telling him, “God, you’ve got this good thing going. You’re getting national news. You’re going to step on your story.”

I have no problem joining whatever they come up with — I’d have to look at it. But I think TABOR needs change. Our public needs are growing incredibly fast. Our roads are deteriorating. There are so many needs in this state.

You know, if you look at the national picture, why don’t we take that 17.2 percent that we spend on health care and spend an average of what Europeans do, when they keep their people every bit as healthy, if not healthier. They have, let’s say, 11 or 12 percent.

If you could take that 5 or 6 percent between those two, all of a sudden there is a whole different budget thing that we would be facing. That’s one of the reasons I’m really interested in health care. It’s filled with dedicated people, but it’s an organizational and fiscal nightmare.

What other top challenges do you think Colorado faces?

I would still see the first issue as how do you make the political machine work in a more bipartisan basis.

Is it broken in your view?

As a state lawmaker, I got the nation’s first liberalized abortion law through a Republican legislature signed by a Republican governor. They were wonderful people. Gov. John Love was a moderate. Republicans in the legislature were moderates . Everybody worked together. I’m just not an old man looking back at the good old days — well, I am to some degree. … A great state needs an efficient and effective legislative body and we don’t have it.

What do you make of this much-hyped 2016 presidential campaign?

I’m really sobered by the fact that I did not think in 1980 that Ronald Reagan would ever get the nomination. He not only got the nomination, but I just read a biography of Ronald Reagan and came away admiring certain aspects of him, particularly the international dealings with Mikhail Gorbachev. Reagan was not near as bad as I thought he was going to be.

So am I now repeating my same mistake? I don’t think so. I think that Donald Trump is just beyond any model that we’ve had. I don’t want to compare him to a certain Georgia governor way back when, but he is comparable to Ross Perot. I think he will go too far too many times. … It’s just so unthinkable that he would be their candidate. I think he’s doing damage to the Republican Party for a generation, particularly with Hispanics.

On the Democratic side, you have front-runner Hillary Clinton —

Did you see The New Yorker “Talk of the Town” when they talked about Hillary and the e-mail problem? For the first time, it really was sobering. They talked about how (Retired Army Gen. David) Petraeus pleaded to a misdemeanor for something very close to this question of mishandling of classified documents. (Former National Security Adviser to President Bill Clinton) Sandy Berger — he mishandled classified operations and he pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor just like Petraeus. All of a sudden it dawned on me.

What are they to do? My poor wife. We’ve know the Clintons — we’ve served with the Clintons. Dottie (Lamm) and Hillary are really very close, and she’s just shattered — not discouraged, though, she’s still very much on board.

Can Hillary Clinton win?

I think she can win the Democratic nomination unless something worse happens, and I think there’s a one in three chance that something worse does happen. But I think the words they associate with her — distrustful, liar and dishonest — that’s not good stuff.

If she must step aside because of the controversy, who can fill her shoes?

I think the most likely person would be (Vice President Joe) Biden. He would be the one to pick up the pieces. I don’t think it would be Martin O’Malley, and I don’t think it would be Bernie Sanders, as wonderful a human being as he seems to be.

Are you a Sanders fan?

I will show my class a video of Bernie Sanders saying we are going to increase Social Security for the elderly and we are going to do it without any new taxes and without adding to the debt. You can’t do that.

He’s such a nice man but, no, I could not — I’d vote for him if he was the candidate against almost any Republican out there, but I think it would be a tragic mistake to nominate Bernie Sanders.

What do you think of the current political debate?

I really think the members of my generation have been poor trustees of America. My mother and father fought a war and a depression and left me with very little federal debt. I’m leaving you with a staggering amount of federal debt. They built the federal highway system. I’ve not even adequately maintained it. They left with effective and efficient institutions … .

I really have a very guilty conscience when I look at my grandchildren. I don’t feel a personal guilt, I tried … .

What you need to have a great generation is a great crisis, whether a fiscal crisis because of our constant borrowing or an environmental crisis because of global warming, and the millennials could well be the next great generation.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.