The American people are angry with their government, and when they vote in 2016, they’re not going to fall for the traditional allurements of the bipartisan establishment and vote for more of the same. Establishment favorites Jeb Bush, Marco Rubio and Hillary Clinton are taking a pounding at the hands of insurgents Donald Trump, Bernie Sanders and Ted Cruz.

Donald Trump has shown himself to be the ablest candidate in channeling anger, but he lacks a firm ideology to back it up. His promises are unrealistic, and his political positions are written on water. Bernie Sanders is far stabler and more honest than Trump, but he’s also a naïve socialist – he sees a problem with the government, and he wants to fix it by making the government bigger. Americans don’t trust their government, yet both Trump and Sanders would have them grant it more power over their lives.

It won’t be enough to elect an angry president. America needs a leader who stands for liberty as firmly as he stands against bipartisan corruption and the status quo. With Senator Ted Cruz of Texas, we have a man who has devoted his whole life to preserving liberty, upholding the Constitution, defending the innocent, and advancing every conservative cause. Cruz is the only major candidate who supports small government in principle, and sees returning power to the people as the only lasting solution to the problems our nation faces.

Cruz has promised to fully repeal Obamacare, not just replace it with some vague, unspecified new program like Rubio or Trump would do. His foreign policy is levelheaded: utterly destroy ISIS, but don’t repeat the nation-building and military adventurism that created the mess in the first place.

The Supreme Court is now of the utmost importance: if a liberal takes Justice Scalia’s place, the recent decisions in favor of free speech, religious liberty, and the second amendment will be overturned. Ted Cruz, who clerked for Chief Justice Rehnquist and has argued nine cases before the Court, knows the federal judiciary like the back of his hand. If he appoints the next two, three or four Justices, our Constitution will be in good hands.

“You want to know what I’ll do as President?” Cruz says. “It’s real simple. We’ll kill the terrorists. We’ll repeal Obamacare. And we will defend the Constitution, every single word of it.”