Buy Photo From left, Democratic challenger Mark Dunec, host Julie Briggs and Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen at WMTR radio studios following their congressional debate. (Photo: William Westhoven/Staff Photo )Buy Photo

Rep. Rodney Frelinghuysen and Democratic dark-horse challenger Mark Dunec engaged in polite but partisan discourse Sunday morning during a congressional debate at radio station WMTR-AM in Cedar Knolls.

Dunec, who arrived first with an entourage from his campaign staff, thanked the 10-term Republican incumbent for his helping defend the country as New Jersey's only member of the House Appropriations Committee and as chairman of the Defense Subcommittee, and for supporting Israel as an ally of the United States in its fight against radical Islamic terrorists.

SEE VIDEO:

Frelinghusen, who arrived with a cup of Dunkin' Donuts coffee, said he shared Dunec's strong support of Israel, but the candidates diverged on domestic issues, particularly on the economy and healthcare.

Dunec outlined his multi-tiered plan to strengthen the economy in part by granting permanent residency to existing undocumented aliens so they could pay income tax and into social security, consolidate the Affordable Care Act, Medicare and Medicaid into a universal healthcare system, and eliminate corporate tax in favor of mandatory profit distribution to shareholders,who in turn would pay a mandatory tax on gains.

"I would not suggest marrying Obamacare with Medicaid and Medicare," Frelinghuysen, who has voted on several occasions with the Republican majority to repeal provisions of Obamacare. "Quite honestly, our seniors depend on Medicare. Those with less money and less means depend on Medicaid. I do not think it would be a good idea for them to go into a program that quite honestly didn't have a proper roll-out."

"In fiscal year 2013, the average per American for healthcare was $8,600. The longevity was 76 to 81 years for men and women. In Canada, the cost was $4,500 and the longevity was 80 to 84 years. So Canadians are paying 40 percent less and living longer," said Dunec, a native of Canada. "We've got a problem in this country. If we want to get our economy rolling and our small business growing, we need a universal healthcare program."

"I respect your heritage, a lot of Canadians come across the border to use American healthcare facilities," Frelinghuysen said. "I bet they do that for a reason."

SEE ALSO: EDITORIAL: Frelinghuysen — again — in the 11th http://dailyre.co/1wqWdeJ

They also disagreed on immigration reform. Both agreed for the need to tighten U.S. borders, but Frelinghuysen stopped short of a broad amnesty for illegal aliens.

"One of the things I hear from many of our constituents is that our laws are not being enforced," Frelinghuysen said. "I think we need a path (to immigration reform), but we need to make sure border security is No. 1."

"Agreed, we've got to secure our borders, but we have to solve the problem," said Dunec, who believes adding undocumented workers to the payroll would improve the ratio of workers paying into Social Security to those receiving benefits. "What I'm not prepared to do is for the status quo to continue. Doing nothing is not an option."

Other questions asked by Briggs and listeners touched on infrastructure, college-loan debts and foreclosures, without significant conflict between the debaters.

The hour-long program closed with caller questions, one asking Frelinghuysen to identify his top accomplishments over the past term, and for Dunec to identify his goals for a freshman term should he win one.

Frelinghuysen mentioned Hurricane Sandy and "the Frelinghuysen amendment" that added $33 billion to "an already robust $38 billion to address that crisis and to allow our state and our region to recover from one of the greatest storms ever. There was not a lot of Republican support for that."

Dunec said "The No. 1 issue is getting people back to work. At the end of the day, my goal is to balance the federal budget."

"As I look ahead for the next two years, it's all about jobs and opportunities," Frelinghuysen said. "Getting government out of the way. There's too much rules and regulation."

"One way I differentiate myself from Congressman Frelinghuysen is that there are no platitudes, there's no talking points, there's no no rhetoric," Dunec said. "It's not left, it's not right. I'm all about details, substance, I think strategically, I think out of the box. We need to present options to the country. That's what's missing. There are no options."

"The details and substance are in the 40 bills that the House of Representatives has sent to the dysfunctional Senate to kick-start the economy and get the government out of the way," Frelinghuysen said.

Staff Writer William Westhoven: 973-428-6627; wwesthoven@dailyrecord.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1wtChIa