“Unprecedented” and “onerous” conditions set by the state’s attorney general doomed a Southern California-based hospital company’s controversial, $843 million bid to take over an ailing chain of medical centers from Los Angeles to the Bay Area, officials said Tuesday as they withdrew their offer.

“It was with a heavy heart that we came to this decision, as we had sincerely hoped for Daughters of Charity Health System to become a part of the Prime Healthcare family, and did everything possible to try to make that happen,” said Ontario-based Prime Healthcare Services CEO Dr. Prem Reddy in a statement Tuesday. “Unfortunately, the conditions placed on the sale by the California attorney general are so burdensome and restrictive that it would be impossible for Prime Healthcare - or any buyer - to make the changes needed to operate and save these hospitals.”

The conclusion of Daughters’ 14-month-long sale odyssey means that the Los Altos Hills-based Catholic hospital chain — which owns St. Vincent Medical Center in Los Angeles and St. Francis Medical Center in Lynwood, along with O’Connor Hospital in San Jose and Saint Louise Regional Hospital in Gilroy, Seton Hospital in Daly City, Seton Coastside in Moss Beach — could file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy reorganization, something Daughters officials said they were prepared to do if the deal fell through.

“We strongly disagree with Prime’s position on the attorney general’s conditions,” the Daughters chain said in a statement. “We are confident that Prime could successfully turn around the DCHS hospitals.”

But they’re looking at their options, despite the disappointment, said the system’s president and CEO Robert Issai.

“We’ve done some pre-planning in this and we’re hopeful; after we get over all the craziness that we will meet with consultants and advisors and dust off other options,” he said Tuesday.

It was a slightly brighter prognosis than when Daughters, bleeding money, first made the appeal for a buyer.

Prime — which owns 34 hospitals in 10 states, locally including Chino, Encino, Glendora, Inglewood, Montclair, and Sherman Oaks — got a purchase agreement, which it said met every condition set by the Daughters’ board of directors.

When it made its offer for Daughters, they had reported losing millions a year. Prime had said it would assume $300 million in pension liabilities and invest $150 million in capital improvements at the facilities.

Advertisement

And with the Daughters chain losing $150 million a year on low reimbursement rates and labor costs, Prime officials called the deal “far and away the best offer for the hospitals.”

That offer included a promise to keep the Daughters hospitals open at least another five years, assume $300 million in pension costs and a multimillion-dollar investment in the chain’s infrastructure.

But it was a massive proposed transaction, and subject to Attorney General Kamala Harris’ approval while drawing scrutiny from the SEIU-United Healthcare Workers West, which argued the sale was not in the workers’ best interests. The union also leaned on past experience, when Harris in 2011 blocked attempts by Prime Healthcare to purchase Victor Valley Community Hospital in Victorville.

The saga had pitted two unions against each other. The California Nurses Association/National Nurses United had backed the sale to Prime Healthcare, while SEIU-United Healthcare Workers West opposed it but approved Harris’ conditions, calling the long list “a victory for community health.”

In February, after consultant reviews, hours and hours of public meetings and thousands of public comments, Harris gave the sale a conditional OK.

Among those conditions was that they be carried out over 10 years.

They also included:

•For 10 years, must be certified to participate in the Medi-Cal and Medicare programs and have or maintain Medi-Cal managed care contracts at each of the facilities.

• Invest $150 million in capital improvement expenditures at the facilities over the next three years.

• Continue to provide charity care and community benefits at historical levels.

• Assume and guarantee all pension obligations covering about 17,000 current and retired employees.

• Revise its policies, tools, procedures, guidelines and training materials for its debt-collection practices to ensure it does not violate state and federal debt-collection laws and regulations.

In a two-page statement Tuesday, calling the conditions “onerous” and “unprecedented,” Prime said maintaining all services for a decade was akin to running the chain the way Daughters had but “expect different results.”

That couldn’t be done, Prime officials said.

Harris on Tuesday chided Prime in a statement, saying that the initial recommendations of the 10-year conditions came in December, and Prime was notified at the time.

“Prime is choosing to walk away from this transaction after publicly stating that it had no issue with the 10-year conditions and intended not to close any of the hospitals or end essential services,” she said. “By walking away, Prime is confirming many of the concerns heard at multiple community meetings that the continuity of vital healthcare services in these communities is not a priority.”

Issai’s chain now faces a difficult decisions, though on Tuesday he emphasized the brighter side.

Options include filing for Chapter 11, but Issai said after Daughters of Charity is released from its exclusivity with Prime, other buyers may be interested.

“Our assets and liabilities are better now,” he said. “The picture looks slightly better.”

Issai would not discuss which health systems are considering buying them.

But the Affordable Care Act has helped Daughters of Charity make up some of the losses, particularly those in low-income areas, to recoup some payment, since many of the patients they see have since qualified for Medi-Cal, he said.

“California (Medi-Cal) reimbursements are low,” he said. “But any reimbursement is better than none.”

Assemblyman Anthony Rendon (D-Lakewood), said in a statement he believes there is a buyer for the hospitals.

“I look forward to engaging with all stakeholders to identify a buyer that will continue to provide much-needed patient care to our underserved communities,” he said.

The bid was the largest hospital transaction ever reviewed by the California Attorney General’s office.

Bay Area News Group Staff Writer Tracy Seipel and Los Angeles News Group Staff Writer Ryan Carter contributed to this story.