Judge Tosses Conservative Provocateur James O’Keefe’s Libel Claim Against Main Justice

By Main Justice staff | April 6, 2015 1:48 pm

A federal judge last week tossed out a libel lawsuit filed by conservative provocateur James O’Keefe against this publication, Main Justice, and its founder, Mary Jacoby.

U.S. District Judge Claire Cecchi in New Jersey found that an Aug. 26, 2013 article in Main Justice, “Former U.S. Attorney Jim Letten Unloads on Conservative Prankster James O’Keefe,” was fair, accurate and not defamatory.

The article was protected under New Jersey’s “fair report” privilege, protecting accurate reporting based on public documents, Cecchi ruled on March 30. (View the opinion here.)

“The First Amendment provides strong protections for reporting on public figures and matters of public concern, and libel claims should not be wielded as weapons to chill such speech,” said Alison Schary, an attorney with Davis, Wright & Tremaine in Washington, D.C., who represented Main Justice, an independent website covering the U.S. Department of Justice.

“We are pleased that the court agreed with our legal arguments and dismissed this flawed case,” Schary said.

O’Keefe, who specializes in often heavily edited undercover video stings mostly targeting liberal organizations and Democrats, did not respond to a request for comment through his attorneys, Matthew Major and Benjamin D. Light of Callagy Law in New Jersey.

A campaign to sue journalists

O’Keefe’s complaint against Main Justice came after he vowed to sue news organizations that improperly characterized the circumstances of his 2010 arrest and misdemeanor conviction for entering the New Orleans offices of then-Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) under false pretenses.

Two activists who accompanied O’Keefe were disguised as telephone repairmen. The goal: To surreptitiously record Landrieu’s staff for a planned exposé of how they handled calls about the Affordable Care Act. O’Keefe’s crew pretended to test the senator’s phones and asked to be taken to the “central box” for repairs before they were confronted and the ruse discovered.

O’Keefe and his gang were initially charged in a federal felony criminal complaint with intent to commit “malicious interference” with the senator’s phones. Those charges were later downgraded to misdemeanors after federal prosecutors accepted the activists’ explanation that they had never intended to tap the phones. O’Keefe pleaded guilty to the misdemeanor and was sentenced to three years of probation, which confined him to his home state of New Jersey. The caper landed O’Keefe’s mugshot on the front page of The New York Times.

Although O’Keefe’s own actions led to his initial felony arrest and subsequent news reports – and even though he would later pay $100,000 to settle a lawsuit stemming from other serious misrepresentations he himself had made – O’Keefe aggressively challenged news organizations that he said were damaging his reputation by failing to correctly characterize the ultimate outcome of his Louisiana prosecution.

In 2012, O’Keefe sued the New Jersey Star-Ledger newspaper after it wrote that O’Keefe was “still on probation for trying to tap the phone of Sen. Mary Landrieu.”

In a statement, he warned: “It is my experience that demanding retractions from dishonorable people only leads to dishonorable retraction. Therefore, today I started a campaign to combat media organizations that state or repeat malicious lies about my work.”

The Star-Ledger later corrected its report.

About a month later in 2012, O’Keefe sued the now-defunct Current TV after hosts Keith Olbermann and David Shuster referred to O’Keefe in separate broadcasts as a “convicted felon,” which mischaracterized the level of offense to which O’Keefe had pleaded guilty. Shuster had previously been disciplined for tweeting inappropriately about O’Keefe.

“MSM will say, do anything to … stop a citizen journalist they cannot control. Understood. I’m going to sue them for libel every time,” O’Keefe tweeted.

By 2013, it was Main Justice’s turn to be sued. But this time, O”Keefe didn’t have a case.

Confrontation with former New Orleans U.S. Attorney

In July 2013, shortly after being released from probation, O’Keefe traveled to New Orleans to confront former U.S. Attorney Jim Letten with his grievances over what he considered his unfair prosecution by Letten’s former office.

O’Keefe later released a video of the encounter. It showed Letten furious about an approach the activist videographer had made earlier in the day to Letten’s wife at their home. It also appeared, from the vitriol of Letten’s reaction, that O’Keefe had gotten under his skin in other ways.

Letten called O’Keefe an “asshole,” “scum” and a “snail” who does “weird little political things.”

“[Y]ou nasty little spud,” Letten yelled, after O’Keefe had ambushed him on the grounds of Tulane University with a video camera. “If you want to be a political … extremist nut job, that’s fine. Don’t break the law.”

O’Keefe complained to Letten, “You took three years of my life from me,” referring to his federal probation. He tried to give Letten a copy of his book, “Breakthrough: Our Guerrilla War to Expose Fraud and Save Democracy,” that detailed his complaints about the prosecution. Letten threw it back at him.

“You were properly prosecuted by the U.S. Department of Justice because you improperly and under ruse … got into a U.S. senator’s office under disguise,” Letten told O’Keefe at another point on the video.

Main Justice was among numerous publications that wrote about the video. The article included a paragraph of background to the incident. It read, as originally published:

In May 2010, O’Keefe and three other activists pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges that they entered the New Orleans offices of Sen. Mary Landrieu (D-La.) under false pretenses. Wearing hard hats, tool belts and reflective vests, the activists had pretended to be telephone repairmen and were apparently trying to bug Landrieu’s phones. Their felony charges were downgraded to misdemeanors. O’Keefe was sentenced to three years probation, 100 hours of community service and a $1500 fine.

‘Public retraction’ demanded

After the article was published, Daniel Francisco, then-executive director of O’Keefe’s non-profit organization Project Veritas, emailed Main Justice to complain that the phrase “apparently trying to bug Landrieu’s phones” was a “slanderous statement.”

Pointing to O’Keefe’s negotiated plea agreement, which stated he had not intended to commit any felony, Francisco demanded a “public retraction” of the article. (Francisco later had a falling out with O’Keefe and filed his own complaint alleging O’Keefe had defamed him.)

In response, Main Justice republished the article to say that when arrested, the group had been “trying to tamper” with the phones.

That description, as Main Justice argued in briefings in support of its motion to dismiss, was based on O’Keefe’s own negotiated plea agreement in federal court.

In the plea agreement, O’Keefe admitted that the disguised activists had claimed they were there to “follow up on reports of problems with the telephone system.” While in Landrieu’s office, one of the activists “walked behind the desk, lifted the phone handset from the cradle, questioned whether there was a dial tone, and handled the receiver,” the plea agreement said.

Two of the activists “also pretended to call the phone with cellular phones in their possession,” and told a Landrieu staff member “they could not get through,” according to the court record. The activists further told a member of Landrieu’s staff and a General Services Administration manager that they required access to the telephone system’s “central box” to perform repairs, the plea agreement said.

As Main Justice’s briefings in federal court said, O’Keefe never followed up to complain that he was still unhappy with the description. Instead, on Aug. 29, he tweeted: “Nothing brings me more joy and happiness than when the papers are drafted for another defamation lawsuit against journalists.”

The next month, he sued Main Justice for libel.

His announcement of the lawsuit was coupled with an appeal for donations to Project Veritas.

A bumbling felon who got lucky?

O’Keefe argued in his libel claim that Main Justice had implied he’d committed a felony.

The article “paint[ed] him to be a bumbling felon who got lucky and pleaded to a misdemeanor,” he alleged in a brief. He further alleged that Main Justice was “sharply and politically opposed to Plaintiff’s activities as a journalist,” allegedly showing malice.

“This sort of manipulation does not warrant First Amendment protection, because it utilizes outright intentional falsehoods,” O’Keefe argued.

Further, the fair report privilege didn’t apply to the article because it “substantially deviate[d] from the truth,” O’Keefe argued, and was “based on wholly inappropriate inferences that would mislead any reasonable person reading it.”

Main Justice argued in briefs that both the original article, saying the activists had appeared to be trying to bug Landrieu’s phones when arrested, and the republished article, saying they had tried to tamper with the phones, were accurate and not libelous.

Most fatal to O’Keefe’s claim, Main Justice argued, was that the article correctly and prominently reported the outcome of the 2010 prosecution – that O’Keefe had pleaded guilty only to a misdemeanor.

“Mr. O’Keefe must not be permitted to use the high costs of modern litigation to bludgeon journalists into either following his script or shying away from the subject altogether,” one brief said.

Main Justice argued that the paragraph in question had to be read in the context of the entire article.

“No reasonable reader could understand statements that a) O’Keefe ‘pleaded guilty to misdemeanor charges … and b) his original “felony charges were downgraded to misdemeanors” to mean that Mr. O’Keefe was found guilty of a felony,” Main Justice argued.

Moreover, “although Plaintiff may have preferred an exact recitation of the language” from his plea agreement, courts only require a “rough and ready’ summary from journalists, not a ‘technically precise’ recounting of every minute detail in an official report,” Main Justice argued.

“Tamper” was used in the colloquial sense of “fiddled with,” Main Justice argued. Such “mincing” of a publications words was specifically condemned by the New Jersey Supreme Court, Main Justice argued.

Libel claim dismissed

In her order dismissing O’Keefe’s complaint, Judge Cecchi found that both versions of the article were accurate under New Jersey’s “fair report” privilege protecting reporting based on public records.

It “is undisputed that Plaintiff and his associates did in fact enter Senator Landrieu’s office disguised as telephone repairmen, did handle the telephone, and did request access to the central phone system, all without proper authorization,” the opinion said.

“[T]he ultimate exculpatory fact—that Plaintiff’s felony charges were reduced to a misdemeanor plea—was accurately reported,” Judge Cecchi wrote of the Main Justice article. “Thus, even though the words ‘apparently trying to bug’ and “trying to tamper’ may have been imprecise, a reasonable person reading the whole article would not be misled as to the ultimate conclusion that Plaintiff was guilty only of a misdemeanor.”

In a footnote, the judge noted that a dictionary definition of “tamper” includes “to try foolish or dangerous experiments with” and that Miriam Webster lists synonyms for tamper as “fiddle (with),” to “fool (with)” and to “mess (with).”

The judge concluded that neither the original article nor the revised article was defamatory to O’Keefe.

Cecchi dismissed O’Keefe’s lawsuit “with prejudice,” meaning that he may not refile the claim again in district court.

O’Keefe’s lawyers, Matthew Minor and Benjamin Light, did not respond to a request seeking comment.

No anti-SLAPP law in New Jersey

New Jersey does not have an anti-SLAPP law which would have entitled Main Justice and Jacoby to seek reimbursement of legal fees. So-called Strategic Lawsuits Against Public Participation are designed to suppress speech on matters of public interest.

“SLAPPS are intended to intimidate those who disagree with them or their activities by draining the target’s financial resources,” according to the Public Participation Project, an organization lobbying for a federal anti-SLAPP law.

O’Keefe had emailed Jacoby in August 2013 – an email that was overlooked at the time because it was sent to a personal account not used in her workday – with a threat. “If you don’t print a retraction, you’re acting in willful disregard for the truth. But hey, I could use your money to fund more investigations,” the belatedly discovered email said.

O’Keefe’s non-profit organization, Project Veritas, reported $1.2 million in revenue in 2013, according to its public tax returns. A large chunk of that funding reportedly came from the Koch Brothers network and a Wisconsin activist allied with Gov. Scott Walker, a potential Republican presidential candidate.

To read more about O’Keefe, click here and here and here and here and here and here and here and here.

RELATED POSTS: