Verisk Health<http://www.veriskhealth.com/>, Inc., a data-driven healthcare technology company, today announced the launch of its innovative, new Accountable Care Organization (ACO) solution. This new software solution streamlines quality reporting for the Medicare Shared Savings Program (MSSP) and supports population health management through advanced risk analytics and workflow tools. Verisk Health is a subsidiary of Verisk Analytics<http://www.veriskanalytics.com/> (Nasdaq: VRSK).

Verisk Health's ACO solution is a comprehensive solution suite that enables providers to implement an ACO strategy to improve outcomes in risk management, system performance, and quality compliance. The solution is designed to address gaps in care, identify waste, measure practice variation, and facilitate MSSP ACO measure reporting and submission. In addition, it tracks year-over-year analysis and benchmarking across all 33 measures.

"We've listened carefully to our MSSP ACO clients to develop a solution that supports them with quality improvement, reporting, and population health management," said Matt Siegel, senior vice president of provider solutions for Verisk Health. "This game-changing offering helps alleviate the pain of the group practice reporting option (GPRO) submission process while driving medical cost savings opportunities with population risk management analytics. Verisk Health works closely with our customers to bring relevant and innovative applications to market. Clients using the new solution can expect enhanced capabilities for periodic assessment as well as GPRO submission."

About Verisk Health

Verisk Health is transforming the business of healthcare by providing data services, analytics, and advanced technologies that answer the industry's most complex challenges. With a focus on reducing risk across all domains of healthcare, Verisk Health's broad solution suite is designed to help health plans, employers, providers, and other risk-bearing entities improve the quality of healthcare delivery, reduce costs, optimize risk-adjusted revenue, ensure payment accuracy, and support compliance. From effective population health management, quality reporting, revenue accuracy, and chart retrieval to tackling fraud, waste, and abuse, Verisk Health is committed to answering the unique challenges of its clients. For more information, please visit www.veriskhealth.com<https://mail.verisk.com/owa/redir.aspx?C=S92YBL2gd0aZ_oVGaqhP5Cfnz6Jx39A....