Among IBD's 197 industry groups, one of the biggest movers lately is the Medical-Systems/Equipment group, which currently ranks No. 5 after sitting as low as No. 104 six months ago.

The group has gotten a lift on a few different fronts, ranging from the boost in hospital admissions expected under the Affordable Care Act (ObamaCare) -- to the positive impact of new technologies and buyouts on medical stocks.

One beneficiary isSteris ( STE ), which makes and sells infection prevention, surgical, contamination control and other products and services to health care, pharmaceutical, scientific, research, industrial and government customers.

It operates in three business segments. The biggest, Health Care, provides sterilizers, surgical tables and examination lights, equipment management systems and other gear.

Other segments are Life Sciences, which offers sterilizers in addition to cleaning chemicals, vaporized hydrogen peroxide generators and high-purity water equipment; and Steris Isomedix Services, which provides contract processing and microbial reduction services.

Stock Group Gains

Steris gets an IBD Composite Rating of 98, the best among the 64 stocks in the Medical-Systems/Equipment group.Cantel Medical ( CMN ) andOmnicell ( OMCL ) score the same. Composite Ratings factor in earnings growth, stock price gains and other metrics.

The two biggest stocks in the group by market cap also have Composite Ratings in the 90s. The largest isIntuitive Surgical ( ISRG ) and the second-biggest isCarefusion ( CFN ), which saw its stock price soar 22% in a single session in October when it agreed to be acquired byBecton Dickinson (BDX) for $12.2 billion.

Steris also got a lift from October buyout news. On Oct. 13, the company announced that it would acquire Synergy Health, a British provider of sterilization services for medical-device manufacturers, hospitals and other clients.

As part of the $1.9 billion cash and stock deal -- Steris' biggest ever -- the firm will move its domicile to the UK to try to reduce its tax burden, though its operational and U.S. headquarters will stay in Ohio.

Steris is among a growing list of U.S. companies looking to shift their domiciles overseas to save on their tax bills.

However, the real benefit of the deal lies in what Synergy adds to Steris' product and services lineup, says Elliott Schlang, managing director of Great Lakes Review, an institutional research boutique in Cleveland. He cites Synergy's position as a leader in surgical instrument sterilization and reprocessing.

"The move to the U.K. is a tax advantage, but much more important is the concept of getting into the surgical instrument repair market with both feet," Schlang told IBD.

Steris officials did not return phone calls seeking comment. In a press release announcing the transaction, the company said that the combined business will have around $2.6 billion in annual revenue, compared with the $1.6 billion in revenue that Steris reported for fiscal year 2014, which ended in March.

The combined company will also boast about 14,000 employees and "bring together geographically complementary businesses," the press release said.

The deal, which should close by the end of March, is expected to result in total annual pretax cost savings of $30 million or more. It combines Steris' Infection Prevention and Services businesses with Synergy's Hospital Sterilization Services.

In a recent report, Zacks Equity Research said that the newly formed company "is expected to acquire a greater share in the international market. Moreover, with this transaction, management aims at targeting the mostly untapped yet lucrative emerging markets" of Asia-Pacific and Latin America.

Buyouts And Bigness

Steris CEO Walt Rosebrough said much the same thing in a statement accompanying the announcement. "(The) new Steris will be a stronger global leader in infection prevention and sterilization, better-positioned to provide comprehensive solutions to medical device companies, pharma companies and hospitals around the world."

It was Steris' second big buyout announcement in several months.

In April, the company said it would spend around $175 million to acquire Integrated Medical Systems (IMS), a privately held endoscope repair, surgical instrument management and sterile-processing consulting company with about $150 million in yearly revenue. That deal closed in May.

"They're moving into acquisitions in a meaningful way," said Schlang, who holds shares of Steris.

Another move that Steris made this year was a restructuring that included closing a production facility in Mentor, Ohio, as well as eliminating about 150 jobs.

The restructuring plan is part of an ongoing process, led by Rosebrough, to improve Steris' profitability and growth prospects. The plan also includes insourcing the production of certain products from foreign suppliers to its own facilities.

Restructuring For Growth

These initiatives have helped Rosebrough "transform" the company, Schlang says. "The restructuring plan and insourcing efforts to improve their margins are very reassuring for the future."

Financially, Steris has strung together three straight quarters of double-digit EPS growth -- the first time it's done that in years.

During its fiscal second quarter, which ended in September, the company posted earnings of 68 cents a share, up 24% from the prior year and above consensus analyst estimates. Revenue grew 21% to $462.7 million, also above views.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect full-year earnings to climb 17% to $2.90 a share.

Potential growth drivers include the impact of both ObamaCare and an improving economy, Schlang says: "ObamaCare is probably getting more people into hospitals for surgical reasons, and all of those patients having surgery have to have their tools sterilized. The economy is helping in the sense that people who might have had elective surgery postponed before are now going forward with that."