In her first 5 appearances in Charleston, Sloane Stephens only managed to win one match. On Sunday, the American won her 5th match of the week and captured her first Volvo Car Open Championship beating qualifier Elena Vesnina, 7-6, 6-2.

"Obviously coming into here I have a lot of anxiety coming into this tournament because I've never done well here." Stephens said. "And I was just thinking, like I said, I changed my mindset. I just thought, you know, I'm just going to go have fun. I have nothing to lose. I've only won one match here ever, and just go out and play and have fun because I mean it's just another week"

It's the 3rd WTA title of the year for Stephens and the 4th of her career.

Stephens took a commanding lead in the first set going up 5-2. But Vesnina, who had to win seven matches over the past eight days just to reach the finals, fought back forcing a tiebreaker. But Stephens prevailed 7-4 to claim the 1st set.

"I just thought to myself, I needed to be more aggressive and take my opportunities." Stephens said. "I was playing really passive. And I had a bit of T. Rex arm syndrome, so I was like I needed to just hit through the ball. And I think at 3-3 I hit a pretty solid return and I played a really good point at 3-3, and I knew I just needed to be aggressive and that's how I needed to play to be able to win the set. So once I started thinking, okay, hit it, be aggressive, I started -- it started coming out more."

Even when Stephens was in control, Vesnina kept fighting. She'd fight off three match points in the 2nd set before finally falling. But the runner up wasn't down about the loss.

"For me actually this final is like a win." Vesnina said after the match. "Because I played so many matches from qualis. I was just counting, I had like seven matches in singles and two in doubles, so nine matches in one week. That's quite a lot. So yeah, I'm just really happy about my run here, and yeah, just let's see how it's going to be the rest of the year. But I'm really looking forward to that because I think it's going to be good."

In addition to the newly redesigned trophy and over $128,000, Stephens was also awarded a new Volvo V60 Polestar automobile.

Stephens becomes just the 4th American to win the tournament since it moved to Daniel Island in 2001 joining Jennifer Capriati and Venus and Serena Williams.