Copyright 2016 Nexstar Broadcasting, Inc. All rights reserved. This material may not be published, broadcast, rewritten, or redistributed.

Louisiana candidates look to fill the United States Senate seat left by David Vitter.

In preparation of the November election the Police Jury Association held a forum to hear from the candidates.

The six candidates spoke during the forum held Saturday morning at the Shreveport Convention Center. Four are Republicans and two are Democrats.

Congressman John Fleming touts his experience in medicine and the military. He says he wants to protect gun and religious rights and support strong national defense.

"I plan to bring Louisiana conservative values to Washington," said Congressman Fleming (R), candidate for U.S. Senate.

Also with a background in medicine, Congressman Charles Boustany says he's the problem-solver and stands for energy production.

"I'm a conservative who's actually gotten results," said Congressman Boustany (R), candidate for U.S. Senate.

Retired Colonel Rob Maness says he has the most experience in the military. He wants limited government with less executive overreach and more border control.

"Our country is weaker than it's ever been in my lifetime and I served for 32 years in the United States Air Force and we're not leading in the world," said Col. Maness (R), candidate for U.S. Senate.

State Treasurer John Kennedy says he can fix the budget by cracking down on consulting contracts and overturning the Affordable Health Care Act.

"I see too many undeserving people at the top getting bailouts and too many undeserving people at the bottom getting handouts," said State Treasurer Kennedy (R), candidate for U.S. Senate.

Public Service Commissioner Foster Campbell has decades of experience working in the State Senate. He says he supports the working class and will focus on poverty.

"We need someone who is fighting for the people rather than the companies," said PSC Campbell (D), candidate for U.S. Senate.

Caroline Fayard says her experience in law and travels across the world gives her insight into helping Louisiana. She says she's not a career politician and that's a good thing.

"I really just want to do what I can to bring good change and good jobs and good investment to Louisiana. I can do that by working with people in Washington D.C." said Fayard (D), candidate for U.S. Senate.

The forum was apart of the three day, 92nd annual Police Jury Conference that had more one-thousand attendees including city leaders and the Mayor.