My original thought for the topic of this week's blog was the Supreme Court's positive decision regarding Obamacare. I intended to applaud vigorously, as it spares us further embarrassment as the only developed country lacking universal access. But then I also seek to ask "access to what?" which will be the topic of a coming blog.

But Obamacare became a secondary focus after the events of yesterday transpired. For 37 years I've been immersed in the annual competition called the Western States 100 mile Endurance Run. Before this I had been a marathon runner, but not until I learned of this amazing run did I embrace this event as a centerpiece for our California life.

Every late June we head for the High Sierra. One hundred miles in one day is a feat of legendary proportions. We became a part of a event that makes real what staggers the imagination... A Hundred Miles in One Day! I have crewed for my wife and son Walter as they ran it magnificently twice. I've done major research projects on the runners that I published in top scientific journals. Several of the runners have become close friends. But mostly my connection has been made as the result of our having created an annual award for the oldest male and female finishers. No big deal when a 20- or 30-year-old runs 100 miles. But at 60 years or older that is a glorious statement of the human potential which is my primary fixation.

This race has tenure in the ultramarathon community. It has become immensely popular. This year over 3,000 applied for the 350 entry slots. It attracts an international participation. One year a delegation of the Tarahumara Indians was there. It has been featured on national TV coverage.

It starts under the chair lift at Squaw Valley and immediately ascends to Squaw Peak, just to get warmed up. Along the 100 mile route it cumulatively rises 18,000 feet and falls 23,000, relentlessly down and up again, over and over and over again. The race follows the route of an ancient Indian hunting trail descending and ascending multiple canyons. It crosses the American River via a hand held rope. It works its way up and down the canyon walls until it ends at the Auburn, California high school track.

Auburn is a gold mining town relic. It has remade itself as a fitness capitol. Weather is often a huge factor, temperatures have been recorded at 114° down in the canyons. Several years the race was run with snow pack in the higher elevations. In 1983 24 of the total miles were snow packed.

This year the winner was Rob Krar, aged 35 in an admirable time of 14 hours and 49 minutes. That translates to a 8.8 minutes per mile pace times 100. I can't do this for one mile, even on the flat, or maybe even down an elevator shaft. There is a 30 hour cutoff time. The main goal is to finish in less than 24 hours that is rewarded by a silver buckle. I can more easily believe there are McDonald's stands on the moon as that people are able to perform this effort. There has never been a death among the runners, but several have had to discontinue when their weights dropped below an accepted level at the periodic aid stations.

I of course have been interested in the old runners. In 1998 Ray Piva at age 71 ran and finished. Yesterday was epochal because for the first time a 70-year-old woman Gunhild Swanson from Spokane was entered. No 70-year-old female had ever made it.

Due to excellent communication tracking the assembled crowd of 1,000 or more was aware of where Gunhild was. Her projected finish time was right on the edge of the conclusion of the race which is 30 hours. We were kept on the edge of our seats until she appeared at the gates of the track with about a minute to go. She finished strong. There was hysteria in the stands, tears flowed. Her official finish time was 29 hours, 59 minutes, and 54 seconds, with all of 6 seconds to go before the race was officially and rigidly concluded.

It was near pandemonium, and certainly far the most exciting moment of my 35 years. I then had the immense pleasure of awarding her one of our oldest finisher clock prizes.

Long may she keep time for herself and for the rest of us. The oldest male was 68-year-old Larry Cawthon at 29 hours and 10 minutes. Finishing is the reward, but Gunhild and Larry did it brilliantly, the human potential revealed in bright colors.