DOVER, Del. (AP) - Legislative budget writers grilled Delaware Medicaid officials Wednesday on delays in a program aimed at reducing waste, fraud and abuse, and about the lack of access by thousands of Medicaid enrollees to the state’s only children’s hospital.

With the state facing a tight budget year and the Joint Finance Committee trying to balance a $3.9 billion operating budget proposed by Gov. Jack Markell, co-chair Sen. Harris McDowell III wondered why the Department of Health and Social Services has lagged on reducing fraud and waste in the state’s $1.9 billion Medicaid program.

“We have seen evidence of bills that are outrageous … and unsupportable,” said McDowell, D-Wilmington.

Lawmakers directed DHSS officials in last year’s budget bill to hire an outside contractor for a $500,000 pilot program aimed at fighting Medicaid fraud, abuse and waste. McDowell said he believes the effort could identify up to $26 million in savings.

But department officials, who disagree with that cost savings estimate, missed an October deadline for hiring a contractor, who was supposed to report on projected cost savings by April 30.

“I understand your frustration,” state Medicaid director Stephen Groff told McDowell, adding that officials are working to ensure that the pilot program will be tailored to the specifics of Delaware’s Medicaid program, including its technological infrastructure and managed care organizations.

DHSS officials say they are days away from finalizing a contract for the pilot program, and that they expect the contractor to issue an interim report by the April deadline.

Rep. Joseph Miro, R-Newark, suggested that DHSS officials have been dragging their feet on the pilot program because they fear its findings will lead to embarrassment and bad publicity.

“You will never admit to that,” he told Groff and DHSS Secretary Rita Landgraf.

Meanwhile, Delaware taxpayers are expected to pay more than $742 million for the state’s share of Medicaid spending next year, up from an estimated $734 million this year. Enrollment has increased steadily in recent years, with roughly one in four Delaware residents covered by Medicaid.

But lawmakers are concerned that the roughly 111,000 Medicaid enrollees covered by UnitedHealthcare do not have access to the only pediatric hospital in Delaware, the Alfred I. duPont Hospital for Children in Wilmington. They instead have to try to get to specialty hospitals in Philadelphia or Maryland, a situation that JFC co-chair Rep. Melanie George Smith described as “unacceptable.”

“We’re giving them millions and millions of dollars,” she said of UnitedHealthcare.

The Nemours Foundation, which owns the hospital, was unable to come to contract terms with United last year, resulting in loss of in-network status for United policyholders.

But DHSS officials noted that Medicaid enrollees who want access to Nemours facilities can opt for coverage through Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield of Delaware rather than UnitedHealthcare.

“People are not stuck in a plan yet. We are still continuing to see churn,” said Groff, noting that a 90-day period for Medicaid enrollees to choose between United and Highmark continues through March.

At the end of that period, officials will make a final determination on whether United and Highmark are complying with “network adequacy” rules aimed at ensuring that Medicaid patients have access to all services.

If not, Groff said, officials will work to bring in new providers.

“UnitedHealthcare has a broad network of physician, specialty and hospital systems that meet the needs of our state Medicaid contract,” said company spokeswoman Mary McElrath-Jones.