Eli Sparks, a Cub Scout with Pack 190, sells popcorn Friday to his neighbor Laura Ramirez. Eli has a goal of selling $10,000 worth of popcorn through his Cub Scout troop. He has passed the $6,000 mark by going door to door and doing it all on his own with his parents' supervision. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

How can I buy? What: Boy and Cub Scouts Popcorn Sale. When: Now through Saturday. Where: Contact dawn@longspeakbsa.org or 584-2203 to have a Boy Scout come to your home. Cost: Varies. More info: trails-end.com.

The message in bright paint on the storm door at Eli Sparks' home reads: Cub Scout Popcorn For Sale Here.

Yes, the 9-year-old Loveland boy is among thousands of Scouts in the Longs Peak Council that are selling popcorn in this region, through Saturday, to raise money for their camping trips, Pinewood Derbies, merit badges and other Boy Scout activities.

Last year, members of the Longs Peak Council (northeastern Colorado, southern Wyoming and the Nebraska panhandle) sold $1.4 million worth of popcorn — down about $100,000 from average due to the floods that hit Loveland, Greeley, Estes Park, Longmont and Lyons in the midst of the popcorn sales, said Dawn T-Baumgartner, development director for the council.

The second biggest seller was Eli, son of Kathryn and Lee Sparks, with $4,500 behind a boy his same age who lives in Wray and sold $7,000.

This year, Eli set his mind to more than double his sales with a goal of at least $10,000. With a week left, he has reached almost $7,000 by going door to door in neighborhoods throughout the city six to seven days per week.

Advertisement

"I'm very proud of him," said Kathryn Sparks. "That's why we are willing to do what we can to help him succeed, to go out every night.

"He has to be the one to ask."

One afternoon last week, Eli approached a door with a sign that read: "Absolutely no soliciting. Except kids."

Laura Ramirez answered the door with a smile to the young scout on her front porch.

"I'm selling popcorn to help send me to camp and college," said Eli, a member of Cub Scout Pack 190. "Would you like to support me?"

She bought a bag of popcorn drizzled in chocolate and said, "I hope you have great success."

His success — and those of other scouts selling popcorn — goes beyond the money raised.

Eli has learned math by adding up the totals, Kathryn said. He has honed his communication skills by approaching people about the sale. He has learned to strategize, he practices his handwriting as he fills out the forms and he spends time with his parents during the sales and delivering the product in November.

Most of the money from the sales goes right back into the Scouts — 35 percent to the Longs Peak Council to pay for prizes and upkeep of camping properties and 35 percent to the individual troops.

In addition, Trails End popcorn sets aside 6 percent of each boy's total each year, as long as they have reached a $2,500 threshold one year, for a scholarship fund once the youngster reaches college.

People are receptive to the sales because, well who doesn't love popcorn, and because the sales benefit children and their scouting activities, Kathryn said.

But does Eli like eating or selling popcorn more? As tasty as it is, he said he likes selling more because he can win prizes and earn money toward camping and college.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer Pamela Johnson at or johnsonp@reporter-herald.com