WASHINGTON, D. C. - Democratic congressional candidate Michael Wager is a "desperate politician who will say anything" by the reckoning of a new television ad placed by the Republican incumbent he's challenging, Russell Township's Dave Joyce.

Joyce's new ad responds to an attack ad from Wager which calls Joyce "just another greedy congressman," and alleges that Joyce voted to "give taxpayer funded healthcare for life to Congressmen, while wanting to cut Social Security and Medicare."

"He calls himself 'Just Dave,' but he's really just looking out for himself," said Wager's ad.

Joyce's response cites a fact-checking group's "Pants on Fire" rating of claims that Congress voted to give itself lifelong taxpayer funded healthcare, and another fact-checking report that classified as "smarmy" political accusations that Congress members approved first class flights for themselves.



"Michael Wager, dishonest, just plain wrong," says Joyce's new ad. "The truth? Dave Joyce voted to ban first class travel for congressmen. He's never flown first class on our dime. Dave gave up taxpayer-funded healthcare. He's still just Dave. False attacks won't change that."

Joyce spokesman Kevin Benacci said the broadcast and cable ad was being run to dispute Wager's ad claims.



"In Mr. Wager's world, he hopes that by repeating the same lies, they will magically become true," said an email from Benacci. "Well, this is the real world, and lies don't just become true, so we thought it was important to let the people know that these claims against Dave are simply false."



Wager cites Joyce's vote for a budget proposal drafted by Wisconsin GOP Rep. Paul Ryan and against a Democratic counter proposal as backup for his claims that Joyce backs privatizing and cutting Medicare, and wants to protect first-class travel for Congress. The claim about Joyce's vote to give taxpayer funded healthcare to Congressmen for life refers to a measure he supported to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

In a statement released by his campaign, Wager said Joyce's "smear ad is a shameful attempt to distract from his record of protecting congressional perks like taxpayer funded first-class travel."

"If Congressman Joyce is interested in having an honest conversation about the issues, I invite him to accept my debate challenge and cease engaging in in dishonest personal attacks that mislead voters," Wager's statement continued.

While Wager, Joyce and Libertarian David Macko are scheduled to debate one another at the City Club in Cleveland on Oct. 13, Wager spokesman Justin LaMorte said Wager has asked Joyce to debate him in each of the seven counties encompassed by Ohio's 14th District.