Frank Phillips

Website: www.FrankforLafayette.com

Age: 58

Family: Son, Wyatt, dog, Shadow

How long have you lived in Lafayette?17 years

Professional background: Information systems/telecommunications

Political/community experience: Planning Commission, Lafayette City Council, mayor, currently VP of the Historical Society, member Waste Reduction Advisory Committee, and Lafayette Lions Club

Education: BS biology, MS information systems, MA telecommunications, MBA

Name a person you admire and explain why: My father taught me the value of logical thinking, common sense, and community service

Once elected, what would be the top priority during your term and why?

The city has a number of important issues that need to be addressed simultaneously in the areas of affordable housing, water, business development and public works. Many of the critical issues council deals with on a recurring basis occur in these areas. Need to start addressing state's future water conservation plans. An affordable housing plan needs to be developed. We need to attract businesses that provide goods and services not currently provided in our community. Street repair and the funding for it is a perennial problem and long-term plans to ensure necessary funding need to be put into place. We also need to continue developing the city's renewable energy and support programs that help reduce our citizen's energy costs.

Advertisement

If elected, how will you increase transparency and boost community involvement in council decisions?

Transparency equals trust, ensure public input in the policy making process, make decisions that are in the best interest of the entire community and avoid even the appearance of a conflict of interest. Many members of the community do not know of the existing city electronic resources for notification of meetings and events they can sign up for. Designate city ombudsman for single point of contact to direct citizens to the appropriate resources.

With the city's rapid growth in mind, how will you encourage revitalization while protecting quality of life?

Ensure Lafayette's home rule power over zoning is used to develop appropriately while maintaining the city's character. Quality of life is impacted by the citizens' sense of community. The support of the arts and festivals on Public Road, the philanthropic organizations that provide help and support to those in need, our award-winning recreation center, library and skate park, our beautiful open space, our dedication to diversity, our excellent schools, our support and recognition of our youth, our sense of the city's history, these are just some of the factors that contribute to Lafayette's uniqueness and quality of life.