The ObamaCare exchanges have added so few customers in the past three weeks that it almost seems like there must be some kind of glitch. With less than three weeks left to enroll, the exchanges still have fewer customers than signed up in 2015, yet the rate of new sign-ups now appears to be slower than it has been since the glitch-filled launch in the fourth quarter of 2013.

That’s worrying news for insurers like UnitedHealth (UNH), Aetna (AET) and Anthem (ANTM). Without an infusion of fresh blood during this final sprint, the exchanges will tilt a bit older and not much bigger than 2015’s make-up that prompted double-digit premium hikes and UnitedHealth’s threat to exit the exchanges if losses don’t end.

It’s also troubling for ObamaCare’s supporters who have hoped that a jump in the individual mandate penalty to a minimum of $695 for going without coverage in 2016, more than double 2015’s minimum hit, would result in a big increase in enrollment rather than a big jump in the tax penalty millions of people will have to pay. Since there’s no glitch holding down enrollment as the individual mandate penalty spikes, the problem must be in the marketability of the plans.

Just 74,000 Sign-Ups Last Week

In the past week, HealthCare.gov, which handles operations for 38 states, added just 74,000 customers, or less than half the 163,000 customers added in the same week a year ago.

In fact the totals in each of the past three weeks are the three slowest weeks since the Obama administration began breaking out weekly HealthCare.gov totals at the start of 2015 enrollment. The three-week total of 231,800 new sign-ups is likely the worst stretch since late 2013 because the weakest month since then (February 2014) still saw close to 700,000 sign-ups.

So far there’s no hint that activity is accelerating as the clock winds down on 2016 open enrollment. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell made no mention of a pick-up in her statement announcing the latest figures, referring only to a burst of activity in mid-December. One leading indicator of sign-up activity also has lagged. Over the past two weeks, 451,000 customers submitted applications, a necessary precursor to selecting an exchange plan. That’s down by nearly one-fourth from the 579,000 application filers in the same period a year earlier.

The drop in applications provides confirmation that sign-up activity is genuinely slow, rather than just an illusory effect of a shift in accounting for plan cancellations. Like last year, the HealthCare.gov states are subtracting customers when people cancel their plans, and each week’s total represents the net addition of customers.

In addition, insurers in HealthCare.gov states will strip out customers who never pay as their deadlines for monthly payments pass, rather than waiting until the end of open enrollment to do so.

An example of what that culling of nonpaying customers looks like comes from Rhode Island, which operates its own exchange. This week, the state reported 30,015 paying and nonpaying customers, down 15.3% from the prior week’s 34,627.

There’s no indication of any similar purging of nonpayers in the HealthCare.gov states. Two states did report that their sign-up totals edged lower last week. Montana sign-ups fell by 78, or 0.1%, from 55,555, and Pennsylvania’s slipped by 1,239, or 0.3%, from 412,914. It’s not clear whether those mild declines are just related to stripping out plans actively cancelled by consumers or whether an insurer here or there has started to winnow nonpayers.

Aetna, Humana Signal Enrollment Weak

Further suggestions ObamaCare enrollment is weak have come from Aetna and Humana (HUM) recently. This week, Aetna told investors that its first-quarter individual market enrollment will be at least as high as at the end of 2015. That’s a pretty low bar considering that Aetna’s exchange enrollment shrank by more than 100,000, or 11%, in the third quarter as customers dropped coverage and likely continued to fall in the fourth quarter.

Meanwhile, Humana reported that its individual enrollment will shrink by 200,000 to 300,000 by the end of 2016. (Aetna has agreed to buy Humana, but regulators have yet to approve it.)

While Medicaid insurers such as Centene (CNC) that have been more aggressive in pricing premiums lower may be stealing customers from the competition — often with high deductibles — the size of the pie is likely to be smaller than companies were expecting.

In 2015, 11.7 million sign-ups dwindled to 10.2 million paying customers by March and likely fewer than 9 million by year-end. The Obama administration’s estimate of 11.4 million enrollees at the end of 2016, which had seemed shockingly low compared to the Congressional Budget Office’s projected annual average of 20 million paid enrollees, now looks on the money and possibly optimistic.

Follow Jed Graham on Twitter @IBD_JGraham.

Related:

ObamaCare Employer Mandate Is Worse Than Feared.