Community leaders, volunteers and organizations from across Boulder County came together Sunday to commemorate the September floods by sharing stories and information.

BoCo Strong, a subcommittee of the Long-Term Flood Recovery Group, hosted the flood commemoration event at Boulder's at Gateway Park and Fun Center with the goal of highlighting the county's resiliency.

"One of the most amazing things was seeing all the cross interactions from different communities," said event co-organizer Tiernan Doyle, who works for Boulder Flood Relief. "We wanted to keep the momentum going."

She created a "garden in the bag" to give to participants. Each bag included soil to represent Jamestown, river rocks for Lyons, pea seeds for Longmont and wildflower seeds for Boulder.

Photographer Peggy Dyer was at a BoCo Strong event on Sunday to photograph people for her "One Million Faces" project. She is photographing Wren Frederick, back right, Lily Young Stallings and Katie Stallings. Their message to the world was "Believe in yourself." BoCo Strong, a sub-committee of the Long-Term Flood Recovery Group, held a flood commemoration event on Sunday at Gateway Park and Fun Center in Boulder. For a video, go to www.dailycamera.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"I'm so proud of our county," she said. "I had to do this as a little valentine."

The event included information booths, several activities for children and the opportunity to be photographed as part of the "One Million Faces" project. Project photographer Peggy Dyer, who previously took pictures of students at Lyons Elementary when the school reopened after the floods, invited people to pose holding a sign with a "message to the world."

"There's a lot of healing that can come from people telling their truth," Dyer said.

On Sunday, people used whiteboard to write messages that included "BoCo Beautiful," "Rebuilding better and stronger" and "Stay strong, make them wonder how you're still smiling."

Advertisement

Mary Steffens, a Red Cross disaster recovery specialist, said the Red Cross paid for Dyer to come to the event through its mental health budget.

"It's really important to show that we're all together," she said. "I really believe that together we're stronger."

Bill VanMatre, who volunteers with Lefthand Fire and Boulder's emergency radio services, helped coordinate communication and rescue efforts for those affected by flooding in Lefthand Canyon — and continues to work on recovery efforts.

Photographer Peggy Dyer was at a BoCo Strong event on Sunday to photograph people for her "One Million Faces" project. Linsi Broom is photographed with her message to the world, "This is it. Make it Count." (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"We're making sure the people's needs are taken care of," he said. "Events like this help build our communities and make us a little bit stronger."

The event also included a viewing of short videos about the floods and the recovery efforts, along with an interactive performance by Playback Theatre West. For the performance, Playback's improvisational actors dramatized the audience's flood experiences.

Sunday's event kicked off a flood commemoration week, with events planned throughout this week in Boulder, Lyons, Jamestown and Longmont. Events include a Boulder night of community stories from first responders and volunteers, a community picnic in Lyons and an open house in Jamestown.

For a complete schedule and more information, go to BoCoStrong.org, call 303-441-1609, or email bocostrong@gmail.com.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Amy Bounds at 303-473-1341 or boundsa@dailycamera.com.