Martin Frankel, the con man who notoriously swindled $200 million from insurance companies in the 1990’s, is back in federal custody weeks after being released from a 13-year stint in prison.

Frankel, who is now 60 and considered eccentric by many, pleaded guilty in 2002 to 24 counts of fraud and racketeering for a massive insurance scheme, and was sentenced to 17 years in jail.

He used astrology as part of his strategy when making stock and investment decisions.

In a rambling, disjointed speech in federal court in 2002, Frankel said that his historic swindle, which destroyed seven insurance companies, began as an attempt to help a former fiancée, but eneded wsith a global manhunt.

Frankel fled the U.S. in 1999 after living a lavish lifestyle in Greenwich, Conn., using numerous aliases and shell corporations to drain millions of dollars from up to 11 insurance companies he controlled in several states to support himself. Those states included among the states affected were Arkansas, Mississippi, Missouri, Oklahoma, Tennessee, and Virginia.

Besides spending lavishly on furs, autos and jewels for female companions, he had a staff of drivers, household support and security guards. He was said to discard bars of soap after a single washing.

Instead of investing money from his insurance companies in bonds, as he claimed, Frankel instead stashed the money in Swiss bank accounts.

The scheme blew up when Mississippi insurance regulators became suspicious of his attempts to use a purported Vatican-connected religious foundation he created to purchase more insurance companies. Seeing regulators close in, Frankel laid plans for an escape.

After four months on the run, FBI agents tracked Frankel and his jewels to a posh hotel in Hamburg, Germany. He was apprehended in September 1999.

According to reports, Frankel was sent to a transitional facility in Philadelphia after being released from the federal prison in Fort Dix, N.J., several weeks ago, but shortly thereafter was removed for unspecified rules violations.

He was prohibited from financial dealings as a condition of his release.

Frankel is being held in a federal jail.