In late February, Blue Cross Blue Shield of Louisiana postponed a plan to stop accepting third-party premium assistance from organization like the Ryan White HIV/AIDS program, and said it based the decision on CMS guidance that said QHPs could accept premium assistance from "Indian tribes, tribal organization, urban Indian organizations, and state and federal government programs or grantees (such as the Ryan White HIV/AIDS Program."

Confusion over the legitimacy of third-party premium payments began in October 2013, when HHS Secretary Kathleen Sebelius wrote a letter that said QHPs weren't considered "federal health care programs" for purposes of the anti-kickback statute, and implying that third-parties who made premium payments wouldn't be in violation of the statute. Shortly after the Sebelius letter, however, the Center for Consumer Information and Insurance Oversight released guidance discouraging provider and payers from making any premium payments on behalf of individuals enrolled in QHPs operating in state and federal exchanges.

Since last fall, there has been a lingering question over whether a third-party can pay premiums for individuals enrolled in health plans offered on state and federal insurance exchanges. An interim final rule that recently arrived at the Office of Management and Budget for review soon might help answer that question. While the contents of the final rule (Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act; Third Party Payment of Qualified Health Plan (QHP) Premiums) are unknown, it can hopefully alleviate provider uncertainty. Under Executive Order 12866, issued in September 1993, all significant regulatory actions have to be reviewed by the OMB's Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs prior to taking effect.

Your HR and Payroll compliance and policy solution! Comply with federal, state, and international laws, find answers to your most challenging questions, get timely updates with email alerts, and more with our suite of products.

STANDING ORDERS

All Bloomberg BNA treatises are available on standing order, which ensures you will always receive the most current edition of the book or supplement of the title you have ordered from Bloomberg BNA’s book division. As soon as a new supplement or edition is published (usually annually) for a title you’ve previously purchased and requested to be placed on standing order, we’ll ship it to you to review for 30 days without any obligation. During this period, you can either (a) honor the invoice and receive a 5% discount (in addition to any other discounts you may qualify for) off the then-current price of the update, plus shipping and handling or (b) return the book(s), in which case, your invoice will be cancelled upon receipt of the book(s). Call us for a prepaid UPS label for your return. It’s as simple and easy as that. Most importantly, standing orders mean you will never have to worry about the timeliness of the information you’re relying on. And, you may discontinue standing orders at any time by contacting us at 1.800.960.1220 or by sending an email to books@bna.com.

Put me on standing order at a 5% discount off list price of all future updates, in addition to any other discounts I may quality for. (Returnable within 30 days.)

Notify me when updates are available (No standing order will be created).