I think he's a good person, but ...

It's one of those things we Southerners say. Just like "bless his heart" means "what an idiot," it comes loaded with so much subtext that outsiders need an English-to-Southern Dictionary to decipher its meaning.

So if you're not from around here, let me translate for you. It means something close to, "I hate what he thinks/says/does, but I'm not going to judge his soul, and I'm going to hold out just a little bit of hope that he'll come to his senses."

AL.com Opinion About the writer

Kyle Whitmire writes political commentary for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears regularly in newspapers in Huntsville, Birmingham and Mobile and is online at AL.com all the time. Reach him at kwhitmire@al.com.

Kyle Whitmire writes political commentary for the Alabama Media Group. His work appears regularly in newspapers in Huntsville, Birmingham and Mobile and is online at AL.com all the time. Reach him at kwhitmire@al.com. Read more

The complete archive of Kyle Whitmire's previous columns

For a while now, I thought Gov. Robert Bentley was a good person, but ...

... but I don't know whether I believe that anymore.

The thing that has turned my mind on the matter were comments Bentley made to lawmakers last week, telling them that he is now open to expanding Medicaid in Alabama under certain conditions.

But before I lay into the governor, I want to share something I've learned in the last year about what it means to be an honest politician. You might want to set your coffee down first. It's a lesson I learned from former state Sen. Scott Beason.

The Beason Rule

In previous life at another newspaper, I called Beason a racist - something I no longer believe and that I should apologize for.

Let me be clear. Beason and I disagree on many things, most notably his toughest-in-the-nation-and-now-scuttled-by-the-federal-courts immigration law, HB56. I think his policies have hurt people. His stupid joke, calling Greene County African Americans "aborigines," I'll chalk-up to the sort of sophomoric locker room bravado any number of people have engaged in to awkwardly fit in. It was stupid and hurtful, but I don't think it truly reflects how he feels.

The Take-Aways Bentley was unequivocal about his opposition to Medicaid expansion last January. If Bentley truly believed that was the right decision, that's one thing. If Bentley, in fact, refused to expand Medicaid for political reasons, that's something different. It would mean that he has deprived as many as 300,000 people of health care for his own political benefit. If Bentley does reverse course, at best, he is doing the right thing for the wrong reason.

But since then, I've had a number of conversations with the senator I once called the Forrest Gump of Alabama politics, and I believe at heart he's the kind of guy who, if he sees you broken down on the side of the road, will stop to help.

Or in other words, I think he's a good person, but ...

The thing I've come to appreciate about the former senator is that, unlike a lot of politicians in Montgomery, he's honest about what he believes, and he expects others to reciprocate. If they truly believe what they say, even if they call him names or say he's a racist, he'll respect their opinions, even mine.

The thing that he will tell you he doesn't respect - and I feel the same way - is when another public official is being two-faced, lying or espousing a false belief just to get elected.

It was a principle I'll call the Beason Rule, and it probably caused him more grief in Montgomery than anything else.

Did Bentley break the rule?

Almost a year ago, in his State of the State address, Bentley reiterated his opposition to expanding Medicaid for roughly 300,000 Alabamians who otherwise fall into the Obamacare gap - too rich to qualify for Medicaid but too poor to afford health insurance. Bentley didn't just dig-in with his opposition. He built a bunker, locked himself in it and booby-trapped the door so no one could open it.

According to Bentley's argument then, Obamacare and Medicaid expansion would grow the national debt, and he wouldn't let Alabama be part of that, nor make hundreds of thousands more Alabamians dependent on the government.

I've been critical of Bentley on many things, particularly his failure to grow jobs in Alabama, as he promised to do in his first campaign, and his willingness to ignore Alabama's biggest crisis - our general fund shortfall - until he was safely past his reelection. However, you won't find much - if anything - I've written taking Bentley to task for refusing to expand Medicaid.

While I disagreed with his decision, Bentley had been consistent, and any criticism of his decision comes down to a debate over the merits of Obamacare - shaky ground, to say the least.

All the while, friends and political junkies tried to persuade me that it was all a ruse, that once the election was over, Bentley would soften and eventually change direction.

I didn't take those arguments seriously because ... well, I thought he was a good person.

Because to believe that the governor could take a turn like that would mean that he would have deprived more people than live in any of Alabama's largest cities of the means to stay healthy, or even alive.

Because if he did make a politically calculated reversal it would mean ... he's not a good person, but someone more cold and duplicitous than anyone we've seen since Wallace.

But last week, while speaking to lawmakers in Montgomery, Bentley said he was interested in Medicaid expansion similar to Arkansas and Pennsylvania's models, which take federal money but direct it then into private-sector programs, and no sooner had Bentley said it than he began to hedge, saying he was still opposed to expansion.

Let's be clear on this - Bentley's comments last week and his speech earlier this year are mutually exclusive things, even if Bentley wants to couch his comments last week in terms blur the bright clear line he drew a year ago.

Does that mean expanding Medicaid is the wrong thing for Bentley to do? Hardly, and I'm all for people having the ability and willingness to change their minds, as long as it's a true change of heart. Perhaps the governor might finally do the right thing, even if it's for the wrong reason.

Or to put it another way, I don't think he's a good person, but ...