Updated 4 p.m. Monday

By Deena Winter | Nebraska Watchdog

LINCOLN, Neb. – The chairman of the state Democratic Party is calling out a Lincoln senator for campaigning on the premise that “health care is a right” but then voting against expanding Medicaid last week.

Lincoln Sen. Colby Coash’s campaign committee sent out fliers in his 2008 campaign that said, “Colby Coash knows that quality health care isn’t a luxury just for the wealthy, it is a basic human right. Colby Coash will fight to ensure that all Nebraskans have the health care they need.” He also promised to be a progressive in the Legislature.

Coash is a Republican, and last week was among the 21 Nebraska lawmakers to vote against cloture, effectively killing Medicaid expansion, a key provision of Obamacare that is voluntary for states. Expanding the program would have provided insurance coverage for an estimated 54,000 Nebraskans who fall into a coverage gap.

Last week marked the second time Nebraska lawmakers have attempted to get an expansion bill passed, and been stymied by a filibuster that requires supporters to get a super-majority to pass the bill.

The chairman of the state Democratic Party, Vince Powers, took to Facebook and Twitter to chide Coash, saying, “Beware right-wing Republicans who campaign as progressives as Coash did.”

“He ended up fighting to keep 54,000 Nebraskans from health care,” Powers said via email.

This year, voters need to specifically ask candidates whether they support Medicaid expansion, Powers said.

“Coash got elected by misleading voters,” Powers said. “The moral is that voters must beware of right-wing Republicans who campaign as moderate Democrats.”

Coash responded saying he’s dedicated his career to helping the “needy, under-privileged, and our most vulnerable citizens” and introduced numerous pieces of legislation to provide more and better health care for Nebraskans. He said while he didn’t support the approach taken in LB887, he’ll “continue to fight to ensure that every Nebraskan gets the health care they need.”

“Medicaid was originally designed to help our most vulnerable citizens, most notably the blind, aged, and citizens with disabilities,” he said via email. “As I noted in my floor speech, this Legislature should focus efforts on reforming our Medicaid system to extend access to critical services for people with disabilities. I don’t believe expanding Medicaid to cover working age Nebraskans is more important than giving access to thousands of people with disabilities waiting for care.”

This session he introduced LB505, requiring insurance coverage of autism spectrum disorders; LB705, increasing the personal needs allowance under Medicaid for the eligible aged, blind and disabled people living in an alternative living arrangement. And he said he supports LB276, which changes reimbursement provisions under the Early Intervention Act and require a Medicaid state plan amendment.

“My support of these bills show that I fight for people that cannot fight for themselves,” he said. “In previous sessions, I have supported bills increasing access to cancer drugs, feeding tubes for infants, access to health care for cancer patients, seniors, and persons with disabilities.”

Coash’s Democratic opponent in 2012, Kyle Michaelis, also noted in a letter to a newspaper editor that during their race, Coash’s campaign literature proclaimed, “Underprivileged Nebraskans need Colby Coash fighting for them.” If that were true, Michaelis said, Coash would vote to expand Medicaid.

Contact Deena Winter at deena@nebraskawatchdog.org. Follow Deena on Twitter at @DeenaNEWatchdog

Editor’s note: to subscribe to News Updates from Nebraska Watchdog at no cost, click here.