Any American who suspects, based on the current situation in Washington, that the United States is well along the road to the “end of Empire” should have watched Saturday’s C-Span coverage of the White House Correspondents’ Dinner.

There, for all to see, from 6 to 11 p.m., were America’s celebrities, from the Obama administration, the Congress, the print media, Hollywood and television and the rest — the country’s cross-fertilized power politics and show business worlds. President Barack Obama, in his eighth and final performance at the annual event, was the most-awaited speaker. TV satirist Larry Wilmore had in the unenviable position of following Mr. Obama at the podium. Mr. Wilmore concentrated on aspects of America’s having had its first black president.

The tickets cost $300 each. It was held at the Washington Hilton under the intense security needed for the president and vice president. The decolletage and the celebrities present made the pre-dinner red-carpet show as interesting as any entertainment-world awards ceremony. Watching them all mill about, schmoozing in their finery, could inspire hatred or concern among those critical of the quality of our current governance.

Leading GOP candidate Donald Trump did not attend, having absorbed a drubbing by Mr. Obama at a previous dinner. Mr. Obama called the Republican campaign “loose.”

Mr. Obama demonstrated again his skill as a speaker. His timing was, as almost always, exquisite. His jabs were well-chosen. Many of them were directed at himself, as when he said that after office he would be sitting around waiting for his “death panel,” a reference to the opposition to his Affordable Care Act. He took the presence of Republicans at the dinner to threaten to run in Judge Merrick Garland for confirmation to the Supreme Court. He said he particularly appreciated Vice President Joe Biden “for not shooting anybody in the face,” a reference to former Vice President Dick Cheney.

He paid what seemed to be sincere appreciation to the press, citing the sometimes difficult-to-fulfill need to provide the American public “a baseline of facts” from which to work in making judgments and decisions. The whole event was enlightening.