Lawmakers passed some $400 million in tax cuts in the 2015 session, with a $226 million cut in the tax that Floridians pay on their cell phone and cable bills being the most significant. But the three-year forecast approved by the Legislative Budget Commission shows despite steady revenue growth from an improving economy they will face a difficult challenge in the 2016 session funding tax cuts as well as major increases in health care and education programs.

An increasing hurdle to tax cuts as well as other state spending initiatives is the Medicaid program, which continues to grow despite the fact that Scott and the Legislature have repeatedly rejected plans to expand the health care program for the poor and disabled under the federal Affordable Care Act.

The state just approved a 7.7 percent rate increase for the private managed care companies that handle the bulk of Medicaid patients, who will represent one out of every five Floridians in 2016-17. The program will cost nearly $25 billion, although the federal government will pay about 60 percent.

“It blocks out the sun,” said Senate Appropriations Chairman Tom Lee, R-Brandon.

Lee warned that if lawmakers don’t find a way to control Medicaid costs it will have a huge impact on the state budget.

“There won’t be revenue to do the things that many other members want to do in priorities, not just now but over a long protracted period of time, whether it be tax cuts or other things,” he said.

Scott will push for more tax cuts when he outlines his 2016-17 budget plan in the next few months. And the agenda will likely include a further cut in the cell phone and cable tax, a reduction in state tax on commercial leases, continuing a major manufacturing tax break that is set to expire in 2017, a corporate tax reduction and another back-to-school sales tax holiday.

It is almost a certainty that lawmakers will pass a major tax-cutting package in their 2016 session. In fact, for the first time in the annual Long-Range Financial Outlook, the forecast builds in a $262 million tax cut for each of the three years, based on average tax cuts in prior years.

Senate President Andy Gardiner, R-Orlando, has said his chamber will start the new budget debate with a goal of having a $250 million tax-cutting proposal, without specifying any specific cuts.

“It’s early,” said Senate Finance and Tax Chair Dorothy Hukill, R-Port Orange, who has filed a series of tax-cutting bills for the 2016 session that more or less follow Scott’s agenda.

Hukill said all the tax cuts are on the table now but will be modified as the House, Senate and governor go through the annual budget negotiations.

“At some point we will have to do what we always do and that’s prioritize what will wind up in our tax package in the Senate and talk to our friends over in the House,” she said.

Another annual tax-cutting challenge for lawmakers is finding a way to pay for big-ticket permanent tax cuts, like this year’s 1.73 percent reduction in the cell phone and cable tax, versus funding one-time tax cuts, like this year’s 10-day sales tax holiday.

One-time tax cuts are much easier to accommodate, while large permanent tax cuts have much greater financial implications for the state budget.

The new financial forecast shows the compounding nature of the recurring tax cuts: If lawmakers pass some $191 million in permanent tax cuts in 2016, the cost will rise to $660 million in recurring annual costs by the third year, assuming similar tax cuts are passed in the second and third year of the forecast.

It will make it more difficult for Scott to win approval for some of his top priorities, including making a $144 million manufacturing tax cut, which Scott sees as a vital element in helping Florida diversify its economy, a permanent cut. If lawmakers don’t act, the tax cut is set to expire in the spring of 2017.

Against that backdrop, the new financial forecast shows despite a projected $635 million surplus in the coming year, lawmakers would only be able to spend an additional $74 million in recurring tax cuts or other spending priorities without creating a deficit in the two out years.

“From my perspective it means we have to be very, very careful in just how much recurring revenue we dedicate, whether it be a tax cut or new funding idea that somebody has,” Lee said.

The forecast provides a financial guideline for Scott and lawmakers in preparing the new budget and it does not represent an absolute limit. Lawmakers may or may not follow many of the assumptions and spending projections, which are built on averages, in the new budget.

It also does not include savings that may be realized by modifying or eliminating existing state programs. Lee said his recommendation will be that lawmakers “scrub” the existing budget looking for those savings as they prepare the new budget, which could provide more money to meet the governor and lawmakers’ priorities.

“We’re one leg of the three-legged stool and we’ll look forward to hearing from the governor and the House. And we’ll work through it like we did last year, hopefully more artfully,” Lee said, referring to the 2015 session that ended up in a special session as lawmakers failed to pass a budget during their regular session.

Tax cut proposals

More tax cuts will be on the 2016 Legislature’s agenda. But rising Medicaid costs and other factors may limit the ability of lawmakers and Gov. Rick Scott to meet his goal of $1 billion in tax cuts during his second term.

Here are some of the major proposals under consideration:

■ Another cut in the communications services tax that Floridians pay on their cell phone and cable television bills. A cut of 2 percent in the rate would cost more than $200 million a year.

■ A 10-day back-to-school sales tax holiday. A one-time cost of about $55 million.

■ A 2 percent reduction in the 6 percent sales tax that businesses pay on their commercial leases would cost $55 million a year.

■ Making this year’s sales tax exemption for college textbooks permanent would cost $44 million a year.

■ Continuing the sales tax exemption for the purchase of manufacturing equipment, which is set to expire in 2017, would cost $144 million annually.

■ Expanding the income exemption for businesses that pay the corporate income tax from $50,000 to $75,000 would cost about $19 million a year.