David Salle, VAGA, NY. Courtesy, Skarstedt New York Ghost 11, 1992

By Carmel Melouney

Like the reappearing spirit in their title, a series of David Salle works entitled “Ghost Paintings” have reemerged after a decade of being hidden away in storage.

The 14 works were made in 1992 by Mr. Salle, a postmodernist painter who has been exhibiting since 1975 and is best known for helping to reestablish painting as an important artistic movement in the 1980s.

The “Ghost Paintings” series wasn’t exhibited until this summer, when it made its debut at the Arts Club of Chicago.

The works will be on show at Skarstedt Gallery on the Upper East Side from Friday until Dec. 21.

The 14 works comprise pre-digital photographs printed onto three contiguous linen panels and painted over with Mark Rothko-like panels of bright color.

Mr. Salle said the linen was imprinted with photographic emulsion, a liquid which transforms the fabric into a base for a photograph. The paintings depict a woman creating improvised movements under a white sheet, the same way children pretend to be ghosts each Halloween.

“I had some overall image of the way you make a ghost-like shape when you put a sheet over your head,” said Mr. Salle of working with a model to create the pieces.

He said he had always been concerned with light and shadow, the interplay that lies at the heart of photography, but couldn’t recall whether the inspiration had been drawn from his own childhood pretending to be a ghost under a white sheet.

David Salle, VAGA, NY. Courtesy, Skarstedt New York Ghost 10, 1992

“It might have happened — luckily there’s no photographic evidence of it,” Mr. Salle said and laughed.

Mr. Salle said there had been plans to exhibit the works in 1992 in Cologne, Germany, but the art market crashed and the show was never executed.

“For one reason or another, we just let it go,” said Mr. Salle, who lives and works in Brooklyn.

“It was a strange moment in the international art world.”

Per Skarstedt, who opened his New York gallery in 1994 and specializes in works from artists of the late 20th century, said he felt lucky to be exhibiting the works after they had been stored away for so many years.

“I think I got lucky that they weren’t shown before,” said Mr. Skarstedt. “It’s very unusual that you find an entire series still in the hands of the artist, and it’s important because they’re so great. It would have been such a shame if they had just stayed in storage.”

Mr. Skarstedt said he had been looking at exhibiting some of Mr. Salle’s works before he knew the ghost series existed.

“He’s certainly an artist I’ve been looking at,” said Mr. Skarstedt. “I’ve always been drawn to the 80s artists, Cindy Sherman, Barbara Kruger, Richard Prince, that whole generation, because that was when I started.

“We do a lot of historical shows here. David just mentioned [the ghost paintings] to me. I didn’t know the paintings existed so I went to see them seven or eight months ago, and I thought they were wonderful.”

Mr. Skarstedt said he liked the way the works merged photography, painting and performance art.

“For me they’re the perfect postmodernist work,” he said.

Mr. Salle said he was not surprised at the circularity of the art world, where works he completed long ago were being shown for the first time, but was pleased to see how “fresh” his work looked now hung in Mr. Skarstedt’s gallery.

“There is a poignancy about something made of a fabric that no longer exists,” Mr. Salle said of the paintings. “This is extinct.”