Things always slow down in August as everyone rushes to finally enjoy summer before it quickly ends. I get the sense that crowdfunders also take a breather too but that doesn’t mean there aren’t some incredibly cool crowdfunding campaigns happening now.

The three crowdfunding campaigns for this weeks #CrowdfundingMailbox are Vincero watches, a standing desk and Swivel Card.

Watches and crowdfunding are a perfect match. I have seen more crowdfunding campaigns than I can remember for different and unique timepieces. Even today when everyone has a smartphone in their pocket meaning they no longer require a watch to check the time people love their watches. I think it is the combination of cool engineering and design the makes a statement for the person wearing the watch. Well Vincero has a unique angel for their crowdfunding campaign on Kickstarter that easily cruised past their goal and now stands over $100,000 today. Vincero is incorporating Carrera marble into every watch they make. The creators have married the Vincero watch with Japanese automatic movement. There are still some early bird reward levels starting at $299 if you are in the market for a new watch.

By now I think we all know that sitting at your desk typing away all day long is pretty bad for your health. Posture, inactivity, just overall general wellness – it sucks sitting during the day but that is what a lot of us do. Standing at your desk is far superior. But most of the standing desks on the market a pretty expensive. Trust me I did the research when I was looking for a new desk. I just couldn’t break down and spend the money to get the one I really wanted to I went the DIY route. Well now crowdfunding on Kickstarter is a super affordable stand up desk. Press Fit will only set you back $199 (early bird rewards are all gone). Even better they ship next month so effectively no wait at all. This campaign was created by David Yamnitsky and Isabella in Boston, Massachusetts. They are MIT students of course.

Finally we have swivelCard: Smart Business Cards funding on Kickstarter. Andrew DePaula has come up with the idea of adding a USB connector to a business card. It’s made with paper too. The cool thing about having a USB connection on your business card is that people you hand the card out to may be directed to a website, dropbox or anywhere you want them to go to get more info. No USB? Well there is NFC as well. So wirelessly information can be transferred by the holder of the card. Makes sense – yes? Isn’t it about time we hand out business cards that we put in a stack never to look at ever again. At best you add them to your LinkedIn profile. Well with swivelCard you have the best of both worlds. All of your contact information plus info like pictures, presentations and more. Just think about it. Crowdfunding on Kickstarter now and way past their goal.

__________________________________

Luxury automatic watches handcrafted with premium Italian marble. Watches that do more than tell time. They tell a story.

Welcome to Vincero (Vin-Chair-0) – A small batch, limited release watch company. We develop luxury mechanical timepieces inspired by timeless events in the past and deliver them direct to the customer.

Here at Vincero we believe a watch should mean more than the name on the dial or the price tag attached to it.

The fact is there are already so many unique and amazing timepieces out on the market. However, the problem is the lack of small production mechanical watches that are actually affordable. It’s time you can own a truly unique watch at a reasonable price.

Affordable, Portable Standing Desk that packs flat and assembles in seconds without screws or tools. Sustainable and Locally Made!

We set out to design a better standing desk.

Press Fit Design – The Press Fit Standing Desk is made from precision-cut parts that assemble like a jigsaw puzzle without any screws or tools. It’s so simple there’s no instruction manual.

Digital Manufacturing – Our completely digital manufacturing process allows us to produce an entirely new type of furniture locally in Massachusetts with the highest quality materials but at a lower price.

Affordable – We searched everywhere but couldn’t find a standing desk we could afford. By using a one-step digital manufacturing process, we’re able to reduce costs and pass those savings down to you.

Portable – It comes apart into light weight pieces that pack flat, so moving is fast and easy.

Sustainable Materials – We’ve worked with a local supplier to use the highest possible quality prefinished maple plywood that is grown and milled in the northeast and 100% Formaldehyde-free, so together we can cut down on pollutants and carcinogens in our homes and water supplies.

A paper USB business card with full analytics and remote access. Meet the new standard for premium business cards.

What is a swivelCard?

A swivelCard is a premium paper business card that includes a USB drive–a smart business card. It includes analytics and can be updated even after giving it out.

What Can swivelCard Do?

We patented a system for turning regular paper into a USB drive. Now we’ve included this technology in a business card. When you own swivelCard, you own the premium business card on the market.

Paper comes alive with embedded USB technology. Imagine giving your business card with pictures, videos, presentations, and websites for the recipient to interact with!

Analytics through a back-end software interface will allow you to access helpful information about your cards and how they are being used.

You can edit the destination you’ve selected remotely. Remote access to your swivelCard gives you many opportunities to continue interacting with the card’s recipient. With the back-end interface you’ll be able to log in to your account and remotely make changes to the destination. Plus, this can be done individually for each specific card. Want that potential client to go to a list of testimonials instead of your standard video greeting? You can make that change on the fly after they’ve left with the card!