Hillary Clinton finally acknowledged during a recent town hall meeting that the Affordable Care Act is leaving many Americans stuck in part-time jobs. Although these workers are ready and eager to hold full-time positions, Clinton said President Obama's signature law has built-in "unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment."

Despite her warning, Clinton still fervently supports the Affordable Care Act, even claiming recently "it's working" as intended. These words may reassure many of her supporters, but they should frighten many of the 4.7 million Hispanics living in Florida. And with the Act's mandates coming into effect this month for businesses with more than 50 employees, more Hispanics will fall victim to the "unfortunate incentives."

Few have felt the Affordable Care Act's negative effects as strongly as the Hispanic community. Hispanics have been increasingly forced into part-time work in recent years, with the health care law's employer mandates helping to drive this trend. Alongside that shift comes lower incomes, weaker career mobility and altogether less opportunity for Hispanics to achieve the American Dream.

Hispanics began to lose ground professionally in the years since the Great Recession. The rate of Hispanics working part-time "for economic reasons" — meaning due to a lack of full-time jobs — doubled as the recession took hold.

It has yet to return to its pre-recession lows. The most recent Bureau of Labor Statistics job numbers show 4.73 percent of Hispanics still facing involuntary part-time employment. Hispanic females face an even higher 5.83 percent. By contrast, the rate of involuntary part-time for the non-Hispanic population was roughly 3 percent.

This gap wasn't always so noticeable. In a recent study conducted for the LIBRE Institute, called "The Hispanic Worker through the Great Recession and Recovery," I observed the wide disparity between Hispanics and non-Hispanics becoming the new normal as the Affordable Care Act took hold. In fact, during the four months leading up to the employer mandate taking effect in 2015, the rate of Hispanic involuntary part-time work skyrocketed 20 percent. Employers were likely accounting for the soon-to-rise cost of providing full-time positions.

This trend toward part-time work is especially hurting young Hispanics, who desperately need solid employment opportunities that lead to a long-term career. A recent Viacom-sponsored study found more than six out of 10 Hispanic millennials were involuntarily working part-time or looking for full-time work in the immediate aftermath of the Affordable Care Act's implementation. And 23 percent of Hispanic millennials reported having their work hours reduced, compared with just 14 percent of non-Hispanics.

Fewer work opportunities means bad news for this community. Home ownership represents the American Dream for many Hispanics, yet a study by the Demand Institute showed that 2.5 million Latinos who are seeking to buy a home by 2020 won't be able to. Much of that stems from reduced household income and savings brought on by involuntary part-time work.

And that's for the Hispanics who can find work at all. The Hispanic unemployment rate is now 6.3 percent, more than a full point higher than that of the general population. Unemployment or involuntarily part-time work are unpromising options for the many ambitious Hispanics building their future.

With that in mind, when Clinton acknowledges the Affordable Care Act is causing a shift to part-time employment, she should also acknowledge how especially harmful that is for Hispanics. Federal mandates, with their "unfortunate incentives," won't help them find long-term work.

There are other reforms needed to level the playing field. Clinton should start by bringing attention to the occupational licensing laws she'll encounter in Florida. These laws require job-seekers to pay fees and spend many hours in training for jobs they're often already qualified to perform. Florida licenses at least 45 professions, many of them jobs favored by Hispanic entrepreneurs. It's just another set of barriers for this community.

A champion for the Hispanic community should focus on tearing down such barriers rather than reinforcing them. If Clinton truly wants to be a champion for Hispanics, she must advocate policies that free up the full-time jobs paving the road to the American Dream.

Carli Dimino is the policy director for The LIBRE Initiative and its sister organization The LIBRE Institute.