<p>A stairway leads to the second floor loft of the Bada home, which consists entirely of the master bedroom and bathroom offering lots of space and privacy.</p>

By Stacey Wiedower

After a couple of years spent criss-crossing the south for employment opportunities, Alex and Monica Bada were ready to settle down. But they weren't sure they were ready to buy.

"We weren't 100 percent committed to buying a house. We just said, ?Let's see if we fall in love with anything,' " said Alex, an engineer with MicroPort Orthopedics in Arlington. "We looked with an open mind."

In part, that's because Alex and Monica ? both native Memphians ? already owned a condominium on Belvedere Boulevard in Central Gardens. When a job offer for Alex took them to Durham, North Carolina in June 2012, they put the condo up for rent.

And then in December 2013, another job offer brought the couple home to Memphis.

"We were just gone for a year and a half," said Monica, a stylist with Ryan Patrick Salon in East Memphis. "We'd hoped to move back there (into the condo), but our renters were in there."

Since the renters had seven months left on their lease, the Badas moved in with family and toyed with the idea of waiting it out. In the meantime, they began a casual home search.

For help, Alex and Monica called Realtor Sheldon Rosengarten of Marx-Bensdorf, who began to show the couple listings. The Badas thought they wanted to remain in Midtown.

However, the houses Alex and Monica viewed in their favorite neighborhoods required too much work for the price. And so they broadened their search to East Memphis.

"When you start widening your search a little bit you find out, especially near the University of Memphis, a lot of these homes are of the same genre as Midtown," Rosengarten said.

And though they didn't want a fixer-upper, they did want a house that offered a blank slate they could fill with their own personalities.

"We wanted something we could sort of make our own, nothing that was already completely finished because we wanted to be able to add our own touch to everything," Monica said. "But definitely something that was older and had character."

The couple viewed about 15 houses before Rosengarten led them to a three-bedroom, two-bath house in the Central Poplar neighborhood, not far from the U of M. It had a nice yard, which was tops on Alex's wish list, and a convenient location just off Poplar Avenue.

"I hadn't really ever considered this neighborhood before," Monica said. "We didn't even know this was here."

The 2,100-square-foot house had undergone additions and updates from previous owners but still needed a little TLC, making it the Badas' perfect match.

"It had been for sale for a year," Alex said. "It had been sitting empty, but we saw the potential in it and ended up making an offer."

The couple purchased the house for $170,000 in late January. "And then we painted everything," Alex said.

"We did lots of cosmetic work," added Monica. "It was a fresh canvas when we came in. The kitchen was already great, already updated. So that was amazing, that we didn't have to do any work with that."

The house has a large front room with a fireplace. The couple decorated the home with a blend of modern and rustic-traditional pieces, resulting in a stylish, eclectic mix.

In the gray-walled dining room, a long, rough-hewn table is surrounded by upholstered chairs in two different styles and colors. Beyond it, the updated kitchen features white cabinetry with oil-rubbed bronze hardware, a tile backsplash and dark countertops.

A built-in peninsula separates the kitchen from a small sitting room with space for a bistro table and chairs and a seating area that's anchored by an animal hide rug.

"We sold a lot of furniture prior to moving, so we didn't have a lot to bring with us," Monica said. "I don't really like to rush into getting things. I just like to find a certain piece that I know will fit the space well. I like eclectic, a little antiquish, a little bit modern ? just all mixed in together."

"Monica's got the vision, and I just sort of sign off on everything," added Alex with a laugh.

In the private areas of the house, a bathroom features a black-and-white tile floor and pedestal sink that fit the character of the 1950s architecture. A guest bedroom and home office have cheery blue walls.

The master suite was added by a previous owner in space that once served as an attic.

"We think it was originally a two-bedroom, one-bath with some sort of sunroom," Alex said. "When they converted the upstairs into a master suite, it gained a lot of square footage."

The long, narrow bedroom has angled ceilings and wood-paneled walls. The attached bath was carved out of the former attic and features his-and-hers closets.

"In our future plans for the house we want to redo the master bathroom," Monica said.

The couple also plans to repaint the home's exterior in coming months. Already, they've put a lot of work into their new, party-ready backyard.

"We wanted to create an oasis of our own," Monica said.

The Badas especially like that their new neighborhood is centrally located for their families ? who live out east ? and for the places they like to go.

"I love the location more than anything," Alex said. "We really wanted to be in Midtown, but this actually works out better for us because we're five minutes from anywhere in Midtown and our parents live in Germantown and Collierville."

Added Monica, "I love that we can come together now. We love having people over, and it's just been a really great house for entertaining."