A Williamsburg physician successfully founded and sold a company that aimed to save doctors time and headaches when it came to entering data for insurance reimbursement.

"We saw the writing on the wall," said Brian Clare, a former emergency room physician who founded eScribe Management Services five years ago.

Scribes — trained medical information managers who observe physicians to document services and treatment for proper insurance reimbursement — started growing in demand when more health systems began using electronic medical records as incentivized by Medicare and Medicaid payments and mandated by the Affordable Care Act. Physicians have found entering the data cumbersome and an inefficient use of their time, Clare said.

In 2010, eScribe Management Services started with one customer — Riverside Tappahannock Hospital — and three scribes, Clare said. In 2015, the company had about 500 scribes at 54 sites in 11 states and Canada. Clare estimates the company had well over 300 percent growth in revenue per year on average. EScribe also expanded through Riverside Health System's other hospitals in addition to Children's Hospital of the King's Daughters in Norfolk and Newport News, he said.

Florida-based ScribeAmerica noticed the success and acquired eScribe in September to add to its portfolio of more than 1,000 sites nationwide. Clare felt the company was the right fit that could take the business to the next level.

The terms of the deal were not disclosed.

"They've got a lot of resources. They're big," Clare said of ScribeAmerica. "I think from our standpoint, it was the right decision to partner with a large organization that has the infrastructure in place."

'Ready for growth'

Michael Murphy, CEO of ScribeAmerica, knew Clare before the merger took place. When Clare was teaching a class at St. George's University in the Caribbean, Murphy was the only student in the room who knew what a scribe was in a picture. He knew because he'd founded ScribeAmerica the same year in 2004.

"We eyed eScribe because Brian Clare always does a great job running organizations," Murphy said in an emailed statement. "With that, we knew eScribe would be buttoned up and ready for growth."

The local company is joining a large network. According to the ScribeAmerica website, "ScribeAmerica essentially created the medical Scribe industry, we are the nation's most frequently used and largest professional scribe training and management company, present in over 1,200 healthcare facilities, in 48 states and employing more than 9,000 scribes."

The concept of e-scribes started in emergency medicine and has now grown into a dozen specialties like pediatrics, orthopedics and cardiology, Clare said.

In 2014, eScribe developed a remote scribe program for clients in rural areas that would use an iPad on a cart to allow scribes working from Williamsburg or Charleston, S.C., to see the patient and doctor interactions remotely over a secure network, Clare said. This meshed well with ScribeAmerica's TeleScribe service.

Train and grow

In its "land and expand" business plan, the company would eye large teaching hospital systems for initial adoption of scribes so that affiliated physicians would also latch on, Clare said. The beauty of landing in university hospital systems was also the ability to recruit and train pre-med students to be scribes.

"It gives them a great opportunity to see medicine at the ground level," Clare said.

That's how eScribe grew early on: recruiting scribes from the College of William and Mary in Williamsburg and Christopher Newport University in Newport News, as well as getting a large health-care provider to give it a try, he explained. Partner Sam Jones also helped as chief operating and financial officer.

What's next?

Now after the sale, Clare, a serial entrepreneur, plans to keep busy with other endeavors, including as chief medical officer for the Williamsburg startup ivWatch LLC, which developed a device to detect and continuously monitor for intravenous leaks. Clare said aspiring entrepreneurs could look for business opportunities by solving health-care delivery problems.

"The industry is changing so much," Clare said.

Bozick can be reached at 757-247-4741. Sign up for a free weekday business news email at TidewaterBiz.com.