SHARE Kathleen Falk Kevin Hayden Tammy Baldwin Dan Schwartzer Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

Madison — About 7,200 Wisconsin residents so far have signed up for health coverage through new online federal insurance marketplaces, a state official said Tuesday.

Dan Schwartzer, deputy state insurance commissioner, said there are signs the insurance exchange is working somewhat better after weeks of a troubled rollout for the federal law known as Obamacare.

Schwartzer, who spoke at a luncheon organized by Wisconsin Health News, said the state's estimate of sign-up figures isn't exact but that in past weeks it had tracked closely with the official federal statistics.

"It looks like it's improving," Schwartzer said of the online exchange.

At the luncheon, federal official Kathleen Falk said the federal statistics on enrollment would be released each month but had no immediate figures to offer.

Falk, a Democrat and former Dane County executive, runs the Chicago office of the federal Department of Health and Human Services.

She said so far 400 computer bugs have been resolved by federal officials and contractors working to improve the performance of the glitch-ridden exchanges.

Right now, 50,000 people can use the federal site at the same time to shop among approved health care plans, she said.

"It's not perfect yet. Progress is being made," Falk said.

Falk wouldn't comment on whether she thought federal officials might approve either of two requests by GOP Gov. Scott Walker to let customers bypass the federal health-care exchange.

Two weeks ago, Walker requested consumers be allowed to use federal subsidies to buy any health plan offered in Wisconsin.

That request would represent a substantial change of policy for the Affordable Care Act, which limits subsidies to those meeting certain standards and offered through the exchange.

But the Walker administration also has asked the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services to include Wisconsin in a pilot program to help consumers go directly to insurers to buy the health plans available through the online exchange.

This so-called direct enrollment option is included in Obamacare as it was originally written.

So, technically, it is already available as an option in Wisconsin and other states — it just hasn't been used much here and elsewhere because of the larger federal computer problems.

To make direct enrollment more viable, the federal government also has launched pilot programs last month in Florida, Ohio and Texas.

Falk said those states were chosen for the test programs because they have the largest uninsured populations among the states using the federal exchange.

"It was kind of a soft launch," Falk said.

Schwartzer said he hoped federal officials would grant both administration requests, including the broader one to open up the insurance subsidies to any plan sold in Wisconsin.

With the sizable problems in the federal exchange, that made sense, he said.

Insurance executive Kevin Hayden disagreed. Hayden, chief executive officer of Group Health Cooperative of South Central Wisconsin and a former state health secretary, said it was too early to go that route.

Hayden, whose company offers plans on the exchange, said he might support the change if the exchange doesn't keep improving and continues to frustrate companies and consumers.

"Let's see how the marketplace works," Hayden said.

In other remarks at the luncheon, the state's deputy of health services defended Walker's separate proposal to respond to the glitches in the exchange by waiting three months to drop some 72,000 patients off the state's BadgerCare Plus health care coverage and waiting to bring 83,000 other poorer patients onto the coverage.

Kevin Moore said the three-month delay would help the Department of Health Services make a smoother transition with both of these groups.

"There's a distinction between being able to do it and being able to do it right," Moore said.

U.S. Sen. Tammy Baldwin (D-Wis.) issued a separate statement Tuesday noting that state taxpayers would save money if Walker would accept federal funds to expand BadgerCare Plus to both groups rather than choose between them.

"Wisconsin continues to pay a price for Governor Walker's insistence on putting politics ahead of what's best for our state," she said.

Walker, in turn, has said he sees it as too risky for state taxpayers to accept expanded federal Medicaid funds because the funds might not always be available.