BTU Lab promotes interdisciplinary partnerships through ATLAS Institute

Graduate student Abhishek Narula, right, works on an interactive light and sound installation called "Kinetic Voices" with Professor Hunter Ewen in an electronic musical instrument design class at the BTU Lab on the University of Colorado. The lab is a hacker space, where students and industry partners can gather to explore technology and society. ( Paul Aiken / Daily Camera )

Charlotte Brace hurried to put the finishing touches on her light-up pointe shoes before showing off the project to her physical computing class at the University of Colorado.

Sitting inside the new "BTU Lab" on campus, Brace and around 10 other students demonstrated their quirky, sometimes-malfunctioning inventions, including a spinning paintbrush, reactive dance pants and a kitchen gadget that was supposed to play "Peanut Butter Jelly Time" every time a user removed a knife, presumably to make a sandwich.

All around them, tools, machines, random bits of electronics and other forms of inspiration lined the walls.

The lab, which opened in September, is jokingly referred to as the "blow things up" lab by faculty and students. BTU also stands for British thermal unit, a measure of energy, said Mark Gross, director of the Alliance for Technology, Learning and Society, or ATLAS, Institute.

It's designed to be a hacker space, where students from different disciplines and industry partners can come together to tinker, play, innovate and find new uses for objects and technologies.

"An awful lot of learning takes place in these informal places," Gross said. "In labs, where people mix and there's a sense of community. It's purposeful, but it's not the strictly structured stuff. Students are very hungry for that."

When the musician bumps into the electronics engineer, cool stuff can happen, Gross said.

In many ways, the BTU Lab embodies what ATLAS is all about —interdisciplinary partnerships involving engineers, students, educators, artists and scholars who explore the intersection of technology and society in new and previously unimaginable ways.

"When a bunch of the hacker spaces started sprouting up, people started saying 'Oh there's really interesting stuff coming out of these spaces,' and were kind of scratching their heads and wondering why," said Alicia Gibb, director of the BTU Lab. "I think one of the really big reasons why is if you have a culture where there's no silos, and there's no 'what you're supposed to do,' it's all about what you can innovate and about what you can hack."

Gibb defines hacking as "using things for their unintended purposes, building things, innovating new things, building off of old things" using any type of material or tool.

With some training, students have 24-hour access to an array of machines in the lab, including a 3-D printer, sewing machine, laser cutter, bandsaw, watercolor robot and others.

Though she's the lab director, Gibb tries not to put any limits on what students can do in the lab. If a student requests a specific tool, she's happy to look at the lab's budget and see if she can make it happen.

"It's a little bit more just anarchic," she said. "I don't really think it's best for me to decide all the things for the BTU Lab."

She'll help students if they ask for guidance, but many times, they learn from other students or from browsing the Internet for other projects that may have used similar components or technologies.

Nils Besvold, who will soon graduate with a finance degree, is also getting a minor in technology, arts and media offered through the ATLAS Institute. For Besvold, the lab is a space to lose track of time while learning how electronics and other technologies work through trial and error.

Besvold used LED lights, a glow-in-the-dark board, strings and a motor to create a repeating pattern as the lights move across the board.

"I love this place," Besvold said. "After this class is over, I'll sit here for another two hours just kind of tinkering with stuff."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta