Boulder native Taylor Phinney, whose cycling career nearly ended after a horrific crash in May 2014, will compete in the elite men’s road race and the individual time trial for the United States at the world road cycling championships in Richmond, Va., beginning Sept. 20.

The turnaround is remarkable for Phinney, who returned to racing just last month at the Tour of Utah after 15 months recovering from a crash into a guard rail during a race in Chattanooga. The BMC Racing rider had told The Denver Post before then racing in the USA Pro Challenge that he was unsure whether he would be strong enough to make the U.S. roster. He put those doubts to rest early, winning the 605-mile event’s first stage in Steamboat Springs.

He will be one of two riders representing the U.S. in the elite men’s individual time trial, with the other spot to be named later, and will also be a part of the elite men’s road team. USA Cycling must name the remaining elite men’s road race and time trial spots before UCI’s Sept. 11 deadline.

Joining Phinney will be four other Colorado riders: Golden’s Alex Howes of the Boulder-based Cannondale-Garmin squad, who is currently in Spain racing as a support rider for his team in the Vuelta; Englewood’s Greg Daniel, a Cherry Creek High School graduate who competed in the Pro Challenge for the Axeon Cycling development squad and will be one of five riders making of the under-23 road team; Carmen Small, a Durango native racing for the Bigla Pro Cycling Team who earned a bid to represent the U.S. in the individual time trial after winning the Continental Championship in May; and Chris Blevins, also of Durango, competing for the junior team representing Team Specialized Racing.

Howes, who won Stage 7 of the 2013 edition of the Pro Challenge, sat out the Tour de France for Cannondale-Garmin and the Pro Challenge to prep for the Vuelta and, he had hoped, the road championships. American Brent Bookwalter — who was in yellow for several stages of the Pro Challenge — Seattle’s Tyler Farrar of MTN-Qhubeka and Ben King of Cannondale-Garmin round out the elite men’s U.S. team.

The most notable absence is Tejay van Garderen, the United States’ top Grand Tour rider, who crashed out of the Vuelta a España on Saturday, fracturing his shoulder and sustaining other injuries. It’s just the latest incident in what has already been a monumentally disappointing season for the part-time Aspen resident. He had dropped out of the Tour de France with illness just before the Alps while sitting in third overall. His BMC team also confirmed that he would not be racing in the team time trial.