A McLennan County grand jury has indicted 106 bikers who were arrested May 17 after a shootout outside a Twin Peaks restaurant in Waco that killed nine people and wounded 20. Curiously, nine of the 106 people indicted last week were not among the 177 people arrested six months ago, according to The Associated Press. AP reported that none of nine has been arrested.

McLennan County District Attorney Abel Reyna has said the grand jury will return to consider charges against the other 80 bikers arrested six months ago, possibly as soon as Wednesday.

The indictments allege that the 106 bikers were engaged in organized criminal activity. This is a broad, catch-all charge — and one with a serious penalty for anyone convicted of the crime: 15 years to life in prison. I think it’s clear the indictments are designed to force most of the accused into accepting plea agreements — which not only will allow prosecutors to leverage testimony against any truly hardcore gang members they want to go after, but also will allow prosecutors to save face for creating a legal morass when they arrested 177 people. As the University of Houston Law Center’s Sandra Guerra Thompson told The Associated Press, “I imagine that they’re going to try talking defense lawyers into negotiating pleas with a lot of these folks, and in so doing, line up folks to testify as witnesses. If they’ve identified certain people as especially culpable, they’re going to start with the less culpable ones and try to get them to turn on the others.”

Criminal cases rarely go to trial — something like 95 percent of them end with a plea bargain. This is not quite how things are meant to work under the Constitution’s Sixth Amendment, but it is how things do work. Plea agreements allow prosecutors to make the best use of their limited time and resources. But when people accused of crimes accept a plea deal, they waive away their rights — and in some cases their innocence. Plea agreements also can deny the public the clarity that trials can bring to a criminal case.

There is so much we still don’t know about what happened May 17. Police say a coalition of motorcycle clubs was meeting at a Twin Peaks restaurant in Waco when a fight between members of the Bandidos and the Cossacks motorcycle gangs — two groups of bikers with violent histories — broke out in the parking lot. A shootout involving numerous law enforcement officers who had assembled nearby to watch over the gathering quickly followed.

The Associated Press has reviewed videos, audio and more than 8,800 pages of evidence related to the shootout. The reports confirm that some police bullets hit bikers, but ballistic results that would tell us more about who shot whom remain pending. Video shows dozens of people scrambling for safety while shots are fired; one video shows a biker inside the restaurant holding a pistol, but he does not fire his gun. Audio reveals police threatening to shoot people if they rise from the ground.

More than 430 weapons were recovered from the crime scene, including 151 guns. Some of the weapons were taken from bikers, some were removed from vehicles, some were found scattered about the scene. It isn’t clear what all the weapons are. We also don’t know how many of the guns were legally owned and carried, or how many of the confiscated guns were fired.

For any crime to be “organized,” it has to be conspiratorial — think racketeering, the crime frequently associated with organized crime. I struggle to understand what crime an ersatz rebel — some weekend Johnny Strabler — sitting inside Twin Peaks drinking a beer or a glass of tea conspired to commit. Most of the bikers were wearing their club’s insignia or colors, but wearing a biker vest shouldn’t count as a criminal act, and should only be considered a conspiracy of fashion, not crime. And yet that vest can mark someone as a co-conspirator in a crime, however ignorant he might be of any conspiracy or crime, if others in the group are aware or culpable.

(The Atlantic’s David A. Graham clearly explains the sweeping — and troubling — nature of the organized-crime indictments in an article you can read here.)

Until shown otherwise, I think it’s safe to say that most of the bikers who were arrested May 17 probably had nothing to do with the alleged fight that prompted the shooting, or with the shooting itself. Most likely, they were in the wrong place at the wrong time, maybe with some wrong people nearby, maybe not, and for that they are facing possible time in prison. Over the next several months we’ll see how many feel forced to deal with prosecutors, and how many force prosecutors to prove their case.