Health care is changing, and Aspirus' CEO believes it is positioned to succeed.

Buy Photo Matthew Heywood recently passed his first anniversary as Aspirus Inc.’s president and CEO. (Photo: Robert Mentzer/Daily Herald Media )Buy Photo

The health care industry is in a phase of "merger mania," with organizations seeking to combine to increase their scale.

"Everybody is out there on the conference circuit saying, 'You need to be $3 billion (in annual revenue). If you can't be $3 billion you won't survive. Go find a friend,'" said Matthew Heywood, president and chief executive officer of Aspirus Inc., the health system that operates in central and northern Wisconsin and in Michigan's Upper Peninsula.

Soon after Heywood took over the top spot at Aspirus in July 2013, though, he and his team arrived at a different view.

"We don't need to merge," Heywood said. "We can be very successful in the $800 million to $1 billion range. We have the wherewithal to survive on our own; let's go in this direction and do it."

Buy Photo An entrance to one of the Aspirus Wausau medical facilities is shown. Aspirus Inc. president and CEO Matthew Heywood says the system is positioned for success in a changing health care market. (Photo: Daily Herald Media file photo )

We caught up with Heywood to discuss his first year as Asprius CEO and discussed the state of the health care industry, the impact of the Affordable Care Act and whether we should fear the Ebola outbreak.

Here's an edited transcript:

What have been some of the changes in the last year?

What we had to do was move from being more of a confederation to more of a system, while keeping our focus on the communities we're in. If we have seven different hospitals, we're doing things sometimes seven different ways instead of one way. You'll get the same patient satisfaction survey. You won't get 31 different bills in the future. We're trying to become more of a system and narrow ourselves down and give a consistent experience to the patient.

In general, we've seen a slowdown in the health industry, and some layoffs in the field. How has Aspirus experienced this trend?

In the near term, utilization has dropped. It's partly the improvement in the way we are caring for the population, and some of the things we're doing to be proactive to help people's care. But some of it, too, is that people have high-deductible health plans. All high-deductible plans are going to do in the near term is make people a little bit better consumers, but then sometimes the patients may postpone critical care, which may cause problems later.

First and foremost, we want to be providing the best care and managing the health of our population. If the volume is going down because we're doing those things, then that's acceptable. If it's because people aren't getting the care they need and it's going to become a challenge for them and they're going to have health problems, we're trying to figure out how we overcome that.

How is the Affordable Care Act working? How is it affecting your business?

The Affordable Care Act has so many layers to it, I will pick out just a few obvious ones. The first one is the exchanges. I think the exchanges are a good way for people to get health care. They've got a lot of hiccups, and they've got some challenges. We are trying to figure out how we get on the exchange and people know what product they're getting. Second, a lot of (the plans on the exchanges) are high-deductibles, which is going to be a challenge in the ways we talked about, but at least it's getting insurance to people who never had it.

I think the exchanges are a good concept, but I think they are still immature and it's going to take two to three years for them to have fewer options, more clarity on who's in the network and people are going to hopefully manage the deductible level and so on.

The other big (change) is, by expanding Medicaid and what Medicaid was covering, that will help move some uninsured people to (insured). Now, Wisconsin hasn't fully expanded Medicaid, but it did do some changes to Medicaid elements that have allowed us to get people coverage who were not getting coverage.

Does Aspirus have a position on full Medicaid expansion? Do you see that as something Wisconsin should do?

If we're trying to make sure people who want insurance and need insurance get it, and we're able to create a system that doesn't necessarily take the federal money to expand it, fine. But we want to make sure that we as a state don't get in a position where we're not helping those people, and we're not accepting the Medicaid dollars from the federal government for the expansion of the program just because we don't want to do it, while we are then not fixing the problems ourselves.

What's your view of the hospital performance piece of the law?

I think the attempt is the right attempt, to get measures to be able to quantify. I believe some of the measures are really aligned toward the future and what we need to get done, such as readmission rates, certain infection rate measures. And there are some other measures that doctors and others would argue that they don't know if it really makes as much of a difference clinically as the amount of focus people have on it.

My argument would be it's really changing our mindset as an industry to measure key things, to have standard protocols and ways of doing things, instead of doing it hundreds of different ways. You can argue the efficacy of some of those measures, but the real, underlying efficacy is that it's starting to make us work as a standardized industry, do things the same way where it's appropriate, measuring success and creating a culture that will be able to do the right thing, know it's right, be able to prove it's right and do it the same way consistently for our patients and communities.

The recent outbreak of the Ebola virus has had a lot of people thinking about the possibility of a pandemic. What would happen if tomorrow somebody showed up in Wisconsin with some kind of major infectious disease?

Well, we go through rigorous training to prepare for any type of airborne (event) or chemical spill or any type of what we'd call a disaster. That goes to quarantining people, people having to wear certain outfits and medical garments, how would we identify, treat and manage those patients. And then (physicians and staff) practice things that are a little more extreme, like mass casualty events. And again, it's not just a virus outbreak. It could be a fire, a chemical spill, a major car accident.

It is something to be concerned about. You have to be more careful and cognizant. With air travel and people going all over the world, you have to be aware of what's going on so that if somebody shows up in your emergency department, you're aware of certain symptoms or certain indicators that maybe there's something you need to worry about.

Contact Robert Mentzer at 715-845-0604; rmentzer@gannett.com; or on Twitter as @robertmentzer.

Read or Share this story: http://wdhne.ws/1oKFxOd