WASHINGTON -- Majority Leader Eric Cantor's upset loss in Tuesday's night Virginia primary could propel Rep. Steve Scalise, R-Jefferson, into the No. 3 position in the House Republican leadership.

Two House Republican sources said that Scalise would likely run for the House Majority Whip if the current whip, Rep. Kevin McCarthy, R-Calif., runs for majority leader to replace Cantor.

Cantor informed GOP members Wednesday that he intends to step down as majority leader next month, according to GOP aides.

One Republican source said that Scalise, the current leader of the large House conservative caucus, would enjoy strong support from many rank and file Republicans who believe the current leadership doesn't strongly enough represent conservative views.

It might also help ease the way for McCarthy to take Cantor's spot -- without a challenge from the right.

The National Journal reported Wednesday that Chief Deputy Whip Peter Roskam, R-Ill., is also likely to run for whip.

The whip is an influential position beyond its official duties of counting the votes, working for member support for leadership positions and helping set the floor schedule.

Rep. Bill Cassidy, R-Baton Rouge, praised Scalise.

"Steve is a champion of Louisiana conservative values," Cassidy said. "He is a good friend and I know he will excel at whatever task he decides to take up next."

If Scalise wins the spot, he could get the vote he and other conservatives have sought on a Republican alternative to the Affordable Care Act. Some Republicans have been reluctant to hold such a vote, fearful it would give Democrats an issue to challenge Republicans in the mid-term elections because the legislation isn't likely to help as many people gain health coverage, particularly those with pre-existing conditions, as offered by the the Affordable Care Act.

Scalise enjoyed a good relationship with Cantor, whom he helped negotiate a fix to the Biggert-Waters flood insurance law that was causing large increases in premiums for some homeowners. Scalise also brought Cantor to New Orleans several times, including a November visit to New Orleans charter schools.

Some pundits predict that Cantor's defeat makes it less likely that House Republicans will negotiate with Senate Democrats and the Obama administration on key policy issues. It also is likely to kill efforts by some House members to get a vote on immigration reform, passed last year by the Senate.

Cantor's winning challenger in the Virginia primary, economics professor Dave Brat, had accused Cantor of supporting amnesty by suggesting he was open to a vote on legislation that could give some illegal immigrants a path toward legal status.

Before his defeat, Cantor was seen as the odds-on-favorite to replace Speaker John Boehner, who hasn't said whether he would seek another term next year.