Oct. 1 will bring the opening of health insurance Marketplaces in every state, where people can buy coverage to begin in 2014. Standing by will be thousands of paid and unpaid helpers to guide you through the process.

Affordable Care Act: Who Will Help You Sign Up?

Sept. 20, 2013 -- Oct. 1 will bring the opening of health insuranceMarketplaces in every state, where people can buy coverage to begin in 2014. Most Americans won't need to do anything because they have health insurance through their employer or the government. But people who do use the Marketplaces are likely to find them complicated at best and bewildering at worst. Standing by will be thousands of paid and unpaid helpers to guide you through the process. Some work for the Marketplaces and some do not.

1. What kind of help is available? There will be four types of helpers available: Navigators , who work for the Marketplaces. They will teach you about the Marketplaces and help you enroll. Navigators will be available in all states.

, who work for the Marketplaces. They will teach you about the Marketplaces and help you enroll. Navigators will be available in all states. In-person assisters , who are similar to navigators.

, who are similar to navigators. Certified application counselors , who will help you enroll for health coverage through the Marketplaces. They work for hospitals or nonprofit groups.

, who will help you enroll for health coverage through the Marketplaces. They work for hospitals or nonprofit groups. Agents and brokers. The rules for them are different in each state.

2. What does the navigator program do? The navigator program helps anyone who wants to get insurance through a Marketplace. The goal of navigators is to help “consumers understand the basics of insurance, how it works, and how they enroll in the Marketplace," says Elizabeth Calhoun. She is a professor of health policy and administration at the University of Illinois at Chicago. "They'll help people digest information so they can make the best decisions." Navigators will be required to take 20 hours of training. They must be impartial and are not allowed to recommend specific plans.