I got lectured the other day by a man who told me that I should be more upset about the patriarchy than I apparently am. He is a good man, one that I actually love and respect, but it was a bit strange to have a feminist with an Adams Apple (and I’m not talking transgender, here) read me the riot act about how I’m the victim of generational oppression.

He didn’t actually put it that way. He simply tried to explain to me why someone like Donald Trump was a toxic misogynist who hated women. I think a lot of this comes from the fact that he doesn’t share Trump’s politics (neither do I) but when I mentioned the fact that Bill Clinton was every bit as anti-woman as the Orange One, he said, “Well, yes, he is too but we’re not talking about him.”

And he’s right, we weren’t. But my point in raising Hillary’s hubby (and you know I always have to hesitate before putting “raise” and “Hillary’s hubby” in the same sentence) is that people who are attacking the Republican front runner for his sleazy, oily and not altogether respectful ways with women should at the very least be equally repulsed by other famous men who have done the same. Or worse.

I belong to a Facebook page maintained by very educated women who went to a high-minded women’s college, and many of them detest Trump. One posted that she couldn’t believe he would make that comment about considering dating Ivanka if she wasn’t his daughter. I responded that it was icky, but so was the fact that Bill Clinton was happily manhandled by a woman only a few years older than his own daughter. The original poster said that my logic was laughable, which means that she couldn’t figure out a way to prove me wrong.

Advertisement

Then there is Ed Rendell, who made the adorable comment that most women in America are probably ugly, and that they wouldn’t vote for Trump because he’s insulted them. I pointed out to some friends that he did say “probably,” so maybe we shouldn’t all jump on the former mayor and governor, who I actually happen to adore. He’s a dirty, old, hairy man with an unfortunate penchant for mumbling on the radio, but I have a hard time really hating someone who is so incapable of muzzling himself that he will inadvertently insult everyone. He is the antidote to PC.

But, and this is only conjecture, I’m thinking that most liberal women will give Dirty Hairy a pass, just as they did to the Arkansas Marauder. After all, both of them support abortion rights, and both of them talk the good talk about progressive things that we women, oppressed as we are by the patriarchy, like.

Like wage parity. Flexible work schedules. Free birth control. And subsidized Botox (OK, I threw that one in but who knows where this Affordable Care Act is heading …)

You are most likely screaming at the top of your lungs, if you are a feminist oppressed by the patriarchy, that I am making a mockery of generations of struggle by generations of women wearing aviator glasses and frosting their hair. And guess what? I am. Because it is precisely the Steinem Stepfords that have made it impossible to achieve true equality in this country, at least as far as I’m concerned.

When you have someone like Donald Trump saying horrible things about Marco Rubio’s penis size, or someone else’s hands, or attacking someone else as a liar, or someone else as an “OK” doctor (when the man is a world-renowned neurosurgeon,) you should step back and say, “what a putz.” You should not wait until he makes menstruation jokes about blonde journalists before you get up on your high horse and complain about how much the man hates women.

I would also argue that unless you hold Hillary’s horndog husband to the same standard as you do the obnoxious pseudo-Republican, you, as a woman or a male feminist deserve no respect. None. Because your agenda is quite obvious.

As far as Ed Rendell is concerned, I truly think he believes that his comments were not all that horrendous. He speaks in public as he speaks in private, as if he were about to pick up the phone and dial that 900 number, or head out to Delilah’s. I’m assuming he respects women because the one that he married is an exceptional jurist, an accomplished role model for me and so many others in our shared profession. He just has a colorful way of talking.

I think that Donald Trump is similar. He has employed women in high-level positions, and none of them has said that he manhandled them or paid them less than their male counterparts. He might have mentioned their breast measurements behind their backs, but no one is perfect (Donald, I mean, not the breast measurements.)

Bill Clinton, on the other hand, has demonstrated his disdain for women in much more blatant ways, and while many of you might say all of those women “consented” to his attentions, at least a few of them would disagree. When they said “no,” he said (fill in the word that rhymes, you know exactly the one I mean …)

All of this is to say that while I want to be respected for my brain and not my beauty (and I know that I have just opened myself to joyful expressions in the comments section online) I am not so uptight and PC as to believe that men who act brutish with my gender are pushing us back into the 19th Century (before abortion was legal, so maybe that’s not such a bad thing.)

Men with too much testosterone are ecumenical, equal opportunity bullies, and the patriarchy has nothing to do with it. Trump, Clinton and Fast Eddie may belong in the pig trough, but we of the fairer sex shouldn’t get our bloomers in a twist about it. Wait a few minutes, and they’ll insult our brothers, too.

Christine Flowers is an attorney and Delaware County resident. Her column appears every Sunday. Email her at cflowers1961@gmail.com.