Ranks of 'gig economy' swell with mobile workforce













Photo: Talia Herman Image 1 of / 4 Caption Close Image 1 of 4 Giselle Chow returns home after walking a dog named Toast as one of her jobs in the "gig economy", San Francisco, CA, September 23rd, 2013. Giselle Chow returns home after walking a dog named Toast as one of her jobs in the "gig economy", San Francisco, CA, September 23rd, 2013. Photo: Talia Herman Image 2 of 4 Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Photo: Talia Herman Image 3 of 4 Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Photo: Talia Herman Image 4 of 4 Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Giselle Chow's tasks include walking a dog and helping plan a public service center's staff retreat alongside daughter Malia at home. The jobs give her time to prepare for dance class, above. Photo: Talia Herman Ranks of 'gig economy' swell with mobile workforce 1 / 4 Back to Gallery

Here's how Giselle Chow makes ends meet in a typical week: as an organizational consultant at events such as the Code for America summit in San Francisco, handwriting place cards for a wedding reception in the East Bay, posting real estate listings on Craigslist ("I was fired from that one"), and walking the neighbor's dog.

She makes much less than she used to as a teacher and administrator at private schools in San Francisco, and she's fine with that. "Seventeen years was enough," said Chow, 41, who quit her full-time job in the summer. "I greatly enjoyed it but wanted to do something else - and spend more time with my kids."

Chow joined the ranks of the "gig economy," also known to some as the "labor force of new entrepreneurs." Its members are referred to as looking for "part-time bits and pieces to meet the nut," and the "Airbnb renter-slash musician-slash graphic designer." Unlike others who are working less than full time, they're doing it by choice.

"We know (the gig economy) is getting larger, although we don't have specific data," said Carl Van Horn, director of the John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers University. "This is a time of flex. But gig is not a word we have operationalized yet in social science."

According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, there were approximately 21 million "contingent" and "alternative employed" workers in 2005, the last time they were officially counted. Listed by the bureau as temporary employees, independent contractors, freelancers, on-call and temp agency hires, it's not clear how many among them were strictly voluntary. More recent surveys have put the number as high as 40 million, which experts dismiss as wildly exaggerated.

Workers in transition

Hopefully, a Bureau of Labor Statistics recount, funded by a $1.6 million grant from the Obama administration, will provide a clearer picture. Their numbers could include many of the 375,000 users of San Francisco's Gigwalk, who take quick-turnaround jobs in sectors such as retail merchandising - stock taking, comparative price checking - at chains such as Walmart and Target, or photos of restaurants for use on Bing, Microsoft's search engine.

"A lot of people are in transition," said Matt Crampton, founder and chief technology officer of the 3-year-old company, whose corporate clients also include Amazon, Pepsi, Deloitte and 7-Eleven, and counts among its early investors Silicon Valley's Greylock Partners and Accelerator Ventures, plus San Francisco's SoftTech VC. "And some jobs have been created that never existed before."

The Web, smartphones and mobile apps have spurred the trend. Gigwalk is one of a number of online employment marketplaces hooking up companies with workers remotely, like San Francisco's TaskRabbit and Mountain View's Elance, both of which Chow has gotten jobs from, and Redwood City's oDesk. "This is a real shift of where the world is working," said oDesk CEO Gary Swart. "Today, work is no longer a place."

That might be a trifle premature. "Ask most people what they want, it's still a 9-to-5 job with benefits and a vacation," Van Horn said. Benefits and vacations are especially hard to come by in the gig economy, and gigging alone is not likely to make you rich.

Bridging between gigs

Gigwalkers earn on average $12 to $15 an hour, according to the company. Many of the jobs pay closer to minimum wage. Rare is the "power gigwalker" like Lisa Duncan, who has made close to $20,000 total in the past three years, mainly from shooting restaurant photos with her iPhone for Microsoft.

"It's my chief source of savings," said Duncan, 30, who telecommutes from her home to her regular job with a local health company, allowing her to "plan my evenings and many weekends around gigwalking. Sitting at a desk all day is not entirely satisfying."

But she's is not walking away from her regular job either.

"You still have be able to bridge between gigs," said Van Horn, who believes the trend is confined mostly to urban areas on the East and West coasts. "Talk to actors and musicians who say, 'It would be nice to have a steady gig.' "

It took Chow two years to think about it before taking the plunge. "I was the chief wage earner in the family. But in the end what I came up with was I didn't think my husband or two kids would have been happy if I stayed in a job where I wasn't happy. It wasn't the job. It was me."

Instead, she decided to become a consultant specializing in graphic facilitation - the use of pictorials and graphics to help organizations formulate business strategies, development plans and structural changes - a skill she picked up as a school administrator. She already has a list of clients, which in addition to Code for America include Stanford University, Genentech and UC Santa Cruz.

Auctioning collectibles

At the same time, she's been working other gigs, delivering an envelope of business stuff to a house in the Marina, transporting a box of clothing to a secondhand clothing store, and returning the proceeds to the clothes' owner.

But it's no picnic. While her family has been supportive, her husband, a preschool teacher, babysits for other families three nights a week - "property taxes are coming up!" said Chow, who lives in San Francisco. She sells "clothes I don't need" and auctions once-prized collectibles on eBay - like advertising dolls from the 1960s and mid-century bracelets - to help make ends meet. Being outbid (i.e. lower) on jobs - data entry and gift bag stuffing came to mind - makes the bridge wider.

Chow wouldn't say how much she makes in the gig economy, but "it's more than minimum wage, and significant enough that it's worth doing." The family has an inexpensive health plan with Kaiser Permanente, but that could become more expensive under the Affordable Care Act.

Giving it 3 years

"I am hoping with the holidays coming up, there will be more TaskRabbity things to do, and people might be more interested in my eBay stuff." She's giving herself three years to establish herself in the graphic facilitation business and "get to the same income level as I had. I've heard from other people that's what it takes."

She intends to attain that level by working project to project. "That's the vision I have of the future, shorter engagements," leaving more time for another of her passions - dancing. "That's been one of the things that made me think about a life change: How can I do more of it?"

As for the dog walking, TaskRabbity stuff, "It's important for me to know it's there, and I can go back to it flexibly."