The smartest woman ever and the person most prepared in history to be president, or so we are told, had this to say on the Obamacare medical device tax:

On the tax itself, again I think we have to look to see what are the pluses and the minuses, that are embodied in a decision about either to remove or alter or continue this particular piece of the Affordable Care Act and I’ve in preparation for coming here, I’ve obviously looked at the arguments on both sides for more information and I think we’ll gather more information and that will perhaps give us a better path forward. But I guess my overall point and it goes to your question is we are on the cusp of another great economic era. What’s happening with oil and gas in our country is unprecedented, or at least not since 40 or 50 years ago, have we had the capacity to be a major exporter of both oil and gas with all the advantages that will give us, what’s happening or could happen with clean energy, we’ll put people to work, we’ll provide all kinds of new economic activity, if we got serious about infrastructure, again we could help employ more people, we have the kind of economic advancements that go along with improved infrastructure, on and on, so I just think we have to get out of the ideological wars that either we can’t change anything or we have to change everything, and begin to be smart and pragmatic problem solvers again, and I think that goes to your point. I don’t know what the right answer about the tax is.

And that was only part of her answer. She once more is saying nothing and using many words to say it, as if she is pulling buzz words and talking points from the recesses of her memory. Maybe she figures that if she talks long enough and sounds serious the audience won’t know she is not answering the question. Does she not have an opinion? Or does she not want to tell us?

Hillary Rodham Clinton signs copies of her book Hard Choices at Books and Books on October 2, 2014 in Coral Gables, Florida.(Photo by Jeff Daly/Invision/AP)

This gets back to the problem we have discussed before: For someone so revered by liberal elites, Clinton has precious little of substance to say. Had she faced a real interviewer the appropriate follow ups (after, “What?!?!“) would have been:

Don’t you have an opinion on a key issue that has come up for vote multiple times in Congress and concerns the president’s signature achievement? If we are on the “cusp of another great economic era” why would we want to tax a high-tech industry that innovates and creates high-paying jobs? Was it a mistake to include it in Obamacare? If so, are there other parts of the law that should be changed? I’m not sure what oil and gas have to do with this but since you bring it up why are we not developing energy resources on government lands? Why have we not yet approved the XL Keystone pipeline and why, since you were involved in dozens of issues, have you decided you will refuse to answer questions only on Keystone? And now that you mention “clean energy” will you end the sort of cronyism we saw with Solyndra? Where is there evidence all the “investment” has created sustainable industries that can survive without continued government subsidies? Speaking of ideological wars in the 2008 campaign the president said, “If you want a new kind of politics it’s time to turn the page.” Was he right? Is the person who decried the “vast right-wing conspiracy” the right person to end those wars or will you reignite them?

Hillary, however, rarely gets even one tough question let alone a string of them. Perhaps all those years at the State Department left Hillary habituated to talking gibberish. Whatever the reason for her total lack of substance and dearth of actual ideas her eventual GOP opponent will need to be sharp enough to catch her filibustering and persistent enough to expose her fluff.