Large rate increase requests like these are occurring in several states across the country and I know they will cause a hardship for many Delawareans,” said Karen Stewart, Delaware’s insurance commissioner, in a statement.“The increases are substantial and I’m going to do my best to reduce them. I am instructing my actuaries to examine vigorously Highmark’s and Aetna’s supporting data for the requests.” (Photo: Brown, Robin (Wilmington))

Costs of Obamacare health insurance plans could rise by double-digits next year if the Delaware Department of Insurance approves newly proposed rates.

But the department says they will do their best to reduce them.

Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield of Delaware and Aetna offer health plans on the state’s health insurance marketplace, which is mandated by the Affordable Care Act.

According to rates posted by the feds, Highmark asked for about a 21 to 28 percent increase to rates in individual plan rates and an 11 to 13 percent increase in small group plans.

Aetna, which acquired Coventry and its policies in 2013, requests about a 16 percent increase to individual plans, but a 6.1 percent decrease in small group plans.

“Large rate increase requests like these are occurring in several states across the country and I know they will cause a hardship for many Delawareans,” said Karen Stewart, Delaware’s insurance commissioner, in a statement.

“The increases are substantial and I’m going to do my best to reduce them. I am instructing my actuaries to examine vigorously Highmark’s and Aetna’s supporting data for the requests.”

Department of Insurance staff will accept public comment on the rate filings by email – at ratedivision@state.de.us – through July 15.

The department will also conduct public comment sessions in June: June 15 at 1 p.m. at Del Tech Owens Campus, Georgetown and at 6 p.m. at the Insurance Department, 841 Silver Lake Blvd., Dover; and June 16 at 6 p.m. Carvel State Office Building, 820 N. French St., Wilmington.

The state will review the rates and Commissioner Stewart will determine the numbers to forward to the feds, which will review them. Final rates will be set this fall. The next enrollment period begins Nov. 1.

Public Comment on Proposed Obamacare rates

- June 15, 1 p.m. at Del Tech Owens Campus, Georgetown and at 6 p.m. at the Insurance Department, 841 Silver Lake Blvd., Dover

- June 16, 6 p.m. Carvel State Office Building, 820 N. French St., Wilmington.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1LXGBFV