NEW HAVEN >> Dr. Paul Taheri was the man in the middle Wednesday as he listened to worried workers and state officials dealing with the rapidly changing health care landscape as powerful market forces change the rules for physicians, hospitals and patients.

Taheri, the deputy dean for clinical affairs at the Yale Medical School and the CEO of the Yale Medical Group, was part of a panel that addressed the move by hospitals to buy up medical departments. Patients are then charged an unanticipated facility fee that workers said leaves them straining to pay or leaving their providers altogether.

It’s not a new phenomenon and Taheri said patients at Yale-New Haven Hospital are just now experiencing what is known as provider-based clinics, essentially outpatient clinics of doctors that once operated privately or as part of the main hospital.

Taheri said it is an example of cost shifting that has been going on for a decade.

Advertisement

This particular model he feels is a “transitional phase” that should be replaced with something that looks at the full health care picture and a payment system that covers real costs.

“We are just as concerned about this as you are. This is a problem we need to solve together,” he told the audience of medical students, staff and unionized workers who filled Harkness Auditorium at the Yale Medical School. He said it was a matter of reaching “equilibrium. We need to get in front of it.”

Gloria Timpko, a senior administrative assistant at the heart failure and transplant clinic, said patients receiving these services make many visits, but now have provider fees showing up in separate bills. Given the special nature of the care, she said they don’t have options to go elsewhere.

“Yale has a monopoly,” she said.

Attorney General George Jepsen said he has introduced two bills to address the issues: One would mandate that patients be made aware of the fees before services, while the other asks that hospitals disclose which practices they are purchasing. He said he is getting more pushback on the second bill which goes to anti-monopoly laws.

Advocates say patients are treated by the same doctors, only at a different facility, with fees that are sometimes in the thousands, as opposed to their usual specialty care co-pays. Hospitals have said this covers overhead and the cost of enforcing higher standards, but Healthcare Advocate Vicki Veltri told CT Mirror that it was just inflating the cost of health care.

Ben Barnes, the state budget chief, said he fears that the advances the state has made on controlling health care costs and a claims database to compare costs, could be undermined by some of these changes.

He speculated, if specialists are moved to locations in the suburbs they could be harder to reach, while high fees tied to hospital treatment could quickly kick in high deductibles.

Jepsen said this purchase of other practices, known as vertical integration, results in higher prices as competition shrinks, facility fees become legal and the hospitals have more power to negotiate leading to market concentration.

Several workers at the meeting brought up the closing of the Yale Sleep Center, which leaves the unionized staff with a choice of finding another job on the campus, outside their speciality, or leaving to go to a new center expected to open outside the hospital.

Gretchen Rose, who was among those laid off, said if she is hired by the new sleep center, she will no longer be contributing to her Yale pension and will take a $6 an hour pay cut.

“I love sleep medicine,” she said, as she contemplated the move.

Taheri said the timing of the sleep center closing and a private option opening was “no great conspiracy.” He said the center used up its endowment and was losing millions, “There was no money left. There was no recourse,” Taheri said .

At the same time, he said the hospital was approached by an outside group.

A worker at the Yale Eye Center feared they may be targeted and she asked how they could protect their jobs. Barnes told them to support the legislation and alluded to their union, Local 34 of UNITE HERE, as capable of doing that.

Recent contracts between the university and the union have centered on a best practices model and there has been labor peace for years now.

Lisa D’Abrosca, the president of AFT Local 5049 at Lawrence and Memorial Hospital, led a four-day strike there, which was followed by a lockout by management. She said services were shifted to clinics with cheaper, less-killed workers. The contract was fought over workers following patients to the clinic sites, rather than being replaced.

“It was a $20 million mistake for L&M. I hope other health care institutions learn from us,” D’Abrosca said to a standing ovation from the crowd. She said the union and management are in a “tentative relationship” now and going forward she said it is paramount to learn to trust each other.

Taheri said teaching hospitals like Yale-New Haven provide 24-hour services that let other hospitals get a free ride. Also, offering a huge array of specialities is extraordinarily expensive. “It allows everyone else not to bear the costs,” he said.

On reimbursements, Taheri said half of their expenses are covered by government programs, but Medicaid only covers 65 percent of costs, while Medicare picks up 90 percent of costs. Add to this, the $260 million paid in uncompensated care.

He said the rest of the revenue stream includes private insurance, investment returns and philantropic donations. The past two years hospitals also took a $50 million state cut, which the government said should be balanced by more people with health insurance under the Affordable Care Act.

He said the provider clinics can be profit centers, but they subsidize other areas that always lose money. “We have to be honest about the whole story,” Taheri said.

A Pulitzer Prize finalist, journalist Joseph Neff of The News & Observer in Raleigh, talked about his series “Prognosis Profits” on hospital consolidations where there are two systems now in North Carolina-UNC Hospitals and Duke University Health System.

He gave several examples of patients previously paying $60 for an EKG, which ballooned to $1,689 at a hospital clinic but eventually knocked down to $952 after insurance. For cancer speciality drugs, Neff said Medicare will pay $7,200 for a course of treatment; one hospital now gets $17,085 and Duke gets $22,800 for the same infusion.