CAPITAL: You headed the relaunch of NationalJournal.com in October. Its seen a 50 percent increase in traffic in 2014, according to internal measurements. What about the new website is attracting so many more visitors?

GRIEVE: Traffic is actually up 57 percent, but who’s counting? Actually, we all are, and that’s part of it. “Traffic” can be such a dirty word for journalists. Our reporters and editors know that great journalism and great traffic go hand in hand. As our managing editor, Kristin Roberts, said the other day: “Important journalism and epic traffic are related. Not related like second cousins who get together every other Thanksgiving. I mean like sisters or spouses. They not only can coexist, they can thrive together.”

CAPITAL: Tell us about the redesign of your print magazine, which debuted today.

GRIEVE: It’s going to be beautiful, and I mean that in a bunch of different ways. First off, there’s the design. We've brought in Joe Heroun, an amazingly talented guy who’s done design work for The New Republic, Boston magazine and a bunch of other great titles. He’s created a really gorgeous magazine for us—one that’s sophisticated, elegant and also really modern. So, to answer your question literally, it's going to look great.

But that doesn’t matter if the content isn’t great. And it will be. Our new magazine editor, Richard Just, brings a really distinct vision to National Journal’s magazine, one that it hasn’t had before. For a long time, we tried to be a news magazine for influential, really well-informed readers. But I’m not sure that concept really works anymore—the news part, not the magazine part. By the time Friday rolls around, our readers know the news. They know all the insta-analysis of the news. What they want—what we all want—is insight, depth and a way to make sense of what’s happened and what’s going to happen, not just next week but next year and beyond. There are a lot of different ways of doing that.

CAPITAL: Capitol Hill is getting crowded these days, with publications like C.Q. Roll Call, The Hill and POLITICO (your former employer) all covering federal policy. What does National Journal offer readers that its competitors don't?

GRIEVE: It is crowded, with lots of publications with lots of reporters racing around to scoop up every little nugget of minute-to-minute news so that they can say they had it first. I’ve done that kind of journalism, and I think we do it really well at National Journal—when there’s a big, fast-moving story that requires it. But day-in and day-out, it’s not what we want to do.

I want to write stories that really tell our readers something they don't know, and that’s hard to do: Our readers know a lot. But when Tim Alberta goes deep into the House conservatives’ plans to oust John Boehner, or Marin Cogan tells some stories you wouldn’t believe about Brian Schweitzer, or Brendan Sasso or Sam Baker help me understand Obamacare or net neutrality in a way I never did before, or Lucia Graves or Ron Fournier gives me a new way of thinking, I know we’re doing it. And sometimes Brian Resnick just finds a really beautiful photograph from space, and that’s cool, too.

CAPITAL: When you left POLITICO, you had a little more than a month of downtime before you started at National Journal, waiting for your old contract to expire. What's the quirkiest way you spent your time during that month?

GRIEVE: I’m not sure “quirky” is a thing I do. But I cooked a lot, and I hung out with my wife and kids, and I helped teach the 16-year-old how to drive, and I figured out pretty quickly that there are worse things in life than a forced vacation.