Wind energy is more than just rotors. It is more than just towers. These wind turbines are important to our economy. Thousands of parts and materials go into each turbine, and dozens of companies are part of the wind supply chain in Colorado.

Bach Composite Colorado in Fort Lupton is one of these companies. We currently employ 70 people at our factory, where we manufacture our proprietary composite nacelle covers for companies like Vestas and Siemens. A nacelle is the “box” that connects the tower to the rotor and contains the generator that helps convert wind into electricity. Compared to the rotors and towers, it is just one small piece of the machine, but it is one piece of many that are proudly made in Colorado, by Coloradans.

Bach Composite came to Colorado six years ago because of the state’s leadership on renewables and commitment to clean energy. In 2009, Colorado’s government and utilities were making investments in clean technology and renewables when other states were not — and Colorado has reaped the benefits. Xcel Energy’s investments in wind have saved its customers about $40 million since 2009. Its data show that states with significant wind-energy development have seen their electricity costs decrease, while states without significant wind energy have seen costs increase. The wind industry has also generated between 6,000 and 7,000 jobs, and landowners with facilities on their property collect about $7.8 million in lease payments annually.

Colorado is now the sixth-highest producer of wind energy in the nation. Just as wind energy has grown in Colorado, so has Bach Composite. The speed of that growth hinges in part on certainty of investment.

The federal wind production tax credit has made a significant and important impact on wind energy in Colorado. The tax credit does not just provide an incentive to buy energy from wind resources. It also provides an economic signal to private investors that they can make sound decisions to invest in the research and development of new technologies that make better, more efficient wind energy components.

If Congress fails to extend the production tax credit, it would result in significant layoffs and possible company closures in Colorado and across the country. At Bach, we would likely be forced to lay off as many as half of our workers. Failing to extend the tax credit also would mean that technology would not progress at the rate that is necessary if we are to reach our goal of energy independence. A slowdown in investment and development of the wind industry would likely reduce the amount of new wind energy coming onto the market at a time when the cost to produce wind energy is dropping below the cost of traditional energy resources.

In the past, U.S. energy policy has provided billions of dollars in tax-credit support to traditional fuels, many of which are now permanent fixtures in the tax code, unlike the temporary nature of the wind production tax credit.

Bach Composites supports an eventual phase-down of the tax credit. But if the market were provided some certainty as to the timing and duration of the tax credit, history supports the “theory” that private investment would follow, and Coloradans would continue to have cheaper and cleaner homegrown electricity.

Coloradans overwhelmingly support energy production — both traditional and renewable — right here in our backyard.

The wind industry is not asking for a taxpayer handout in perpetuity. It should, however, be extended for a set period of time, enough so that when it does phase out, the wind industry can stay competitive and help drive Colorado’s economy forward with the most innovative technology and best workforce in the nation.

Hans Thornberg is plant manager for Bach Composite.



To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.