November 5, 2014

Contributed Photo

Piedmont Internal Medicine doctors (from left): William Simpson,Joseph David, Michelle Bell, Jae Lee, Kevin McCarthy and Demetrius Maoury.

By .(JavaScript must be enabled to view this email address)

Fauquier Health has purchased the county’s largest internal medicine practice The $5.3-million transaction, completed Friday, includes Piedmont Internal Medicine’s 32,000-square-foot office building at 419 Holiday Court in Warrenton.The practice’s 14,000 patients will notice little, if any change, representatives of both parties stressed in an interview Wednesday.“We have been in practice 21 years and have done well but have had increasing pressures from outside forces that are increasingly distracting us from time with patients,” William L. Simpson, Piedmont’s lead physician, explained Wednesday. “We needed to figure out a way to counter that.“Reimbursements are flat. Expenses are going up. Capital costs are rising; we’ve got equipment needs,” Dr. Simpson added. “New doctors are being told, ‘Don’t join a private practice; it’s too risky’.”For 2-1/2 years, his six-physician practice has recruited candidates who ended up choosing to join “a system down the road, just because of the security of it,” he said.Dr. Simpson also cited “economies of scale. As a small practice, we have to buy everything at full price.”At the same time, the local hospital faces increased competition, and its management wants to ensure the community has enough physicians, Vice President and Chief Operating Officer Greg Bengston said.“We’ve had a longstanding relationship with Piedmont Internal Medicine and Bill. There’s a level of trust there; that’s the first thing,” Mr. Bengston said. “Consolidation in our market is acute, especially with the Haymarket hospital (Novant) opening . . . . These folks have been in Warrenton a long time and wanted to stay in Warrenton, and we wanted them to be affiliated with the hospital.”Selling the practice will allow Piedmont’s physicians, especially Dr. Simpson, to focus more on patient care and less on administration. The six doctors on Nov. 1 started work as Fauquier Health employees, as did their staff of 35 nurses, aides, lab technicians and office workers.The affiliation also should create buying power and efficiencies.For example, in its first year since selling to Nashville-based LifePoint Hospitals , Fauquier Health saved $1 million on drug and supply purchases, Mr. Bengston said.Affiliating with the publicly-traded corporation also made it easier for Fauquier Health “to reinvest both in services we need in the community and strategic partnerships like this,” he added. “Their model really contemplates reinvesting back into the community, rather than the hub-and-spoke model of other hospital companies.”With this acquisition, Fauquier Health employs 28 doctors and owns three primary care practices, including one in Bealeton and one at Lake Manassas.“It keeps primary care local and helps the health system grow,” Mr. Bengston said. “It’s no secret that Inova, Novant, Valley Health have all at different times, in different ways, come into our market.“I think this is a win-win for the hospital and physicians . . . . I think the similarities between this partnership and our partnership with LifePoint are striking. A lot of the same reasons — consolidation in the industry, managed care contracting, buying power with supplies and drugs — are all common denominators in both deals.”The parties began serious discussions of a possible deal about 18 months ago.In addition to the changes in health care, Dr. Simpson and three of his partners struggled with the demands of their new building.Their real estate company, Faith/PIM LLC spent $5 million to construct the three-story building in 2006 and ’07. They borrowed $3.7 million from The Middleburg Bank and $628,000 in private funds for construction, according to county real estate records.Then, the Great Recession began. Despite renting part of the building to Fauquier Health for its Wellness Center and space to a dermatologist, 4,000 square feet remained vacant. The bank worked with the group, extending the term of the loan, according to the documents.“It cost us $5 million to build and we sold it for $5 million,” Dr. Simpson said. “We built in the boom; then the market fell out. We were ‘under water’ for a while, but we managed to hold on.”Things got so tight that he, his wife and children shoveled the snow and mulched the landscaping, the physician added. “Again, we were under water, so we couldn’t spend a whole lot of money hiring things out.”From a financial standpoint, most of the business change involves LifePoint’s purchase of the building.Fauquier Health paid $300,000 for equipment and furnishings.“Practices in the past could sell and take advantage ‘good will’,” Dr. Simpson said. “But you don’t get (compensated for) good will any more . . . . It’s a lot of sweat equity down the drain . . . But we’ve had some good years. We’re not going anywhere; we’ll continue to serve the community.”The 54-year-old physician, who came here in 1993 to join Barry Lupton’s internal medicine practice, said he has no regrets about selling.“It’s the next chapter. It’s a happy time,” he said. “I don’t know that anyone’s sad at all . . . . Everyone seems optimistic and pleased at this point.”Fauquier Health has retained all 35 Piedmont employees in their same jobs, at their same pay, “with a better benefits package, which is fantastic,” Dr. Simpson added.Mr. Bengston credited the physicians for “transparency” in handling the transition with their staff. Dr. Simpson and his colleagues conducted a full staff meeting in June at the adjacent Holiday Inn Express to break the news of their plan to sell the practice.With the hospital’s marketing support, it should get easier to attract new patients after the practice adds two physicians, Dr. Simpson said.Many people move to Fauquier but keep relationships with primary care doctors in the metro area, he explained. His practice lacked the time, budget or physician capacity to make those new residents “aware of the options here.”The hospital’s management sees “a win-win,” Mr. Bengston said.Through the first 10 months of this year, Fauquier Health remains profitable and “ahead of budget,” he said.LifePoint reported a profit of more than $1 billion for the third quarter , an increase of 29 percent from a year ago, beating analysts’ projections. The company of 60, mostly-rural, hospitals has benefitted from Medicaid expansion in many states.“The biggest compliment I get is, ‘Hey, I haven’t noticed any change’,” since the local hospital affiliated with LifePoint last November, Mr. Bengston said. “I hope the same will be true” at Piedmont Internal Medicine.