Americans need a tax administration free of ideological or political bias.

Rep. Ander Crenshaw, R-Fla., is chairman of the House Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Subcommittee. (Photo: Andrew Harrer, Bloomberg) Story Highlights After more than a decade of steady increases, IRS appropriations peaked in 2010.

The same year it began targeting non-profits based on name, not activity.

And the same year it held lavish conferences and made expensive videos.

Given the IRS' recent history of targeting Americans who hold certain political beliefs and wasting millions of dollars on lavish conferences and videos, we can all agree this agency needs to be held accountable for its treatment of taxpayers and the money they send to Washington.

The 2014 Omnibus Appropriations Act takes a long stride toward this goal by requiring numerous, frequent and extensive reports from the IRS about its spending on training, bonuses, information technology and operations. It also expressly prohibits the IRS from targeting persons for their ideological beliefs and from interfering with First Amendment rights.

OUR VIEW: IRS whipped, you feel pain

The IRS can repair its breach of public trust by devotion to a mission of tax administration free of ideological or political bias. Keeping the agency's budget nearly flat will make it think twice before straying off course. There's not a penny to spare.

After more than a decade of steady increases, IRS appropriations peaked in 2010 — the same year it began targeting non-profits based on name, not activity, and the same year it held lavish conferences and made expensive videos. When awash in money, the IRS has moved toward harassment and horseplay, not responsible customer service.

Critics of the omnibus bill argue that increasing the IRS' funding boosts revenue and decreases the deficit. Yet, facts do not bear this out. In 2013, while the IRS was living with sequestration reductions, total collections reached an all-time high.

Nonetheless, we need the IRS to enforce tax laws, stop and prevent fraud, prepare forms and instructions, process refunds, collect revenue and assist taxpayers in complying with tax obligations. The omnibus bill provides an additional $92 million to improve taxpayer service, address identity theft and combat fraud.

The appropriations process is about making choices when funding is limited. As chairman of the subcommittee that oversees IRS funding, I am proud of my panel's work. We are now pointed in a direction that respects American taxpayers. They deserve responsible fiscal policy from Washington. The omnibus delivers it, and not a moment too soon.

Rep. Ander Crenshaw, R-Fla., is chairman of the House Financial Services and General Government Appropriations Subcommittee.

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1jBwUzQ