The European Union prides itself as the being the world’s green crusader. It is fighting climate change with a set of ambitious targets to reduce future carbon-dioxide emissions and boost the use of renewable energy, such as solar and wind, by setting an example to the rest of the world.

But a revival of coal as an energy source across Europe is leaving a dark spot on the EU’s green credentials, according to a new report by several environmental pressure groups. Coal is the most polluting of all fossil fuels in terms of CO2 emissions. EU countries are under pressure to phase out coal as part of EU-wide goals to cut emissions and boost the development of renewable energy sources.

Activists protest against the expansion of open-pit coal mines in Germany’s Lausitz region on Aug. 23. Getty Images

At the center of Europe’s coal renaissance is the region around the German-Polish border, already home to five of Europe’s most polluting coal plants, says the report, which was compiled by CAN Europe, WWF, the European Environmental Bureau, the Health and Environment Alliance and Climate Alliance Germany. Swedish power firm Vattenfall GmbH is now planning to expand the number of open-cast mines in the Lausitz area to exploit its deposits of lignite, a particularly polluting type of coal.

Vattenfall says the Lausitz mines, with their vast deposits, are there to take up the slack when renewable energy sources fail to meet Germany’s needs. “Without flexible and reliable brown coal, we wouldn’t be able to provide stable electricity supplies at stable prices,” the company says on its website.

What is striking is that the expansion of coal mining is happening in Germany at a time when Europe’s largest economy is forging ahead with ambitious and controversial plans to promote renewable energy. According to the report, Germany — along with the U.K. — had the highest number of coal plants with especially high CO2 emissions in the EU in 2013.

The study,which ranks the top 30 most-polluting power plants based on their absolute CO2 emissions in 2013, with Germany and the U.K. each having nine of these lignite or hard-coal plants. Germany uses more coal to generate electricity than any other EU country, says the study.

“It’s the availability and low price of coal that’s driving the growth in coal in Germany,” says Darek Urbaniak of WWF. “There’s a risk that coal is here to stay.”

There are several reasons why environmental pressure groups worry that the coal revival could undermine the EU’s long-term targets of cutting CO2 emissions. EU countries are expected to back proposals to cut CO2 emissions by 40% by 2030 compared with 1990 levels at a summit next month.

Recent plans by the Obama administration in the U.S. to curb emissions from power plants could result in more exports of cheap U.S. coal to Europe. Coal is likely to remain a far cheaper alternative to oil and gas in the coming years, particularly in light of the current unrest in places like Iraq.

Another development that worries environmental campaigners is the recent appointment of Polish Prime Minister Donald Tusk to become the next president of the European Council. In that position, Mr. Tusk will be responsible for forging compromise among the EU’s 28 national leaders on key issues, including energy. Mr. Tusk, campaigners point out, has called for countries to develop their indigenous fossil fuels more aggressively to help reduce their dependency on Russian energy imports as part of broader plans to create a European energy union.

Another key issue is the cost of energy. Deriving energy from coal is still cheaper than renewable making it an attractive energy source. Large, energy-intensive companies in Germany and around Europe have been warning the EU that high energy prices are making them less competitive and will drive them away from Europe. Powerful business groups in Europe say that “carbon leakage” — when companies with high emissions move to places where they bear a lower financial burden — could undermine Europe’s economic recovery.

Follow Vanessa Mock