The rise in prescription drug costs has been an issue of great concern for many Americans.

Democratic Leader Nancy Pelosi, in a hearing Dec. 2 about affordable medications, noted that pharmaceutical drug prices “represent the fastest growing sector of healthcare costs” in the United States.

Rep. Donna F. Edwards (D-Md.) partnered with Pelosi and fellow co-chair of the Steering and Policy Committee, Rep. Rosa DeLauro, (D- Conn.) to lead Wednesday’s hearing, which was called “Ensuring Access and Affordability of Prescription Drugs, While Spurring Innovation.”

Lifesaving drugs are integral to the survival of the sick yet some believe that pharmaceutical companies take advantage of this necessity.

“The intent of lifesaving drugs is just that—to save lives, not to solely fill the pockets of executives and investors of large drug companies,” Edwards said.

Expert advocates for affordable care, including doctors and representatives from health organizations, testified to the problem many Americans face in getting reasonably priced medications.

One witness, Dr. Jeremy Greene of Johns Hopkins University, shared a story of a patient who had a pinworm, a parasite that affects about 40 million people in North America. Greene prescribed albendazole, a medication that had previously been worth pennies per pill.

“I was not prepared to see her return to my office an hour later with news that the drug now costs more than $150 per pill,” Greene shared.

While expensive medication is a nationwide issue, there is particular concern about African Americans’ access to reasonably priced prescription drugs.

Prince George’s County health officer Pamela B. Creekmur attested to the issues that some Blacks face in getting medications.

“Costs of prescription drugs have been an issue for a long time in the African-American community,” said Creekmur. “It’s not fair. It never has been fair. Something has to be done.”

Pelosi mentioned that the Affordable Care Act was supposed to improve the ability of all Americans to tend to their medical needs, yet pharmaceutical companies prevent medications from being easy for all citizens to acquire.

Creekmur noted that certain people pay $3,000 a month for lifesaving prescription drugs, a heavy toll that could prevent some from getting medications to help them survive.

Edwards is adamant about ending this problem.

“We owe it to the people we serve to put a stop to the price-gouging that is bankrupting patients and overcharging Medicare, straining hospitals, and fleecing taxpayers,” said Edwards.

The congresswoman further urged, “We must continue to challenge each and every one of these drug companies, and by putting pressure on them, and even shaming them, they might change their tactics.”

2,938 total views, 2 views today