Parent Robert Small was articulate, polite and firm in his questioning of Common Core standards on Thursday night in Towson, but ended up being arrested, as reported by Liz Bowie of The Baltimore Sun yesterday.

ednewscolorado

Small interrupted Baltimore County School Superintendent Dallas Dance, whose "top objective is the adoption of Common Core Standards," according to a gushing article about the 30-year-old Superintendent in Baltimore Magazine earlier this year.

The parent spoke out of turn, as the forum did not allow the citizens of the public forum to ask questions unless they wrote them on a piece of paper, but the questions were edited, screened and omitted, as reported by Ann Miller of the Examiner, who provides a must-read first hand account of the meeting. Miller submitted a question, but two key parts of her question were removed surrounding data collection on her children:

What is the process for parents to review what data has been or will be collected on our kids?

What are parents options for opting out of data collection on our kids?

Miller also asked why "parents across the state [have not] heard of Common Core until the month of its implementation?" and also commented that parental input was never requested.

Miller's questions were never answered.

Bowie writes that once Small broke the rules, astonishingly, the engaged father

"was pulled out of the meeting, arrested and charged with second-degree assault of a police officer."

Unless the dad here decided to attack the security guard after he was removed, the video certainly shows no "assault." Miller noted that the question came as the meeting was coming to a close.

Fortunately, Ann Miller has a video of the incident, which clearly illustrates Small speaking up, and being removed for his efforts. As the father was being led away by a security guard, he said to the audience,

"Don't stand for this. You are sitting here like cattle." Then he said, "Is this America?"

Bowie writes that Small

"was taken to the Towson precinct and detained. Small was charged with second-degree assault of a police officer, which carries a fine of $2,500 and up to 10 years in prison, and disturbing a school operation, which carries a fine of $2,500 and up to six months."

Hopefully, Small's story will not go unnoticed by the complicit mainstream media. His only crime was being an engaged father.

Follow Renee Nal on Twitter @ReneeNal and Facebook.

Check out her news and political commentary on Liberty Unyielding, Gather and TavernKeepers.com for news you won't find in the mainstream media. Renee is also a guest blogger for the Shire Blog.