Allergies to peanuts, shellfish, dogs, cats and other triggers haven’t stopped 31-year-old Allie Bahn, a fourth-grade teacher and blogger from Boston, from living in Italy and Australia. She keeps medication and sanitary wipes handy.

Still, she’s had mystery attacks while traveling, including a severe one last fall that forced her to flee a hotel in the middle of the night. Consequently, she prefers renting apartments, as she can interview the owners, and calls airlines in advance to determine her risk.

“I recently flew American Airlines, and they let me preboard so I could use those wipes,” she said.

Preparedness allows Bahn, among more than 50 million Americans with allergies, to manage the growing number of animals inhabiting the travel world from airplanes to hotels.

Passionate debate was ignited recently by an incident involving a 7-year-old boy who boarded an Allegiant Air flight in Bellingham, Washington, with his parents — only to discover that he was allergic when seated near a service dog. The episode caused a 90-minute flight delay before the family was asked to deplane.

Aiming to fulfill demand without turning their cabins into zoos, airlines limit the size and number of pets that passengers can carry on for a fee. But under the Air Carrier Access Act, commercial airlines must accommodate service animals without a fee.

They must also accommodate emotional-support animals, defined as those that help relieve symptoms of stress, depression and other psychiatric conditions, for which passengers are required to have a current letter from a mental health professional. Online sources for these documents abound, and in response to a recent New York Times article, readers complained that this practice is being exploited by travelers seeking to avoid fees.

The airline solution to animal-versus-allergy is to reseat the afflicted.

“We will reseat them in a place farthest from the animal or, if that is not acceptable or available, we will put them on the next available flight at no additional cost,” said Ross Feinstein, a spokesman for American Airlines.

Once they arrive at their destination, pets and their human escorts will have little trouble finding a hotel room. According to a 2014 survey by the American Hotel & Lodging Association, roughly 60 percent of hotels allow pets, up 10 percent over the previous decade.

One bright spot for allergy sufferers: the availability of hypoallergenic hotel rooms rose 15 percent between 2004 and 2014 to 45 percent, according to the lodging association.

Dr. Mark Lazarovich, an allergist in South Burlington, Vermont, created AllerPassMD.com, a website that reviews more than 200 hotels with hypoallergenic rooms in cities including New York and Paris. During his research, he called one hotel with hypoallergenic rooms, which are intended to be pet-free, and, when he inquired, was told he could bring a dog.

“I think the good will is there, but there is a certain level of understanding of the problem that’s missing,” he said.