Last week in a breezy phone conversation with Stardock founder and CEO Brad Wardell, I learned quite a few things about the latest edition of the company’s casual election simulation, Political Machine. I say casual because the latest edition promises a more streamlined experience for new players and play sessions that are meant to last as long as the average American lunch hour (around 30 minutes).

A lot has changed since the 2012 edition of the game, including the way it will be delivered to the masses, how it models some pretty important political activities, and when it will ultimately be made available to the public. We also talk about what’s changed in the 2016 edition, the current political field, and Donald Trump’s hair. Sit back and enjoy my conversation with Wardell about Political Machine 2016 – one of the few (only?) games about the upcoming U.S. presidential election.

Let’s talk about this new game – just for the record, what’s the official title?

Brad Wardell: It’s called The Political Machine 2016.

The last addition was Political Machine 2012, right?

Wardell: Right.

How do you think the issues have changed since the last game – the important issues voters care about – are they the same or have they changed dramatically?

Wardell: They are quite a bit different this time. When you have don’t have an incumbent everything kind of goes up in the air. Last time tax cuts and Obamacare were the major issues; this time we’ve got ISIS going on in the Middle East, you’ve got the Ukraine issue, you have gun control (from a video game standpoint all this stuff is really good) the issue of equal pay for women in the workplace, etc. So all of this has kind of come to the forefront rather than the tame issues like social security reform, etc. From an entertainment or video game point of view, this election’s issues are a little bit more interesting.

Do you think stuff like “same sex marriage” is off the table?

Wardell: No I don’t think so – it’s in the game. I mean, we don’t choose. Our job is to model the real world as closely as we can and try to be as fair as we can to all the candidates – which is tough, because everyone thinks we’re picking on their candidate but we’re just tackling the issues as best we can from as many sources as we can to try and be accurate and make sure people have a good time playing the game.

How many candidates are in the 2016 edition?

Wardell: We have every (even minor) candidate this time. You saw Elizabeth Warren in there [referring to a screenshot from the game that Stardock shared with us last week – you can see it again here] – even though she’s not running – across the line. Whether they are fairly minor Democratic governors or even a candidate like Scott Walker who has already dropped out… they are all in the game, and you can, of course make your own candidates from scratch yourself… if you want to run as yourself and pick where your strengths and weaknesses are, you can do that as well.

Can you create your own party this time around?

Wardell: No you still have to choose – and this always comes up – as people want to run as an Independent; we had to decide if we either have a game that has some bearing on the real-world [of politics] or we are making a fantasy game. We think that more people are interested in playing something that feels like the real world.

What are some of the new gameplay elements that are in Political Machine 2016?

Wardell: The big thing this time (and there a couple of other new features) – and it’s something we learned from watching the previous election – is that we now have random events that can alter the election. Remember when McCain and Obama were running and we had the financial meltdown right during the middle of the election season? That changed everything when they had to deal with that. Unfortunately in Political Machine we didn’t have time to implement that sort of thing… we really wanted to but we just didn’t have the budget. So this time we said “we really need to have this.” So if there’s a terrorist attack, or some other thing that might happen (even if it’s not likely to happen) we need to have them in there. So we have all these unlikely random events. We have random events like “the Russians starting to move trips into Estonia,” or an “airstrike on Turkey,” a particular scandal happening, or a financial meltdown, Riots, etc., that can become a major issue. We would have never predicted that immigration would become a major issue of this campaign. You know, Donald Trump’s come in and he’s really hot on illegal immigration, so we wanted to make a game where players had to respond to these special random events or issues that pop up from game-to-game.

Are these frequent or are they pretty rare events?

Wardell: You’ll typically get at least one per game but you’re not likely to get multiple random events per game. It’s pretty likely you’ll get one, it’s unlikely you’ll get two, and it’s almost impossible you’ll get three.

Yeah, because (I would assume) these have a major effect on gameplay.

Wardell: Exactly. and you might even play a couple of games and not get any. The whole point is that they are not “for sure.”

So what are some of the other new bells and whistles?

Wardell: We’ve changed a lot of the visuals and it’s a little more esoteric but a little more satisfying to the player… and we’ve changed the way the political operatives work. Also, before you could get endorsements and once you were done with all the endorsements you just had all of this political capital and you could do nothing and kind of just “hung in there.” This time around you can use political capital to continue to get minor endorsements, which improve your [candidate’s] awareness. It’s a better way to model real-world late-game “get-out-the-vote” campaigns. We didn’t previously model “get-out-the-vote” campaigns in our games and this time around we are actually implementing that. They call it the “ground game” in politics and when we first started designing the game we didn’t think about the importance of it.

Yeah because it’s pretty important.

Wardell: Yeah, it’s kind of weird.. like twenty years ago you didn’t hear about “the ground game” and “they are getting their voters out” but in the last election it was a pretty big deal. Remember after the last election how they were talking about how bad Mitt Romney’s mechanism for getting his volunteers to get out the vote was? And so that was one of those things where we wanted to go back and model that better because this needs to be an important part of the game now. One of the other areas we focused on this time around is the multiplayer… by integrating it more closely into Steam we’ve made it so you can invite your friends into the game and get games going very quickly because a given game of Political Machine 2016 only lasts like 30 minutes.

Is multiplayer turn-based or real-time?

Wardell: Well, it’s simultaneous turns so you and your opponent are always moving – as a result there’s almost no time when you’re not doing “something.”

One of the things I wanted to ask you about was how outside money is playing a real role in politics now, having a major influence. Do you have any of that playing a role in the game?

Wardell: That comes up in the random events. Essentially what happens is you can raise money but the more money you raise, you are basically rolling the dice on whether or not it’s going to create a scandal.

So give me an example of how that would work in the game.

Wardell: Let’s say you keep going to the same place; because what you did traditionally was you’d keep going to places like California and raise money endlessly because that is where most of the money is. Now the more you raise money in a given state, the more likely the odds are that you’ll get a scandal. What happens is a scandal comes on the game screen and it says “so and so caught receiving laundered money from foreign donors” or from some other source and that can then affect your credibility and trustworthiness across the board, which is very damaging in the game. On the other hand, if you don’t take out money you can’t do things like take out ads…

So there’s not an element to represent Super PACs controlled by someone like the Koch brothers in the game?

Wardell: There’s not a mechanic for that because we’re not sure how it would play into game.. it’s one of those things that comes up as an incident… what you get instead is the ability to hire operatives that can increase your money-making abilities. We don’t model the negative aspect of outside money because unfortunately – you and I know this – there’s isn’t really a lot of punishment in the political system for these people. We talk about it but the candidates never pay a price. We have to be careful about wanting to put in an “aha moment” where there’s a negative for raising money or dealing with Super PACs because in reality they [candidates] aren’t really paying a price in the real world.

And the old argument is “I’m not connected to that Super PAC,” so…

Wardell: Exactly. We always say “what about these 501(c)s? We need to model these 501(c)s.” Okay, but what is the actual game impact, the actual election impact? The team making the game has had this discussion a lot. Someone says “Well, you know, if you bring them in maybe it alienates the voters,” and the response to that is “Well, yes, but has that actually ever happened or is it just that you want that to happen?” We’ve been dying to find a way to use the 501(c)s in some way, and the way it has been thought of is (this came up the last time we were developing the game and this time too) “What if we have Super PACs act as an almost independent agent in the game that are doing things on the player’s behalf?” But it’s a 30 minute game and the problem is that it would tick players off if they lost the election because of something that was completely out of their control. “Well, that’s realistic,” we could say but we ultimately say “okay, but that’s not fun.”

The influence of outside money is realistic, though.. the infamous Willie Horton Ad is a good example, or the Swift Boat ads–

Wardell: Yeah and that wasn’t put out by Bush, that was put out by – they weren’t PACs back then– by a third-party group.

Those kinds of things definitely have an influence, but it is probably complicated to try and model that in the game and make it fun.

Wardell: That’s why we came up with the random events, where you can have scandals etc. It would be nice if we could have those kinds of things attached to each candidate — and it’s another thing we talked about during development – where each of the candidates could have baggage; so if, for example, you pick Hillary Clinton she has these baggage items.. but then – you could almost write about the “politics of writing a political game” because then how do you keep the partisanship of designers or even the appearance of it coming into play? I have had to deal with this already. One of the ratings on our candidates is intelligence and one of our designers had given Donald Trump a three out of ten. If we have Donald Trump rated as a three he is basically a moron. You’ll find plenty of people who will say “Donald Trump IS a moron” but do you really think Donald Trump is that mentally handicapped? Imagine if we added in that Hillary Clinton has email scandals and Donald Trump has bankruptcies, and Carly Fiorina has her HP failures and on, and on, and on… Each of these candidates could have baggage, but which ones do we pick and if this comes up during play and these things come up randomly, are we being fair to all candidates at that point?

So are these things in the game now?

Wardell: No, they were in the game and then we took them out because we were constantly feeling like people would say we were picking on their favorite candidate in an unfair way because the way these things come out is completely random. In the build that had this stuff you could be playing Hillary Clinton three times and this stuff about the email scandal would never come up. Let’s say you and I are playing and you’re Hillary Clinton and I’m playing as Rubio, and the Hillary Clinton email scandal pops up and knocks you down and causes you to lose, but Rubio doesn’t get a random event… people will say “this game is biased against ‘so and so.’ That’s why we took it out, because unless we could guarantee that it would come up for both candidates (it which point it’s predictable) it’s not fair. And if it’s predictable then you might as well put it as a stat. So we can put a stat that says that Hillary Clinton’s credibility is lower than Rubio’s, but Rubio has less experience. People will accept that.

So in the last game you had a lot of historical presidential candidates – are these included this time around?

Wardell: We have them but we are debating still on how to implement them; we’re going into Steam Early Access for right now, so what we’re debating is whether those candidates should be available to play from the beginning. Because what usually happens is in multiplayer people would just run as George Washington because he had like “the god stats,” and that kind of takes a lot of the fun out of the game. Everyone is just playing Washington vs. Jefferson, every single game. So we’re debating if those are going to be unlocked only after playing through the game’s mini-campaigns.

You haven’t decided one way or the other at this point, right?

Wardell: Right. We have the assets and we’ve updated all the classic candidates – the graphics across the entire game have been updated – but we haven’t decided how we’re going to use those particular assets yet.

But they aren’t going to end up being DLC or anything like that, right?

Wardell: No. We’re not planning on putting out any DLC. This time we want the game to come out early enough so we can do pre-updates to update the game with new issues.

What is your target date for the final release?

Wardell: The 1.0 version will come out before the first primary, because previously we waited until July to release and at that point it’s too late.

So sometime in February or around there?

Wardell: Well we’ll go into Early Access in the next week or two and then we can find out from players what they want and don’t want. Like I’ve said, we’ve been playing it for awhile and we’ve made some hard choices.. like one of the most expensive things was the baggage feature, which we had to write up, come up with, and then tear it out. I hate doing that.. unlike the previous games where when it was done that was it, we can come out with multiple updates to do things like ad new issues. It’s kind of exciting because we can come out with the game and keep updating it right up until the election.

So someone at Stardock is going to pay attention to the campaigns and add stuff into the game?

Wardell: Oh yeah. This time we have actually budgeted that in. In the previous versions the game was done and we’d release around August when the VP candidates are picked or during the national conventions, but the problem with that is that at that point everything is kind of done. This time we’re going to release it early enough to be able to apply those updates. Previous releases were always at retail, so we really couldn’t do that and it wasn’t really fair to those customers. Now that the market is all digital it’s really easy for us to update all the issues on the fly.

Now is this the first Political Machine to be released on Steam?

Wardell: Post-Impulse [Stardock’s digital distribution platform that it sold off] we always made a version of it available on Steam, but this is the first version that isn’t going to have a retail box. When you’re not doing a boxed version it really does change things and allows you to be a lot more flexible. In terms of updating the issues and stuff; in the past when people bought the game at retail it wasn’t really worthwhile to budget for things like updating issues because only a tiny fraction of the market was going to actually get to use it. Now if it’s pure digital, we know everyone’s going to get those updates. Here’s one of the things we want to be able to do is like.. you watch a debate on TV and some gaffe happens… we can update that night on Steam with new issues. And you can go and play the next day and all of the sudden you’ll see “Rubio admits he’s not American-born” or something.

So unfortunately you can’t run a primary in the game. Why is that?

Wardell: No this game always assumes you already have the candidates picked for each party. That would be an interesting thing… the only thing is that might make the game feel like it’s a drag because we really want people to be able to go in, play the game and it’s relatively straight forward… something you can play during lunch.

Yeah and there’s like 300 candidates on the Republican side in this cycle…

Wardell: There’s a lot! Oh, and Trump was hard to put in the game because of his hair…

Yeah, and you have to be careful.. you don’t want him to look like he’s going to fly off the screen or something…

Wardell: Someone made his hairpiece as a running mate at one point during development, but we took that out.

You’re a pretty political guy and you’re not afraid to express your opinions—

Wardell: Well. I’m very opinionated, but I’m not super ideological. A lot of people think I’m a right-winger, but I’m more of a libertarian… some people think that means right-winger, but I’m pro-choice, pro-gay marriage, and I have no problem with the welfare state stuff; but on certain issues I’m also “right” – like most people I have a mixture of positions on issues.

So let’s do a little handicapping here; who do you think is going to be at the top after the first primaries next year in Iowa and New Hampshire?

Wardell: Iowa doesn’t matter anymore… If I had to pick I’d say that the end of this it will be Hillary Clinton vs. Marco Rubio. A lot of this stuff comes down to who has the better organization — people can talk about Donald Trump all they want but he doesn’t have a sufficient on-the-ground organization to carry him through. I remember last time people liked Newt Gingrich a lot, and he never had a chance because in primaries it really boils down to what organizations you’ve set up – which we do model in the game – and ironically the only two candidates that have a semblance of a ground game on the Republican side at this stage – well, I mean, actually Jeb Bush does but I don’t think he has a chance – is Marco Rubio and Ted Cruz (who I never would have thought was a contender but based on the ground game stuff – and I wouldn’t vote for him in a primary), who might actually have a chance…

The media has certainly started to talk about him more after the last Republican debate…

Wardell: I don’t think he’s electable, but that’s just my personal opinion…

I’m not going to share my opinion on that…

Wardell: If Trump gets in there our next interview will be me calling in from Belize or something…

This cycle appears to be in line with the last Republican primary cycle. If you look at who was in the lead at about this time in 2012 it was, like Herman Cain…

Wardell: Yeah, Herman Cain and Newt Gingrich.

And Gingrich only ended up winning Georgia, if I remember correctly… and Herman Cain didn’t win any, so…

Wardell: I guess if Donald Trump makes it any further, then the next time it will be like… Kim Kardashian vs. some other reality TV star… that’s where we’ll be as a country…

Have you thought about doing stuff like that for the game – like, just weird fantasy candidates?

Wardell: Back in the original version I had some favorite TV characters in the game, but it wasn’t well received at the time [in reviews]. We seem to get beat up every time. The last one got beat up fairly but a little excessively because you had the people that wanted the game to be completely serious, modeling everything, and should take two hours to play… and then you have the people that found the game to be too complicated as is. So this time around we’re trying to satisfy both groups better. Last time it was a little shallow on the one hand and yet still too complicated from a UI perspective.

So you’ve tweaked the UI quite a bit to make it easier for new players?

Wardell: Yeah, I’m hoping this time when people load it up they’ll go “oh, this is a much more polished product” than what we’ve done before.

Does it have a tutorial?

Wardell: Yes and it also has advisers in the game which it didn’t have before. Before we just threw you in and said “good luck!”

So the game’s going to hit Steam Early Access when?

Wardell: Probably in the next week or two and then it’ll be in early access until February.

And what are you looking to get for people to play the game through early access?

Wardell: It’s only going to be around $9. This time around we’re hoping that having a low price, and being more accessible that we’ll get a lot of people wanting to check it out and find it’s a lot of fun.

All right Brad, thanks for taking the time to talk to us about this game. We’re looking forward to playing it because there aren’t too many games coming out these days that are about politics.

Wardell: Which is too bad because the election does make a good game – especially the American system – because every state is worth x number of points! It’s as if the founding fathers saw the rise of videogames!

You can check out The Political Machine 2016 at its website.