People Moves of the Week: GI Partners, Morgan Lewis & Bockius, PwC

GI hires former Peet's Coffee & Tea exec; Morgan Lewis taps cyber-security specialist; PwC names John Stadtler leader of the firm's U.S. financial services industry practice

Alvarez & Marsal — The New York advisory firm has hired Laura Hardin as a managing director in Houston. Hardin specializes in business valuation, forensic accounting and consulting services on a variety of sectors, particularly energy. In the past, she has testified in Russian courts and has worked extensively in Latin America, Europe, Africa and the Middle East. Prior to joining Alvarez & Marsal, Hardin served as a vice president with Charles River Associates. Prior positions were with FTI Consulting, Navigant Consulting and PricewaterhouseCoopers.

Equiteq LLP — David Jorgenson has joined the London advisory firm as global head of M&A. Based in Equiteq's New York office, Jorgenson has advised business owners, shareholders and C-level executives on various aspects of growth, including private equity and mergers and acquisitions. Previously, Jorgenson worked at Milwaukee-based Robert W. Baird.

F&C Asset Management plc — The London asset management company, which is part of BMO Global Asset Management, tapped Georg Kyd-Rebenburg as head of European wholesale distribution. Prior to F&C, he worked at AllianceBernstein LP since 1996 as country head for Germany and Austria.

Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP — The New York law firm enlisted corporate partner Graham White as managing partner. Based in the London office, White will oversee the firm's private equity practice. Previously, he was a senior partner in the London office of Kirkland & Ellis LLP and held a similar position with Linklaters.

GI Partners — The private equity firm appointed Laila Tarraf head of human resources. Prior to joining GI, Tarraf served with Peet’s Coffee & Tea since 2006 as vice president of human resources. In the past, she served in human resources leadership roles at Wal-Mart Stores Inc. (NYSE: WMT) and Electronic Arts Inc. (Nasdaq: EA).

Houlihan Lokey Inc. — Loren McCutchen was added to the investment bank's due diligence services practice as a director in Dallas. McCutchen arrives after 18 years at consulting and accounting firm Deloitte & Touche LLP, where he worked in the merger and acquisition transaction services group.

Kaye Scholer LLP — Michael Penney jumped to the Chicago law firm from finance company Hercules Technology Growth Capital Inc. in Palo Alto, California. While at Hercules, Penney held several titles, including general counsel, secretary and chief compliance officer. He oversaw corporate governance matters, as well as portfolio transactions and capital markets transactions.

Morgan Lewis & Bockius LLP — The Philadelphia law firm brought in Mark Krotoski, a cyber-security specialist, as a litigation partner. He will initially be a part of Morgan Lewis' Washington office before splitting his time between the Palo Alto, California, and San Francisco offices. Krotoski served as assistant chief of the national criminal enforcement section of the antitrust division of the U.S. Department of Justice. Before that, he was national coordinator of the Computer Hacking and Intellectual Property program.

PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP — The professional services provider named John Stadtler (pictured) leader of the firm's U.S. financial services industry practice. In his new role, Stadtler will continue to oversee large engagements while steering the direction of the banking, insurance and asset management practices. Stadtler joined PwC in 1988 and has been a partner since 1999. The company also named David Leavitt tax principal in its New York real estate practice. Previously, Leavitt advised clients on a wide range of tax matters for Mayer Brown LLP in Chicago.

US Capital Partners Inc. — The San Francisco investment bank has added Sarah Tomita to its ranks. As vice president of business development, Tomita will participate in direct debt investments, and help arrange equity placements for small to lower middle market companies. Prior to joining US Capital Partners, Tomita was a vice president at Goldman Sachs & Co. (NYSE: GS).

For more information on related topics, visit the following: