When a spreadsheet surfaced last week containing analysis on the more than 1,600 noise complaints related to planes taking off and landing at Longmont's Vance Brand Municipal Airport last year, a long-standing debate being fought in court spilled into the public forum.

Airport Noise Complaints* Raw Data: 1,646 complaints by 110 people 52% of complaints by one person 28% of complaints by 9 people less than 1% of complaints anonymous or no address 20% of complaints by 89 people *Data collected from Jan. 1, 2014 through Dec. 13, 2014 Coming Tuesday Before he left, former airport manager Tim Barth commissioned an environmental study done on airport noise. While the company concluded that there was no significant prolonged noise from overhead planes, it did show that noise from planes sometimes reached high 70s db and low 80s db, between the level of a vacuum cleaner and a blender or diswasher.

The analysis, compiled by Don Dolce, the chairman of the Airport Advisory Board, included in one of the tabs the complete raw data. The raw data is a simple table containing the date, time, the complainer's name, address, contact information and type of complaint.

However, in attempts to compile the log into something easily readable, Dolce has for three years been compressing the data, sorting it by type of complaint, geographic source of the complaint, and most controversially, frequency of complaint.

In most of 2014, for instance, there were a total of 110 people logging 1,646 complaints. More than 90 percent of the total complaints were about supposed noise from Mile Hi Skydiving. Almost a quarter of the total complaints came from Longmont residents while almost three quarters of the complaints came from residents in unincorporated Boulder County.

This year's complaint log stops at December 13 although city officials say there were complaints after that date and they are trying to recover them.

But, since 2012, Dolce has been looking at the data and weeding out what in the 2014 spreadsheet are called "invalid complaints."

Eight of the 1,646 complaints Dolce filed as invalid because they were anonymous, three were filed as anonymous because they gave no address, 457 complaints by nine people were considered invalid because Dolce thought the complainers had "special cause" and 850 complaints by one person were considered invalid because Dolce considered the large number a statistical outlier.

The result in Dolce's analysis is two tables on a tab labeled "Summary' which compares the total data and the "valid" data. Less the complaints removed as "invalid," the airport received 328 complaints from 89 people, with roughly two thirds of them coming from Longmont residents and a third coming from county residents. Slightly more than 70 percent of the "valid" complaints are about noise from Mile Hi planes.

Dolce says he was just trying to provide extra information to anyone who might look at the data - that a significant portion come from frequent complainers, or people that might have an interest in the current lawsuit between Citizens for Quiet Skies and Mile Hi.

Kimberly Gibbs poses for a portrait in her backyard on Friday. (Matthew Jonas / Staff Photographer)

"The key there was why not allow others who are going to see this data and may only look at that one table... why not give them one more piece of information and that is that, just looking at the data, there appears to be another population in there," Dolce said, adding that because he was dealing with people, perhaps "outliers" and "invalid" were poor word choices and he was sorry for the misunderstanding.

City officials and at least one of those frequent complainers, however, saw Dolce's analysis as not operating in the spirit of a board that serves Longmont citizens.

Shawn Lewis, an assistant city manager who has also been serving as interim airport director since Tim Barth left the position after almost 19 years, denounced Dolce's analysis.

"I don't think he was being malicious in the analysis but I definitely think there was an attempt to reduce the number of complaints," Lewis said. "However, as a city government, we don't subscribe to any analysis methodology that in any way discounts or reduces one comment whether it was made once or 1,000 times."

Kimberly Gibbs, who is leading the lawsuit against Mile Hi and had her 59 noise complaints filed under "invalid" on account of "special cause" said the analysis was misleading, especially if summarized for city council who may only glance and see 328 total complaints.

"It was unethical - completely unethical and arbitrary," Gibbs said. "The problem for me is not so much that my complaints were thrown out. The most important thing for me is that it shows a clear motive on the part of the chairman of the airport advisory board to arbitrarily delete complaints."

Minutes from a Jan. 8 airport advisory board meeting say that Dolce presented the complaint data, explaining about "valid" and invalid complaints, within Barth's annual report to the board. Neither the annual report nor the noise complaint log have been reported to council since 2008, the Times-Call reported on Sunday. Barth did not return calls seeking comment.

Lewis said that while the raw data table was a city document, city staff does not consider Dolce's analysis a document prepared by a city staffer and will not accept it.

"There is no intention of using or even storing on city computers an analysis that was done by a person outside the city organization," Lewis said. The analysis that has caused such a controversy "wasn't worth being seen or used by anyone. It should have been disregarded as soon as it was understood that it was attempting to make the numbers look better than they were."

Karen Antonacci: 303-684-5226, antonaccik@times-call.com or twitter.com/ktonacci