Topics: broadband, Dream City, Oregon, Portland, telecommunications, The Internet, Innovation News, News

In 1932, presidential candidate Franklin Roosevelt delivered a message of civic empowerment to the citizens of Portland, Oregon.

“Where a community – city or county or a district – is not satisfied with the service rendered or the rates charged by the private utility,” the New York governor told the crowd, “it has the undeniable basic right, as one of its functions of government, one of its functions of home rule, to set up … its own governmentally owned and operated service.”

Roosevelt was talking about electricity, whose provision and regulation was the hot issue of the day. But 80 years on, his words fit right into the debate about the Internet in American cities. Should a city, county or district dissatisfied with lousy corporate service have the authority to construct and offer its own Internet?

Portland says yes. Along with some of the nation’s largest cities, like Los Angeles, Boston and San Antonio, the Oregon city has joined Next Century Cities, a group that advocates for municipal “self-determination” on the issue.

President Obama thinks so too, and will host a community broadband summit at the White House this June.

New Jersey Sen. Cory Booker, the former mayor of Newark, proposed a law this week that would clear the way for localities to build, operate and expand their own broadband networks.

But in 19 states, the provision of public broadband is plagued by legal obstacles. Not surprisingly, telecom companies believe state legislators are right to regulate and restrict the practice. And some advocates for the open Internet say the problem isn’t recalcitrant, monopolistic corporations — but regulation-ridden cities themselves.

Hovering over all this is a larger question: Is the Internet today, like electricity a century ago, a utility that — as a group of Democratic senators opined last year — Americans “cannot live without”?

As Bogotá, Colombia, is to bus rapid transit, so Chattanooga, Tennessee, is to municipal broadband. The “fastest Internet in the Western Hemisphere” has transformed this post-industrial river town into a national example, the envy of urban mayors trying to birth and lure tech firms. San Francisco and New York offer tax breaks in the hundreds of millions of dollars to keep companies like Twitter and Fresh Direct. Chattanooga’s approach was more constructive.

“Cheap, high-speed Internet would encourage companies to relocate,” Emily Badger writes. “And if those firms ever went bust, or decided to leave town (for, say, more tax breaks elsewhere), at least the city would still be left with an invaluable long-term piece of infrastructure.” Chattanooga now hosts five venture capital funds with more than $50 million to invest, and has attracted a smattering of tech outfits to its downtown core.

In 2007, the city announced a 10-year plan to build out — through the municipally owned electric company — a very fast municipal broadband network. Today, Chattanooga provides fiber connections to 60,000 homes and 4,500 businesses, about half the city’s total potential customers. Downloading a two-hour movie takes the average high-speed broadband customer in the U.S. half an hour. In Chattanooga, it takes 30 seconds.

Chattanooga is the largest American city to have constructed its own broadband system. But hundreds of others have followed suit, building independent networks or smaller infrastructure improvements. It was in Cedar Falls, Iowa – where the publicly owned Cedar Falls Utilities provides broadband nearly 100 times faster than the national average – that President Obama made his case for municipal networks this month.