Buy Photo Founded in 1964, MJ Insurance has grown steadily in size and revenues as it has provided commercial insurance, risk management, employee benefits and human resources consulting to clients in all 50 states and 16 countries. From left are shown key executives Vice President of Employee Benefits Andy Vetor, Chief Executive Officer Mike H. Bill, and President and Chief Operating Officer Jon E. Loftin. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star )Buy Photo

Since its founding in 1964, MJ Insurance has grown steadily. Perhaps even more impressive, it has never had a year in the red.

In each of its first 49 full years, company executives say the provider of commercial insurance, risk management, employee benefits and human resources consulting has posted a profit. Now as it approaches a half century in business in June, the company has posted its highest-ever revenues of $25 million for fiscal 2013, which ended in August and has watched sales rise another 12 percent for the first six months of fiscal 2014.

What is MJ Insurance’s secret? It has kept adding new clients while holding onto existing ones — just as it has been able to retain many of its veteran employees.

“I’ve watched them grow,” said Robert Wagner, founding partner for Lewis Wagner LLP in Indianapolis and a client of MJ Insurance since 1972.

Wagner’s own firm represents many in the insurance industry, and he said MJ employees demonstrate the type of intelligence and experience that allow them to manage risk competently, while not overloading clients with unnecessary insurance products. “You know the people there, and you have confidence in them,” Wagner said.

“Our goal is to be a trusted adviser first,” said Michael H. Bill, who assumed the role of chief executive officer for MJ in 2006, taking over for his father, Michael M. Bill.

Reflecting the thoughtful approach that company executives and clients say defines MJ, the family-owned insurance agency executed the leadership change through a carefully planned, 10-year transition. That gave everyone time to get used to changing roles, and for the successor, Michael H. Bill, to help create and advise a new leadership team.

The younger Bill said his father, who founded the company with James Ritter half a century ago and continues to serve as its chairman, has been as a mentor to him, allowing him to hone his skills as a leader, become a professional mentor in his own right, and set a course for the future. “He would always give us his perspective and advice, but once leadership was transitioned to myself and team, he’s never questioned decisions and he’s always been 100 percent supportive,” the second-generation leader said.

MJ looks to leverage its reputation as a trusted adviser to build on a business model that gets beyond relying solely on commissions from selling insurance to billing clients directly for consultations. In addition to increasing business from commissions, this has allowed the firm to further bolster revenues, even as some companies wrangle with reducing their insurance offerings to employees, including slashing health-care benefits because of sky-high costs in that sector.

“There is a shift going to fee for service,” said Jon Loftin, MJ’s president and chief operating officer.

Much of the company’s income, such as from the work it does for Lewis Wagner, still comes from commissions tied to insurance premiums paid by clients, a traditional business model for insurance brokers. But Loftin says MJ now charges a growing number of clients directly for consultative services.

With direct fees, unlike commissions, he said, there’s no built-in financial incentive to sell clients additional insurance.

“More times than not, we’re trying to get them less insurance rather than more, and that sounds counterintuitive,” he said, but it also can save clients money on premiums. “If there’s a low risk that they feel the company can handle on their balance sheet, why cede that to an insurance company?”

MJ’s consultative services include advising on how provisions in the Affordable Care Act will affect a business and how to navigate changes, an area where MJ has intentionally honed its expertise to meet client demand.

The focus on advising follows the company’s internal emphasis on professional and personal improvement for its 130 employees, 110 in Indianapolis and 20 in MJ’s Phoenix office. That, too, has an impact on clients MJ serves in all 50 states and 16 countries in sectors ranging from sororities to mining companies and construction firms.

“This development and goal-setting, it pours out of every team member and it’s very infectious to current and prospective clients,” said Ryan Michalowski , director of human resources for Defender Direct, an MJ client. The provider of ADT Security Services systems, as well as HVAC and plumbing, headquartered in Indianapolis, employs 2,200 nationwide.

Recently, Michalowski said, MJ advised Defender Direct on how it could take a proactive approach to worker safety training following acquisitions of HVAC companies in 2012 and 2013.

“They’re more concerned about how they can make your company more successful,” he said. “It’s not about ‘Let me sell you something.’ ”

MJ Insurance• What: insurance agency providing commercial insurance, risk management, employee benefits and HR consulting.• Headquarters: Indianapolis.• Leader: Michael H. Bill, chief executive officer.• Quote: “Without great clients and great people, we would not be able to grow.”

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/PAYtQ4