Dr. Cully White is in hot water for botched surgeries. White’s patients trusted him, but his patients say in the end, they were only left with pain. More former patients of Dr. White are coming forward with emotional pleas for help.

White is being sued by Debby Schallock, a former patient who accuses White of installing screws and rods in her back that were allegedly made in a tool shop.

Debby Schallock connects with others through a Facebook group containing almost 500 individuals who claim to have undergone surgery performed by White.

Many of the surgeries allegedly occurred at Aurora St. Luke’s Medical Center in Milwaukee. Schallock said she first saw White for neck pain. She believes the materials used in that surgery are counterfeit.

According to a lawsuit filed by another former patient against White and the hospital, White is accused of taking kickbacks from a medical supply distributor that mixed FDA-approved parts with counterfeit materials made in a tool shop.

“That’s a little scary, thinking that’s inside of you,” said Schallock.

White voluntarily surrendered his medical license in 2013.

According to White’s records from disciplinary proceedings through the State of Wisconsin Medical Examining Board, White performed surgery on the wrong side of a patient’s spine, and did not tell the patient.

White also allegedly told the board, he performed 600 spine surgeries a year, twice as many as other physicians.

White’s assessment reads, “Demonstrated good knowledge of surgical technique and approaches, but both chart reviews and discussions raised concerns about his foundational knowledge of the clinical diagnosis of neurosurgical spine conditions.”

White was also federally indicted for health care fraud.

“Seeing a dollar sign instead of a person, maybe. I don’t know what’s in his head. I’ll never be the same. He took away my future,” said Schallock.

Source: Counterfeit materials: More patients come forward with allegations against former doctor Cully White

Join the Discussion