The Greater Philadelphia Health Action, Inc. is gearing up to expand coverage to another underserved community in the city.

The nonprofit organization plans to open a $17 million, 58,000-square foot facility at 31st and Reed Sts. next June, in Point Breeze. The Carl Moore Health Center will specialize in offering primary care, obstetrician /gynecology, podiatry, dental, behavioral health and pharmacy services. The two-story center is named for GPHA founder Carl Moore.

The 26,000-square foot clinical space will be located on first floor, while the second level will house GPHA’s administrative offices. The organization’s administrative offices will move from the current location at 432 N. 6th St. and that space will be used for Chinatown Medical Services. The new center is projected to serve an estimated 25,000 patients on a yearly basis.

“The building is right in the heart of a very densely populated community and allows us to deliver our services directly to the community without them having to travel,” said Brian Clark, chief operating officer and chief financial officer of GPHA.

The company bills itself as the largest non-hospital based medical provider in the city. It serves about 85,000 patients on an annual basis at its various clinics. Last year, the organization had 250,000 patient visits. It has more than 400 employees, including 100 medical providers, including doctors and dentists. During a Tribune editorial board meeting this week, Clark provided an overview of the organization’s focus on providing comprehensive health care for all ages.

“We are doing something that very few folks are in the business of doing and that is taking care of those who are really underserved,” Clark said.“Patients are getting quality, top of the line care in their neighborhood.”

GPHA, formerly the South Philadelphia Health Action, was founded in 1970 with a focus on providing primary health care. Throughout the years, the organization has expanded its services in response to community demand. For instance, GPHA added behavioral health services in the 1980s when it saw that there was a need.

“At the time there were very few behavioral health programs around and virtually none for poor people,” Clark said. “If you had a lot of money you could get into a program and if you didn’t have money, you weren’t able to and that has changed in a lot of ways. GPHA has been at the forefront in providing behavioral health care in the community.”

As a federally qualified health center, GPHA receives federal government funding to provide primary care services. The organization provides care on a sliding fee scale based ability to pay.

According to the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, there are more than 1,300 health centers serving nearly 23 million medically underserved individuals. One out of every 14 people living in the U.S. now relies on a federally-funded clinic.

Prior to the passage of the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, 20 percent of GPHA’s patients were uninsured. GPHA outreach and enrollment specialists are on hand to assist patients in applying for health insurance.

Due to the ACA the organization was able to cut that number to almost 10 percent.

“Prior to the ACA when people got sick who didn’t have insurance they couldn’t come to a primary care doctor, they couldn’t go to a specialist but when their need got to be what is called catastrophic, at the point where it’s most expensive to take care of them — they get shipped to an emergency room,” Clark said. “What the ACA does is, it says we are going to create an environment where folks can get insurance, what that means is they can get care before it becomes catastrophic.”

The community-led organization has the following health facilities – Al-Assist Behavioral Healthcare Center, Chinatown Medical Services, Frankford Avenue Health Center, GPHA, Inc. Dental and Behavioral Healthcare, Hunting Park Health Center, Snyder Avenue Dental Center, Southeast Health Center, Wilson Park Medical Center and Woodland Avenue Health Center.