By ABBY WEINGARTEN, Correspondent

Eating healthfully: The concept seems so subjective, the act so painfully elusive for so many Americans. But in a culture of ever-increasing obesity, it is one that deserves further, more profound exploration.

Karen Koenig, a Sarasota nutritionist and author, has been studying clients’ positive and negative eating habits for more than three decades. Her latest book — “Starting Monday: Seven Keys to a Permanent, Positive Relationship with Food” — is helping readers learn when to say no or yes to food, how to make more conscious choices about what they consume, and how to generally create more gratifying lives. I sat down recently with Koenig to talk about her journey toward getting “full,” and how her personal experience has changed the way people look at what is on their plates.

Q: In “Starting Monday,” you write about helping people banish quick-fix diets, reconnect with their appetite signals, retrain their brains to respond to food in a healthy way, and “figure out what mistaken beliefs and needless fears are holding them back from achieving their health and fitness goals.” How did you come to this deep understanding in your own life?

A: Slowly and painfully. I had my own eating problems from adolescence through about age 30. I was a chronic dieter and binge eater, and for one and a half years I had bulimia. One day, I picked up a book called “Fat is a Feminist Issue,” and it changed my life.

The author talked about being comfortable with food, and I carried the book around like AA people carry around their little books. This was about the late ’70s, and I started reading more books and I went into therapy to deal with my eating and body image issues. I started to get better, gradually.

Q: According to a survey from November 2013, the adult obesity rate is 27.2 percent (up from 26.2 percent in 2012) and it is on its way to surpass all annual average obesity rates since Gallup-Healthways began tracking the rate in 2008. Obesity rates have shot up across almost all major demographics. Yet, even with this spike in obesity, our culture is obsessed with thinness. What are your thoughts on this?

A: We are at two extremes in our culture, definitely. We are extremely focused on thinness, fitness and health.

The subtext of everything else in this culture is that more is better, excess is fine, live in the moment and have quick fixes — so the two are always clashing. Part of it is, we’re an affluent society and food is really accessible, and we’re a capitalist society so food companies want to earn money.

We just have a very different view of food than Europeans and Asians. And food addiction is a common behavior, not a normal behavior, yet we seem to use the words interchangeably.

Q: Tell me about the clients who come into your Sarasota office with eating issues.

A: There are definitely a lot of women. Some women will say they’ve had food issues since they were kids, but for many of them it was adolescence and the peer pressure that started it all. I have clients from age 18 to 80, and I have elderly people who just started working on their food problems a few years ago.

Women are the ones who come to therapy and read self-help books more. I’ve only seen a handful of men in my 30-plus years. Men have a wider latitude of weight, so if they are 10 pounds overweight they might think that they’re fine. Women are sensitive if they only gain five ounces.

Women take care of themselves with food and they’ve traditionally been around food more, preparing it and feeding their families. They’ve been the ones home taking care of the kids. They’ve been near the refrigerator more. It’s been part of women’s lives more, historically.

Q: How do you help these women rethink their eating habits?

A: It has to do with them understanding why they wouldn’t want to take care of themselves 100 percent, 100 percent of the time. When people can be compassionate, nurture themselves and always provide themselves with loving kindness, that’s when things can stay permanent. If you’re not sure if you’re worth it, you’ll stop.

Why wouldn’t you want to take care of yourself 100 percent of the time? Do you go from self-care to “I don’t care”? Ten out of 10 times, this behavior was learned in childhood when they weren’t validated or when they were mistreated.

Once that self-nurturing side is developed in them, everything in life changes. Food behaviors are learned. There are so many people who didn’t have parents who regulated themselves well emotionally (doing too much or too little work, never knowing when enough was enough). I help clients learn to know when enough is enough with food.

Q: What are the biggest challenges clients seem to have with remaining on the health and fitness bandwagon?

A: Many people don’t get enough sleep, and getting adequate sleep is very important to good eating habits. Changing reactions to stress is another one — which is hard because carbohydrates do promote relaxation in our brain and food triggers dopamine, so finding other things that will do it is so important.

Self-talk is a big one. For example, I had a client who couldn’t get motivated and hated her job, and I felt miserable just from hearing her. You can’t tell yourself to stop if you want to go. You have to be a cheerleader for yourself and say things that will get you the best results. Did you give yourself a pat on the back after taking that 10-minute walk? Self-talk is huge for success.

Q: Tell me about a client’s success story.

A: I had a client who was a manager of a nonprofit, and she grew up in a rigid family system and was on and off again with food.

Since I’ve known the client, she has retired and left her job. She was a person who always worked overtime and then had nothing to do, and who always wanted to sail but who didn’t feel deserving of having her own sailboat. She finally changed her outlook, got a sailboat and traveled.

She enjoys food now and doesn’t count calories, and her life is so much different. Her anxiety level is so much different.

Changing the way you look at food changes your whole outlook. Seeing these results is very rewarding.