The victim and suspect had met earlier in the evening and went to the house to party, police said. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

Officers said the victim suffered a gunshot wound to the stomach. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

There was a large police presence at the scene of Sunday morning's shooting. (Source: KPHO/KTVK)

Officers were going door-to-door looking for the suspect and questioning neighbors. (Sourfce: KPHO/KTVK)

Phoenix police said a suspect has been caught in connection with a shooting Sunday morning that left one person dead.

Officers knew the name of the suspect but it was just a matter of tracking him down, Phoenix Police Sgt. Vince Lewis said.

Just before 1 p.m., Lewis said, "We are not looking for any outstanding persons at this time."

[RAW VIDEO: Sgt. Vince Lewis describes the investigation]

The shooting happened in the 2100 block of W. Poinsettia just after 5:15 a.m.

“When I woke up I seen all the cops outside so and that was it and then they told me somebody had died,” neighbor Gary Kelly explained.

Police received a call about an unwanted guest at the home in north Phoenix. About 30 seconds later, a second caller told police it was an emergency.

A neighbor said she heard loud music and a gunshot ring out.

A man who lives in the area said the gunfire was unsettling.

"First time we’ve ever actually seen or heard anything like this. That’s crazy. Like I said, this is a safe neighborhood. Weird. If you’re going to scare us, no, no, no,” the man said.

A number of officers showed up.

"They conducted a protective sweep of the interior of the home and found one adult male victim with a gunshot wound to the stomach,” Lewis said.

Officers said the victim and suspect knew each other and had gotten into an argument.

“Apparently they met each other earlier in the night and came back here to continue a party," Lewis said. "There was some type of argument and there was one gunshot heard.”

Investigators recovered a shotgun inside the home. They detained two people for questioning - a man and a woman - who were in a bedroom.

The suspect lived in the home where the shooting happened.

Police detectives walked around the area knocked on doors in their quest for information and leads in the case.

“I guess I want to go in and lock up you know I don’t want to be out here, that’s for sure. Oh my. That’s just too bad because this is always such a quiet area. We never hear anything, you know,” said Becky Ockenfels, a neighbor.

Police aren't releasing the name of the victim until they can notify next-of-kin.

Copyright 2016 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.