Bar owner denies drug claims, says she's concerned about increased crime like everyone else.

Buy Photo Cahoots is seen on Bardstown Road. Sep. 3, 2015. (Photo: Jessica Ebelhar, Special to the C-J)Buy Photo

Every day for the past 10-plus years, Tommy Jackson has walked the two blocks from his home in the Highlands to his neighborhood bar around 5:30 p.m., when it’s time for dinner and a chat with the owner — longtime friend Marcia Cain.

For Jackson, who uses a respirator, can’t cook and doesn’t live near family, Cahoots is like a second home.

But for others in the neighborhood, the bar is a problem place known for its rumored drug dealings, assaults and other crime. Some residents — following a mid-August street fight that they say was likely started by Cahoots patrons — are asking that the bar’s liquor license be revoked.

On Sept. 15, Cahoots is scheduled to go before the local Alcoholic Beverage Control board to address an Aug. 2 citation — concerning two bartenders who were found with narcotics and drug paraphernalia — that could result in a fine or the suspension or loss of its liquor license.

But despite the bar’s problems, including recent negative publicity and social media scrutiny, Jackson said Cahoots isn’t the bar everyone’s making it out to be.

“I know Marcia, I like her and I can’t imagine that she would do as bad a business as people are trying to say she’s been doing,” said Jackson, who has visited Cahoots for Thanksgiving and Christmas dinners in recent years and said he is never expected to pay. “… They’re just like family, really, as long as I’ve been coming here. I just hope everything goes good for Marcia.”

In recent years, Bardstown Road where Cahoots is located has changed.

Residents, business owners and police all acknowledge that — with more bars opening and others with bad reputations closing — more people have started visiting the area and more problems have started to arise, with police routinely called on reports of assaults, thefts and drug use.

Police say the issues are mostly limited to the section between the 900 block of Baxter Avenue and the 1100 block of Bardstown Road, where at least seven bars are located. But members of the Original Highlands Neighborhood Association say they can pinpoint it even further — the problems, they say, are coming from Cahoots.

“It seems like all the other bars are doing OK, but Cahoots, it seems like they’re not able to keep the patrons under control,” said association president Matt Blair.

Rumors about violence and drug use at the bar aren’t new, but concerns about Cahoots have increased within the past year after a September 2014 police raid found two people with marijuana and cocaine. As seen in a well-viewed YouTube video, police shut down the bar during the raid with more than a dozen people inside, patting them down before they were allowed to leave.

According to city documents, ABC officers visited the bar with Louisville Metro Police Department detectives after receiving a complaint that drugs were being sold and used within the building. Officers set up a controlled buy for the inspection, which resulted in one arrest on felony drug trafficking charges and one citation for misdemeanor marijuana possession. Officers also reported finding a 19-year-old minor in the bar.

At a hearing in January, the ABC board offered Cahoots the option of paying a $2,300 fine instead of having its license suspended. Cain said she paid the fine.

Cain and her attorney, Jaret Hill, have since criticized the raid, saying police targeted the business and only found drugs there because they had set up the purchase.

“The neighborhood people are probably going to be like ‘yeah, right, whatever,’ but all I really want to do is provide a place for people to come and have a good time and enjoy themselves,” Cain said. “I don’t do drugs; I don’t know about drugs in here.”

Since the raid, though, police calls to the bar have not stopped. In the past year, police have reported 21 incidents at Cahoots, including six drug searches, six assaults, five thefts, two robberies and two fraudulent uses of credit cards.

At the Highlands Taproom across the street, eight thefts and one charge of criminal mischief have been reported in the same time period.

Most of the thefts and assaults at or outside of Cahoots are minor, but others include horrific reports of a 40-year-old being shot and a 23-year-old being attacked with beer bottles by multiple women. Both of the more violent incidents took place after the June closing of Phoenix Hill Tavern on Baxter Avenue, which some Cahoots customers and Highlands residents say could have caused an increase in criminal activity down the road. The latter attack also took place the same night as the August street fight — a video of which has been circulated online.

Residents say the video, a version of which has been titled "cahoots fun," is one more example that confirms their stance against the bar, but Cain and the video’s owner, Mula Mezi, say the footage clearly shows the fight taking place down the street, near Friend’s Hookah Café.

Mezi originally uploaded the video on his Facebook page and titled it “Huge Fight on BardsTownRd in Louisville, Kentucky !!!” He said he isn’t sure who changed the video’s name and uploaded it to YouTube.

“Whoever renamed it ‘cahoots fun’ is someone who has a vendetta against Cahoots,” he said.

Blair, with the neighborhood association, said it doesn’t matter where the fight took place. While many of the police-reported incidents have taken place outside the bar, it’s still easy to connect them to Cahoots.

“Why are all of the problems happening outside happening within spitting distance of the bar?” he asked.

In recent months, Cain said she has made changes in response to the increased number of customers and police reports, including hiring three off-duty security guards for Friday and Saturday nights, allowing an additional police presence and instituting a weekend cover charge. She’s also eliminated live entertainment on Saturdays and raised drink prices throughout the week.

“I don’t want bad things happening in the area,” Cain said. “I live here, I work here and I have for many years. It’s very concerning, yes. I’m just as much a victim as anyone else.”

But Blair and the association say the changes aren’t enough. The association has now requested the ABC board revoke Cahoots’ liquor license and not allow any future business in that building to receive a license allowing sales past 2 a.m.

“There’s a line between a bar-restaurant and a nightclub,” said Highlands resident Winn Willinger. “If you’re open at 4 a.m., you’re selling cheap beer and having some sort of event, trying to get as many in the door for cover as you can. … The crowd coming in and causing trouble are coming in for clubbing.”

Customers at Cahoots say the problems won’t go away if the bar were to close. They’ll just move somewhere else.

And the group of regulars that appreciate the bar and the kindness of its owner — known for planning fundraisers for customers down on their luck, including one man who couldn’t afford his father’s funeral — will have nowhere to go.

“(Marcia’s) real good to everybody,” said customer Michael O’Bryan. “Everybody gets the benefit of the doubt with her. She just welcomes people into her business. Everybody’s like her friend. She doesn’t have customers as much as she has friends.”

Reach reporter Bailey Loosemore at 502-582-4646 or bloosemore@courier-journal.com.



ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGE CONTROL HEARING

What: The local ABC board will consider taking action against Cahoots for an Aug. 2 citation concerning two bartenders found with narcotics.

When: 1 p.m. Sept. 15

Where: Old Jail Building, 514 W. Liberty St.



POLICE REPORTS

The Louisville Metro Police Department has recorded 21 incident reports listed at Cahoots’ address, 1047 Bardstown Road, in the past year. They include:

9/10/14 – During a controlled buy set up by police in conjunction with the local Alcoholic Beverage Control board, one person was cited on a charge of misdemeanor marijuana possession and another person was arrested on two felony charges of trafficking in a controlled substance and misdemeanor marijuana possession. Detectives also found a 19-year-old minor in the bar.

10/1/14 – One person was cited on misdemeanor charges of marijuana possession and drug paraphernalia possession after his car was searched.

10/13/14 – A victim reported a phone stolen.

10/25/14 – A victim reported being assaulted in the bar.

11/2/14 – One person was arrested on assault charges after an officer saw him strike a victim in the face.

12/5/14 – One person was arrested for robbery after a victim reported a stolen phone.

12/25/14 – A victim reported a stolen phone.

3/21/15 – One person was cited on misdemeanor charges of possession of marijuana, possession of a controlled substance and possession of drug paraphernalia after her car was searched.

4/6/15 – A victim reported a stolen phone.

5/6/15 – Three victims said they were assaulted after leaving the bar.

5/30/15 – Police found two bartenders, not currently working, with drugs on the property. One was arrested on a felony charge of possession of a controlled substance and misdemeanor charges of possession of marijuana, possession of a controlled substance and possession of drug paraphernalia. Another was arrested on a charge of trafficking marijuana.

6/5/15 – Officers responded to a call of shots fired. They later found a victim in a hospital with a gunshot wound.

6/16/15 – A victim reported being pushed off her chair and punched in the back of the neck.

7/11/15 – A victim reported his credit card was used fraudulently.

7/24/15 – A victim reported being robbed at knifepoint.

7/27/15 – A victim reported her wallet stolen.

7/23/15 – One person was arrested on misdemeanor charges of possession of marijuana and drug paraphernalia and a felony charge of tampering with physical evidence after his car was searched.

8/8/15 – A victim reported her credit card was used fraudulently.

8/16/15 – A victim reported being assaulted with broken beer bottles by several women.

​

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1Uz58V9