Topics: culture war, don lemon, ed berliner, Editor's Picks, LGBT Rights, michael brendan dougherty, Mike Pence, Newsmax, religious liberty, RFRA, sarah westwood, Media News, News, Politics News

Although he is one of my favorite pundits, The Week’s Michael Brendan Dougherty is also a devout Catholic who tends to lean conservative on economics. So when it comes to the political arguments of any given news cycle, we more often than not disagree. But while that’s been the case with the contentious “religious freedom” law recently passed (and more recently amended) in Indiana, I do think Dougherty’s Tuesday column about the controversy made a point that has otherwise gone under-appreciated.

It’s an obvious one, too. A reminder that, to paraphrase Orwell, the hardest truths to remember are often the ones staring you in the face. What Dougherty understands is that the kerfuffle that consumed Indiana — and, to a lesser degree, Arkansas — during the past week was not about the Constitution, the Religious Freedom Restoration Act (RFRA), Indiana Gov. Mike Pence’s 2016 ambitions or partisan politics. It was about symbolism and the culture war; it’s really as simple as that.

People who don’t live and breathe politics likely figure this is self-evident. But for the kind of people who spend at least some time every day catching up on the latest news and political debates, the essential nature of the religious liberty vs. LGBT rights argument can get knocked down by a wave of ancillary information. Secondary or tertiary points — which only really matter insofar as they’re a sword or a shield to use in online arguments or while bickering with friends — grab the media’s attention. And eventually, the conversation drifts away from reality as well as what really matters.

For example, look at the sheer number of articles that have been written in the past week or so about whether or not Indiana’s RFRA differs from the one Congress passed in the 1990s. A cursory search will show you examples from Vox, the Indianapolis Star, Think Progress, the Federalist, the Washington Post and National Review. Generally, these pieces reach the conclusions you’d expect: The left-of-center sites report that Indiana’s RFRA is different — or that the recent Hobby Lobby decision has changed the federal law’s implications — and the right-of-center ones find that there are no significant differences.

If you simply want to know everything you can about the new policy in Indiana, or if you find constitutional questions particularly compelling, most of these pieces are valuable. And I’m absolutely not criticizing the journalists and editors who wrote and commissioned them; providing as much relevant information as you can is the journalist’s stock-in-trade. But because so much energy is put into arguing over a talking point, the real reason why the bill inspired such outrage gets lost in the shuffle, and you end up arguing over details that are ultimately beside the point.

A short segment about the Indiana fight, which I participated in for the conservative Newsmax TV, offers a good example. Overall, I felt things went pretty well. It was my first stint as a televised talking head, so I made more faces and bobbed around nervously more than I should have; but host Ed Berliner didn’t ask any cheap “gotcha” questions, and I thought the conversation he moderated between myself and the Washington Examiner’s Sarah Westwood produced more light than heat. Which, as anyone who’s watched five minutes of CNN’s Don Lemon knows, is rare for cable.