Robocop star Gary Oldman claims that President Obama is operating like “Bush on steroids.”

Oldman, perhaps the finest character actor active today, plays scientist Dennett Norton in the newly released RoboCop remake. Oldman, who delivers an outstanding performance in every role, has 76 acting credits on IMDB, which includes his role as Commissioner Gordon in Christopher Nolan’s Batman trilogy.

In an interview, Oldman responded to a question about the RoboCop reboot’s possible relevance to current events. Said Oldman:

… I live in America at the moment, in California. But you look at American politics at the moment, and it’s one mess after another, one scandal after another. I mean, it’s falling around [Obama]. The empire is crumbling. Right, yeah. And you’ve got footage of him speaking in 2008 and 2009 talking about Bush, and how against the Executive Order he is, and how everything was going to be transparent, and now he’s doing the same thing but on steroids. It’s Bush on steroids.”

Unrelated to politics, RoboCop co-star Abbie Cornish recently said that Oldman gave her some good advice on the set about never losing the excitement of coming to work. As The Inquisitr previously reported, his response left her in awe of his ability, and she now hopes that she can maintain the same level of longevity that he’s achieved.

Along similar lines to Oldman’s comments, constitutional law professor Jonathan Turley of George Washington University, a self-declared Obama supporter, has deemed Obama’s use of executive orders and administrative decisions to get around Congress as an unprecedented and dangerous usurpation of legislative authority.

The president has unilaterally delayed, postponed, or waived various provisions of Obamacare, for example, and has selectively enforced or not enforced other federal laws. There is also the issue of NSA warrantless surveillance of ordinary Americans.

Commenting on the potential violation of the constitutional separation of powers, Turley said in an FNC interview in part that…

“Well, I’m afraid it’s quite serious because the framers created a system that was designed to avoid one principal thing, the concentration of power in any one branch. Because that balancing between these branches in this fixed orbit is what not only gives stability to our system but it protects us against authoritarian power, it protects civil liberties from abuse. What we’ve been seeing is a shift of gravity in that system in a very dangerous way that makes it unstable, and that’s what the president is doing.”

During the George W. Bush administration, the mainstream media and the Democrats regularly accused the GOP president of shredding the Constitution and assaulting civil liberties through the expansion of executive power. Turley noted that there has been no similar outcry currently under the Democrat president and that he’s been surprised about how passive Congressional Democrats in particular have been:

I’m afraid this is beginning to border on a cult of personality for people on the left. I happen to agree with many of President Obama’s policies, but in our system it is often as important how you do something as what you do. I think that many people will look back at this period in history and see nothing but confusion as to why people remained so silent when the president asserted these types of unilateral actions. You have a president who is claiming the right to basically rewrite or ignore or negate federal laws, and that’s a very dangerous thing.”

Do you agree with Gary Oldman that Obama is Bush on steroids?