A clinic that provides services to low-income families in four upstate New York counties has received more than $200,000 in federal funding. This is good news for The North Country Family Health Center, formerly The Children's Clinic. The non-profit almost closed last year because of financial problems.

The North Country Family Health Center employs more than 100 people and provides health care in locations throughout Jefferson, St. Lawrence, Lewis and Franklin Counties.

Joey Marie Horton used to work at what was then called the North Country Children's Clinic. She went on to work at Fort Drum Regional Health Planning Organization for a few years. But the clinic asked her to return to help stabilize the clinic's finances. "I knew the individuals that were here. I knew that the team that were here were extremely caring and devoted to this mission."

The problem was the clinic was losing money. Last October, the former leadership made a dramatic announcement that the clinic would close. That's when the Samaritan Medical Center and the New York State Department of Health stepped in to save it. Now as Executive Director, Horton said it was critical to keep providing health services for low-income children. "Our first focus was to ensure that we could create a financially sustainable business model and that this organization could live on providing this much needed service for the next 40 years."

Horton found a new way of funding the clinic. She got it designated as what's known as a "Federally Qualified Health Center." The change meant the clinic had to expand its health services to adults—which is why the clinic changed its name. But as a Qualified Health Center, the non-profit became eligible for federal dollars under the Affordable Care Act.

Horton said the clinic will use the $200,000 grant for a new clinic in Lowville that opened this month. They will also bring on a new primary care doctor in Watertown. The clinic helps low-income people in a few ways; it offers sliding-fee scale for those without insurance, and an option to get medical advice at home via Skype and the Internet.

Horton says the non-profit is doing better than they projected a year ago. "With Samaritan and Department of Health support, the organization is now finally on the road to recovery, that's for sure," says Horton. Correction: A previous version of this story incorrectly reported that the North Country Family Health Center provides services in three counties. It provides services in four. Horton worked at the Fort Drum Regional Health Planning Organization previously, not Fort Drum.