A recent, highly publicized editorial is claiming that some insurance companies are not making cheaper alternatives to certain prescriptions available, causing some of the sickest – and therefore most expensive – patients in the system to either take on pricier health plans or go shopping elsewhere.

[DATA MINE: Obamacare Insurance Plans May Have a Loophole for Pre-existing Conditions]

Obamacare was designed to abolish health insurance practices that excluded people with diagnoses such as cancer, HIV or hepatitis, as well as other pre-existing conditions. Taking advantage of loopholes is not illegal, but could undermine some of what was supposed to be the key triumphs of the law passed in 2010. “If [non-discrimination] provisions aren’t enforced then they really aren’t very useful,” says Abbi Coursolle, a staff attorney at the National Health Law Program. “Moves like this could exclude people who need care the most.”

An editorial published last week in the American Journal of Managed Care claims some health insurance companies are categorizing prescription drugs only in the most expensive tiers, making them unaffordable for patients. Drugs are supposed to be divided in such a way that encourages doctors to prescribe the least-expensive, generic versions, but in some cases the drugs are not available in that category, the editorial claims.

The editorial does not account for the level of coverage available on the exchange, such as whether they are so-called bronze or gold plans, or for the cost of premiums, nor does it take into account out-of-pocket limits. At this time no study has been conducted to see how widespread this practice could be.

The National Health Law Program has filed a complaint in Florida claiming that some plans in the health insurance marketplace are discriminating against patients with HIV, causing them to pay 40 percent of the costs in addition to a deductible.

In another article published online Monday in the Journal of Managed Care and Specialty Pharmacy, researchers found plans cover certain drugs that are used to treat rare diseases 65 percent of the time.

Members of the health insurance industry say the allegations are false. "Not only does this opinion piece ignore the fact that health plans have no financial incentive to drive away the sick, it undermines the principle of choice that allows patients and consumers to pick a plan with a cost-sharing arrangement that works for their specific health needs," says Brendan Buck, vice president of communications for America’s Health Insurance Plans.

But the prescription drug claims represent only one of the many ways patient rights groups say insurance companies are finding wiggle room in the health care reform law to discourage some of the neediest patients from enrolling in their plans. They say health insurance companies want to keep the healthiest people on their plans because they are less expensive to treat.

[STUDY: End-Of-Life Plans Are Rare, Driving Up Costs - and Suffering]

“Some plans may do it out of well-reasoned economics, and other plans may have more nefarious motives,” says Jack Hoadley, health policy analyst and researcher at the Center on Health Insurance Reforms at Georgetown University. A market-based system allows various health care plans to offer certain advantages over their competitors, he says.

Insurers argue that plans are not discriminatory but that a health plan that works well for one person may not work for another – and that there are plenty of options to meet each person’s needs. Americans have the option to pick from bronze, silver, gold and platinum plans, which each come with varied benefits, premiums and deductibles. In some states people can sign up through the state exchange, in others through Healthcare.gov, the federal exchange, or others can go directly to health insurance companies or private online brokers.

Patient rights groups claim other ways insurance companies can discourage the sick from enrolling include restricting patients to only certain doctors and hospitals, jumping onto the exchanges later, or having enrollees pay a higher percentage of the most expensive prescriptions.

Restricting health care providers allows for better rates from hospitals and doctors for their services, in exchange for higher volumes of people from an insurance company. This approach also can allow better coordination of care, Hoadley says. For example, a plan could choose a health care system in which more physician assistants and nurses are used, because they may think that particular approach to delivery ensures better follow-up care. Both approaches have the potential to bring down overall premium costs.

“There is some evidence that consumers are willing to give up some flexibility in which doctors, hospitals and drugs they use in exchange for lower overall [health insurance] costs,” he says.

An investigation by the Associated Press in March found that four out of 19 cancer centers that responded to the survey were covered under all health insurance plans on their states’ exchanges. Some health plans are excluding well-known, reputable providers from the system, such as the University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center.

[ALSO: Obamacare Data Mismatch Could Leave Thousands Uninsured at Election Time]

Patients with cancer who need the best care available may not have access to the plans, may have to pay costly out-of-network rates or have to look for another health insurance company that will cover that particular health care provider. Coursolle says her organization is concerned providers do not exclude large, basic categories that leave large numbers of people out of the plans..

Other plans are requiring patients to initially pay about a third of their drug bill, which can add up to several thousand dollars a month. Many consumers were surprised at some of the high prices they paid within the first few months of coverage, Coursolle says, because they may not have understood the intricacies of their plans.

Some insurers have waited to enter the marketplace, figuring that sicker customers have already been picked over, leaving healthier people to enroll, even at the cost of lower volume. Hoadley says transparency is another issue in that there is little consistency among the various state plans. When people are comparing health care options, he says, they need to easily and accurately be able to explore which drugs, hospitals and doctors are included. Massachusetts is best at this, Coursolle says, because it reformed its health care system prior to Obamacare.