Topics: aol_on, AShley Madison, Ashley Madison hack, Editor's Picks, Infidelity, Love, Marriage, Pick up artists, Sex, The Game, Life News, Entertainment News

For the last two months, I’ve been closely following the Ashley Madison hack coverage. And I’ve been shocked and fascinated to notice that amid all the punditry over whether it was right for a thief to claim moral high ground over cheaters like some sort of relationships Robin Hood, there were some fundamental misunderstandings about relationships.

I would even go so far as to say that our misunderstandings about relationships, as a culture, have led to such a high preponderance of cheating.

Here are just a few of them:

Misconception No. 1: The Ashley Madison hack destroyed millions of relationships.

Nothing could be further from the truth. The hack didn’t end any relationships. Those relationships ended the moment someone snuck behind a partner’s back and joined the website. That was the actual rupture in the relationship. From that point forward, until both partners found out the truth, they were each living in different realities. The leak— however right- or wrong-headed it may have been—repaired the rupture, and gave couples a chance to resume their relationship.

Misconception No. 2: But while cheating is wrong, so is invading someone’s privacy. Their freedom of choice in their private lives was taken away from them.

This is kind of like saying that we should not investigate murderers. They should have the option of confessing or not confessing on their own when they’re ready.

Obviously, it’s rare for cheaters to choose of their own free will to tell their partner what they’ve done. Typically, either they get caught—or they know they‘re about to be caught, so they confess. So whether it was a hack, a suspicious partner snooping through their computer, or an affair partner blowing the whistle, their privacy was still likely going to be invaded.

Getting caught is something that everyone signs up for when they start cheating, just as they sign up for losing when they buy a lottery ticket.

It just happened this time in a way they didn’t expect.

As for whether it’s OK for other people to know about it, or the consequences for those living in other countries where adultery is criminalized, that also was a risk they signed up for the moment they joined and gave their credit card number to Ashley Madison, leaving a technological slime trail behind for anyone to discover.

Misconception No. 3: But not everyone on Ashley Madison was cheating. Some people just joined and never used it. Others may have been in open relationships.

The but-I-never-used-it excuse is no excuse. Anything you do behind your partner’s back that you don’t tell them because it would upset them if you did, is cheating. The only real people on Ashley Madison who didn’t cheat are either those who weren’t in relationships when they joined or those who did it with full disclosure to—or in collaboration with—their partners.

There’s a concept called defensive grandiosity, which is when, to ward off a feeling of shame or powerlessness, we do something to reassert our sense of power or value. So even if someone just signed up as an unconscious fuck-you to a partner one night, unless they told them about it, they still created a rift in the relationship and have issues that need to be resolved.

Misconception No. 4: If you checked the data dump and didn’t find your partner there, it’s a good sign.

No, it isn’t. It’s a horrible sign. If you have to investigate your partner, then you are in an unhealthy relationship. In fact, by the previously mentioned definition, you’re actually cheating if you’re doing it behind their back.

Because there are only three possible outcomes to searching for a loved one: Your partner is breaking your trust, you have trust issues, or both are true and symbiotically connected in one grand dysfunctional relationship.

So if you checked the data, no matter what you found, you need to have a serious discussion with yourself, and then with your partner.

Misconception No. 5: It was mostly men on Ashley Madison because it’s mostly men who cheat.

Some of the old tropes about gender differences need to die, along with the evolutionary theories used to justify them. Don’t take my word for it. Take the Kinsey Institute’s: “Early studies reportedly found that men engaged in infidelity more than women (Wiederman, 1997). However, more recent research seems to suggest that the gender gap is narrowing (Barta & Kiene, 2005; Burdette, Ellison, Sherkat, & Gore, 2007) and when transgressions other than intercourse (e.g., emotional connection, kissing) are taken into account, women report as many acts of infidelity as men (Allen et al., 2005; Treas & Giesen, 2000).”