Fox News’ Andrea Tantaros and Jesse Watters had an interesting response to the recent release of the CIA torture report, with both dismissing the claims contained within. While one thinks Democrats are just trying to distract Americans from Obamacare, the other thinks the report can be dismissed since “America is awesome.”

In a related report by the Inquisitr, the CIA torture report reveals the “brutal” tactics used by officers within the Central Intelligence Agency, and the report was considered so bad that American offices overseas had their security increased in preparation for its release. U.S. Secretary of State John Kerry condemned the CIA interrogation techniques used on terrorists at the same time that he asked Congress for authorization to send American ground troops against the Islamic State.

“President Obama turned the page on these policies when he took office and during week one banned the use of torture and closed the detention and interrogation program. It was right to end these practices for a simple but powerful reason: they were at odds with our values. They are not who we are, and they’re not who or what we had to become, because the most powerful country on earth doesn’t have to choose between protecting our security and promoting our values.”

When talking about the CIA torture report on Fox News’ Outnumbered, Andrea Tantaros argue that the Senate-produced report was strategically launched upon Americans by the Democratic Party. California Senator Dianne Feinstein will no longer serve as Chairwoman of the Committee in 2015 and Tantaros believes the Senate Democrats wanted to diminish the awesomeness of the United States before they relinquish control to Republicans.

“The United States of America is awesome,” Andrea Tantaros argues. “We are awesome. But we’ve had this discussion. We’ve closed the book on it. The reason they want the discussion is not to show how awesome we are. It’s to show us how we’re not awesome. They apologized for something. They don’t like this country. They want us to look bad and all this does is have our enemies laughing at us.”

Fox News’ Jesse Watters believes the timing of the CIA torture report was intended to be a distraction from the alleged woes of Obamacare.

“I don’t want to know about it,” said Watters. “I think people do nasty things in the dark, especially after a terrorist attack. I find it ironic that they’re dropping this report on the same day that Gruber’s testifying, to knock that out of the front pages.”

The report happened to come out when Jonathan Gruber testified before Congress about the Affordable Care Act. Gruber came under fire since he recently commented that Americans were “stupid” when it comes to Obamacare and he also suggested subsidies for health insurance were only available to those who received insurance on state-based exchanges, an issue that will be decided by the U.S. Supreme Court in 2015.

Andrea Tantaros also believes the timing of the CIA torture report was suspicious.

“Sunlight at the CIA? I’m sorry, that’s one place I don’t need sunlight. I don’t think they need to give me a lot of transparency at the CIA. Look, thousands of Americans were killed after 9/11. The Bush administration did what the American public wanted, and that was do whatever it takes to keep us safe. These terror tactics have been stopped because as a country, we decided we are better than this. Which is my point. Then why are we putting out this memo?” asks Tantaros. “It’s about Democrats being so fundamentally lost as a party, Harris, they have to return to an old playbook. The plays that they ran right when Obama got into office trying to prosecute CIA officials for these terror tactics — and that same playbook that they feel got them the House of Representatives back, even under Tom DeLay’s electoral map. They have nothing else to talk about,” Tantaros added. “And they don’t want to talk about Gruber or health care or the IRS or anything else.”

What do you think about the comments of Andrea Tantaros and Jesse Watters?