Topics: aol_on, Conservatives, David Brooks, Editor's Picks, New York Times, Republican Party, The Right, Elections News, Media News, News, Politics News

I can’t believe I’m saying this, but David Brooks is making sense. In his New York Times column this morning, he appears to discover what at least half the country has long known: The Republican Party has been hijacked by unruly nihilists. “The House Republican caucus,” Brooks writes, “is close to ungovernable these days. How did that situation come about?” I’m not sure what prompted his eureka moment, but it’s nice to see Brooks, a card-carrying member of the conservative intelligentsia, finally reckon with the present state of the GOP.

Three months ago I wrote a similar column about the degeneration of conservatism and the Republican Party. I argued that conservatism, as a practical political philosophy, was essentially dead in this country. And that the GOP has abandoned its rich intellectual history, thinkers like Edmund Burke and Alexis de Tocqueville and even William F. Buckley, Jr. In today’s Republican Party, there is no place for ideas or compromise or prudent governance; it’s a party of reactionaries and insurgents, people drunk on destruction.

To his credit, Brooks grapples honestly with this in his piece. He writes:

This was not just the work of the Freedom Caucus or Ted Cruz or one month’s activity. The Republican Party’s capacity for effective self-governance degraded slowly, over the course of a long chain of rhetorical excesses, mental corruptions and philosophical betrayals. Basically, the party abandoned traditional conservatism for right-wing radicalism. Republicans came to see themselves as insurgents and revolutionaries, and every revolution tends toward anarchy and ends up devouring its own.

This is all undeniably true, but it didn’t happen in a vacuum. Today’s GOP is the inevitable result of decades of collusion between the Republican Party and the conservative media-industrial complex. The sane and reasonable conservative voices have been subsumed by the hysterical shrieks of Sean Hannity and Bill O’Reilly and the entrepreneurs on right-wing talk radio. These are the voices that represent conservative politics, and they are what’s poisoned the conservative brand. And Brooks makes no effort to deny this: