Naples, Fla. warmed to 87 degrees on Saturday afternoon, tying the city's record high temperature for Dec. 26th.

The temperature marks four straight days of the city tying or breaking record highs.

Fort Myers also hit 87 degrees on Saturday. That reading though was warm enough to break the city's 51-year-old record of 85 degrees for Dec. 26th.

Saturday's records come amid what has been a mild December in South Florida.

So far this month many communities are on pace to end up experiencing one of their top five warmest Decembers on record.

Typically in late December Southwest Florida is nearing its climatological cool point, when daytime highs normally only top out in the mid 70s with overnight lows in the mid 50s.

However the weather pattern our region has been locked in is not conducive to typical winter weather, in many ways thanks to the jet stream.

The jet stream is an upper-atmosphere path of wind helping to steer storms and roughly act as the dividing line between mild and cool air. For much of this month, the jet stream has been entrenched in a pattern where a trough is stuck in the western U.S. while a ridge remains in place along the east coast.

Jet stream troughs are southward moving kinks in the wind flow allowing colder air from the north to move south. Likewise jet stream ridges are northward moving jaunts in the wind pattern allowing mild southern air to advance northward.

Add to the situation a strong area of high pressure setting up over the Atlantic Ocean, and it's easy to see why Florida has been seeing such warm temperatures.

Wind around high pressure systems moves clockwise. With the placement of the high off the east coast of the country, Southwest Florida's winds have been pumping in mild and muggy air from the south and southeast for several days.

Looking at current forecast data, there does appear to be much in the way of change coming the the atmosphere's patterns this week. That means more record highs could be tied or broken over the course of the next several days.

Through Thursday, daytime highs look to remain mild peaking well above the seasonable norm for the end of December peaking in the mid and upper 80s.

The first signs of change in our weather don't appear likely to make a presence until next weekend. This is when, based on the latest guidance, a cold front may try to push through the Southeastern U.S. and influence South Florida's weather.

It's too early to determine the strength of the front and how much it will impact temperatures and humidity values, but in the coming days our forecast team should get a better idea of how the front will act and what it will do with our weather.