The Senate HELP Committee drilled down on interoperability and EHR meaningful use during its Oct. 1 hearing on achieving the promise of health information technology. Top officials from the Office of the National Coordinator for Health IT (ONC) and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) served as panelists in the sixth installment of the committee’s series of hearings.

Committee Chairman Lamar Alexander (R-TN) continued his recent push to immediately finalize Stage 2 meaningful use rules and to postpone Stage 3 finalization until the beginning of 2017 at the earliest. “Patients need an interoperable system that enables doctors and hospitals to share their records, but they need time to do it right,” he said in his opening remarks, noting that only 12 percent of doctors and 40 percent of hospitals currently comply with Stage 2.

“I hope one of the lessons from the Affordable Care Act is that it’s better to move ahead with a consensus if you can get a consensus. You can get a consensus here,” Alexander continued. “Republicans and Democrats want electronic health care records to succeed for the benefit of the patients of this country, and because it’s critical to at least two of the administration’s two major initiatives: precision medicine and merit-based payment.”

Alexander said the Senate is working in bipartisan fashion on legislation that would improve the use of EHR systems so that it could be combined with the 21st Century Cures Act for review by both houses of Congress in the coming year. The legislation “would include whatever we need to do about electronic healthcare records that the administration can’t do by executive order,” he added.

Ranking member Patty Murray (D-WA) concentrated more on interoperability. “We need to prioritize standards so that increasingly systems developed by different vendors and used by different doctors are actually able to speak to each other. These standards would not only support important research, but they would also cut down the amount of time providers spend on administrative tasks and allow them to focus resources on providing care,” she said.

Murray also called for development of a “network of networks so that providers have many options for trustworthy information sharing and don’t have to reinvent the wheel every time they need to exchange information with a new facility.”

In doing so, Murray emphasized that it should be easier for providers to shop for EHR systems — but those systems must be able to “stand up to the realities of today’s cybersecurity threats” while making records accessible to patients so they can stay engaged in their own care.

Karen DeSavo, MD, National Coordinator for Health IT at ONC, responded, “We do understand firsthand what it’s like to be in the clinical environment and working with EHRs. The propsals in our certification rule reflect the input and guidance we received through not just abstract conversation, but meaningful day-long conversations with [doctors] and others to see how we could better serve them through this program.”

To Murray’s point, DeSalvo noted, “It is our approach and philosophy that to get to interoperability, we have to do this with the private sector and with consumers having their data. They are right at the center of this.”

DeSalvo mentioned the emerging Fast Healthcare Interoperability Resource (FHIR) standard as an example of strong collaboration between ONC and the private sector, stating that the effort is moving along faster than ONC would be able to drive it on its own. “More importantly, it will give consumers an opportunity to be able to pull their data out of the record,” she commented.

“What we want to do is raise the floor. We want to get everybody on a set of shared standards that make sense, but not get in the way of innovation. We really need to see the marketplace advance in such a way that it is going to meet the needs of providers on the front lines,” said DeSalvo.

CMS Acting Principal Deputy Administrator Patrick Conway, MD, noted, “We have significantly reduced the number of measures and requirements to try to simplify the program and focus on high-level requirements. Of those that are left, the vast majority are focused on interoperability.”

Nonetheless, progress is being made, according to Conway. He cited bundled payment pilot programs, in which participants are finding ways to be successful within current parameters.

Sen. Richard Burr (R-NC) quipped in response, “It’s amazing that they can figure it out, but we can’t figure out how to design a structure.” Burr then acknowledged that the private sector — as opposed to the federal government — has the decided advantage of “total flexibility.”