"It's a bold new venture for us," said Dan Woodward, a Kaiser strategic marketing consultant who spearheaded the project. "This is a learning experience for us."





Kaiser ran two pilot retail locations in California last year. A key lesson, Woodward said, is to not even assume that people know what health insurance is. That's because a healthy chunk of the new market has never had health insurance.





Retail strategies are taking different forms in Kaiser's other six regions, including with standalone tablets in malls and mobile enrollment units.





State or federal-run government marketplaces let consumers browse plans and government subsidies. Individuals can't purchase insurance online through Cover Oregon until later this year . They will be able to fully enroll for plans through insurance agents or certified application assistants later. Officials at Kaiser say they would encourage consumers to look at multiple plans on the exchange on a desktop in a private-area later.



The Affordable Care Act makes provisions for independent The Affordable Care Act makes provisions for independent navigators that help people shop on exchanges



Colin Blyth, the manager of Kaiser's Washington Square location, said he and his associates' top goals are educating shoppers about the Affordable Care Act and what separates Kaiser Permanente apart from other insurers.

Most of the 30 people who stopped by halfway through day one did not know about exchanges opening. The government shutdown , which does not affect exchanges, led to more confusion. "People still think the government is providing their health insurance," said Blyth. "People are saying 'Ok, is this where I buy my Obamacare?" We'll update this post if we learn of any other insurers in Oregon that have moved in a similar retail direction. Follow OregonLive.com's health blog for more stories about the transformation of the health care system and developments with Cover Oregon. *Updated to add more information about timing of enrollment on Cover Oregon



For Kaiser, this new information center fits into the new health care landscape under the Affordable Care Act, where millions of uninsured are mandated to purchase health insurance. Health insurers across the U.S. have started retail locations.