Once-strained relationship now constructive, city and university leaders say

Matthew Cushing walks his dog, Gracie, on a trail at the University of Colorado south campus property Monday. The land — at Boulder's southern gateway — strained town-gown relations for years but now, still largely undeveloped, may be at the center of cooperative flood planning efforts. ( Mark Leffingwell / Daily Camera )

CU-Boulder South (Daily Camera graphic)

The University of Colorado's purchase nearly 20 years ago of a 308-acre parcel at the southeastern edge of Boulder trashed its relationship with the city.

"Town-gown" relations were at an all-time low in 1996. The purchase pitted anti-development City Council members and neighbors against CU administrators and the Board of Regents, who said they were planning for future generations of students.

At one point, university officials talked about fully developing the land with housing and academic buildings, though those plans for what many called Boulder's southern gateway were never realized.

Now, "CU-Boulder South" is in the spotlight again as the city and CU work together on South Boulder Creek flood mitigation efforts. This time around, conversations are going smoothly — discussions are friendly, even.

The drastic improvement in the relationship may be because there's a new crop of leaders in Boulder and at CU, or perhaps the two organizations have a better understanding of how interconnected their fates are, said Jeff Lipton, CU's director of real estate.

"Part of it is just turning down the volume," said Lipton, who's worked at the university for 40 years and remembers the nasty battle over the 308 acres.

"We have very good and tight staff relationships, and we're trying to work things out before they become big political issues. And we agree on probably 95 percent of the stuff before us.

"CU is only going to be as successful as the city, and the city is only going to be as successful as CU. We always have to remember that. We're like any family. That doesn't mean we're going to agree on everything."

Advertisement

Though CU still has no short-term plans to develop the 308 acres in unincorporated Boulder County, a collaborative flood mitigation project with the city could benefit both parties. Boulder could reduce flooding in neighborhoods north of U.S. 36 without harming as much city open space, which contains threatened plant and animal species.

In return, CU's cooperation would be a marker of good will and could help the university bargain for something it needs when it does develop the south campus — city utilities.

Laura Edwards, left, riding Gizmo, and Jill Talbot, riding Gould Rush, live close by and have permission to ride on the University of Colorado south campus land. The 308-acre parcel is in the spotlight again as the city and CU work together on South Boulder Creek flood mitigation efforts. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

Those types of negotiations are months away, and both sides are hesitant to discuss hypothetical scenarios or deals. Talks between the city and CU about the feasibility of joint flood mitigation efforts are ongoing this fall.

Earlier controversy

The controversy began when CU announced its intention to buy an old gravel mine, then called the Flatiron property, in 1996.

To Boulder leaders, who had passed on several opportunities to purchase the land, the decision came as a surprise. City leaders and neighbors vocally opposed development of the parcel and wanted it to remain open space, as it had been designated in a long-term planning document.

In October 1996, CU paid $11 million for the land and received a $5.4 million gift from the seller, Flatiron Park Co., for a total purchase price of $16.4 million.

Current councilwoman Lisa Morzel, who also served on the council in the mid- and late 1990s, remembers her first meeting between CU's regents and the council.

"We had a problem with the university, and the tension in the room was so stiff you could cut the air," she said. "I can remember certain council members and certain regents just arguing the entire time. It was terrible.

"This acquisition by CU happened overnight. I think the city was so shocked that they would do something like that. That's part of what set some of the tenor in the early stages. It was like a midnight surprise."

The University of Colorado's south campus and the area's flood zone. (Daily Camera graphic)

Tensions arose between CU and Boulder County, too, when the university argued that, as a state institution, it is not bound by local land-use regulations.

Rather than immediately develop CU-Boulder South, the university relocated only tennis courts there and built up the east campus. Time passed.

Although some in Boulder still oppose south campus development, Morzel said local leaders know better than to stop talking with CU altogether.

"Later the council recognized that this was not a constructive relationship, that we had to really have good relations with the university," she said. "There've been advances. It's not to say that we may not have some disagreements, but I think we have far better relations that allow for the discussion about those potential disagreements."

No building plans

The CU-Boulder South property has remained largely empty. The space contains tennis courts, a warehouse building with office space, a cross-country running course and a public pedestrian and bicycle trail.

At some points since it purchased the land, CU considered plans for building classrooms, varsity athletics facilities, housing and other structures.

Today, CU won't build on the parcel for "20 or 30 years," Lipton said. Instead, the university is focused on improving and updating existing structures, making better use of current space and, when necessary, building new structures on east campus.

When development day comes, Lipton said, it's most likely that support facilities will be housed there — such as staff offices and non-academic campus departments — rather than academic buildings containing classrooms and lecture halls.

For now, there are no plans to build structures on the parcel, Lipton said.

"The fact is, right now we don't have any specific needs we'd want to put out there," Lipton said. "We looked at this as something to leave behind for the next century."

According to the university's 2011 master plan, roughly 165 acres could be developed, with the rest of the land split among natural areas, ponds and flood storage. Beyond that, the plan gives vague hints about CU's eventual development plans there, such as recreational facilities, fields and outdoor research projects.

"No development of CU-Boulder South is planned during the 10-year period," according to the 2011 master plan, which will be updated in 2021. "The university will work cooperatively with the other governmental agencies on any flood mitigation strategies that might be developed."

Much of CU-Boulder South does not fall within the 100-year floodplain, according to current city mapping. A portion of south campus that falls within the 100-year floodplain sits south of an existing berm.

During the September 2013 flood, Lipton trekked out to south campus, which is roughly three miles from the main campus. The land that CU could eventually develop was "high and dry," he said.

Talks

The lack of pressing development plans is one reason why CU is a "willing participant" in talks about South Boulder Creek flood mitigation efforts, according to a letter from CU to the city.

The overall goal of the mitigation effort is to prevent water from South Boulder Creek from overtopping U.S. 36 and flooding neighborhoods north of of the highway along Foothills Parkway.

A plan presented to the City Council during a September study session would have built a 23-foot berm and large water detention facility south of U.S. 36 and Table Mesa Drive.

Council members had concerns about the plan's impacts to open space and asked city staffers to look at alternatives with CU.

Talks between the city and the university are still in early stages, said Kurt Bauer, engineering project manager for the city, but one possibility includes moving more of the berm onto CU's land to reduce the impacts to open space.

"Part of CU South would be under water for a while, and that's why we need to coordinate with them," Bauer said. "It limits the use of land there. You could still have ball fields and that kind of stuff, or open space or wetlands, or whatever, but certainly not structures."

CU planners have designated the area directly south of U.S. 36 and Table Mesa as "potential flood storage" on a draft framework map.

In the coming months, the city and CU are expected to talk about the feasibility of a plan to move more of the berm onto CU-Boulder South, Bauer said.

If the plan is deemed feasible by CU, that's when negotiations would begin.

"They've stated publicly at these meetings that this land is an asset for them, and we recognize that, too," Bauer said. "That's where we need to meet with them and say, 'Here are the impacts; is that going to be feasible or not, and what does that mean? Is this at all even negotiable or not?' It is obviously their land, and it's an asset."

As land prices in Boulder continue to rise, CU sees its earlier south campus purchase as an investment for future generations, Lipton said. It's a "land bank," he said.

"It's not about the money," Lipton said. "It's more about the future of the property and getting some understanding about whether and when and how it can be developed, if it needs to be. For us to have a piece of land is probably a lot more important to us than having some cash."

It also depends on how much land and which piece the city wants to use, Lipton said.

If the city wanted to create flood detention facilities on the campus, a good compromise would be for CU to put sports fields in those areas, he said.

In another hypothetical scenario, the city could bring water and sewer to south campus in exchange for using part of CU's land, Lipton said.

"We have great relationships with the city, so I suspect it's going to be a friendly negotiation," he said. "Whenever there are discussions with private developers, there's always some negotiation and some bargaining."

Goals align

The university is also willing to work with the city because many of its students, faculty and staff members live in neighborhoods that are flooded when South Boulder Creek overtops U.S. 36.

That's where CU's goals and the city's goals align. The desire to keep residents safe is exemplified in recent partnerships, such as the $7.4 million construction project designed to make the intersection of Broadway and Euclid Avenue safer.

That project built a new bicycle and pedestrian underpass beneath Broadway and Euclid, reconfigured existing intersections and expanded transit stops along Broadway.

Those types of partnerships are expected to continue, said Boulder's Morzel. They're a good template for how to have successful discussions about south campus, she added.

"If we can stay above politics and just look at the facts — how it's designated, where the floodplain is, what's best for mitigation ... because it's to CU's advantage to make sure that neighboring subdivisions don't get flooded, either," she said. "They realize they are part of this community, very much an integral part of it. I think we have to keep talking.

"CU is a sovereign entity and can do basically what it wants to do, but I think the strongest suit of cards we can play is to keep an open dialogue and to understand what their needs are, where their future growth is going to be and how they're going to accomplish this."

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta