KOLKATA : A seminar on 'Acid Violence - Challenges & Remedies' was organised in Kolkata by Acid Survivors Foundation India & Human Rights Law Network for the benefit of acid attack victims. The meet was inaugurated on Friday by Maloy Sengupta former Chief Justice of Sikkim High Court and among the others present were Sunanda Mukherjee, chairperson, West Bengal Commission for Women and Ishwar Bhatt, Vice Chancellor, National University of Judicial Sciences.ASFI is one of the leading NGOs in India for prevention of acid burn violence as well as for providing support services to survivors while HRLN under the leadership and coordination of Mr. Debasish Banerjee in West Bengal is a group of lawyers and social activists dedicated to the use of the legal system to advance human rights in India and the sub-continent.The broad issues that were dealt with in the seminar included, compensation for victims of acid violence, a micro- perspective on legal strategies for giving relief to survivors of acid violence, a macro- perspective on legal strategies for combatting acid violence, the need for effectively regulating sale of acid, the role of the victim and their families in facilitating investigation by police, macro perspective of challenges of investigating crime in India.Speakers said that acid attack has become a frequent headline in the daily newspapers. It is really unfortunate that acid attack victims are not adequately compensated for medical treatment and rehabilitation. Existing provisions regarding the compensation to the acid victims are not sufficient. One of the primary reasons for such increased rate of acid attack is the easy accessibility and availability of acid which is facilitating its use. Implementation of the guidelines given by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in connection with payment of reasonable compensation and regulating sale of acid need to be implemented by the government expeditiously said Chief Justice Sengupta."Our primary vision is to wipe out acid violence from India through social, educational and regulatory procedures. We are also providing for medical care and attention to acid survivors so that they can lead a life of worth, usefulness and dignity. As this inhuman crime of acid violence is increasing in India it is becoming necessary to make our services available to more and more victims; which in a geographically vast country is challenging. I am grateful for each of your support with which I am sure we will be able to find means of providing affordable medical treatment for acid survivors. We endeavour to promote an enlightened attitude towards human rights, gender equality, women's awakening and empowerment through various means" said Debashish Banerjee, co-ordinator of Human Rights Law Network."Recently there have been a faint sign of a serious attempt being made to contain acid violence by way of implementing regulations on sale of acids in New Delhi and Habra in West Bengal. This required to be emulated in other places on a war footing. A death sentence has also been awarded to an acid violence perpetrator in Bhopal. These positive signs although late are in itself is very encouraging. India is a large country and a lot requires to be done to bring about an elimination of this scourge in India" said Mr. Rahul Varma, National Director & CEO ASFI.