Sharon Coates, guest essayist

Much has been made lately of the hardships that will be imposed upon business because of the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. As landscape designers and small business owners, we at Zaretsky and Associates don't pretend to know all of the effects of this law on businesses and the economy. But we do hope that it starts a larger conversation about what it means to be an employer.

We decided many years ago that we wanted to help people have careers, not just jobs. We wanted to find a way to improve people's lives, and that would begin with our staff. Even though we are a small business we offer a variety of benefits, including health insurance. Why? It's simple. We need to sleep at night and we could not easily do so knowing that one of our established employees could lose their house if they got cancer.

Is health insurance too expensive? Well, yes, but that's another conversation.

What does it mean that we have chosen to offer and pay for health insurance and other benefits for our employees that have been with us for over one year? It means that we, personally, take home less money. But it also means that we develop fiercely loyal people, who work hard every day, and take pride in doing good work and helping to build a successful business.

In the news, we've heard that many businesses are planning on cutting employees' hours to less than 30 a week so they don't have to offer health insurance. We hope these business owners will take a moment and think about the greater good.

This is not a new theme. The business community has cried out in protest when all sorts of changes have been instituted. When car manufacturers were required to install seat belts in all cars, they said it would be too expensive and they'd go out of business. We're sure the same occurred when laws were passed requiring fire escapes and lunch breaks (and on and on). And yet today, we look back and think: "Of course we need seat belts and fire escapes." Well, we all need health insurance, too.

We keep hearing from business organizations that "the sky is falling." We are great believers in capitalism, and we believe we can build strong companies where people have careers and still be profitable. We can tell you that for most of us, doing the right thing will reap great rewards in the long run … and help us sleep better at night.

Coates and Zaretsky co-own Zaretsky and Associates, a landscape design-build firm in Penfield.

Read or Share this story: http://on.rocne.ws/1a8v2ZI