Buy Photo Drug-sniffing dogs went through Ridge High School lockers and the student parking lot. (Photo: FILE)Buy Photo Story Highlights Police on Friday conducted a surprise K-9 sweep of Ridge High School.

One student was arrested on drug charges.

An 18-year-old Ridge High School student was arrested on drug charges Friday morning after a surprise K-9 sweep of lockers and student cars.

Police said they found under 50 grams of marijuana and prescription pills in the car belonging to the student, who police did not name. Police said they found the drugs after obtaining a search warrant for the car.

The small amount of marijuana was enough only to warrant a minor disorderly persons charge, but the pills could be treated as an indictable offense.

No other drugs were uncovered.

The sweep was the first of its kind in the township, where several years ago a high-school student and her brother were charged with dealing drugs out of their home. Investigators reportedly identified about 100 customers from the region.

“I think that we have no more and no less the amount of drugs that any other similar school of similar demographics has,” Bernards Police Chief Brian Bobowicz said Friday afternoon.

The unannounced sweep was done by request of the school district, which did not return a call for comment Friday.

The search used four K-9 dogs belonging to the Somerset County Sheriff’s Office, the Morris County Sherriff’s Office, the Warren Township Police Department and the State Police.

After school administrators placed the building into a “shelter in place” mode, the K-9 teams sniffed through hallway lockers, a large study hall and the student parking lot.

The sweep did not include cars belonging to teachers or school employees.

“The focus was on student use and that was what was approved by the Prosecutor’s Office,” Bobowicz said.

In a joint statement with police, school officials said Friday that the sweep was “a measure to ensure that the safety and well-being of our students are preserved.”

“The objective of this operation was to deter students from bringing controlled dangerous substances to the school and to impress the message of law enforcement and the Board of Education’s stance on zero-tolerance on illegal drugs and drug abuse.

“The Bernards Township Board of Education will continue to cooperate with local law enforcement and utilize every resource to ensure that Bernards Township remains a drug-free school and deters future contraband.”

School officials said representatives from the police department and the Prosecutor’s Office will attend the board’s Feb. 23 public meeting at the William Annin Middle School in order to answer parents’ questions.

Read or Share this story: http://mycj.co/1E8UddV