Alma College has named more than 400 students to the dean’s list for outstanding academic performance during the 2013 fall term. Students who achieve a 3.5 or better grade point average during a term, while carrying a minimum of 13 credits, at least eight of which are evaluative grades, are named to the dean’s list.

Those named to the list from mid-Michigan include:

Alma: Kyle Aho, Mercy Bourdet-Shaw, Jaycee Cole, Curtis Dancer, Matthew DesRochers, Janelle Dickman, Amanda Gatlin, Taryn Handyside, Alyssa Harris, Luke Kanine, Ann Kennedy, Erica Kettlewell, Scott Kitzmiller, Levi Lake, Brittany Leppien, Collin Lesko, Samantha Smith, Derek Stefanovsky, Casimer Strzynski

Ashley: Zachary Baker.

Barryton: Brittany Caryl.

Advertisement

Blanchard: Cody Hall.

Breckenridge: Michaela Hoyle, Wesley Hoyle, Joseph Huntoon, Breu Olling.

Clare: Margaret Warner.

Edmore: Alyssa Ball.

thaca: Kara Giles, Misty Godley, Brooklyn Misenhelder, Cody Nevins, Samuel Reeves, Mary Seals.

Middleton: Ashlee Davis, Kaycee Inniger.

Morley: Tricia Smith.

Mt. Pleasant: Kristina Begres, Robert Brent, Kaylyn Funnell, Seth Hartshorne, Kevin Judge, Allison Smith.

Perrinton: Sarah Knight, Koryn Walden.

Shepherd: Helen Bess, Payge Nestle, Pamela Prewett.

St. Louis: Hannah Austin, Jarrett Leister, Charles Oswald, Brittney Wichert, Brandon Yaroch.

Sumner: Jacob Woodcock.

Vestaburg: Aaron Colamarino.

Bowling fund raiser set

Community Cancer Services of Isabella County is sponsoring its annual “Bowl Over Cancer” bowling tournament on Sunday, Feb. 23, 2 at

Chippewa Lanes in Mt. Pleasant. Registration begins at noon.

This is a Dutch Bowl tournament with two person teams. Bowlers can increase their luck by purchasing “split insurance” and by entering into the “Shot Call” contest. Door prizes and pizza are included in the $35 team entry fee. Cash prizes are awarded to the best teams. Call 773-9531 formore information.

All the proceeds stay here in Isabella County for cancer patient support and treatment.

New arrival

William Dennis Backus

Denise and Duane Backus of Clare announce the birth of their son, William Dennis Backus, Jan. 31, 2014 at McLaren Central Michigan.

Grandparents are Mattie and Dale Miller of Palo, Joel and Selena Backus of Mt. Pleasant, Debra Heistand of Oil City and Deby Weiler of Lakeview.

Siblings are Austin Weiler and Tayvin Backus.

Donkey basketball to be held in Farwell

The Farwell Middle School PTO is hosting a donkey basketball game Tuesday, Feb. 25 at 6:30 p.m. in the old Farwell High School gym.

Tickets are available at the middle school office, T&C RV on East U.S. 10 or by contacting Dottie Brugger at 989-330-0957.

Advance tickets are $6 or $8 at the door the day of the show.

Children 5 and younger attend free.

Concessions will be available, and proceeds will go toward middle school programs and events.

COA to host Affordable Care Act Q and A

The Isabella County Commission on Aging is hosting an Affordable Care Act presentation, followed by a question and answer session, Wednesday at 6:30 p.m.

The evnt is free and open to the public.

Through a partnership with the Mid Michigan Community Action Agency, certified navigator Jennifer Raymond will discuss the ACA and the marketplace application process.

The Isabella County Commission Aging is located at 2200 S. Lincold Road in Mt. Pleasant.

Habitat to hold town hall meeting

Habitat for Humanity of Isabella County is holding a town hall meeting Thursday, Feb. 20 at 6 p.m. at the Veterans Memorial Library Annex in Mt. Pleasant.

Those interested in applying for a home during the 2014-2015 season are encouraged to attend.

To register, call Jeremy Murphy, executive director, at 989-317-4650.

Basic training graduate

Air Force Airman Noah T. rathbun graduated from basic military training at Joint Base San Antonio-Lackland, San Antonio, Texas.

Rathbun completed an eight week program that included training in military discipline and studies, Air Force core values, physical fitness, and basic warfare principles and skills.

Airmen who complete basic training earn four credits toward an associate in applied science degree through the Community College of the Air Force.

Rathbun is the son of Daniel Rathbun of Eaton Rapids and Ambrerlee Bassett of Harrison.

He is a 2006 graduate of Hastings High School.

Chip Hills teachers get iPads

Teachers in the Chippewa Hills school district recently received iPads for classroom use.

Each building in the district also received a classroom set of iPads for student use.

The iPads were purchased through title monies as well as money given to the district by the Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe.

SEAR to meet

The State Employee Retirement Assocation meeting for Feb. 18 will be presented by Barbara Frankenfield from the Isabella County Commission on Aging and Karen Lackland of Woodland Hospice.

They will present a program regarding the Conversation.

The meeting begins at 1:30 p.m. at the Isabella County Commission on Aging, 2200 S. Lincoln Road, Mt. Pleasant.

Anyone with questions can contact Jackie Curtis at 989-772-0597.