Alabama has become the fourth state to pass legislation calling for a constitutional convention of states to limit the power and jurisdiction of the federal government.

Last week’s move made Alabama the first state to pass such legislation this year after Georgia, Florida, and Alaska which passed the Convention of States resolution in 2014.

The Convention of States efforts hinges on Article V of the U.S. Constitution, which allows Congress to propose amendments and “on the application of the legislatures of two thirds of the several states, Congress shall call a convention for proposing amendments.”

Alabama’s resolution would impose fiscal restraints on the federal government and limit the terms of office for its officials and for members of Congress.

In a statement Thursday, Terry Richmond, Alabama legislative liaison said he was “overwhelmed by the support we received from both volunteers and legislators over the past few months. The dedication, vision, and prayers of every volunteer in the state, along with the hard work and commitment of our sponsors and their staff, is what made this victory possible. The people of Alabama should hold their heads high — they’ve implemented the Founders tool to fight federal overreach, and we’re one step closer to turning a Convention of States into a reality.”

Convention of States co-founder Mark Meckler said “The citizens of the great state of Alabama have stepped up and joined the movement to tell the federal government to back off by passing the Convention of States resolution by overwhelming majorities. Legislation is pending in many other states, with Texas and Kansas next in line. The citizens are speaking; it’s time for the states to put the federal government back in the box.”

Legislatures in 36 states have constitutional convention resolutions now making their way through committees and other parts of the legislative process.

At least 34 states, or two-thirds, must pass applications for a convention and ultimately would need a sign-off from Congress to hold a convention. Thirty-eight states must then ratify any amendment proposals coming out of such a convention.