NADP Members Urge Congressional Leaders to Join Their Colleagues to Improve Consumer Choice and Clarify IRS Subsidy Rules

WASHINGTON, DC--(Marketwired - May 12, 2016) - National Association of Dental Plans (NADP) members will urge Congressional leaders to improve consumers' dental benefit options offered in the small group market and call for clarifications on subsidies for children's coverage inside Marketplaces, during its 2016 industry fly-in, "NADP Advocacy in Action" May 11-12, in the nation's Capital.

"Serving as the voice of the dental benefits industry is one of the primary purposes of NADP," said Board Chair Theresa McConeghey of Principal. "Our members are to be commended for their participation in the democratic process and their representation of our industry."

In face-to-face meetings with Members of Congress, NADP members will seek continued bi-partisan support to align the offer of dental benefits whether sold on or off the Marketplaces. They will ask specifically for support of H.R. 3463 and creation of similar legislation in the Senate. The bipartisan legislation, introduced by Reps. Griffith and DeGette, harmonizes on and off-Exchange markets to offer consumers similar dental choices. The bill offers a win-win solution as it has no-cost implications, no opposition and does not impact other Affordable Care Act requirements.

"We want to make it easier for all consumers to purchase dental benefits, whether they shop inside or outside Exchanges," said NADP Executive Director Evelyn F. Ireland. "NADP research and numerous outside studies show having dental coverage leads to a greater likelihood to receive dental care. In a 2015 NADP consumer survey, 84 percent of consumers with dental benefits report having a dental checkup in the past year compared to only 61 percent of those without dental benefits."

NADP members will also be asking for support to encourage the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to fix the Advanced Premium Tax Credit (APTC) calculation, noting the issue has bi-partisan support as well as support from consumers, carriers and providers. Currently, the calculation is based on a silver medical plan in each family's area within a state which may not include the pediatric dental benefit. Because of this calculation error, families in some states and regions are receiving APTC for dental benefits while most are not.

Advocacy in Action attendees will provide detailed documentation of the issues at the conclusion of their face-to-face meetings, and NADP will follow-up with policymakers throughout the year. These materials are also available on NADP's website at www.nadp.org.

About NADP

National Association of Dental Plans (NADP), a Texas nonprofit corporation with headquarters in Dallas, Texas, is the representative and recognized resource of the dental benefits industry. NADP is the only national trade organization that includes the full spectrum of dental benefits companies operating in the United States. NADP's members provide Dental HMO, Dental PPO, Dental Indemnity and Discount Dental products to more than 90 percent of the 205 million Americans with dental benefits.