Buy Photo Chris Smith, center, a second-year medical student at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, takes the blood pressure of patient Joan Serfass of Camden, left, as Erica Schramm, right, a third-year medical student at Cooper Medical School of Rowan University, looks on at a clinic where the medical students care for patients at 3 Cooper Plaza in Camden. 10.14.14 (Photo: Chris LaChall/Courier-Post, Chris LaChall/Courier-Post)Buy Photo

Back for her first primary care exam since giving birth, Perla Blandon soothed a fussy 4-month-old on her knee as she and her provider, Jordan Barger, discussed her health.

For several minutes, the 36-year-old answered questions directed in Spanish, speaking carefully and smiling as she corrected Barger’s grammar.

Though surrounded by a roomful of observers, it was a comfortable conversation. For the past year, Blandon has acted as both patient and teacher for Barger, a third-year medical student who accompanied her during prenatal appointments.

It’s been valuable for both.

“She said that whenever she has something she needs ... I’m able to give her either the answer or what she needs at the clinic,” said Barger, acting as Blandon’s translator.

The uninsured Camden resident has received free medical care and lots of attention, thanks to a year-round clinic at 3 Cooper Plaza run by students from Cooper Medical School of Rowan University and the Philadelphia College of Pharmacy, University of the Sciences.

With 268 students who see patients weekly and just 250 patients in its files, the clinic is experiencing an embarrassment of riches when it comes to medical providers.

Even so, there is a need for the clinic’s services in the city.

While the Affordable Care Act and New Jersey’s participation in expanded Medicaid increased the number of people with coverage, Camden still has plenty of uninsured residents who need primary care, explained Dr. Anna Headly, a Cooper assistant professor who oversees the clinic.

“Cooper is a safety-net hospital, but even safety nets can’t catch everyone,” Headly said. “That’s why it’s good that we’re here.

“There’s a lot of people who are not eligible — mainly (the) undocumented. They’ve been here a long time. Many of them speak English ... but they’ve never been able to get papers.”

Others could not afford even subsidized premiums through the federal insurance marketplace or were stuck waiting for their Medicaid applications to be approved. Most of the clinic’s patients are the working poor.

At the clinic, patients are matched with students who follow every aspect of their care, from the initial exam to making appointments, handing out medications, and faxing required paperwork for things such as insulin. Appointments can last from 30 to 90 minutes.

Typical health issues include diabetes, high blood pressure, depression and other effects of stress and trauma. But the students also have diagnosed a few patients with terminal cancer, accompanying them through hospice care. One medical student was invited to a funeral.

But much of their clinic work involves asking questions and listening to patients, explained Christopher Smith, a second-year student at Cooper Medical School. Students aren’t expected to know all the answers, but they work with faculty to find them out. In the meantime, they practice empathy as they help patients navigate the complexities of the health care system.

Matched last year with a patient with uncontrolled asthma, Smith learned the man often ended up in a hospital emergency department because he didn’t have medication or primary care. Smith offered him both, along with his cellphone in case he needed help between appointments.

“I believe it’s going to help the future of medicine,” said Smith, a 34-year-old who moved his young family to Camden. “You become a care provider, but you also become an advocate.”

“This is a learning environment. We’re in this together.”

Reach Kim Mulford at (856) 486-2448 or kmulford@courierpostonline.com. Follow her on Twitter @CP_KimMulford.

If you go

• The Camden Collaborative Community Practice Clinic offers free primary care for uninsured Camden residents, ages 14 and older.

• The clinic is open for appointments or walk-in visits on Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday from 3 to 5 p.m. in Suite 211 at 3 Cooper Plaza, Camden.

• Spanish-speaking providers or translators are available.

• For information, call (856) 295-1715.

Read or Share this story: http://on.cpsj.com/1sYdop4