George Flinn intends to make health care reform his sole election platform. Flinn's Patient Centered Health Plan is a viable alternative for Obamacare that advocates principles like portability and insurance competition across state lines to lower costs.

(Newswire.net -- April 11, 2014) Memphis, Tennessee --









George Flinn Announces Bid for U.S. Senate

Dr. George Flinn is running for U.S. Senate to reform our healthcare system.

Dr. Flinn is focused on promoting the Patient Centered Health Plan, which can be viewed at http://www.patientcenteredhealthplan.com/. The plan is a viable alternative to Obamacare and advocates portability to eliminate the problem of pre-existing conditions and allows insurance companies to compete across state lines to lower premiums. Flinn believes that Obamacare and the insurance companies are destroying the United States’ health care system. It directly results in job loss, increased health care costs, destroyed doctor/patient relationships, discrimination against married couples and the removal of the health care industry from our free market economy.







“We have to fix health care,” Flinn said Tuesday morning. “Most people in Washington have given up on fixing it. Its current direction has taken us down the wrong road, in my view. I’ve got a plan called Patient-Centered Plan that will fix our broken health care system."







Dr. Flinn will take charge to bring accessible and affordable healthcare to all Americans without having the damaging effects of Obamacare. For thirty-five years, Dr. Flinn has dedicated his life to medicine and has improved the health of people in his own community while insisting on the best health care practices. He has treated thousands of patients, each with their own unique circumstances and believes that health care should attend to individualized needs.







“My sole focus is to fix our health care system,” he said. “I’m not focusing on anything except presenting a plan to fix health care.”





Flinn For Senate



info@flinnforsenate.com

Http://FlinnForSenate.com