But while nearly all accept this reality, sensationalized characterizations of the black community promote misconceptions about the primary reasons for high incidence.

Take for example the false claim that HIV/AIDS is a product of irresponsibly foregoing condom usage. Black MSM confront a great paradox in HIV incidence: Meta-analyses from researchers at the CDC showed in 2012 that black MSM reported fewer high-risk behaviors than MSM of other ethnic groups. Still, at the time the authors published their study, black MSM had three times the chances of testing HIV positive and six times the chances of having undiagnosed HIV. Disparities in condom usage on racial and ethnic grounds do not provide a real explanation for this crisis.

Incarceration due to the war on drugs has of course disproportionately affected people of color. But pointing the finger at male-to-male transmission in prisons to explain the crisis is similarly incorrect. From July 1988 to February 2005, Georgia implemented mandatory HIV testing upon prison entry and subsequent voluntary testing by request or by clinical indication. Of those found to be HIV positive in Georgia prisons and jails, 91 percent were positive upon entry. The real danger of living with HIV in prisons is not the risk of infecting another inmate, but the stigma and abuse that stems from a positive diagnosis.

HIV/AIDS in the black community, in many ways, is not an isolated crisis but rather the child of a more familiar one. It is the same American dilemma of historical racial subjugation. When considering America’s HIV crisis among African Americans, especially MSM, we must look back to that first relationship between socioeconomic status, HIV incidence and black Americans’ persistent struggle to overcome structural inequalities.

Years of discrimination in housing and other resources, inadequate sexual health education in our crumbling public schools and persistent racism are the primary culprits in this crisis. And while mass incarceration doesn’t cause HIV incidence to explode in prisons, it certainly affects those who are not jailed. The women and men left behind in society must encounter a numerically restricted sexual network, increasing the chances that they will come into contact with an HIV-positive individual in small, high-prevalence communities.

HIV will not disappear without an offensive strategy. There are many factors that contribute to the crisis, but expanding access to high-quality health care is the integral first step to decreasing the racial disparity in incidence. The concept of following through on the “treatment cascade” or “care continuum” is vastly important — individuals must be diagnosed, then linked to care, then remain in care, then eventually achieve viral suppression to prevent transmission. The problem is that far too many black MSM are unable to access medical care with the frequency that other groups do.