Turns out, the late Speaker of the House Thomas "Tip" O'Neill had it wrong. As we look to 2016, all politics is national.

Sure, there's a plethora of important county, school board, legislative and congressional elections coming in the new year. But the presidential race threatens to eclipse them all.

In normal election years (is there such a thing?), Knox County primaries happen in early May.

This year, though, the local races will be piggybacking on the presidential primary on March 1, when Tennessee joins the so-called SEC Primary designed to give Southern states a louder voice in filling the White House.

Early voting starts in just over six weeks.

By the looks of things, the GOP presidential contest still will be a wide-open affair. The angry outsiders have not burned out as in the past, and campaign finance laws now allow a few wealthy donors to extend the lives of candidates who would have starved for cash under the old rules.

Stirred up by debates about illegal immigration, terrorism, refugees, abortion and "Obamacare," thousands of voters who haven't darkened the door of a voting booth in recent years will turn out.

Consider that only 5,439 voters managed to make it to the polls during early voting and on election day for the Nov. 3 Knoxville city election. Less than two weeks later, some 9,750 folks showed up at the Convention Center to catch a glimpse of Donald Trump.

So what will happen March 1 after tens of thousands of newly motivated citizens make their choices for the top of the ballot and turn their attention to the races below?

There are many intriguing matchups that could be shaped by heavy turnout in the GOP primary.

In Commission District 4, incumbent Jeff Ownby is considered vulnerable, in part because of an embarrassing arrest early in his first term. Will the flood of voters remember that, or care? And if they do, will Janet Testerman's name ring a bell because her late father, Kyle, was city mayor three decades ago? Or will political newcomer Hugh Nystrom be able to leverage the big contributions he's receiving from some of the area's political heavyweights?

In District 2, two former appointees are facing off. Michelle Carringer was once named to the commission and John Fugate to the school board. Will their earlier service be meaningful to folks who show up for Ted Cruz or Marco Rubio?

Will the national "throw the bums out" attitude cost incumbent commissioner Brad Anders renomination, or will he, as a police officer, benefit from the equally national Blue Lives Matter movement and turn back newcomer John Ashley?

What about John Whitehead's bid to return to the assessor's office he vacated years ago? Will his name breed familiarity, or will voters go for the recent experience of chief deputy Jim Weaver? Or perhaps this will be the year for Andrew Graybeal, who like Trump has ditched the Democratic label.

Much will depend, of course, on how hard the candidates work in their campaigns. Politics is local to a large extent. But if a candidate knocks on your door, don't be surprised if he or she seems more concerned with Washington, D.C., than Knox County.