Last year, Indiana Gov. Mike Pence made the disastrous decision to sign a bill that allowed businesses to refuse service to gay and lesbian customers based on the business owner’s religious views.

The move cost Indiana financially, economically and politically, with Pence now struggling for re-election. The bill was such a debacle that Pence and other supporters were forced to pass an amendment just days later effectively retreating from the discriminatory legislation.

The House’s State, Veterans and Military Affairs Committee is preparing to consider HB 1180 in coming weeks, a bill similar to the Indiana legislation. That would be a bad move all around.

Indiana is not the only example of what not to do. In Georgia, legislators have also debated similar legislation. Business groups in Georgia recently released a study finding passage of a law protecting discrimination could cost the state up to $2 billion in lost business and direct sales.

Put simply, defending discrimination is not just wrong, it is also costly.

The ink wasn’t even dry on the Indiana bill when major companies began canceling events and conferences there, with some companies and organizations publicly contemplating relocating if the law was allowed to stand.

Colorado is no stranger to the negative repercussions of defending discrimination. In 1992, when Colorado voters passed Amendment 2 prohibiting local laws that protected gay and lesbian people from discrimination, we quickly became branded as the “Hate State” and saw significant economic blowback as a result.

Since then, Colorado voters have changed dramatically, with polls now showing overwhelming support for gay rights. Not only has Colorado changed, but the Republican Party has as well, as evidenced through a massive upswing in conservative support for gay rights. A 2015 reputable voter survey (conducted by a team of Republican polling firms) found that nearly three in four voters support protecting gays from discrimination at the hands of private businesses otherwise open to the public. While Republicans tend to be less gay-friendly, we still saw 54 percent say “yes” to the protection of gays in the marketplace.

As conservatives, we believe in the free market. If bigots don’t want to serve certain classes of people, our instinct is to say “let the market decide.” Ultimately, we theorize, the bigots will go out of business.

This philosophy unfortunately now runs head-first into those who proclaim they need the government to protect their “religious freedom.” While state and federal law protect religious freedom, they do not protect the right to discriminate against those of other religions on all matters outside religious organizations and places of worship.

Our opponents believe more laws are needed to allow businesses to discriminate against gays under the guise of religious freedom. Instead of banning discrimination, backers here demand the right to freely discriminate. As a society, we say “no” to discrimination based on race, gender, national origin and other protected characteristics. Gays deserve to spend their hard-earned dollars at the same place we spend ours.

There is a better way forward for conservatives. Our ultra-conservative neighbor Utah recently saw historic passage of LGBT job and housing protections. A month later, 71 percent of Utah voters approved of Gov. Gary Hebert.

In Colorado, we have strong protections both for our LGBT residents and for our people of faith. Let’s keep it that way. No political movement has a copyright on any single civil rights issue.

Laurie Leprino is a political activist. Jessica K. Peck (Jessica@JP Denver.com) is an attorney.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.