Quality Assurance Thamara Venegas places a roll of padding into a roll of printable material, Thursday, Oct. 9, 2014, at Circle Graphics in Longmont. (Matthew Jonas/Longmont Times-Call) ( Matthew Jonas )

When Circle Graphics entered the out-of-home advertising market in 2000, the Longmont-based company did so with an aggressive, "disruptive pricing strategy," company officials say.

"It was quite successful over the years," said Andrew Cousin, Circle Graphics' chief executive officer.

When Circle Graphics offered its services at approximately 50 percent of market pricing, it allowed the grand format digital printer to snag market share, Cousin said. Circle Graphics officials estimate that the company now prints about 60 percent of the billboards in the United States.

"Some of the downsides of that is it becomes tougher and tougher to move the needle on the side of market share," Cousin said.

Andrew Cousin, CEO of Circle Graphics

That's where Mammoth Media comes into play.

Earlier this month, Circle Graphics acquired the Hingham, Mass.-based Mammoth Media, a grand-format printer with a focus on the transit market. Fianncial terms of the deal were not disclosed.

Cousin spoke with the Daily Camera last week about Circle Graphics' evolution, the acquisition of Mammoth Media and the combined company's goals for the future.

The following has been edited for clarity and length.

1.) Do you intend to retain Mammoth's operations?

We have hired everyone that was port of the Mammoth operation. We intend to keep the operation intact in Massachusetts. It's a nice foothold for the East Coast market.

Freight costs and delivery times are critical and (Circle Graphics has negotiated) pretty good freight rates. I believe we're UPS' largest customer in Colorado.

Having an East Coast presence is pretty valuable to supply those markets, but we're also interested to continue to expand our internal capabilities in Colorado for the transit market.

2.) Where does this transaction land in Circle Graphics' acquisitions to-date?

Circle primarily has grown organically in Colorado. The acquisition of the Baton Rouge, La., facility occurred in the third quarter of 2012 (via the acquisition of some assets from billboard maker Lamar).

Lamar used to do some of the print production in house in that facility in Baton Rouge and, over time, I think Circle recognized that (it) could operate that facility efficiently. We acquired that operation from Lamar in 2012. There was that acquisition and then the Mammoth (transaction).

Generally, the growth has come internally.

I think at some point it makes logical sense for us to have a presence on the West Coast.

3.) How have Circle Graphics' sales performed in recent years?

I think with a continued sales effort across the company, we believe we could sustain double-digit sales growth, although that will be more heavily skewed on the transit side than the billboard side of the business.

Our second division, which is consumer products — including a range of wall decor and canvas gallery wraps — that division is growing at a much faster rate than the out-of-home division.

The out-of-home division, the mature segment of our business, is still growing nicely. I think we could hit 10 percent or slightly higher growth in that division.

On the consumer products division side, the rate of growth is five times that ... and expanding nicely.

4.) What strategies has Circle Graphics taken to maintain its foothold in the industry?

It's interesting, it's hard to gain that 60 percent market share in any industry. I'm not claiming credit for this. Circle has been extraordinarily successful.

It's really been the result of an absolute laser-focus on cost and quality and services.

Billboard printing is not a difficult industry to enter, you do need a grand-format printer.

We have Ph.D. chemists on staff formulating our own ink, and our cost of ink is 10 percent (of that from traditional manufacturers).

Our disruptive pricing has been extremely valuable ... and I think we have a very innovative design of the product that lends itself to a high-degree of automation at a low cost and that is regarded in the industry as high-quality.

5.) What have been digital billboards' effect on Circle Graphics' out-of-home advertising business?

There are a half-million billboards (in the United States) and about 1 percent of those billboards are digital today. The new digital (boards) are rolling out at a 0.2 percent rate.

So they're not a huge factor in terms of our market size. We're not complacent about that.

The cost of digital billboards is coming down. There are definitely some new entrants. I think we're going to see continued price reductions on the cost of putting up digital billboards, which will make the economics more attractive for the billboard owner.

At the same time, there are some real regulatory headwinds for getting a digital billboard permitted. There are many cities and municipalities that will not (approve these types of billboards) over concerns of ambient light being closer to residential areas and the second is a distraction factor for people driving.

They're definitely a factor, and we are watching it closely, but we're not nervous.