Parents are under increasing pressure to splash the cash on their own children and other people's kids this Christmas. Lisa Salmon looks at what they're spending and considers the alternatives

As the festive season picks up pace, parents are yet again facing huge pressure to buy the best toys and gadgets for their excited youngsters.

And the best comes at a hefty price of course. In fact, new research has revealed that the average parents plan to spend as much as £275 on gifts for each of their children. Topping the gift list is a TV, a camera and a personalised football kit.

The study, by World Bicycle Relief UK, also revealed that 71% of UK mothers said they felt pressure to spend a lot of money, and 28% added that they had already exceeded their initial budget.

Jeremy Todd, chief executive of the parenting charity Family Lives, points out that companies have realised how powerful children are as consumers and many advertising campaigns proactively target children, which can really increase the pressure on mums and dads

He says: "Every season, especially Christmas, new toys and gadgets come onto the market and many children and young people want to get their hands on them. It can be difficult for parents to know how to respond to a child who wants everything.

"Although it doesn't feel like it at times, you as the parent are the most valuable resource for your child."

He stresses that any creative time parents spend with their children is worth more than anything that can be bought in a shop, and advises:. "Even if you work, which leaves you with less time, think 'quality time' and do something you all enjoy."

He adds: "It can feel good to spoil your child with expensive gifts, but cost is a great consideration for most parents, as is keeping limitations on how much you treat your children."

And it's not only their own children that parents have to buy for - separate research by the games and jigsaw manufacturer Orchard Toys has revealed UK parents will buy gifts for an average of 12 children, on top of their own offspring, this Christmas.

On average, they'll buy for four child relatives, four of their own friends' children and four of their children's friends this year - spending £188 in total.

In terms of 'spend etiquette', the research points to between £5 and £15 being the socially acceptable sum on each child outside the family, and up to £23 on related children, such as nieces, nephews and godchildren.

Simon Newbery, managing director of Orchard Toys, says: "Our research shows that parents are generous but sensible, and not over-indulgent, when it comes to Christmas gifting for children.

"There's no greater joy than giving a child a present that they will actually play with, their parents will like, and that doesn't cost the earth."

And it seems it's just as hard for parents to buy presents for other people's children as it is for their own - 40% of parents admitted they found it difficult to choose, with games emerging as the fail-safe option.

The top gifts parents buy for other people's children are games, toys, books, arts and crafts, money, clothes and confectionery.

When quizzed on what types of gifts they most like their own children to receive at Christmas, educational toys were overwhelmingly preferred by almost three quarters of parents.

Half of parents admitted re-gifting their children's unwanted or duplicate gifts. Soft toys are the most likely candidates for this, while technological toys are welcomed by just 6% of parents.

The majority - almost 60% of parents - still insist their children send a traditional handwritten thank you note for a gift, while one in 10 settle for a digital thank you via email, text or even Facebook.

When it comes to deciding who to buy presents for and where to draw the line, it's a delicate balancing act. More than 40% of parents said they mutually agreed with other parents before swapping festive gifts. Nearly a third just bought for children in their immediate family and godchildren, while a further 30% admitted they only gave Christmas gifts to those who gave presents to their own children.

Justine Roberts, chief executive of the parents' social networking site Mumsnet, says: "Christmas can really ramp up the pressure on parents who are already feeling the pinch. Factor in nieces, nephews and godchildren and the expense mounts rapidly.

"Some families manage to focus on developing fun Christmas traditions rather than succumbing to pester power, and others go the home-made route to keep the costs down.

"And luckily, lots of Mumsnet users are savvy about shopping around for the best prices, setting budgets and planning early to avoid a Christmas Eve panic-splurge."

:: The World Bicycle Relief UK study was to mark the launch of its Gift of Giving campaign (www.uk.worldbicyclerelief.org/donate), which aims to alleviate some of the pressure on parents by offering an alternative, inspiring gift idea for their children to give or receive.

The campaign is encouraging parents to consider charitable gifts this year, whether it be a small donation as a stocking present or a higher donation as one of their children's top gifts.

World Bicycle Relief UK provides schoolchildren living in poor rural areas of Zambia, Zimbabwe and South Africa with robust bicycles that give them access to education, healthcare and better opportunities.

STOCKING FILLERS

My First Paddington Bear

A soft and squishy, 20cm high machine-washable Paddington Bear, big enough to help satisfy the current craze for all things Paddington. Suitable from birth, £15, www.hamleys.com

Maisey & Daisy Design Your Own Pencil Case

Children can design their own pretty denim pencil case with this set from the Maisey & Daisy range. Comes with iron-on transfers, fabric paint and pretty flower gemstones. £5.99, www.whsmith.co.uk and WH Smith stores

Glitter Party Kit

Everything needed for the ultimate party, containing a lip gloss mobile phone, body glitter, three nail varnishes, holographic nail stickers, a heart ring, two flower hair clips, toe separators, and a nail file. Suitable for children aged six plus, £4.99, www.galttoys.com