As they help health systems navigate an industry undergoing a sea change, two hospital trade groups are climbing into the same boat.

The Illinois Hospital Association, an influential lobbying group with about 200 members, and the Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council, a Chicago-based hospital trade group with about 150 members, are merging effective Jan. 1. The groups signed a letter of intent yesterday. Leaders of the nonprofits estimate that their combined 2015 revenue could be around $60 million.

Dan Yunker, CEO of the health care council, and Maryjane Wurth, CEO of the hospital group, both said the decision was driven by their members. “There was an opportunity to align the strengths of both organizations to better serve the health care community,” Yunker said.

Though the two groups began merger discussions last fall, it's not clear yet who will lead the organization, where the headquarters will be or how many employees will be laid off or how much money the merger will save. Yunker and Wurth said they're respective organizations are still evaluating those details, among others. A new name for the organization also will be determined during that process.

The Illinois Hospital Association, based in Naperville, has 150 employees; the Metropolitan Chicago Healthcare Council has slightly less than 100.

Bringing together the nonprofits will create a more powerful organization with a stronger voice, said Michael Eesley, CEO of Centegra Health System and chairman of the health care council board. He noted that hospitals would have broader access to the services and programs both nonprofits offer if they combined.

Amid the biggest changes reshaping the industry under the 2010 Affordable Care Act, hospitals and physicians are now getting paid by insurers to keep patients away from costly overnight stays and instead focus on coordinating patient care to keep people healthy. It's a big shift for providers, who were used to getting paid for each service they provided, which didn't deter unnecessary tests and spending.

Another big change: Hospitals are now managing large populations of patients, a big task where using sophisticated data analytics helps track trends and prevent patients from getting sick in the first place.

STRENGTH IN NUMBERS

The council and the hospital association each bring their own set of tools to the table. The health care council focuses on the Chicago and Cook County health care landscape. It offers health systems ways to bolster their business, including an ambitious regional health information exchange where hospitals can share patient records electronically.

The nonprofit also spawned Land of Lincoln Health, a health insurance company that sells plans on the state health insurance exchange.

The hospital association concentrates its lobbying efforts in Springfield and Washington, D.C. It also offers its members insurance products, group purchasing power and data analytics to help hospitals keep track of patient trends.

“It's taking our respective strengths and putting them together, whether it's on the advocacy side or on the business side, so that we can ultimately, with all changes going on with health care, help our members be successful in caring for their patients and their communities,” Wurth said.

Hospitals pay dues to both agencies. It's also not clear how that will change. Wurth would not say how much hospital members pay, but she said it's based on a formula that factors in the size of the hospital or health system.

A spokeswoman for the Chicago health care council said dues ranges from about $5,000 to nearly $30,000 per hospital each year, noting that dues have remained the same since 1989.

Nationally there 22 regional and metro hospital associations.