Topics: diversity, Editor's Picks, Race, Star Wars, Star Wars the Force Awakens, Entertainment News

J.J. Abrams’ “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” is a fun and exciting film. Older audiences will be pleased as they remember their childhoods of the 1970s and 1980s. A new generation of fans who only know the more recent prequel films — and were likely left wondering “Why is ‘Star Wars’ such a big deal?”— will finally begin to understand why “Star Wars” captivated several generations of viewers around the world.

“Star Wars” is an example of “the monomyth” — a set of story forms and narrative structures that are common across all cultures and which together form a shared human mythology.

As such, J.J. Abrams takes the “Star Wars” formula of a quest — a magical item, family secrets, the coming of age struggle, finding one’s destiny and the battle between good and evil — and continues it in “The Force Awakens.” “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” is for the most part a remix of “Star Wars: A New Hope.” As an example of the monomyth and the subsequent repeated themes present in all the “Star Wars” films, this is to be expected.

“Star Wars: The Force Awakens” hearkens back to its origins in George Lucas’s original “Star Wars” trilogy. “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” is also grounded firmly in the Age of Obama and a multicultural, “post-racial” present.

The original “Star Wars” films created a filmic imaginary galaxy that was almost entirely populated by white people. “Star Wars” had a magical energy field called the Force, sentient droids, bizarre aliens, faster than light travel, lightsabers, and moon-sized battle stations that could destroy a planet with one blast of its laser. Yet there were no black or brown people in Lucas’s original 1977 film. What cultural critic and scholar bell hooks and others have described as “oppositional reading” turned the Star Wars universe upside down: If black and brown folks were not actually in the visual and narrative frame (or if there, depicted in a racist and derogatory manner by the White Gaze), they would imagine themselves still present in the movie.

Black audiences would cheer on the “black” character Darth Vader as he killed “white” rebels. And there were no limitations on the racially transgressive act of childhood play where kids on the ‘res, in black cities such as Chicago, communities like Harlem or in the barrios of Los Angeles would become Luke, Han, Leia or Chewbacca.

George Lucas, to his credit, attempted to correct this oversight. He cast Billy Dee Williams, then one of, if not the, most recognizable African-American Hollywood leading man of the era, in “A New Hope’s” sequel, “The Empire Strikes Back.” Williams’ character would be one of the heroes in the (then) final movie Return of the Jedi. Billy Dee Williams would be joined in that movie by token and largely forgettable black characters — noticed only because of their conspicuousness — who were mostly cast in the role of random, nameless starfighter pilots and who died in the final climactic battle. Lucas tried to make a more diverse and representative world in his Star Wars prequels. But again, this well-intentioned effort was overshadowed by the Steppin Fetchit, race minstrel-like character known as Jar-Jar Binks, the Charlie Chan Asian caricatures of the Galactic Trade Federation and Watto, an anti-Semitic stereotype embodied by the greedy, craven, slave master who owned a young Anakin Skywalker on the planet Tatooine.

Fortunately, people of color, especially those who are “Millennials” and younger, will not have to read themselves back into “Star Wars: The Force Awakens.”

The stars of Abrams’ new Star Wars film are a black Stormtrooper named Finn (John Boyega) and a young white woman named “Rey” (Daisy Ridley). They are joined by a charismatic and heroic starfighter pilot named Poe Dameron, who is played by the Latino actor Oscar Isaac. There are people of color and women in almost every scene of “Star Wars: The Force Awakens.” This extends to the antagonists in Abrams’ new film as well. The newest iteration of the Empire — now known as the First Order — also demonstrates much more racial and gender diversity than its predecessor. In Lucas’s original films, the Empire’s soldiers were all white and male. They were modeled after the Nazis. More than just uniforms and regalia, the Empire possessed a racist, xenophobic and sexist political culture.

This is not diversity as racial “tokenism.” The women and people of color who populate Abrams’ “Star Wars” film are present as quotidian fixtures; their existence is not marked by their uniqueness, but rather in how common and mundane humane diversity would be in the fantastical worlds of “a long time ago” and in “a galaxy far, far away.”

The diversity in “Star Wars: The Force Awakens” has the potential to be remarkably empowering for those black and brown folks, and white viewers too, that see this as the new normal. However, we must be cautious. Celebrating the racial and gender diversity of a movie while not simultaneously understanding how Hollywood, and the mass media more generally, reproduces and reinforces sexism and racism, can also be a distraction from substantive political and social change work.