ENLARGE DINNER DIPLOMACY | Sunny Kim teaches a cooking class in her home in Queens, New York. David Orme for the Wall Street Journal

THE DRIVE ACROSS New York City—from my Brooklyn apartment to a leafy residential block at the outer edge of Queens—was a journey in itself. Arriving at Sunny Kim's home just as her Korean cooking class was starting, I was actually a little nervous: Showing up at a private residence made the whole thing feel disarmingly intimate.

New York is a city of immigrants; a recent report from the mayor's office counted 37% of the population as foreign-born. It's also a great restaurant city. Still, though I love Korean food and spend a lot of time eating in Manhattan's Koreatown, how often do I have the opportunity to sit down to a home-cooked Korean meal? That's the experience that League of Kitchens, the organization that offers this class and others like it in the homes of immigrant cooks across New York City, aims to provide.

Photos: Cooking Korean Dishes Click to view slideshow. David Orme for the Wall Street Journal

Classes With Immigrant Cooks Around the Country San Francisco: La Cocina This "incubator kitchen" in the Mission District was founded to help food entrepreneurs, many of them immigrant women, grow their businesses. Upcoming classes taught by program members include grilling in Japan, Nigeria and Mexico; South American empanadas; and foods of the Diwali festival from Gujarat, India. From $65 for a two-and-a-half-hour class, lacocinasf.org Seattle: Project Feast Cooks from Burma, India, Iraq, the Philippines and Ethiopia, among other places, teach hands-on classes in a commercial kitchen in the suburb of Tukwila. The program connects Seattleites hungry for ethnic cuisines they might not find in local restaurants with immigrants and refugees eager to gain experience in a professional setting. From $25 for a class of about three hours, projectfeast.org Los Angeles and New York: CourseHorse This online aggregator is like OpenTable for classes. In the cooking category, there are international offerings at well-known cooking schools like the Institute of Culinary Education as well as smaller schools specializing in cuisines ranging from Malaysian to Kosher Sephardic. Course offerings will expand to multiple other cities later this year. From $65 for classes of varying length, coursehorse.com Various Locations: EatWith This online marketplace offers dining experiences in private homes in more than 30 countries and an ever-expanding roster of American cities. Many of these are classes taught by immigrant cooks, in which students help to prepare the meal that they then sit down and eat. Class size is small and events are intimate; EatWith reports that 60% of guests stay in contact with their hosts or fellow students after attending a class or meal. From $35 for classes of varying length, eatwith.com

Ms. Kim welcomed me with a cup of green tea and some pork-and-beef dumplings she'd made. A natural host, she was chatting with the other students—we were five in all. We learned that Ms. Kim, the executive director of the Korean American Community Center of New York, and her husband, Kyong Nak Kim, a Methodist minister (now retired), emigrated from South Korea in 1983. In garden plots that ran around the side of the house, Mr. Kim grew produce that his wife used to make kimchi. She stored it in enormous clay crocks alongside the miso paste and soy sauce she fermented for months to get the right flavor. "I didn't make soy sauce in Korea," she said. "But when my mother-in-law passed away, I thought, 'Who will make it now?' I studied for three years to make it taste good."

ENLARGE Ms. Kim's scallion, meat and vegetable skewers David Orme for the Wall Street Journal

In other words, Ms. Kim was no ordinary home cook. "We're looking for someone who has a deep knowledge of traditional cooking," said Lisa Gross, founder and CEO of League of Kitchens. During a lengthy audition process, Ms. Gross's team also vets the cooks' homes to make sure they're comfortable, clean and conveniently located. Candidates are given three months' paid teacher training, and Ms. Gross's colleague Liz Tarpy, formerly the senior culinary editor at Food Network, helps cooks who would never reach for a tablespoon or cup-measure under normal circumstances to translate their dishes into recipes that students can reproduce at home.

Over five and a half hours at the Kims' house, we prepared a number of namul, or vegetable side dishes, as well as meat and vegetable skewers called sanjeok. The main course was a platter of galbi—grilled beef short ribs. Ms. Kim would get a dish started, then hand it over to a student with a firm, encouraging, "OK. Now you do it." Along the way, she kept us fortified with snacks and earthy ginseng tea. Still, we were hungry by the time we sat down to dinner along with Mr. Kim. My earlier nervousness was a dim memory. The meal was delicious—and unlike anything to be found in a restaurant. We lingered over it like old friends.

From $100 for classes in Korean, Indian, Bengali, Afghan, Lebanese and Greek cooking, leagueofkitchens.com

Galbi (Korean Short Ribs)

ENLARGE Korean short ribs David Orme for the Wall Street Journal

The puréed Asian pear in the marinade not only contributes subtle sweetness, but also aids in tenderizing the meat. These ribs are even more delicious when barbecued on a grill.

Active Time: 30 minutes Total Time: 2½ hours (includes marinating) Serves: 4-6

Make marinade: In a blender or food processor, purée 10 cloves garlic, 1 small onion, roughly chopped, ¼ Asian pear, peeled and cut into chunks, and ½ cup water. Pour into a large bowl. Rinse blender or food processor with 3 tablespoons soju, sake or white wine and add to bowl. Stir in ⅓ cup soy sauce, 2½ tablespoons honey, 2 tablespoons sesame oil and ½ teaspoon black pepper.

Marinate short ribs: Submerge 2½ pounds Korean-style short ribs (aka flanken-cut short ribs) in the marinade, cover with plastic wrap and refrigerate at least 2 hours and up to 6.

Cook short ribs: Heat broiler on high. Line a broiler pan with foil. Lay ribs across pan in a single layer. Broil ribs 10 minutes, flip and continue to broil until meat is well done, brown all over and crisped at the edges. Repeat with remaining ribs. Serve with rice.

—Adapted from Sunny Kim, League of Kitchens