Former U.S. Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist, R-Tenn., headlines a list of 57 Tennessee supporters for GOP presidential hopeful Jeb Bush. (Photo: File / The Associated Press)

Former U.S. Senate Majority Leader Bill Frist and Tennessee Economic and Community Development Commissioner Randy Boyd are among 57 Tennessee supporters for GOP presidential contender Jeb Bush, according to an announcement from the campaign.

"I am honored to support Jeb Bush for President and am impressed with his detailed policy agenda to reform Washington," Frist said in a statement.

"His ideas on reforming the tax code, repealing and replacing Obamacare, and rolling back the regulatory regime installed by the Obama Administration will drastically improve our economy."

Former ECD Commissioner Bill Hagerty is also a Bush supporter in Tennessee, a state Republican presidential candidates are already crisscrossing in hopes of earning the many available conservative votes. Tennessee is one of six southern states participating the March 1 "SEC primary."

As one of the earliest states to vote, and as a heavily conservative state, Tennessee is expected to play a key role in choosing the Republican presidential nominee. The delegates will ensure Bush meets ballot requirements in Tennessee, in addition to leading ground-level organizing efforts.

Bush senior campaign adviser Tom Ingram, a longtime aide to U.S. Sen. Lamar Alexander and Gov. Bill Haslam, said the list of supporters shows Bush's commitment and ability to win Tennessee.

"Organizing a presidential campaign in Tennessee is tougher than in some other places, and this shows enthusiasm and momentum for Jeb Bush in one of the important 'SEC primary' states," Ingram said in a statement.

"This campaign is systematically organizing across the country, doing the hard work required to get on ballots and ultimately put together an organization that can win a primary and deliver the White House. This is the latest example of a campaign that is pulling the right levers in ground-level organizing."

This isn't the first time Frist and Bush have worked together. While Bush was governor of Florida and Frist served in the U.S. Senate, both spearheaded legal maneuvering to try and prevent removing the feeding tube from Terri Schiavo, reports The New Yorker. The case received national attention for years, as conservatives fought with Schiavo's husband and others over the feeding tube and whether Schiavo wanted to remain alive in a vegetative state.

Haslam recently introduced Bush ahead of a rally in Knoxville before a University of Tennessee football game. A spokesman for the governor said Haslam, who also leads the national Republican Governors Association, isn't endorsing anyone in the primary yet.

Buy Photo Former Florida governor and GOP presidential contender Jeb Bush has visited Tennessee multiple times this year. (Photo: File / The Tennessean)

In addition to the Knoxville trip, the former Florida governor has visited Tennessee a half-dozen times this year. He attended a recent fundraiser in Williamson County, headlined the Tennessee Republican Party's annual dinner this summer and spoke at the National Rifle Association's annual convention in April.

Bush was not as well received at the NRA event as some of the other GOP presidential contenders. In the past, Tennessee GOP primary voters chose former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee and former Pennsylvania senator Rick Santorum as their nominee.

"It'll be a challenge, because Tennessee in the last few presidential primaries has kind of gone to the fringes," Ingram told The Tennessean when he joined the Bush campaign.

"The expectations are realistic, but I think the opportunity is there for him to present himself, for the people of Tennessee to get to know him for who he is, not who his family is, and I think they'll be impressed if they do that."

The full list of Bush's Tennessee supporters is available below.

USA TODAY's GOP Power Rankings list Bush in sixth place out of the 15 remaining candidates.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1LvKcxu