Elizabeth Esty joins Republicans to vote for health insurance bill

Photo: Carol Kaliff Image 1 of / 1 Caption Close Image 1 of 1 Buy photo U.S. rep. Elizabeth Esty U.S. rep. Elizabeth Esty Photo: Carol Kaliff Buy this photo Elizabeth Esty joins Republicans to vote for health insurance bill 1 / 1 Back to Gallery

WASHINGTON -- Rep. Elizabeth Esty, D-Cheshire, was one of 39 House Democrats who broke party ranks Friday and voted for a Republican-sponsored bill that would let insurance companies sell individual health coverage to all comers, even if it falls short of the required standards under the Affordable Care Act.

Esty was the only one of the five Connecticut House members, all Democrats, to endorse the bill, which would allow insurance firms to sell individual coverage plans to existing and new customers, even if the plans fall short of the requirements of the Obamacare law.

The measure sailed through the House by a 261-157 vote and goes to the Senate, where it faces an uncertain fate. President Barack Obama has threatened to veto the measure because, he says, it would allow "insurers to continue to sell new plans that deploy practices such as not offering coverage for people with pre-existing conditions, charging women more than men, and continuing yearly caps on the amount of care that enrollees receive.''

On Thursday, in what proved to be an unsuccessful effort to head off the House vote, Obama tweaked the Affordable Health Care program to allow insurers to sell only to existing customers coverage plans that would be deemed substandard under the new health care law. He met with insurance executives at the White House on Friday afternoon to plan the road ahead.

The twists and turns stem from Obama's promise during the 2012 election campaign that Americans could keep their health insurance coverage if they wanted to. However, after the Obamacare law kicked in Oct. 1, many insurers canceled existing policies because they did not meet the standards of Obamacare and then offered new policies at higher premiums.

The resulting uproar has fueled the Republican-led efforts to amend the program, as the Obama administration tries to resolve the problem -- along with other irksome issues such as the balky website healthcare.gov.

Esty, who noted that she has consistently opposed the many Republican-sponsored efforts to repeal the Affordable Care Act, said she voted for the measure sponsored by Rep. Fred Upton, R-Mich., because it addressed the problem of consumers who have faced cancellation notices from their insurance companies by allowing insurers to provide those plans into 2014.

Esty said she had heard from "small business owners and other affected individuals in central and northwest Connecticut who feel blind-sided by recent cancellation notices from their insurance companies. Additionally, I have heard from many retirees who received cancellation notices of plans that were part of negotiated benefit packages.''

Rep. Jim Himes, D-Greenwich, said he voted "no" because the Upton bill "was just one more attempt to repeal health care reform and would likely raise insurance premiums.''

Rep. Rosa DeLauro, D-New Haven, ripped the Upton bill as "designed to weaken the health care law, and to roll the clock back on all the needed reforms we worked so hard to pass. This legislation would take us back to the unacceptable state of our health care system before we passed the Affordable Care Act." She accused the Republican majority in the House of "trying to put insurers back in the driver's seat, letting them control the health of American families.''

Rep. John Larson, D-East Hartford, voted "no" and said the Upton bill was another Republican effort to scrap Obamacare.

Before the vote, Rep. Greg Walden, R-Ore., chair of the National Republican Congressional Committee that focuses on electing Republican House members in 2014, told reporters that next year's election campaign "will be about the political category 5 hurricane'' surrounding Obamacare.

Email: chuck@hearstdc.com