Republican lawmakers are using a major legal victory to press for answers from the Obama administration on Obamacare payments to insurers.

Leaders from two influential House committees wrote to several agencies that the administration has no excuse for delaying giving them documents about the source of funding for cost-sharing reduction payments. The letters come a few weeks after the House won a major lawsuit that said the administration bypassed Congress to give the cost-sharing payments to insurers.

The cost-sharing reductions are meant to help insurers pay down deductibles and copays for low-income Obamacare patients. However, a federal judge ruled on May 12 that the payments were illegal because they were never appropriated by Congress.

The ruling isn't going into effect, though, as the administration is appealing it.

Stay abreast of the latest developments from nation's capital and beyond with curated News Alerts from the Washington Examiner news desk and delivered to your inbox. Sorry, there was a problem processing your email signup. Please try again later. Processing... Thank you for signing up for Washington Examiner News Alerts. You should receive your first alert soon!

The House Ways and Means and House Energy and Commerce committees have sought information on the payments since February 2015, a few months after the Republican-led House filed the lawsuit.

"Much of the administration's objection to the committees' oversight is seemingly rooted in its purported concerns about disclosing information related to the ongoing litigation brought by the House," one of the letters said.

Now that a judge has ruled, the administration no longer has the excuse to delay providing the information, the letters said.

However, the administration has appealed the ruling by Judge Rosemary Collyer, who was appointed in 2003 by former President George W. Bush.

The lawmakers said that prior documents overturned to the committee were insufficient.

Also from the Washington Examiner DHS disciplines 41 Secret Service agents for Chaffetz leak The Department of Homeland Security Department said Thursday that 41 Secret Service agents are being disciplined, after a watchdog report found personal information from Rep. Jason Chaffetz, R-Utah, was leaked. Last September, the DHS Inspector General confirmed that several Secret Service agents accessed information about Chaffetz, now chairman of the House Oversight Committee, from an application he submitted for a job at the Secret Service in 2003. This information was also "wrongfully" leaked to the press. Of the 57 agents that were reviewed, 41 are "receiving some level of discipline," said DHS Secretary Jeh Johnson in a statement.

Several agencies said they withheld information due to confidentiality issues.

Reps. Fred Upton, R-Mich., and Kevin Brady, R-Texas, wrote the letters. Upton heads Energy and Commerce and Brady heads Ways and Means.

The letters were sent to Treasury Secretary Jacob Lew, director of the Office of Budget and Management Shaun Donovan and Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia Burwell.