There are 9 candidates running for four seats in the Minnesota House of Representatives for Bulletin area districts 41A, 41B, 42A and 42B.

District 41A is made up of Fridley and parts of New Brighton and is currently represented by DFL incumbent Connie Bernardy, who will face Republican-endorsed challenger Jeff Phillips.

District 41B is made up of Columbia Heights, Hilltop, parts of New Brighton and St. Anthony, and is currently represented by DFL incumbent Carolyn Laine, who will face Republican-endorsed Camden Pike and Constitution Party-endorsed Tim Utz.

District 42A is made up of Arden Hills, Mounds View and parts of Shoreview, and is currently represented by DFL incumbent Barb Yarusso, who will face Republican-endorsed challenger Randy Jessup.

District 42B encompasses Little Canada, Vadnais Heights, Shoreview and part of Roseville, and is currently represented by DFL incumbent Jason Isaacson, who will face Republican-endorsed challenger Heidi Gunderson.

The Bulletin asked the candidates to elaborate on their opinions regarding the MNsure health insurance exchange program, which debuted last year under the Affordable Care Act, as well as local transportation and infrastructure funding and their top priorities in office, if elected.

District 41A

Connie Bernardy

Bernardy, 51, of Fridley, is seeking her second consecutive term in the House and her fifth overall. She works part-time for Ramsey County Parks and Recreation and earned a bachelor's degree in communications from the University of Minnesota, Twin Cities. She is married to Dan.

"Putting middle class families, students, and seniors first will be my priority," Bernardy said, regarding her plans for the next two years if she is reelected.

She says she will work to expand early childhood education, support equal pay for women doing equal work and create jobs through transportation projects that will serve those aged "8-98."

Bernardy says, "I know that Minnesota can do better," with regards to MNsure, and advocates that the state make use of "State Innovation Waivers" available in 2017 per the Affordable Care Act.

Using those waivers, Bernardy says the state can give patients more control over their healthcare choices.

Bernardy says she would keep tuition affordable at state colleges and universities while balancing the budget without taking money away from education.

Jeff Phillips is the Republican-endorsed challenger in district 41A. He did not respond to the Bulletin's elections questionnaire by the newspaper's deadline

District 41B

Carolyn Laine Camden Pike Tim Utz

Laine, 68, of Columbia Heights, is seeking her fifth consecutive term in the House. She has a master's degree in psychology from St. Mary's University of Minnesota and works in counseling psychology.

Laine says her top priority going into a possible fifth term is health care. She says she expects the MNsure system to function well for 2015 enrollment, better than it did during its roll-out period, and that she'd work to take steps to improve upon requirements of the Affordable Care Act.

"I will work to go beyond the ACA to a health care system that truly covers all people with comprehensive care according to their ability to pay," Laine said.

Laine says she favors a "percent tax on wholesale fuel costs" to better fund transportation projects, plans to keep in place a higher education tuition freeze and to work on expanding early childhood learning opportunities.

"I will seek changes to our county child protection programs to allow past reports of abuse to be considered when assessing a current report,” Laine said, adding she would work to allow for early voting in elections.

Pike, 27, of St. Anthony, oversees guest services at the Roseville and Woodbury HOM Furniture stores and says he has experience in marketing, public relations, graphic design and editing.

He graduated from St. Anthony Village High School in 2006 and says he has completed some college coursework.

He is not married and this is his first time running for elected office.

Above all else, Pike says he's concerned about Minnesota schools.

"My top priority would be to strengthen our education system, by allowing greater local control, while providing the necessary funding for our schools," Pike said. "I would fight to end unfunded and unnecessary mandates and testing that frustrates administrations, teachers, and students."

Pike says he would do away with MNsure and that he wants to create a tax and regulatory climate in the state that's favorable to companies and employment, in order to stave off what he terms a "mass exodus of businesses and jobs from Minnesota."

Pike says he is in favor of reinvesting in roads and bridges in order to keep state business thriving and says he would not raise the gas tax for infrastructure funding.

Utz, 57, of Columbia Heights, is retired from a career in commercial construction, where he worked as a carpenter, foreman, supervisor and the owner of his own business.

He studied his profession through the Twin Cities Joint Apprenticeship, Associated General Contractors Continuing Education through the carpenters union and through the Carpenters International Training Fund.

He is married to Nadine, and previously ran for the house twice as a Republican, and once before, in 2012, as the Constitution Party candidate.

Utz, discussing infrastructure, said, "As with all aspects of [the] Legislative process, I hold to the strictest view of constitutional restraints on state powers."

From that viewpoint, Utz says there is a constitutionally mandated way the state can tax and spend on infrastructure. He says the state has no constitutional role in healthcare and that "the [MNsure] system should be eliminated."

Utz says his goals, if elected, would be to serve as an open and transparent legislator who abides by strict constitutional restraints, all the while empowering and informing residents of district 41B with respect to their "duty of civic participation."

District 42A

Barb Yarusso Randy Jessup

Jessup, 53, of St. Paul, owns four metro area The UPS Stores and says he's lived in 42A for 16 years. He studied pre-engineering at Bethel University, going on to earn a degree in chemical engineering at the University of Minnesota, where he later obtained an MBA.

This is the first time Jessup has run for elected office. He has been married to Jan for 31 years.

Jobs are a priority for Jessup. He says a bout of unemployment 12 years ago helps him empathize with the under- and unemployed and says if he is elected, he'll prioritize legislation that fosters an "employment-friendly environment in Minnesota."

"Minnesotans have worked together to build some outstanding job-generating companies -- both big and small -- and we need to keep these companies here and add more like them," he says.

Jessup said the roll-out of MNsure was "problematic" and he would like to see both healthcare companies and consumers have more say in how it's run, but he would not seek to end the program.

He is in favor of funding current infrastructure needs, but not in favor of raising taxes for what he called "expansive transportation projects."

Yarusso, 58, of Shoreview, works part-time as a tutor and is seeking her second consecutive term in the House. She earned a PhD in chemical engineering from the University of Wisconsin, Madison, and is married to her husband, David.

Yarusso says there's a "public transit hole" in her district, "both in the existing lack of transit and in planned projects."

"I have advocated for the extension of the bus rapid transit system to the TCAAP (Rice Creek Commons) redevelopment area in the future," she said. "We also need to have a local transit system that can connect residents with major community destinations and the BRT stations when developed." Yarusso says she would favor raising the gas tax in order for it to keep up with inflation, and would like other transportation related taxation to be restructured, to spread funding more equitably around the metro area.

She is in favor of fixing the MNsure website while keeping the program as it is, implementing education policies that have proven to shrink the achievement gap and giving state regulators "the tools needed to address the growing competition for water resources," with respect to groundwater issues.

District 42B

Jason Isaacson Heidi Gunderson

Isaacson, 43, of Little Canada, is finishing his first term in the position. He is married to Cynthia and has a 14-month-old son, Iver. He has a bachelor's degree in political science and a master's in communications, both from North Dakota State University. He is currently working on a doctoral degree in communications from the University of Minnesota, and works full-time as an instructor at Century College in White Bear Lake.

In regards to the MNsure health insurance exchange program, Isaacson says access should be increased across the state, and businesses should be provided "competitive options" in utilizing the program.

Isaacson says his work in office helped to secure state funding for a third part-time lane on Interstate 694. He recommends that new transportation initiatives should be explored, especially in the east metro area. "We must also invest in pragmatic mass transit solutions for the eastern suburbs," he adds.

As for his priorities if he's re-elected, Isaacson says he will have three main priorities for the upcoming legislative session: increasing career and technical training in high schools, expanding a customized training program he developed for employees in the manufacturing industries and lowering property taxes for businesses and individuals.

Gunderson, 41, of Vadnais Heights, has been married to Ron for 19 years and has three children. She has an associate's degree in nursing from St. Catherine University, and is the owner and president of Woody's Rebar Company, Inc., a construction contracting business.

Gunderson says the rise in MNsure rates "has to stop," saying rates will be driven down by competition if more insurance providers are allowed to join the exchange program. Additionally, she says, getting more experts at the table, including adding an insurance representative to the MNsure board, would provide "invaluable" insights.

When asked about transportation, Gunderson says improvements to existing roads and bridges need to be the top priority. "Although I think it is valid to explore alternative methods of transit, we can't ignore the current infrastructure," she says.

Gunderson says her main priority, if elected, will be cutting state spending, adding that the current spending level is "simply unsustainable." Also, she says she will encourage businesses to stay and grow in Minnesota by "cutting red tape" and loosening regulations.

Election Day is Nov. 4. Most polls will be open from 7 a.m. to 8 p.m. To find your polling place, visit http://pollfinder.sos.state.mn.us.

Mike Munzenrider can be reached at mmunzenrider@lillienews.com or 651-748-7824. Follow him on Twitter @mmunzenrider. Johanna Holub can be reached at jholub@lillienews.com or 651-748-7813. Follow her on Twitter @jholubnews.