U.S. Rep. Paul Ryan (R-Wis.) would be the rare speaker with no prior House leadership experience. Credit: Getty Images

By of the

If Paul Ryan is going to succeed as speaker of the House, he is going to have to handle three daunting divides that make this arguably the toughest job in American politics today.

One is a tactical divide among House Republicans between a more purist and militant minority and a more pragmatic majority.

One is an extreme ideological divide between the two parties that has produced century-high levels of polarization.

And one is a divided government in which a Democratic President, a GOP Senate constrained by the filibuster rule and a Republican House are almost never on the same page.

Can any speaker succeed under these conditions? Can Ryan?

Here are some reasons to think the Janesville Republican might overcome the obstacles before him, as well as some reasons to think he might not.

First, why Ryan might succeed:

He has shown skills a speaker needs. Ryan would be the rare speaker with no prior House leadership experience. But as chairman of two committees, he has shown an ability to rally his caucus behind controversial legislation, has been a prolific fundraiser (for both himself and for the Republican National Committee) and has been adept and at ease with the media.

“Paul has the communication skills,” says Wisconsin GOP colleague Rep. Jim Sensenbrenner, who calls outgoing Speaker John Boehner “a technician and fundraiser.”

Sensenbrenner says Ryan’s skills will be especially important when it comes to satisfying the party’s frustrated base that House Republicans are doing everything they can to advance a conservative agenda despite the Democrats’ control of the White House and their ability to use the filibuster to block bills in the GOP-controlled Senate.

“The House — and Boehner specifically – has ended up being blamed for not being able to lay legislation on the president’s desk for him to veto,” says Sensenbrenner, who says one of Ryan’s political tasks will be to help keep the GOP base energized, rather than angry at its own leadership, so it turns out in the 2016 election.

His colleagues like him. Ryan is collegial and has good relationships across the aisle, which could count for something on those occasions when Republicans and Democrats have to work together. Democrats hate his budgets and Medicare proposals, but they don’t hate the author. In Wisconsin, you can’t find a Democrat who will say a good word about Republican Gov. Scott Walker. Not so with Republican Ryan.

“He has not been afraid to reach across the aisle to see if there is common ground,” Democratic Rep. Ron Kind of La Crosse says.

“I disagree with him on so many things, but this is a guy that keeps his word, and that is worth its weight in gold around here,” says Rep. Gwen Moore (D-Milwaukee).

The GOP caucus has managed to overcome its divisions in getting behind Ryan. That’s a start. The dysfunction among House Republicans is not just the product of an unruly caucus but leadership failures as well, says Catholic University political scientist Matthew Green, who wrote a book about the speakership. He says Boehner was erratic in how he punished party renegades and allowed alienation to brew to the point where there was not only dissent in the caucus but organized dissent in the form of the 40-member House Freedom Caucus. That was fatal.

“Boehner’s leadership style has contributed to these divisions,” Green says. “A lot of folks have bought into this narrative that the Freedom Caucus is a perfectly cohesive group of bullies or terrorists, saying, ‘You must do this or else.’” Green says that some of them have shown signs of flexibility, including their agreement to back Ryan without insisting he agree to a long list of demands.

“That’s the kind of negotiation that makes a party work, and that allows it to keep its factions together,” says Green.

Ryan “was able to unify diverse forces in the Republican conference this week. I was honestly surprised he was able to do that,” Sensenbrenner said last week. He is one of the most conservative members of the House but a critic of the oppositional approach of the Freedom Caucus.

Republicans have a powerful political motivation to avoid a governing crisis.

As Sensenbrenner warns, “if we continue on the path we’re on, we’re going to end up taking a shellacking in the election.”

Ryan thinks the job is doable, and he’s a smart guy. Could he be wrong? Sure. But he doesn’t have a history of miscalculating. Every big career decision has worked out pretty well for him: using the job of House budget chair to become the domestic agenda-setter for his party; not running for Senate; not running for governor; passing up previous chances to run for House leadership.

“Despite being considered in many ways a policy nerd or whatever, he’s actually pretty thoughtful politically,” said Steve King, a Republican National Committee member from Wisconsin who has known Ryan since before he entered Congress.

Interviewed before Ryan committed to the speaker’s race, King said Ryan would do it if he thought there was “not only a good chance, but it’s pretty certain” he could make it work.

And now, some reasons why Ryan might not succeed:

The hard-line House Freedom Caucus isn’t going away. A large majority of its members have agreed to back Ryan for speaker, but it remains capable of massive disruption. It’s unclear exactly how Ryan will treat all its demands for changes in the way House Republicans do business, and how the group will respond if it doesn’t get what it wants.

“We know what the Freedom Caucus is against but we don’t know what the Freedom Caucus is for,” says Sensenbrenner. “Therein lies the problem.”

He’s not a magician. There are real questions about whether the House GOP caucus is governable right now under any speaker. For some GOP lawmakers and for some conservatives outside Congress, almost any deal or compromise with Democrats is a capitulation.

Yet Congress needs to pass funding bills and a debt-ceiling fix that will require some Democratic votes.

That will challenge the unity of the GOP caucus.

“There is a group over there that is incapable of getting to yes,” says Democrat Kind. “As the majority party, they do have a responsibility to govern. I don’t know if Paul is going to be able to correct that situation.”

Ryan will have to lead on a broader set of issues than he did as a committee chairman and master new skills. Ryan’s focus has always been on economic, budget and fiscal issues, not social issues or foreign policy.

“It’s one thing to be a policy specialist, but when you’re speaker, you’re going to have to deal with a whole range of issues that may be outside your comfort zone,” says Green, the political scientist.

Ryan also will have to learn the art of using both carrots and sticks to enforce discipline in this caucus.

And he’ll have to meet one of the true tests of a successful speakership, says Green, which is to “pass legislation that frames issues in ways that help his party and the presidential candidate of his party even if they don’t become law.”

One thing that both Republicans and Democrats can agree on is that the job of speaker is so challenging right now that Ryan’s decision to seek it is a huge personal gamble.

Democrat Gwen Moore says she walked over to Ryan on the House floor about two weeks ago after the push began in the GOP caucus to draft him for speaker.

“I was concerned about him on a personal level, as a colleague and as a friend … that were he to take this job, he would inherit the same 40 or so Freedom Caucus people and that it would be no different for him,” Moore said. “I told him I was very concerned it was a fool’s mission.”

Follow Craig Gilbert on Twitter @WisVoter