VATICAN CITY, VATICAN - MARCH 13: A woman holds rosary beads while she prays and waits for smoke to emanate from the chimney on the roof of the Sistine Chapel which will indicate whether or not the College of Cardinals have elected a new Pope on March 13, 2013 in Vatican City, Vatican. Pope Benedict XVI's successor is being chosen by the College of Cardinals in Conclave in the Sistine Chapel. The 115 cardinal-electors, meeting in strict secrecy, will need to reach a two-thirds-plus-one vote majority to elect the 266th Pontiff. (Photo by Dan Kitwood/Getty Images)

4558741

In letters first obtained by The Daily Caller News Foundation, Bishop of Lansing Earl Boyea and Cardinal Raymond Burke endorsed Christ Medicus Foundation CURO, a Catholic healthcare sharing network that allows members to be exempt from the Obamacare penalty and the moral objections many religious observers take with the legislation.

The Catholic church leaders called for a transformation to protect human life from the “bureaucratic, coercive, and secular” healthcare culture and the “moral problems” of the Affordable Care Act.

“I, as an episcopal advisor to CURO, certainly offer you my best wishes for this venture and pray that it will meet the needs of those who are most deeply concerned with the moral problems associated with ACA,” Boyea wrote in the letter.

David Wilson is the co-founder of CMF CURO, the Catholic network that allows users to pool resources to cover health costs in over 40 states. He said the Obama administration doesn’t take religious concerns about the contraception mandate seriously and has gone after how people practice their faith in their daily lives.

“This administration has been more aggressive with it than any we’ve seen before,” Wilson told TheDCNF. “In the case of the HHS mandate, one just has to conclude that the administration doesn’t take those concerns seriously at all. We shouldn’t accept being marginalized.”

Hobby Lobby won a landmark supreme court case last year that allowed the company to get a religious exemption to the Obamacare mandate that they provide insurance covering contraceptives, including those that can destroy embryos.

“CMF CURO is an important part of this transformation insofar as it seeks to transform the healthcare culture from one which is bureaucratic, coercive, and secular, to one which is rooted in solidarity, the primacy of the family, individual responsibility, and in the person of Jesus Christ,” Burke wrote.

The religious right has been taking hits recently as they fight a losing battle over wedding vendors, cake, pizza and gay weddings. Recent religious freedom laws in Indiana and Arkansas that would have not likely been controversial a decade ago sparked a firestorm that led the states’ leaders to back down.

Follow Casey on Twitter and like him on Facebook

Content created by The Daily Caller News Foundation is available without charge to any eligible news publisher that can provide a large audience. For licensing opportunities of our original content, please contact [email protected].