Virginia Groups Seek Public Pressure for Medicaid Expansion



President Obama watching the results from a previous Supreme Court case on his signature healthcare law. Virginia healthcare reform supporters want members of the public to push lawmakers to expand Medicaid. Photo by Pete Souza/The Whitehouse/Wikimedia. President Obama watching the results from a previous Supreme Court case on his signature healthcare law. Virginia healthcare reform supporters want members of the public to push lawmakers to expand Medicaid. Photo by Pete Souza/The Whitehouse/Wikimedia.

June 29, 2015

RICHMOND, Va. - With the major legal challenge done, Virginia healthcare reform groups now aim to put public pressure on lawmakers to expand Medicaid.



Last week, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled against a legal challenge to the Affordable Care Act. Now supporters hope to convince Virginia lawmakers to take the option under Obamacare to expand the number of working poor who qualify for Medicaid.



Karen Cameron, director with Virginia Consumer Voices for Health Care, would like the General Assembly to hear from folks in the coverage gap - people with too much income for current Medicaid, but too poor to get a tax credit in the health insurance exchanges.



"People should contact their members of the General Assembly and let them know why closing the coverage gap is important," says Cameron. "We can make others, including our decision makers aware of the diversity of people in the coverage gap and the circumstances that have put them there."



According to federal and state figures, 15 million people have gained healthcare coverage nationally - 285,000 in Virginia. Another 195,000 in the gap would be covered if the state expanded Medicaid.



Republicans in Congress and at the state level have worked to repeal or dismantle healthcare reform, arguing it would cost too much or raise the cost of care too high. But according to the Congressional Budget Office the law will soon reduce the deficit by $45 billion a year.



Michael Cassidy, president with The Commonwealth Institute, says reform is working - both increasing the number of people covered, and holding down the overall cost of care.



"It's time for Virginia lawmakers to recognize that health reform is working, abandon their efforts to undermine it and take advantage of the opportunities that health reform offers right here in Virginia," says Cassidy.



According to Cameron, the Virginia economy is losing about $2 billion by not expanding Medicaid, and both the state budget and the state hospital system would benefit from fewer people who couldn't pay for their care.

Dan Heyman, Public News Service - VA