Markets find a way to grow, especially when government dangles a carrot in one hand and a stick in the other.

Obamacare has always faced strong opposition, with Texas politicos often leading the resistance. Yet three more insurers recently joined the health exchange serving the Dallas area.

Now, seven insurance companies offer almost twice as many health plans as a year ago, with a wide range of premiums, deductibles and provider networks.

That’s progress, because more choice is usually better for consumers. For 2015, the average premium in Dallas County increased just 3 percent for one of the most popular offers on the exchange, according to the Kaiser Family Foundation.

Most people still get health insurance through employers or Medicare. But a private plan in a health exchange may be the only option for millions locked out or priced out of the individual market.

While the health law still faces serious challenges in Washington and the Supreme Court, it’s notable that insurers are expanding, not pulling back. Like doctors and hospitals, they’re acting as if reform is here to stay.

“You can’t sit this out if you’re an insurance company,” said Marinan Williams, CEO of Scott & White Health Plan, which just launched 12 plans in North Texas. “It’s too big an opportunity.”

More than 3 million Texans are eligible for coverage in the individual market, Kaiser estimates. In the first year, nearly 734,000 Texans signed up, which leaves many potential customers up for grabs.

California, whose leaders embraced the Affordable Care Act, signed up almost twice as many residents in its exchange.

Texas has the highest uninsured rate in the nation, with about 30 percent of working-age adults having no coverage. The exchange, run through HealthCare.gov, is intended to address some of that.

Open enrollment continues until mid-February, but for coverage to begin Jan. 1, people must sign up by Dec. 15. Brokers suggest renewing or choosing a new plan before the deadline rush.

The exchange also offers subsidies to help pay premiums. This year, 84 percent of Texans on the exchange received a subsidy, with an average tax credit of $233 a month.

If that doesn’t entice people, how about the prospect of a fine? This year, the penalty for not having insurance is $95 per adult or 1 percent of annual income (up to the cost of a low-price plan). Next year, penalties will range from $350 to 2 percent of income.

“Over time, people in Texas will be even more likely to engage,” said Elizabeth Carpenter, director of Avalere Health, a Washington consulting firm.

Not so ‘skinny’

Another group of customers is feeling a bigger sticker shock. They previously purchased older, “skinny” health plans that are being phased out. Blue Cross Blue Shield of Texas, the state’s largest insurer, said it won’t renew less comprehensive plans.

A 57-year-old woman told me her premiums would double if she stayed with the same Blue Cross option. The lowest-price offer in the exchange was over 50 percent higher. A middle-aged couple faces a 38 percent increase.

That’s largely the added cost of guaranteed insurance. Under law, everyone qualifies, not just healthy applicants. Policies also must include what are classified as essential benefits, such as maternity and mental health, which were excluded from earlier, skinnier plans.

Last year, President Barack Obama told insurers they could extend coverage that didn’t comply with the health law. He was under fire for having promised that if you liked your insurance, you could keep it.

In Texas, most people buying outside the exchange renewed their plans last December, locking in less coverage and lower prices. Some small businesses and individuals continue to find workarounds.

Jacqueline St. Hilaire, president of the Texas Association of Health Underwriters, said her premiums rose just $21, to $235 a month.

“It’s fantastic compared to what others are facing,” said the Richardson broker, who’s 51.

She bought from a provider that’s not on the exchange here. Brokers can use quote engines to search the state for the best deals. That strategy may work for people who don’t qualify for a subsidy, such as individuals whose household income will top $46,680 next year.

Others will turn to exchanges to maximize their subsidy. Brokers, insurers and navigators can help with the process, at no extra charge. On its website, St. Hilaire’s group lists 266 agents who specialize in individual plans on the exchange.

A learning curve

Alone or not, you’re better off if you shop carefully. Seven insurers offer 64 plans in the Dallas area. A 40-year-old nonsmoker can pay $213 a month to $666, with annual deductibles ranging from zero to $6,600.

There’s a learning curve, to be sure. Consider what happened when Texas began allowing competition among electricity retailers.

After deregulation, retailers created electric plans with discount prices and various lock-in periods. One year later, just 18 percent of residential customers had switched to a cheaper offer. Today, over 3 in 4 have made a change.

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.