It’s been a busy couple of years for Lonnie Carter.

He’s negotiated with environmentalists over the best way to remove ash ponds from Santee Cooper’s coal-fired power plants. He’s implemented new solar energy policies and worked with local officials to lure Volvo Cars to Berkeley County. He called for removal of the Confederate flag at the Statehouse following the AME Mother Emmanuel shootings.

Through it all, the common thread in Carter’s work life has been consensus.

In nearly 12 years as president and CEO of Moncks Corner-based Santee Cooper, a state-owned electric and water utility and economic development agency, Carter has sought to form partnerships that advance the best interests of customers, community and business.

A graduate of The Citadel and lifelong South Carolinian, Carter is past-chairman of the Charleston Regional Develop-ment Alliance. The S.C. Chamber of Commerce named him its 2015 business leader of the year.

Q: A brief description of your business?

A: Santee Cooper is South Carolina’s largest power producer, its largest renewable energy generator and the ulti- mate source of electricity for 2 million people across the state. Santee Cooper is a public power utility owned by the state and it receives no tax dollars. It offers low-cost, reliable and environmentally responsible electricity and water services, as well as innovative economic development initiatives.

Q: Who is your favorite business leader and why?

A: The late John Rainey, for- mer chairman of Santee Coo- per’s board and more recently chair of the S.C. Board of Economic Advisors. John practiced and preached excellent business principles, and he was a man of utmost integrity. You may not have always agreed with him, but you could always count on him to do the right thing.

Q: Who is your favorite leader of any kind and why?

A: There’s no way I could pick one favorite. I note when people are effective leaders in challenging times, and that’s an ever-growing list. Two recent examples would be Gov. Nikki Haley and North Charleston Mayor Keith Summey. Gov. Haley during the AME Mother Emanuel shooting and related Confederate flag controversy, and Mayor Summey during the Walter Scott shooting. These were both significant tragedies, and yet these leaders both managed to build coalitions so they could respond effectively, comprehensively and with good community buy-in.

Q: What is the best leadership advice you’ve received?

A: To be myself. The CEO’s role is to set forth a vision, communicate it and get buy-in from others to help achieve it. I can’t do that effectively if I’m not honest and true to myself.

Q: What is the best book on business or leadership that you’ve read and why?

A: “True North,” by Bill George. He advocates for authentic leadership. Authentic leaders remain grounded and stick to their principles in the face of criticism. And leaders will certainly encounter criticism.

Q: What other business publications do you read?

A: I’m a big fan of Bloomberg and have the Bloomberg app on my phone. I also read the Wall Street Journal.

Q: What are the most important decisions you make as a leader at your business?

A: The most important decisions I make are hiring and promoting good people to round out my leadership team. Nobody runs an organization this size alone, and so your team is critical to your company’s success.

Q: What is the biggest challenge facing business leaders?

A: In the energy industry, the biggest challenge is navi-gating what has become a patchwork quilt of regulations. Regulators are increasingly acting without benefit of a broad, overarching policy. It creates a lot of inefficiencies in the process and in the results.

Q: What was your biggest mistake as a leader and what did it teach you?

A: I was involved in organization planning several years ago (outside of Santee Cooper), and although I thought the group was moving down a harmful path, I didn’t speak up. The organization did suffer. I learned that it’s better to speak up, even if I’m wrong, than to sit quietly by and let the wrong decision be made because all points of view aren’t considered.

Q: What was your biggest success as a leader and what did it teach you?

A: I come back to the impor-tance of picking a good leader-ship team, and I have a good team that is achieving great results for Santee Cooper, our customers and South Carolina.

Q: What are you doing to grow the next leader in your company?

A: Santee Cooper has a year-long leadership development program. In addition to passing on information about the company and the industry, we’re also teaching participants how to be good leaders. It’s a good program, and many of its graduates are now running critical departments around the company.

Q: How do you define a great business?

A: A great business is one that can simultaneously bring value to its market and provide a return to its investors.

Q: What’s your favorite thing about doing business in this region?

A: I’m a native of South Carolina. I grew up here, attended college here and have spent my entire career here. I love this state, and I am constantly impressed by the people and the work ethic here. People here want to provide a good day’s work. South Carolina is a business-friendly state because of our people.

Q: What is your least favorite thing about doing business in this region?

A: I would like to see us do a better job improving infrastructure. Many businesses talk about the road conditions here, and that is one area. There are others, too, though. We need a natural gas pipeline serving the eastern part of the state, so that we have ready access to natural gas as a fuel source for electricity. That will be important as the region continues to grow.

Q: Name one thing government could do to help your business?

A: Streamline and speed up permitting processes.

Q: Name one thing government could stop doing to help your business?

A: We need to move away from the extreme partisanship that too often creates roadblocks to good government and distracts elected officials from addressing the really critical issues of today.