DHHS Commissioner: MaineCare Enrollment On The Decline

Recently released data from the Department of Health and Human Services shows the number of people enrolling in MaineCare could be declining over the next few years. But whether that’s good news or bad news depends on who you ask.

DHHS Commissioner Mary Mayhew says the MaineCare program has been in a state of financial crisis for decades, but that could be changing.

“We’ve moved from a a period of focusing on bailing out the boat to now charting a course,” Mayhew said Monday.

Across the country, statistics show enrollment in Medicaid is increasing by an average of roughly 5%. Here in Maine, it’s a different story, where MaineCare growth is almost nonexistent. Recent projections show the program will grow by less than two-tenths of one percent in State Fiscal Year 2014 and for 2015 those numbers could actually decrease slightly.

Mayhew says the lower enrollment and costs are a direct result of maine lawmakers’ decision not to expand MaineCare under the Affordable Care Act.

“We don’t live in a world of unlimited resources financially. We have to manage this program based upon core priorities and a vision for the type of program we want,” Mayhew said.

Mayhew and Governor LePage’s Mainecare vision is a program that prioritizes care for the elderly and developmentally disabled. Mayhew says the flat-lining enrollment coupled with the repayment of a half-billion-dollars in MaineCare debt to maine hospitals in 2013 are driving forces in the state’s credit rating being upgraded. That puts the state in position to get better rates on bonds to fund projects at Maine Maritime Academy, National Guard armories and highway and bridge construction.

But Democratic leaders, who lost a highly publicized battle to expand Medicaid in Maine, aren’t entirely convinced. Assistant House Majority Leader Jeff McCabe says it’s Augusta lawmakers, not the LePage administration, who deserve credit for the higher credit rating.

“We sat at the table, we helped pay the hospitals back. We’ve balanced budgets. We’ve come up with good investments through bonds. We’ve made smart investments here in the state of Maine. And we’ve also tried to balance a governor who’s irrational, erratic and volatile. Which also contributes to our bond rating as well,” McCabe said.

As for the declining MaineCare numbers.

“I think anytime we can sort of slow the growth of MaineCare, if people are getting private insurance or if we’re helping people receive access to see a family doctor that’s a good thing. But if we’re just kicking people off of MaineCare rolls who actually need the service, who are seeking service and just not paying the hospitals, that’s a bad thing.”

Mayhew also spoke about the termination of the state’s contract with the Alexander Group. The Rhode Island based consulting firm was hired to analyze Maine’s current welfare system and the potential impacts of expanding the MaineCare program under the Affordable Care Act. According to findings from the Alexander Group’s report, MaineCare expansion would cost Maine more than $800 million over the next decade.

Last month, it was revealed that parts of the report were plagiarized from other reports. Mayhew said the fact that parts of the report were found to be plagiarized that won’t stop the department from using those findings to shape policy.

“Well I want to be clear, there is still value in the work and the report that they did, Mayhew said. “There was poor performance around attributing resources upon which their reports were based. But we still found tremendous value in the expansion report that they did. And the operational report they provided to help shape the direction for all of the welfare programs we still intend to continue to review and evaluate as it relates to changes in the department.”