Buy Photo The township expects to receive a start date for the demolition work next week. (Photo: Mary Frank/Staff Photographer )Buy Photo

Demolition is anticipated soon on a landmark downtown building that was left in ruins after a fire on May 15 at the corner of Robbins and Washington streets.

Township Administrator Paul J. Shives said municipal officials met with representatives of the property owners earlier this week. The owners are part of a real estate partnership called 27 Washington Street Associates, which had 15 commercial or public tenants leasing space inside the complex.

Shives said the owners have hired a demolition contractor and are in the process of disconnecting all the utilities, the first in a series of steps that will culminate in the knocking down of the two-story brick structure. Another meeting with officials is scheduled next week, at which time the township expects to receive a start date for the work.

“They want to proceed as quickly as possible to demolish the structure,” Shives said.

Though investigators have ruled the fire an accident, no definitive explanation for its cause has been reached. The fire is thought to have originated above a drop ceiling in the rear of East Coast Gamers, one of the previous commercial tenants.

On the night of the fire, East Coast Gamers owner Michael Marino said he received a call from his alarm company at 11:17 p.m. to inform him that a motion sensor had been tripped inside the store.

He called a friend who was in town and asked him if he could stop by the business to see whether anything appeared amiss. The friend called Marino back a short time later. There was smoke billowing from the roof. He told Marino to get there as soon as possible.

After the fire investigation was over, Marino said, he was informed the wiring in an old electrical junction box above the ceiling panels had failed. The wiring was too frail to be energized, he was told. The building was constructed in 1916, judging from the date he noticed on the cement casting around the old steam boiler in the basement.

Erik Larsen: 732-682-9359 or elarsen@app.com

BEHIND THE NEWS

About 100 volunteer firefighters responded to the May 15 fire in downtown Toms River, which at one point had threatened to set ablaze the entire block between Robbins and Main streets. Water had to be drafted from the river to fight the flames.

In addition to East Coast Gamers, 14 other businesses that occupied the two-story brick building were damaged, including Capone’s Gourmet Pizza and Pasta, and Absolute Bail Bonds.

The offices of Hometown Heroes, a nonprofit charity group that supports local communities in times of need, also was destroyed.

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1m0m0qO