As former Vermont Democratic Gov. Howard Dean might have said, it's all over but the shouting. In just a few hours, Iowa voters will begin streaming into the crucial first-in-the-nation caucuses, start picking delegates to this year's national party conventions and in general let the world know whether the pollsters and pundits are right or if they should hang their heads in shame.

In previous years, the polling data was reliably predictable. This year it's in doubt, partly because there's been little predictive power in polls the world over for about the last two years. From the referendum on Scottish independence to the most recent Canadian national election to last November's Kentucky gubernatorial race, what the polls said before each election didn't match up with the eventual results.

A lot of people who have considerable input in shaping how the American public is looking at this election just don't want the outcome to be what the polling suggests. They don't really want New York developer Donald J. Trump to be the GOP front-runner and they don't want Vermont Sen. Bernie Sanders to finish anywhere near former Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton, let alone beat her. It would be too much of a disruption to the established political order.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the 2016 Presidential Elections]

A lot of things could happen tonight in Iowa. The army of voters expected to turn out for Trump could prove as illusory as the one Gen. George Patton was supposed to lead across the English Channel to a landing at Calais. Texas Sen. Ted Cruz, who has been nipping at Trump's heals, could fall out of the top three as the result of some last minute fumbles or he could emerge the big winner by nearly tying or actually coming out ahead of Trump. Kentucky Sen. Rand Paul, whose father's supporters know how the caucuses work and who four years ago used them to take over the GOP delegation headed to the Tampa convention, could surprise everyone by finishing in the money.

No one really knows; there are just too many variables in play to make any kind of accurate predictions.

What we do know is that field of candidates for the GOP nomination will narrow. Trump has an event scheduled in Little Rock for later in the week in which it is expected that former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee will quit the race and throw his support to the businessman. Former Pennsylvania Sen. Rick Santorum, who actually won the Iowa caucuses in 2012, is also expected to drop out shortly after Iowa, but only he knows to whom he will throw his support. Trump's one-time backing for the practice known as partial-birth abortion, which Santorum crusaded against, may make it difficult for him to follow Huckabee's lead.

Things are not any clearer on the Democratic side. Sanders has been surging. Some polls have him, within the margin of error, ahead of Clinton. As someone said long ago, you can trust the trend lines even if you can't trust the numbers. Is he this election's Eugene McCarthy, about to topple the 900 pound gorilla in the race by running better than expected, win or lose – or have expectations for a strong Iowa finished been raised so high that Clinton will be able to boast, no matter how well Sanders runs, she beat off the competition as long as he finishes behind her?

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on Ted Cruz]

The Gallup Poll out Monday says Republicans and Democrats agree that the four big issues in the campaign are terrorism and national security, the economy, employment and jobs, and health care and the Affordable Care Act. Gun control, government regulation of Wall Street and the banks, gay marriage and abortion, and global climate change, meanwhile, are all near the bottom of both barrels. It's an issue split that would seem to favor the more established candidates going into the fall election while squeezing out those on the fringe like Sanders or Trump.