Monarch product leads CU to 3-0 soccer win

Throughout her first three seasons with the Colorado soccer team, Carly Bolyard was an important player for the Buffaloes. Still, she and her coaches knew she had more to give.

"We challenged her in the offseason that she hasn't had her best moments yet," Buffs head coach Danny Sanchez said.

So far this season, the Buffs are getting Bolyard at her best.

Bolyard's goal in the fourth minute Sunday sparked the Buffs to a 3-0 win against Detroit at Prentup Field. Brooke Rice and Emily Paxton added second-half goals for the Buffs (4-2), who snapped a two-game losing skid.

A senior, Bolyard has a team-leading three goals this season, a dramatic improvement for the Monarch High School product, who had only two career goals coming into the year.

CU's Darcy Jerman, back, and Detroit's Kristen Tobin use their heads to advance the ball during Sunday's game. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

"I'm more confident as a senior and I want to be a leader on this team," Bolyard said. "I've always wanted to be a senior leader."

Bolyard scored a goal in her first career game, as a freshman in 2011, but waited more than two years for her second one. That goal was the game-winner against BYU during the second round of the NCAA Tournament last season.

In between those goals, Bolyard went through a tough trial. During her sophomore season, she suffered a torn ACL in her knee. That ended her sophomore season early and produced some lingering effects last season.

"Coming back from an ACL, it was difficult, but it was a journey and a battle and a challenge, and I did it," she said.

Advertisement

In previous years, Bolyard also had some pretty good players in front of her, such as Anne Stuller, Hayley Hughes and Amy Barczuk.

"It was hard to get my opportunities (to score), but they were great role models to me, actually," Bolyard said. "Every time I was on the field with them, they knew what they were doing and I just wanted to follow what they were doing."

Now, it's Bolyard's turn, and the Buffs are benefiting from having her on the field.

"She's playing with a lot of confidence," Sanchez said. "Towards the end of last year, she was playing really well. (But this year), she's her most fit and playing with her most confidence. A lot of times in soccer, that's the key.

"She's a good player and she's in good form right now, so we want to continue to build off of that."

As a team, the Buffs are hoping to build off of Sunday's win, especially with rival Denver coming to Boulder on Friday.

"We needed to come out today and play well and I thought we did," Sanchez said. "We're glad we got the win, but this is a huge week for us in regards to the Colorado Cup and obviously Denver is a big rival for us."

Notable

CU's Brittney Stark, left, collides with Detroit goalkeeper Marina Manzo during the Buffs' 3-0 win Sunday at Prentup Field. For more photos from the game: BuffZone.com. (Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera)

The Buffs out-shot the Titans 21-4 and had a 12-2 advantage in shots on goal. ... Rice, a senior, scored her first goal as a Buff. She transferred from Santa Clara last season. ... Paxton's goal was her first of the year and fifth of her career. ... Sophomore goalkeeper Kenzie Tillitt made her season debut, playing the final 15 minutes in relief of Kate Scheele. Tillitt made the first two saves of her career. ... CU's two-game skid was its first losing streak since 2012.

Contact staff writer Brian Howell at howellb@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/BrianHowell33.