But Mr. Riley’s political longevity in an age of anti-incumbent sentiment and spikes of racial tumult can be explained, in part, by his deft balancing of tradition and progress in Charleston, a 345-year-old city that has long valued the former and increasingly hungers for the latter.

The complexities and contradictions of such a balancing act can be glaring: On Thursday afternoon, Mr. Riley called Lee, the Confederate general, “a person of great character.” But he also spoke of the transformative effect of watching Dr. King deliver his “I Have a Dream” speech on live television in the summer of 1963.

“I became more and more aware of the injustices that African-Americans had been subjected to, and how wrong that was for them, and our country,” he said. “And I wasn’t alone.”

A quest for balance has also marked Mr. Riley’s stewardship of Charleston’s historic peninsula. An internationally renowned student of architecture and urban planning, he has been one of the country’s most ardent advocates of a brand of urbanism that seeks to guide the future of cities with an eye to what worked in the past: walkable streets, mixed-use developments, and thoughtful buildings and parks that offer what he calls “the inspiration of the public realm.”

Mr. Riley has long argued that such design can inspire the kind of civic buy-in that he has hoped to extend to blacks — indeed, to people of all races here.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

If nothing else, his application of those principles has burnished the beauty of historic Charleston. The downtown, shabby in spots and somewhat overlooked when Mr. Riley took office, now attracts four million visitors a year. People come to stroll among the meticulously refurbished historic buildings, partake in a thriving restaurant scene and enjoy the many amenities championed by Mr. Riley — a waterfront park, an aquarium and a minor-league baseball stadium that bears his name and is nicknamed The Joe. Many of these projects were famously micromanaged by Mr. Riley, who has been known to worry over the color of gravel and the degree of the incline of park benches.

Photo

In an effort to spread these ideas, Mr. Riley in 1986 founded the Mayors’ Institute on City Design, whose stated goal is to train mayors to be the “chief urban designers” of their cities.

“He really took the responsibility of a city’s design to heart,” said Mayor Mick Cornett of Oklahoma City, a Republican who has participated in the institute’s planning sessions. “The care of the architecture that you’re handing to the next generation. Just taking care of it, and enhancing it, and adding to it — that’s a lot different than making sure the buses run on time.”

In his new biography, “The Mayor: Joe Riley and the Rise of Charleston,” Brian Hicks, a local news columnist, recounts that when Mr. Riley marched to Columbia in 2000 to call for the Confederate flag’s removal from the capitol, he was forced to wear a bulletproof vest after receiving threats. Later that year, the legislature moved the flag off the capitol dome to a place in front of the building.

The flag would not come down for good until July, after the Charleston massacre prompted a backlash. Mr. Riley watched from the capitol steps as it was lowered for the last time.

Despite his successes, Mr. Riley also leaves office amid lingering notes of pain and paradox in Charleston. The Rev. Joseph A. Darby, the presiding elder of the Beaufort District of the African Methodist Episcopal Church, is among those who wonder if the muted response after the church shootings was part of what he called the city’s “raging politeness,” a reticence to talk about its deepest and most complicated problems.

Mr. Darby is also among those who say the success of Mr. Riley’s revitalization efforts has increased housing costs and driven a number of working-class African-Americans out of Charleston, particularly on the peninsula in the heart of the city. Blacks made up 41 percent of the population in 1990, but by 2010, the number had dropped to 25 percent. Some neighborhoods in the city core have lost half of their black residents since 2000, according to a report by The Post and Courier, a daily newspaper.

“He’s done well in improving the diversity of the city, and being open to all members of the community,” Mr. Darby said. “He hasn’t been able to stop the gentrification.”

Photo

Mr. Riley said the numbers could be misleading. Among other things, he said, some blacks have been lured to suburbia, but not necessarily forced out. And he points to statistics that show that the city has produced more than 9,800 units of affordable housing during his administration.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the traditionally black East Side neighborhood, there is a mixture of respect for the mayor and a concern about the city’s demographic change.

Al Smith, a 62-year-old painter, pointed to a house that used to rent for $600 per month. “Now that white folks own it, it costs $2,200,” he said. “They squeezing us out like rats.”

Three of the six candidates who competed to replace Mr. Riley were black. But the two candidates headed to the runoff — John Tecklenburg, a businessman, and State Representative Leon Stavrinakis — are white.

Both have praised Mr. Riley, and their quarrels revolve largely around strategies for managing the city’s success: Mr. Tecklenburg has called for a one-year moratorium on hotel construction on the peninsula, an idea Mr. Stavrinakis rejects.

Upon retirement, Mr. Riley plans to return to the Citadel, the Charleston military academy from which he graduated in 1964, where a chair in American government and public policy has been established in his honor.

Mr. Riley has also been named the building chairman of the International African American Museum, his last grand, and as yet unrealized, vision for his city. As much as 60 percent of the Africans brought to America during the slave trade era entered through South Carolina Lowcountry ports, and Mr. Riley said it was the city’s “duty” to present their largely untold stories to the world.

“I won’t rest,” he said, “until that’s built.”