The consequences of an evenly numbered – and too often evenly divided – Supreme Court grew more apparent last week as justices ventured into strange legal territory, taking on a role quite different from what the nation’s founders envisioned.

Rather than serving as the final arbiter of constitutional questions, the court is suddenly acting like an arbitrator, telling both sides try to work things out. That may strike some as a nice change of pace for a litigious society. But it is not the high court’s role.

Worse, this jury-rigged solution obscures a deeper issue: Our 229-year-old system of checks and balances is breaking down because of the continued refusal of Senate Republicans to consider President Barack Obama’s nominee for the open ninth seat on the High Court.

The court failed last week to rule on the merits of a case brought by religiously-affiliated non-profit employers who object to the Affordable Care Act’s requirement that they provide female workers with contraception coverage in their health insurance. The Obama administration devised an accommodation: Non-profits could ask for a waiver, and women could still be covered. But some employers objected, saying that even applying for a waiver violates their religious beliefs if it ultimately enables women to obtain contraception. Seven cases in which lower courts around the country supported the administration’s system were before the High Court.

With the court split between four conservatives and four liberals since the death of Justice Antonin Scalia, a 4-4 ruling would have effectively upheld the lower courts’ decisions. Instead, the court punted, saying there appeared to be enough consensus on a possible compromise for the matter to be settled.

However solomonic that may seem, it’s not how the court is supposed to work. It’s there to provide clarity on what is and isn’t constitutional, not to say, “Well, some say yes, some say no. Who are we to judge?”

There’s more to come. The court is weighing a case challenging Texas’ requirements that abortion providers have hospital admitting privileges and meet the standards for ambulatory hospitals. A deadlock would leave in place a lower court ruling in Texas’ favor, keeping in place tactics clearly aimed at putting clinics out of business and making it harder for tens of thousands of women to exercise a constitutional right.

And more may be on the way, with South Carolina banning abortions after 20 weeks – even in cases of rape or incest. Oklahoma on Friday averted a law making it a crime to perform an abortion at any time only because Gov. Mary Falin found it too vague and poorly written.

These attempts to erode a woman’s right of choice underscore how essential a functioning court is. In ignoring a sitting president and declaring that “the American people should decide” in the next election who should fill the court vacancy, Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell and his fellow Republicans are telling Americans that partisan politics trumps their rights, at least for the next eight months.