It may be too early to hail “Tyrant” as the next intelligent geopolitical drama after “Homeland.” We’ll need to see where it goes after the first couple of hours.

So far, however, the latest from Howard Gordon (“24,” “Homeland”) is a daring push into both international politics and family dysfunction, moving beyond CIA heroics to study the mentality of a dictator.

The set up and execution are compelling. “Tyrant,” premiering June 24, is worth a look.

While the scene is exotic, the questions posed are universal: can an offspring every truly break away from a controlling parent? Can an identity be changed as easily as an address?

Set in the fictional Middle Eastern country of Abbudin, “Tyrant” explores the fate of a population in the grip of a madman’s power, the life-altering boyhood experiences of two brothers, the culture clash of Americans and Middle Easterners, the paralysis of diplomats in certain oil-rich territories, the unfair treatment of women and girls in much of the world and more.

Produced in Israel, the series has already drawn complaints about the show’s presentation of Muslims and Arabs. The Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR) found the pilot’s depiction of Arab Muslim culture “devoid of any redeeming qualities” and ” represented by terrorists, murderous children, rapists, corrupt billionaires, and powerless female victims,” said CAIR National Communications Director Ibrahim Hooper. “In ‘Tryant,’ even the ‘good’ Arab Muslims are bad.”

But the viewing public has enough experience with real-life tyrants from Saddam Hussein to Muammar Gaddafi to pick up the inferences; also enough experience with TV drama to grasp the idea of fictional villains apart from Muslims in general.

For its part, FX says the network, studio and producers have discussed the concerns internally and with the Muslim Public Affairs Council and with Muslims on Screen and Television.

Cynical or no, past experience suggests this kind of back and forth can only mean extra publicity for the show. Achieving notoreity with special interest groups is a time-honored first step.

In a word, an American family with ties to a non-specific Middle Eastern country is drawn into the political, military and economic maelstrom of the brutal dictator’s regime.

“Barry” ( Adam Rayner) is an American dad who has carefully put distance between himself and his family history. His real name is Bassam Al-Fayeed, he is the son of a dictator and he’s been in self-imposed exile for 20 years, living quietly in Pasadena.

Barry would like to continue working as a pediatrician in Los Angeles with his wife Molly (Jennifer Finnigan), devoted teenage daughter Emma (Anne Winters) and his son Sammy (Noah Silver), who is easily wowed by the wealth and power of his grandfather’s regime. But when Barry and his family are invited to his nephew’s wedding, a trip to the homeland will bring up repressed memories.

The cinematography is stunning, the music and atmospherics are immersive. With occasional hiccups the acting is mostly subtle.

Suspension of disbelief will be required (how else can Bassam/Barry slip out of his father’s palace in the middle of the night to rendez-vous with an old journalist buddy?) But “Tyrant” is worth the effort.

Joanne Ostrow: 303-954-1830, jostrow@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ostrowdp