Please enable Javascript to watch this video

GURLEY, Ala. (WHNT) - A vote of no confidence! The state's department of public health tells a Madison County healthcare facility administrator to stop treating patients. Patients at Regency Manor are forced to go elsewhere.

A four-page court order from the Alabama Department of Public Health outlines allegations against Regency Manor such as neglect and abuse.

State officials started looking into the dementia and Alzheimer’s healthcare facility last month. The facility administrator's license is now suspended.

Alabama's Health Officer has a strong opinion about Regency Manor.

“We do not have confidence in the present owner operator to provide this service as a licensed healthcare facility,” said ADPH Spokesman Dr. Tom Geary.

The spokesman confirmed patients of the Gurley-based specialized healthcare facility must find assistance elsewhere. The facility must stop operating by Wednesday.

“There were complaints regarding abuse and neglect of residents. Some of these were substantiated,” added Dr. Geary.

WHNT NEWS 19 made a call to the person in charge of the facility.

“One of our workers made up all of the accusations and turned us in,” said Facility Administrator Monique Okezie.

WHNT NEWS 19 wanted to know more, so took a ride to Gurley to talk in person. Okezie did not want to discuss the issue on camera before meeting with her lawyer.

Investigators told WHNT NEWS 19 they witnessed several problems inside the 16-bed facility.

Some of those include employees not making a care plan, orders not being followed and a lack of adequate staff.

“Everyone agreed that the best option would be to have the Alabama Health Officer order an emergency closure/suspension of their license,” added Dr, Geary.

The facility administrator told WHNT NEWS 19 her license is not revoked and she plans to clarify the problems next month.

The state confirmed they will talk with Okezie next month and she, along with her current staff, will not have anything to do with the facility.

Okezie told WHNT NEWS 19 the families of all 12 patients treated at the facility are aware of the problems and are working to find another place for their family member.