Greek life has been shaken on OU's campus since the video surfaced, particularly among members of the historically black fraternities and sororities.

News 9's Evan Anderson had an opportunity to sit down and have a round table discussion with the chapter presidents of OU's PanHellenic Council, known as the "Divine Nine." The student leaders made some powerful points.

“I think that's an old tradition that's been passed down,” said a student leader.

“You can just tell by the fluidity of their song, that it is in fact tradition,” said Boston Williamson, Phi Beta Sigma, Inc.

Sigma Alpha Epsilon men joyfully and gleefully chanted a racist song, to the rhythm of ‘If you're happy and you know it,' almost as though it had been rehearsed.

3/9/2015 Related Story: Fallout Continues After OU Racist Video Made Public

“We were surprised at the enthusiasm they had behind it,” said Marcus Peasant, Omega Psi Phi Fraternity, Inc.

Each of the student leaders said they believe the racist chant highlights a much deeper problem, not just at OU, but at universities across the country.

“I feel like the nation is watching us right now," said Taylor Ashley.

“We all know that these types of things happen nationwide, but to my knowledge, this is one of the first times it's been this big of an outcry and response,” said Williamson.

"Do you all think that the university and the president has done what they should do?" News 9's Evan Anderson asked.

"I think so, yes," leaders at the table said.

"I think he's done all within his power as of right now, but within the coming days, I feel he can make more actions," said Peasant.

"I think this is an opportunity to turn the tide, and to really move forward and set a precedent for the entire nation,” said Williamson.

"We want to use this as a learning experience, as an opportunity for our groups to unite, and for us to unite across campus," said a student leader.

3/9/2015 Related Story: #OUnity: Moving Forward And Coming Together

The PanHellenic council only meets every other week. This was supposed to be an off week but they felt it was necessary to get together.