Readers react to Freemasons vote on LGBT members.

Letters to the editor: letters@tennessean.com (Photo: The Tennessean.com)

Stand against discrimination

Re: "Freemasons in Tennessee vote to uphold ban on gay members," March 24.

I grew up Jewish in a small Southern town.

My father was considered a "man's man," enjoying football, basketball, golf, and poker. He was a Shriner, an Elk, a Jaycee, and a Freemason.

He loved all people and all people loved him. But my father was a giant when he taught my sister and I that when one group is discriminated against, we are all discriminated against. I am calling on all "real men" who have children who look up to them to renounce their Tennessee Freemason membership. Asking their gay members who do meaningful community work to step down should be an affront to us all.

Cindee Schreiber Gold, Nashville 37215

Mason vote reflected best choice

As a past master of a Masonic lodge with 40 years under my belt, it is good to see the Grand Lodge of Tennessee doing the right thing regarding the two homosexuals from West Tennessee.

Leviticus 20:16 states very clearly what God thinks of this kind of activity. It is an abomination in the eyes of God.

Masonry is made of men who believe in a supreme being. It is not a church, because it has no plan of salvation. Its purpose for the last few thousand years has been to take good men and make them better. There are none who are perfect.

I heard a young man who had just been a Mason for a couple of years explaining to a news reporter that he believed the Grand Lodge was wrong in this decision. This young man has not been around long enough to be saying anything, one way or the other. He must have already forgotten the oath that he took when he was initiated into the craft.

It behooves the reporter to go down and talk to the Grand Master on Seventh and Broadway. If I were going to talk to someone about the school system, I would not seek out a first grader.

I am not homophobic. I have common sense, and believe the Bible says just exactly what it means.

I am serious enough in what I believe, that I will drop out of the Masons if they let this abomination to God continue without dropping the perpetrators from the rolls.

After talking with several other Masons, I know that I'm not alone.

Hershel Butts, Mount Juliet, 37122

Mason vote out of step

I've often wondered what the big secret was.

I've heard the members of the Freemasons were outstanding citizens that do wonderful things for the community.

Really, why the big secret? Well maybe now we know. Sounds like a bunch of good old boy homophobes patting themselves on the back for excluding members who don't fit their club mentality.

Glad I'm not a member. Good riddance, dinosaurs.

Chase Adams, Madison 37115

Trump vs. Cruz 2016 (Photo: Cagle Cartoons)

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1MtAezB