Headlights and tail lights from cars and trucks stream along Interstate 25 at U.S. 34 in a long-exposure photograph taken during the evening rush hour Friday in east Loveland. (Photo by Steve Stoner/Loveland Reporter-Herald) ( Steve Stoner )

The need is critical, the need is now and a growing Northern Colorado can't be ignored.

That's the message that elected leaders from more than a dozen communities along the North Interstate 25 corridor, from north of Denver to Fort Collins, have joined together to carry. In lobbying to get the North I-25 project in the 2014 Federal Transportation Bill reauthorization, the goal is one that binds them all: to reconstruct and widen the already-congested interstate that is vital to the growth of the communities, and not wait 60 years to do it.

The Plans

According to the I-25 Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), a long-term study of the highway completed by the Colorado Department of Transportation in 2011, growth of households along North I-25 is expected to increase by 74 percent by 2035, with employment increasing about 76 percent more than in 2005.

"In order to manage all these people, we're going to need all these improvements," said Loveland City Council member Joan Shaffer, who represents the city on the North I-25 Coalition.

The state agency's proposal for North I-25 reconstruction is based off the 2011 EIS and is split into three phases. Full build-out would be completed in 2075 and the final result would include free and tolled lanes -- a $1.2 billion project that would include full reconstruction and rebuilding of interchanges.

An alternate proposal delivered by state officials this year would get the expansion done much sooner by converting an existing third lane of I-25 between Colorado 7 (the Brighton exit) to Colorado 66 (Lyons, Longmont and Platteville exit) into a tolled express lane, with the lane to serve as a revenue source to attract private partnerships for building a third lane of traffic from Colorado 66 to Colorado 14 (Mulberry Street) in Fort Collins.

Advertisement

There is about $90 million for the $1 billion project in the Responsible Acceleration of Maintenance and Partnerships (RAMP) program, but the Weld County communities along the corridor would have to sign off on the plan. It has already met with opposition.

The North I-25 Coalition began meeting in September on the heels of CDOT's proposal.

"The RAMP discussion and the toll idea that was advanced by CDOT ... started this discussion and it brought elected officials together," Weld County Commissioner Sean Conway said Thursday at a meeting of coalition members. "This is not just important in Fort Collins or Erie or Longmont or Loveland or Windsor, it's important to all of us."

"We desperately believe that we can't let the status quo persist," Conway continued. "We've got to do something about it."

First Step

For now, and aside from the RAMP discussion, the elected officials who make up the North I-25 Coalition have their sights set on the Federal Transportation Bill, which could be reauthorized by Congress this fall. If the project is included in the bill, it would then compete for funding with other projects across the nation.

"We want the full project -- one general purpose and one managed (toll) lane -- and then once it's in there you start fighting for the money to make it happen," Shaffer said.

And the officials on the coalition are ready for that fight. At a meeting of the coalition on Thursday, members began to review brochures that they plan to put in the hands of the congressional delegation to lobby for the project's inclusion in the bill. They think the population projections speak for themselves, as well as other elements of the 2011 Environmental Impact Study.

For Shaffer, the importance of the study -- a $22 million project that took seven years to complete and outlines a near future of gridlock if nothing changes -- can't be understated.

"Unless we in the coalition work hard to bring it to the attention of the community and legislative officials, this will be a study that sits on the shelf," she said.

Members of the regional business community are also expected to join the conversation. Shaffer is involved the effort the Northern Colorado Legislative Alliance, which represents chambers of commerce in the region, to form a business coalition around the same I-25 issues.

"You need to have the business community at the table at any coalition, because they're the ones moving goods and services along the highway," Shaffer said.

Colorado transportation officials have also been at the table for meetings of the coalition, which CDOT Commissioner Kathy Gilliland said is critical for whichever direction the coalition takes.

"I-25 is CDOT responsibility when it comes down to it. Whatever the coalitions are doing, it's still CDOT's responsibility to make things happen."

Gilliland is concerned, however, about the future of the $90 million in RAMP funding if the coalition continues down the path toward the transportation bill. Communities along the North I-25 corridor -- seven Weld County communities and Weld County itself -- have until the end of March to make a decision on whether to use the RAMP funding and the toll lane it would create.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.