Topics: Editor's Picks, Eliza Carthy, Kate McGarrigle, Linda Thompson, Music, Richard Thompson, Teddy Thompson, Entertainment News

Unlike its American counterpart, the British folk scene of the middle and late sixties was noteworthy for its profusion of great female voices: Sandy Denny, Maddy Prior, Shirley Collins, Jacqui McShee. Indeed, English folk seemed to prize the voices of its women, and to erect fewer barriers to their greatness than was the case on this side of the Atlantic.

And yet of the great voices of early British folk, Linda Thompson’s is the one that has most endured. Notwithstanding a grueling struggle with dysphonia that has slowed her output, she has just released the third album, “Won’t Be Long Now” (on Pettifer Sounds) since her return to performing in 2002, and it brims with the same heartache, good humor and wisdom that has always characterized her work, but with an added measure of yearning and human wisdom that adheres to singers who have come back from significant reversals.

If Thompson is still remembered to some degree for the great albums she made with her former husband Richard Thompson (“I Want to See the Bright Lights Tonight,” et al.), “Won’t Be Long Now” casts an eye further back at the traditional sounds that first animated the British folk scene, and even includes some of the players of that time — like Martin Carthy and Dave Swarbrick — as well as a helping of her extended family, including son Teddy Thompson, dauther Kami Thompson and grandson Zak Hobbs. (The album also includes one electrifying performance with Richard Thompson on the opening track, “Love’s For Babies and Fools.”) The result is a serene and confident recording that is more about the joy of being able to make music, 40 years on, than it is about needing to prove anything otherwise.

The interview that follows was recorded in the first week of October at Teddy Thompson’s apartment in downtown NYC, with grandson Zak, who tagged along and answered a few questions, the afternoon before Linda’s recent appearance at the Living Room, in which Teddy and Zak (and fiddler extraordinaire Dave Mansfield) performed some of the songs from the new album. As you would imagine, Linda Thompson is funny, wise, earthy and unapologetic, all of which are apparent even in a transcript.

Let’s begin at the beginning. From your point of view what’s different about this album, “Won’t Be Long,” when compared to the albums of your “comeback” period?

I think this one’s a little traddier. I wanted it to have a slightly traddier feel, and I think it has… I tend to work with more or less the same people. I’m very happy with Martin Carthy I’m very happy with Richard [Thompson] playing the guitar, obviously, and John Doyle. I sort of a have a rep company, and they all sort of come in. So I don’t know how much different it is, but I think it is slightly more acoustic and it has slightly more family on it. Zak [Hobbs, Thompson’s grandson, who plays on the album] is old enough to pay his way now.

I definitely want to talk about the family aspect of the recording because it’s so central to the album.

It is.

Did you simply want family to play on it because you enjoy having family around, or does it amount to a sort of statement about music making generally at this point?

Definitely the former. The thing about a family singing together: it’s a good sound. It’s a nice, good thing to do. And I’ve got three – well, Zak’s my grandchild but I think of him as my kid – I’ve got three musical kids, and it is a way of keeping in touch with them as well. I get to see them more often! Besides, I love Teddy’s playing, and I love Kami’s singing. Zak is just incredible to work with. It’s incredible working with family. We sometimes have strops. Did we have any strops yesterday in the studio?

Zak: No, I think we were pretty good actually.

“Strops” is the British slang for…

For like, flouncing out. Like, “Well, I can’t work like this!” But we didn’t have any strops yesterday at all. Zak and I had written a song and we put it down and we were very happy with it.

But family singing is also part of British folk tradition — as with the Watersons — and of the folk tradition generally. The Carter Family…

Yeah, you have American traditional families, as you say, the Carters, and we have all these families like the Watersons and the Copper family and all these families going back generations. I think it started when people worked together, when they worked on the land together, and started singing and started collecting songs. God knows how it’s evolved to, you know, living in a high rise in New York. Teddy’s not a very folk-y musician, but he still has it in him. And Zak, who is 18, I never would have thought he’d really like it, but he loves it. It must be some sort of horrible genetic deficiency. [laughs]

Zak, you must have heard folk music your entire life because it’s been around, but is it your sort of thing?

Zak: Well, no one thought I was musical at all. I wasn’t that sort of kid. But then I went to a very musical sort of school and I thought, well I have to know an instrument. So I picked it up when I was 11. And all that music that I listened to, all that guitar-y folk-y music that I listened to, that was just what I wanted to play.

Linda: As much as I tried to talk you out of it, as much as I tried to tell you you were never going to make a damn dime… you didn’t listen!

Is family singing effective because of some spooky ESP-like ability to phrase well together, or is it because you share a certain timbre?

These are all terrific questions… I think its all timbre. Because in my family, we all phrase things pretty differently. You know, it’s called “blood singing” when family sings together. And it sounds like blood singing, it sounds like these people are connected. You can listen to people who aren’t related and they sound wonderful, but never quite as good as the Carter family. It’s just that there’s something there. Like Ralph Stanley and his family, and I think you’ve hit it on the head, I think it’s just the timbre.

The harmony arrangements on this record are really extraordinary; there are a couple of those wall-of-backing vocals moments . . .

Well, that would be Teddy mostly. Teddy arranged the backing vocals. Except on “Mr. Tam.” That was me and Eliza Carthy just working out, you know, not quite as refined as Teddy’s backing vocals, just kind of belting it out.

Is that an inclination that comes naturally to you, to arrange vocals with such precision?

Yeah, I think it comes quite naturally to me. I think in fact when I first started – Emmylou [Harris] and I have talked about this a lot, Emmylou loves singing harmonies, everybody knows, and I do too, and really I preferred singing harmony. But Richard said I had to sing the lead. He said your voice is more suited. But I like harmony, I don’t quite have the harmonic ability that I did, but it’s nice to be able to say to the kids, “Could you go up there?” I like doing that.

So Kami sings lead on the Anna McGarrigle song. And how did that come about?

I didn’t want to do it! We had done it live, in a tribute to Kate McGarrigle, and Kami had sung the lead, and I was so happy doing the harmony, and it’s a very high harmony that I’m singing, and it was very relaxing, I could sing it in my head, so you’re up here [sings a note] and you’re not in your throat [sings a note], and it was just a joy for me to sing the harmonies. In fact I’ve been lobbying with my producer for years saying, let’s get Tom Waits in to sing the lead and I’ll sing the harmony. And the record company and the producer are saying, No no no, you have to sing your own lead vocals. But I’ve made a big step on this record; I’ve managed to get someone else to sing one of them. She sings it well.

Getting ready to do the record did you have material piled up that you wanted to record?

You know, we did actually have a bit of a stockpile. Because of what happened last time we were making a record, we over-recorded a little bit, and I said let’s leave off that trad stuff, and the next time we do a record, let’s try and make it more that way focused. So I think we may have had five or six. When you’ve got that many, even four, you feel as if you’re halfway there. So we had a direction and the bones of some things. I mean, “Never the Bride” was completely recorded for the last record but we never put it on.

Did you tinker with it?

Oh, we didn’t touch it.

The opening track, “Love’s For Babies and Fools,” is the track with Richard Thompson. And it’s really striking, overpowering even. It showcases the sound you’re going for, just one guitar, no overdubs. How many takes does something like that require these days?

Oh we just banged it out. It’s so … visceral. We don’t play together very often, so when we do, there’s some kind of race memory there. Whenever I write something like that I think, Oh, who could play the guitar on that? And then I think, Only Richard, really. He loved the song, and that was nice, that was gratifying for me. I wrote it about Rufus Wainwright and I played it for Kate [McGarrigle] and she said, I love it, you’ve got to finish it. So I did finish it, and Richard played on it, and I was happy with the results.

You wrote it for Rufus? Or about Rufus?

No, no, about rather than for. I wrote it about it him. I’d love it if he sung it one day, that would be amazing. It was just a tale of a young man, starting out in life and Rufus is, as you know, a supremely talented being, and you know, those people are difficult, there’s ups and downs . . . I hope he likes it. He hasn’t heard it yet, so…

Such an incredible lyric, such a very moving lyric. From my point of view, I think it’s slightly risky to make it the opening track. It’s emotionally demanding, but I like that.

Well, I’m glad you like it, but there’s no risk involved, because there’s no record industry, there’s nothing, so that was the tone I wanted to set, and not only do I know my audience, I know most of them friggin’ personally. It’s not depressing, it’s art. Good art just can’t be depressing. I just thought that was a good opening tone for the album, and I just thought it was strong. I hope it was the right move; we’ll see.

How do you write a song like that?

That happened very quickly. I’d actually started writing it a long time ago. Rufus and Teddy are great friends. They were all living in New York. Rufus and Teddy. And Martha, too. They’re all great friends and very good musicians and they were in their twenties at the time, and it was a sort of a dog-eat-dog kind of world. And you know, Rufus was par-taying. He was young, and he’d signed a big record deal, and it was party time.

And you know how that’s fun for a while, but even he, towards the end of his twenties, he thought, You know, this really is boring. And it is boring. And sometimes people think that when they’re young, they think I can do what I like – what’s love, love is for babies. He’s very different now; he’s a happily married man. That came incredibly quickly, that song.

I don’t know if I’d ever have put it out if Kate hadn’t come to stay with me in London. And I said, This is about Rufus. And the great thing about the Wainwrights and the McGarrigles is that you could write something about them… “Martha is a hooker, Rufus is a son of a bitch…” and if it’s a good song, they’ll go, Ah, fantastic. And I feel the same about certain songs that Richard wrote about me. People would ask me, aren’t you mortified, and I’d go, Are you kidding me, that’s a great song! So, I may never have finished it without Kate, God rest her soul.