RESTON, Va., Aug. 21, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- hCentive, the leader in ACA health insurance exchange technology, announced today it placed 117th on the influential 2014 Inc. 500, an annual list of the fastest growing private companies in the United States. In addition, hCentive also ranks as the #7 company in Virginia and #17 in Top Health Companies. hCentive offers a range of technology solutions for both state health agencies and insurers that reduce complexity and ensure compliance with the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA) guidelines.

"Our place on the Inc. 500 and our aggressive three-year growth rate are testaments to the prowess of our technology and people which has made us a leading provider of exchange technology solutions," said Sanjay Singh, Chief Executive Officer of hCentive. "We see continued growth for our products as more states and private insurers look to simplify and streamline their offerings and require a proven technology partner to offer end consumers the very best experience when choosing their health benefit products."

The 2014 Inc. 500|5000 is ranked according to percentage revenue growth when comparing 2010 to 2013. To qualify, companies must have been founded and generating revenue by March 31, 2010. Additionally, they have to be U.S.-based, privately held, for profit, and independent — not subsidiaries or divisions of other companies —as of December 31, 2013. The minimum revenue required for 2010 is $100,000; the minimum for 2013 is $2 million. As always, Inc. reserves the right to decline applicants for subjective reasons. Companies on the Inc. 500 are featured in Inc.'s September issue. The companies of the Inc. 500 represent the top tier of the Inc. 5000, which can be found in its entirety at inc.com.

The 2014 Inc. 500|5000 complete results including company profiles and a sortable interactive database can be found at http://www.inc.com/inc5000/list/2014. hCentive's listing can be viewed at http://www.inc.com/profile/hcentive.

To learn more about hCentive's services, visit http://www.hcentive.com/.

About hCentive:

hCentive is in the business of simplifying the complex world of health insurance. hCentive provides technology solutions for health insurers and state health agencies. These solutions help them reduce cost and administrative complexity, while enhancing relationships with their customers.

hCentive is the first organization to build an exchange solution from the ground-up post the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act of 2010 (PPACA). hCentive has developed a deep understanding of healthcare reform and has crafted solutions and services that align with federal and state regulations and meet or exceed all industry standards.

The WebInsure State platform helps states create a health benefits exchange to comply with health insurance exchange requirements of the PPACA. The WebInsure Exchange Manager provides a complete connectivity solution for health plans to connect to State Exchanges. Our comprehensive billing solution, WebInsure Financial Management, provides the next generation in financial management, enabling organizations to modernize their operational procedures and move member-facing processes toward a retail-centric business model. The hCentive WebInsure Private Exchange platform allows health plans to offer defined contribution plan marketplace to small business customers. The hCentive WebInsure Medicare platform helps health insurers cost-effectively acquire and manage Medicare and small business customers.

SOURCE hCentive