By Bonnie Watson Coleman

Over the course of 16 years in the New Jersey General Assembly, I learned a lot about safety net hospitals, our state's trauma centers, teaching hospitals and innovation centers, and the vital role they play in providing care to New Jersey residents. Now, after just weeks in Congress, I'm deeply concerned as I watch Gov. Christie offer a budget that will risk losing more than $100 million in federal dollars a year in funding for hospitals in our state.

The New Jersey Hospital Care Payment Assistance Program, better known as Charity Care, ensures that patients who can't afford their medical bills ― patients without insurance who do not qualify for Medicaid or Medicare ― receive the treatment they need. Hospitals can't simply decide not to save a life, but they also can't function without compensation. Charity Care fills the gap, and our state dollars are matched with federal funding that meets the needs of hospitals and the individuals they serve.

The federal match dollars we receive every year were already in peril, because Gov. Christie's administration has failed to follow the basic requirements of the program. When treating patients on Medicaid, hospitals receive only about 70 cents for every dollar they spend. In addition to covering patients without any insurance, Charity Care makes up some of this difference, which is why the federal government requires that Charity Care dollars go to hospitals that treat a large percentage of both groups of patients.

Unfortunately, New Jersey has focused only on the uninsured when making Charity Care payments. The implementation of the Affordable Care Act has given approximately 500,000 New Jersey residents health insurance, but 400,000 of those are covered through the expansion of Medicaid ― making spending Charity Care dollars the right way even more important.

As our safety net hospitals open their doors to these new Medicaid patients, they will need every dollar of Charity Care funding for which they are eligible. A cut to the state dollars for this program in the FY 2016 budget will create a financial crisis for these facilities and fuel economic chaos in our local and state economies. It is absolutely vital that the New Jersey Legislature protect the state's Charity Care funding and bring the program in line with federal requirements for how these funds are distributed.

The two-fold problem of irresponsible budgeting and bad policy should alarm all New Jersey residents. Loss of these funds will seriously hurt urban hospitals and all of us who rely on these institutions for highly specialized care and treatment. With dramatic cuts in Charity Care funding, some of our essential inner-city hospitals may even face closure.

The solution is simple, logical and fair: The state must maintain its current level of Charity Care funding and rank hospitals by the total percentage of low-income patients they treat, providing reimbursement accordingly. This assures that hospitals will be treated equitably and New Jersey will continue to receive the federal funds it needs.

I am committed to working as hard in Congress as I worked in the state Legislature to protect New Jersey's Charity Care funding. Gov. Christie and my former colleagues must do their part by maintaining current funding levels and aligning New Jersey's policy with federal law by targeting reimbursements to hospitals that treat the highest proportion of both uninsured and Medicaid patients.

We owe it to our safety net hospitals to provide the reimbursement they need for the care they provide. Let's work together and do the right thing.

Bonnie Watson Coleman represents New Jersey's 12th Congressional District in the U.S. House of Representatives.



Follow The Times of Trenton on Twitter @TimesofTrenton. Find The Times of Trenton on Facebook.