Seniors make up for lost time to finish this spring

EDITOR'S NOTE: The Times-Call's series Take Two revisits people we have written about in the past year. Take Two stories will run on Mondays.

Seniors in Silver Creek High School's Leadership Academy have learned this year that life doesn't always go as planned.

Less than three weeks after they presented their capstone projects to their classmates and faculty members, record rains brought historic flooding to the area.

"Everybody at Silver Creek, their lives stopped for a week," said Doug Palmer, one of the Leadership Academy students.

While the students were out of school, many volunteered to help flood victims, but they lost time to work on their own projects.

"I'm so glad the kids were willing and able (to help)," Academy director Carrie Adams said. They learned more from that real-life situation than from made-up scenarios, she noted.

The floods also have hurt the students' ability to raise money, said Adams, adding that it is more important to help people in need.

Ava Hartmann, who plans to send 1,000 paper cranes to the people of Hiroshima while advancing the abolishment of nuclear weapons, hasn't yet approached Longmont Mayor Dennis Coombs about her project -- in large part because of the flooding.

"I felt that was inappropriate," Hartmann said.

She realizes, though, that she needs to be more assertive now.

Jamie Kirkland is organizing an aviation workshop for kids, planned for late April. She expects to teach children how to make wing ribs and show them "how a wings' shape affects how a plane flies," she said.

As part of that lesson, she's working with other aviators to build a wind tunnel. She's also building a website that will provide information about her event, Kirkland said.

In planning the workshop, Kirkland has learned that communicating -- particularly with folks who aren't on email or social media -- can be complicated, she said.

She's realizing the enormity of her project, as well.

"It's going to be difficult to organize all these projects ... and make the day run smoothly," Kirkland said.

Palmer, who wanted to host a TEDx event advancing the advantages of Longmont, ran in to a major roadblock that had nothing to do with the floods. When he applied for a TED (Technology, Entertainment, Design) license, he learned that one can't host an event for more than 100 people unless the host has attended a TED conference, he said.

Instead, Palmer is organizing his own Longmont LEAD (Learning, Educating, Activating, Developing Leaders) conference, he said.

"It's been kind of a crazy journey," he said. "I've learned a lot about ... rolling with the punches, creativity, problem-solving," Palmer said.

Victoria Camron can be reached at 303-684-5226 or vcamron@times-call.com.