HornRock Properties has released a new housing phase of premium home sites at the Legacy of Mountain Lakes to accommodate the growing number of homebuyers drawn to its townhome designs.

The townhomes at Legacy of Mountain Lakes have open floor plans with gourmet kitchens. For a limited time, buyers will get a top-of-the-line Wolf oven/range at no additional cost. (Photo: ~Courtesy of HornRock Properties) Story Highlights HornRock Properties has released a new housing phase of premium home sites at the Legacy of Mountain Lakes to accommodate the growing number of homebuyers drawn to its townhome designs, desirable Morris County location and award-winning school district.

Growing interest from a wide variety of buyers, including young families and couples, has led to several new sales at the luxurious collection of just 39 residences during the busy spring selling season, according to Maurice Hornblass, a principal of HornRock Properties. To satisfy demand, the developer decided to release the two townhome buildings with premium locations much earlier than expected.

Situated at the intersection of Morris Avenue and Fanny Road, Legacy of Mountain Lakes offers a superb Morris County location characterized by winding country roads, bucolic lakes and heavily wooded terrain. With its attractive setting and close proximity to convenient transportation, the community unquestionably offers a prestigious address. The community features easy access to Route 46 and interstates 287 and 80, putting residents just minutes from world class shopping, entertainment and major business centers. Morristown — with top-rated restaurants, shopping and nightlife — is just a 10-minute drive away.

HornRock Properties has released a new housing phase of premium home sites at the Legacy of Mountain Lakes to accommodate the growing number of homebuyers drawn to its townhome designs, desirable Morris County location and award-winning school district.

Growing interest from a wide variety of buyers, including young families and couples, has led to several new sales at the luxurious collection of just 39 residences during the busy spring selling season, according to Maurice Hornblass, a principal of HornRock Properties. To satisfy demand, the developer decided to release the two townhome buildings with premium locations much earlier than expected.

The new phase includes six new homes from the Legacy of Mountain Lakes “Carriage Series” which were designed to meet the needs of today’s young, sophisticated buyer. Often drawing first-time buyers from more urban locales such as Hoboken, Jersey City and even Manhattan, the three-story Carriage Series townhomes provide a more affordable opportunity for buyers looking to enjoy the low-maintenance lifestyle of a new construction home and all of the benefits a Mountain Lakes address has to offer.

“Homebuyers realize we’re nearing the end of our sales program and that this is their best opportunity to select the home location of their choice at Morris County’s premier new townhome community,” Hornblass said. “It has translated into a number of sales in the past few weeks alone and heavy interest in all of our available townhomes.

“These new homes offer an enhanced suburban setting in one of Northern New Jersey’s most attractive locations and well-appointed, luxurious interiors with considerable space and room to grow. As buyers rush to avoid missing out on this one-of-a-kind housing opportunity, we don’t expect our remaining homes to be available very long,” Hornblass added.

Homes in Legacy’s Carriage Series are offered in two designs, the “Midvale” and the “Hillcrest”, both of which offer three-bedroom layouts with two full baths, two half baths and one- or two-car garages. These townhomes range from 2,162 to 2,236 of finished square-feet and are priced from $599,900. The Carriage Series homes feature expansive living spaces, exquisite finishes and a modern, “open concept” layout.

The new phase will also accommodate all home designs in Legacy’s “Signature Series” collection, which will include premium locations surrounded by wooded terrain and beautifully landscaped grounds.

Homes in the Legacy’s Signature Series feature three bedrooms, two-and-a-half baths baths and either 2,829 or 2,853 square feet of luxury living space, priced from $799,900.

Both the Carriage Series and Signature Series collections are being offered with a limited-time incentive program that includes a top-of-the-line Wolf range/oven added to special gourmet kitchens at no extra cost.

Legacy of Mountain Lakes has proven to have broad appeal to a wide range of home buyers. Buyers to date have cited the community’s visually stunning location, excellent quality-of-life and top-notch public school system as motivating factors.

“Many buyers who have their heart set on Mountain Lakes are pleasantly surprised to learn about the multiple townhome designs we offer and just how much quality, space and comfort they are receiving for their home buying dollar,” said David Hornblass, another HornRock principal.

“The combination of a beautiful new construction townhome and this classic American small town setting is proving to be a tremendous draw. The community is buzzing with activity every day as our residents enjoy everything this tremendous location offers,” he added.

Situated at the intersection of Morris Avenue and Fanny Road, Legacy of Mountain Lakes offers a superb Morris County location characterized by winding country roads, bucolic lakes and heavily wooded terrain. With its attractive setting and close proximity to convenient transportation, the community unquestionably offers a prestigious address. The community features easy access to Route 46 and interstates 287 and 80, putting residents just minutes from world class shopping, entertainment and major business centers. Morristown — with top-rated restaurants, shopping and nightlife — is just a 10-minute drive away.

Mountain Lakes is home to countless parks and nine lakes, making it ideal for outdoor recreation, all right in the heart of one of northern New Jersey’s most picturesque settings. Golf is abundant in the area, and lake clubs, such as the Mountain Lakes Club, offer a variety of outdoor activities and dining options. The Lakeland Hills YMCA is right down the street from Legacy of Mountain Lakes, offering a pool, gymnasium, child care, summer camps, fitness facilities and more, all within walking distance.

For more about The Legacy of Mountain Lakes, contact the sales office at 973-265-0899 or visit www.legacyofmountainlakes.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dailyre.co/1bWUist