Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Congress hopeful Irv Halter visits Cañon City

Democrat candidate for the 5th Congressional District Irv Halter visits during his stop in Cañon City on Saturday. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record) Democrat candidate for the 5th Congressional District Irv Halter visits Saturday during his stop in Cañon City. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record) Where he stands Here's what Democrat Irv Halter, a hopeful for the 5th Congressional District, said about other topics Saturday during his visit to Cañon City. Iraq Situation "Iraq has been a very difficult chapter in our national history. What I'm most concerned about now is not letting ISIS ... get into a position where they split apart that entire country and take it over. ... That would be a threat to our allies in the region, and frankly, eventually to us. I think that the air strikes are an incremental step. I think we need to be very careful about how much more we do than that and help slow down ISIS and let the Iraqi government do their job to stop this aggression." He said after the air strikes, the U.S. needs to do more with the Iraqi government to make it more representative of the entire country. "If the Iraqis themselves won't take charge of this, it's not something we can fix. But I think, you know, we've got limited troops on the ground right now helping coordinate with the Iraqi military, that's why these air strikes are possible. I think we need to continue to bolster their defense, while encourage political reform which needs to happen there or (Iraq) will fall apart regardless of what happens." Advertisement Immigration Issues "Our first job is to protect our borders, there's no doubt, any country that's its first job to secure borders," he said. "I also believe the bill that was passed in the Senate a year and a half ago should've been voted on in the house. That's what legislation is for. It's imperfect legislation, but it basically accounts both for voter security ... but it also allows for a very long and hard path for people who are here who are not going back to eventually secure some kind of legal recognition. Democrat candidate for the 5th Congressional District Irv Halter visits with Cañon City man Robert Henderson during his stop in Cañon City on Saturday. (Brandon Hopper / Daily Record) Getting Past Politics "I'm not a defender of Democrats when Democrats make mistakes," he said. When asked what mistakes Democrats have made in recent years, Halter said, "The president clearly was shooting behind the target on veterans' affairs issues. I've talked about where I think our Congressman has failed, but the fact is the president is the executive in charge of the Veterans' Affairs Administration. I think he was slow on that." "When it comes to health care, he promised with the Affordable Care Act a lot that has not been delivered. Part of that is the execution, and part of that is frankly, it's a flawed bill. Health care is a very important issue. I think we need to go back to square one and figure out what it is we really need to do." — Brandon Hopper Irv Halter got some reconfirmation on his thoughts when he visited Cañon City for the sixth time on Saturday. A Democrat running for the 5th Congressional District, Halter met with several veterans in the group who worried about the lack of support. "I want to engage with veterans, I want to find out their issues," said Halter, who is a retired Air Force Major General after 32 years of service. "I want to work with the VA to make sure they get the help they deserve." Halter is the Democratic challenger of incumbent Republican U.S. Rep. Doug Lamborn, who's made a habit out of beating his challengers, especially ones retired from the Air Force. Lamborn beat retired Air Force Lt. Col. Jay Fawcett in 2006, Air Force Maj. Gen. Bentley Rayburn in 2008 for the GOP primary seat, and retired Lt. Col. Hal Bidlack in 2008 for the seat, according to the Colorado Springs Gazette. The district includes Fremont, El Paso, Teller, Chaffee and Park counties. "The folks really are ready to make a change," Halter said Saturday at the meeting. "I met a Republican here today who's ready to vote for me and tell others to do so. "(We need to work on) trying to have more balanced policies that move us forward and start acting like the country we are again instead of just bickering." For much of his adult life, Halter said he, too, was a Republican. He later became an Independent and most recently a Democrat because of what he called a larger tent that his current party has. Though Halter never has held an elected office, he's hopeful he'll have one come November and believes it to be a strength, saying that Lamborn has turned into a lifelong politician who has lost touch with everyday people — especially veterans. "We've unfortunately learned over the last few months that veterans have not been getting the care they were supposed to," Halter said. Halter said that Colorado's 5th district is the third highest in the country in terms of concentration of veterans. According to his website, halterforcongress.com, Halter flew missions over Iraq and Afghanistan, commanded key field organizations, and eventually became Vice Director of Operations for the Joint Chiefs managing global military operations during his service.