SHARE Ron Johnson Affordable Care Act

Special Section: Videos, interactive maps, summaries and local coverage of Obamacare



By of the

U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson plans to file a lawsuit on Monday challenging a federal rule that allows members of Congress and their staffs to continue to receive health benefits similar to other federal employees.

The lawsuit stems from a provision in the Affordable Care Act that requires members of Congress and their staffs to buy health insurance on the marketplaces set up through the law.

A rule released last summer by the Office of Personnel Management stated that the federal government could continue to contribute to the cost of health benefits for members of Congress and their staffs — just as it does for other federal employees — even though they would be buying health insurance on a marketplace.

They also would be able to pay their share of the cost with pretax dollars, the same as other federal employees as well as employees who get health benefits through an employer.

In a telephone interview Friday, Johnson said he was filing the lawsuit because he believed President Barack Obama was continuing the historical trend of presidents' chipping away at the power of Congress.

"It has disturbed the balance of power," Johnson said. "I think it is not beneficial for our republic to have that balance of power continue to be eroded."

He also said that members of Congress made a "covenant" with the American people and promised to subject themselves to the law.

The administration, he said, helped them back out of that deal.

Members of Congress and their staffs still must buy health insurance through a marketplace — as specified in the law. The federal rule that Johnson is challenging only deals with whether the federal government will continue to pay part of the cost, just as it does for other federal employees.

The federal government pays about 72% of the cost of the various health plans available to federal employees or 75% of the cost of the chosen plan, whichever is less.

Private employers on average pay more than 80% of the cost of health benefits.

Johnson contended that members of Congress and their staffs get special treatment under the law.

Yet the marketplaces set up under the Affordable Care Act are aimed at people who do not receive health benefits through an employer. And Timothy Jost, a law professor at Washington and Lee University who has written extensively about the law, has noted that members of Congress and their staffs are the only people required to buy health insurance through the marketplaces.

Johnson acknowledged it would be "painful" for members of Congress and their staffs if he wins his lawsuit, because they would have to pay more for their insurance.

He might give pay raises to his staff to help them pay for their insurance coverage, he said, if his lawsuit is successful.

Johnson, a longstanding opponent of the Affordable Care Act, is being represented by the Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty, a conservative public interest law firm. He plans to file the lawsuit in federal court in Green Bay on Monday.

"The purpose of the lawsuit is to ensure the law is enforced as written," said Richard Esenberg, president and general counsel of the Wisconsin Institute for Law & Liberty.

The provision does not affect many people, he acknowledged.

"This is absolutely a matter of principle," he said.

No other employer can give pretax dollars to employees to buy coverage on a marketplace, he said — though he acknowledged that the marketplaces aren't aimed at people who get health insurance from an employer.