A line of white crosses stretches along Dowdy Ferry Road in southeast Dallas, past the junkyard of forgotten cars, past the bushy areas where dumped dogs go to die, all the way to the spot where volunteers recently discovered the body of a missing woman.

Volunteers erected the crosses in memoriam Saturday — 91 for each of the dead animals found here since August.

The largest cross of all, however, honored Marisol Espinosa, the once-missing Pleasant Grove mother whose remains animal activists found while searching for dumped dogs last month.

About 100 people gathered to remember lives lost and to demand change along Dowdy Ferry Road, in a rural area just south of Interstate 20 that has become a dumping ground for trash, animals and human remains.

“This needs to stop. People need to do something,” said Connie Cooley of Allen, who came with her rescue mutt, Chewbacca. “We can’t allow for the least of us to be treated with such non-compassion.”

In addition to planting the crosses, supporters, including Dallas Police Deputy Chief Paul Stokes and Deputy Mayor Pro Tem Erik Wilson, prayed in front of enlarged photographs of dead dogs.

“Love really is the goal here,” said Pastor Becky Porter of the Heartland Church in Carrollton, who led a prayer. “It seems like humans forget about love, but dogs love easily and stubbornly.”

She went on:

“Love is getting dirty while searching for the lost and forgotten.”

“Love is standing up for animals who are being broken and dumped.”

“Love is what you’re doing today.”

Animal-rights supporters began finding dumped dogs in the Dowdy Ferry area about a year and a half ago. The nonprofit Dallas DogRRR has saved about 135 dogs from Dowdy Ferry since then, its vice president said.

But activists have counted 91 dead animals found since they began keeping track last August — mostly dogs, but also cats, horses, cows, goats, deer and roosters.

Stephanie Timko, who helped organize Saturday’s event, said animals end up at Dowdy Ferry for a variety of reasons: Some have been victims of animal cruelty and killed. Other are thrown off bridges and left for dead. Many are simply abandoned by negligent owners who don’t want them anymore.

“They sit by the roadside waiting for their owners to come back. They get more and more anxious and approach cars — and that’s when they get hit,” Timko said.

Stokes, who oversees the southeast patrol for the Dallas police, said police have installed cameras to catch dumpers. But he said education is key to stopping illegal dumping and curbing Dallas’ loose-dog problem.

Organizers hoped Saturday’s event would help. Volunteers fanned out into the neighborhood afterward, handing out fliers to raise awareness about how to report animal cruelty and dumping.

“It’s pretty impressive,” Wilson, the deputy mayor pro tem, said of the efforts. “It’s impactful.”

Activists announced that they plan to speak — with photos of dumped dogs in hand — at the Dallas City Council meeting Wednesday.

“I know we’ll see you at City Council and I know the council is going to hear from you,” Timko said as Chewbacca, who had been sitting quietly, let out a howl.

The group laughed and joined the dog with cheers.

Animal advocate Amy Cox came Saturday wearing a sweatshirt that said, “Rescue is my favorite breed” and carrying a reusable shopping bag that featured dogs wearing glasses.

She said she’s a frequent traveler who normally shows off her Texas accent “loud and proud.”

“But, quite frankly, right now I’m a little ashamed of my city and what we’ve allowed to happen,” she said.

Many people who love animals, admiring the “fluffy ones” in pet stores, have no concept of the suffering that dogs endure daily in places like Dowdy Ferry Road, Cox said.

“It’s not all cuteness — it’s sadness in the animal world,” she said. “If the citizens of this city had any concept of what was going on, I have no doubt they would come out to stop it.”

Twitter: @smervosh