Troy Krenning and Irene Fortune respond to questions about issues facing Loveland

Troy Krenning Age: 51. Occupation: Attorney. In Loveland since: Born and raised in Loveland. Family: Wife, Kim. Two adult children. Relevant Experience: I have served as a Loveland planning commissioner and Planning Commission chairman since 2001. I am a former police officer/detective and chief. I currently manage a downtown Loveland law firm and understand the needs and issues of owning a small downtown Loveland business. I previously oversaw a $25 million federal project with the U.S. Department of Justice. How can people find you?: troykrenning.com and Facebook Troy Krenning. Email: troydklaw@msn.com. Irene Fortune Age: 55. Occupation: Chemist, lab manager, regulations compliance -- retired from chemical manufacturing industry. In Loveland since: 2005. Family: Husband, Jim. Relevant experience: Growing up on a farm, followed by 30 years in manufacturing -- progressing from technical to management to business-wide regulations compliance -- demonstrates that I plan ahead, apply rational decision-making and reach workable solutions by partnering with others. I'm a proven leader, who sets budgets and sticks with them. How can people find you?: fortuneforloveland.com; facebook.com/FortuneForLoveland. Email: fortuneforloveland@gmail.com.

Ward 1 will have a new Loveland City councilor in November, with voters set to decide between two familiar faces in the community.

Irene Fortune

Local attorney Troy Krenning has sat on Loveland's Planning Commission for nearly 12 years and in announcing his candidacy, he said part of the reason he decided to run for City Council was to give back to the community where he was born and raised.

His opponent, Irene Fortune, currently sits on the city's Transportation Advisory Board and on the board of directors for Senior Alternatives in Transportation (SAINT). Both candidates have voiced strong -- and very different -- opinions about the city's oil and gas regulations as well as the ballot initiative for a moratorium on hydraulic fracturing within Loveland city limits and the current City Council's decision to delay placement on the ballot.

Krenning and Fortune seek the council seat that mayor candidate Daryle Klassen currently holds. The Ward 1 candidates submitted emailed responses to three questions about issues facing Loveland. This week, the Reporter-Herald will publish answers to the same questions asked of all City Council candidates (in alphabetical order by ward).

What role should City Council have in attracting and retaining jobs in Loveland?

Fortune: This is my sixth year on Loveland's Transportation Advisory Board. From this I've learned that the city that provides reliable infrastructure -- roads, water, power, drainage -- and has the competitive advantage for attracting stable, high-paying jobs.

Troy Krenning ( Steve Stoner )

Loveland's economic development director confirmed this last spring when she said the first question asked by prospective new business owners is, "how reliable is the water and power?"

In the older sections of Loveland with empty buildings, the power is not sufficiently reliable and water lines are breaking, requiring shutdown and emergency repair. No business that I worked in -- from summer jobs at Baskin-Robbins to chemical manufacturing -- wants that. I was at Anthology last year when the water shut off unexpectedly. Immediately someone yelled from the kitchen. "whatever you do, don't shut down the coffee machine!" Coffee without water?

Businesses need assurance that infrastructure works now, and that long-term plans will make power, water, physical access, and drainage reliable -- 10, 20, 40 years from now.

Competition to attract good businesses is fierce -- witness Texas' recent attempt to entice Madwire away from Loveland. We can rise above the rest by demonstrating long term plans for essential infrastructure.

Krenning: Loveland has been and will continue to be an attractive place for employers by maintaining low tax rates, imposing reasonable fees for quality municipal services; public safety, roads, water and electricity. The biggest challenge facing Loveland's ability to encourage job growth and retention will be to avoid excessive regulation and expenses created for businesses by over-regulating and over-charging job creators who seek to make Loveland their home or are already doing business here.

I will fight efforts to increase taxes and impose burdensome regulations. I will demand accountability for bureaucrats who place obstacles in the way of businesses. I own a downtown Loveland business and understand the challenges of being a small business, making a profit and paying employees. As a member of the Loveland Planning Commission for over a decade, I have often rejected efforts of the city to make it difficult for new businesses to get started through excessive regulation.

Loveland enjoys a wonderful educational system, is ideally located near major universities, major highways, is the gateway to Rocky Mountain National Park and is simply a beautiful place to live, work and play. Employers will be drawn to Loveland not because of government, but often in spite of it.

What is your preference regarding the future of hydraulic fracturing in Loveland city limits?

Fortune: The first moratorium was vital to give Loveland's fire department and emergency responders time to prepare for risks associated with this form of drilling. We were unable, during that time, to assess the risks to the health, safety and property values. As currently practiced, hydraulic fracturing technology has barely 10 years of commercial-scale activity. There are conflicting reports about the associated risks and I hear a variety of concerns as I talk to voters at their door. We would benefit from time to assess and address actual and perceived risks.

My work in chemical regulations required knowledge of the oil industry as well because they provide materials for chemical production.

Some chemical and oil companies have a public record of proceeding with new technologies while providing insufficient protection for workers, the surrounding community, or the environment. In ways we would never accept in medical or pharmaceutical industry, these companies employed new technologies in unsafe ways while claiming otherwise.

Twenty to 40 years later the effects could no longer be ignored and the cleanup began. The worst part is that taxpayers paid to clean up the mess.

It would be unfortunate to repeat that history in our city.

Krenning: As a planning commissioner I have spent a great deal of time working with city staff, the City Council, property owners and the community developing a set of enhanced environmental standards for those wanting to operate in the city. These regulations allow Loveland to balance local control over the industry, protect the rights of property owners, and protect residents and the environment. The city's developed standards go as far as a local government can go without triggering a costly and needless lawsuit against the city by the state of Colorado.

Despite the hard work of all involved, a small but vocal group wants to circumvent the work that has been done and impose a ban on the energy industry in Loveland, an industry which incidentally employs over 500 residents, our neighbors and family members.

I support the right of citizens to effect change through the petition process. I equally support the right of citizens to challenge decisions of local government through the legal process. For the moment, the issue is awaiting a decision by a judge. If and when the time is right, I will support an election so that all of Loveland can be heard on this important issue. Anyone who knows me knows that my track record supports citizen involvement and the sharing of ideas by interested people. I listen and I make decisions based on the common good of the community.

How should Loveland distinguish itself among the communities of Northern Colorado?

Fortune: Loveland residents have a safe place to live, raise a family and work. Many people tell me they love living here. Let's keep it that way as we grow.

This involves building strategically placed fire stations for quick access to our homes and businesses. For everyone's safety we must plan ahead for enough police to discourage potential offenders. We'll need enough emergency responders to come to our aid when accidents occur.

I would support infrastructure that makes Loveland attractive to businesses that provide good-paying jobs, because these in turn create work in car repair, medical services, retail, etc. and can reduce anxiety over lack of stable employment.

Now that we've had three "100-year floods" in 75 years, we'll refine preparation plans for the next one.

I could offer more examples of ways to distinguish Loveland in terms of safety and resulting quality of life but one thing I've learned from listening to my SAINT riders. That is, there are as many visions for Loveland as there are histories. Wise input can be found in each. Loveland's future will benefit if City Councilors remain alert for that wisdom by listening carefully, as if all Loveland residents matter.

I will listen that carefully.

Krenning: "Loveland -- everything you love" is already distinguished with its beautiful lake in the center of town, as the gateway to Rocky Mountain National Park, and as the Valentine capital of the world. Loveland has always been distinguished from our neighbors in Fort Collins and Boulder as having a common sense, conservative and realistic approach to local government. Loveland is known as a place where you can find a quality school system, buy a home at a reasonable price, live safely, drink clean water and drive on well-maintained roads. Loveland enjoys low taxes, and provides quality services to its residents. As a council member I will fight to maintain Loveland's long standing character and conservative values. I will avoid the temptation of some to spend city resources on those things that are wanted by a few but not needed by the many.

Government is changing and it will be important for Loveland to be distinguished as a community that has a local government which provides basic, affordable services; stays out of the way of those wanting to start a business, stays out of the pocketbooks of citizens and makes decisions based on the entire community, not special interests.

Jessica Maher can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 516, or maherj@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @JessicaMaherRH.