Mary Hester takes over as president following retirement of co-founders Heinrichs and Meer

Hester (Photo courtesy Intrado)

Mary Hester hasn't been with Intrado since the very beginning, but she's been there long enough to be comfortable saying "I grew up in the company."

This summer Hester took over as the new president of the company following the retirement of co-founders George Heinrichs and Stephen Meer, who founded Intrado 35 years ago.

Hester joined the company full-time in 1996, although she had been there part- time for several years before that.

"I was like, employee No. 150," Hester said this week inside Intrado's 277,000-square-foot headquarters at the Boulder County Business Center. "At the time we did QA (quality assurance work) there were maybe 30."

Hester, like Heinrichs and Meer, is a former police dispatcher. She worked for the Boulder Police Department for 13 years; Heinrichs and Meer were working for the Boulder County Sheriff's Department when they founded what was then SCC Communications as a part-time consulting company in 1979. It started out as a software company selling CAD — computer-aided dispatch — systems to what are called PSAPs — Public Safety Answering Points.

The founders recruited dispatchers such as Hester to work part-time in their off-hours helping them test systems. After a few years of that, having young children convinced Hester that being a mom really didn't go well with the shift work that comes with being a dispatcher.

Advertisement

"I wouldn't have gone anywhere that wasn't attached to saving lives," she said. "And SCC was."

A couple years before Hester joined SCC full-time it had changed its business model from being sellers of licensed products to being an outsourcing company that both public safety agencies and private companies would hire to manage their 911 services. In 2003 the company changed its name to Intrado, a Spanish term meaning formal entry or portal.

Intrado no longer provides reverse-911 calls as it did in the old days but public safety remains its primary focus, and it does that by providing network capability, infrastructure and database management. The company's technology handles more than 250 million 911 calls annually, and through the years Hester has helped guide the company into different endeavors that still match its core business model.

Before being named president earlier this year Hester was the company's executive vice president since 2008.

"I've been here through all the building of the divisions and the changes in technology," Hester said.

Omaha, Neb.-based West Corp. bought out Intrado in 2006 for $465 million, though the company remains headquartered in Longmont. About 800 of its 1,100 employees work at its headquarters, another 200 or so work at a site in Montreal and the rest are spread out over sites in Illinois, California and Austin, Texas, according to spokesman Ray Wendell.

Hester, 56, lives in Boulder with her husband of 31 years. Their two grown children, both professionals, also live in Boulder, she said.

Adapt and innovate

Hester has seen first-hand how the rapid advance of telecommunications technology has forced Intrado to adapt and innovate.

"We try to be ahead of what's next," she said.

Landlines aren't gone yet, she notes: Intrado still manages some 170 million landline telephone numbers, and traditional carriers remain major clients of Intrado.

But wireless and it's various incarnations — such as Voice Over Internet Protocol communication — has forced PSAPs to adapt, or be left behind. A mandate put out by the Federal Communications Commission requires that all carriers be able to provide text-to-911 services by the end of this year, and Hester suspects that will push the many late-adopting PSAPs into equipping themselves with the technology to handle text-to-911.

Text-to-911 already exists in various spots around the country but it's far from prevalent, Wendell said. But, he notes, Intrado was the first, having introduced it in a county in Iowa in 2009. And it is spreading, although slowly.

Hester said that as all carriers are required to provide it, more PSAPs will feel the need to upgrade.

"Now, with the new technologies, (public safety agencies) really have to rethink how they divide up their funds," she said. "Communities are going to push to make it happen, and the funding's going to have to be there.

Hester brought up a graphic but all-too-real example: There's a school shooting, and kids are hiding under their desks in a classroom, texting 911. Sometimes that's going to work and sometimes it's not, depending on the location.

"They don't know that it doesn't work because they've grown up with new technology," she said.

Contact Times-Call staff writer Tony Kindelspire at 303-684-5291 or tkindelspire@times-call.com