As the law now stands it would apply to the current UAW plan for those hired before October 2007

Buy Photo UAW President Dennis Williams (Photo: Regina Boone/ Detroit Free Press)Buy Photo

Veteran UAW workers at Fiat Chrysler — and eventually those at General Motors and Ford — could face their first deductibles on health care if the federal government's so-called Cadillac tax isn't revised or repealed by 2018, according to a side letter in a tentative UAW-FCA four-year agreement.

The tax, part of the Affordable Care Act, takes effect in 2018. It levies a 40% tax on individual health care plans that cost more than $10,200 per year, or family plans that cost more than $27,500 annually. The tax applies to the amount over the limit.

As the law now stands it would apply to the current UAW plan for those hired before October 2007. The most common UAW plan for senior workers has no deductibles and features comparatively generous benefits.

While the tax would be paid by health insurers rather than the workers, automakers and UAW leaders assume the cost of the tax would be passed on through higher premiums.

Kathleen Neal, a health care benefits executive at FCA, wrote in a letter to a UAW official that the Cadillac Tax for more expensive plans could result in a maximum $400 deductible for some members and $800 maximum for family coverage.

More broadly, the union and FCA agreed to establish a health care co-op and invite GM and Ford to join it. The co-op's mission is to study best practices for improving health care results at the lowest feasible cost.

Last week in a news conference UAW President Dennis Williams said the co-op should find enough savings to reduce costs of workers' plans below the levels that trigger the so-called Cadillac tax.

Together FCA, Ford and General Motors spend $2 billion annually on medical care for UAW workers and their families. According to estimates from each company, GM and Ford have seen their health care costs rise to about $800 million this year from about $550 million each in 2011. Fiat Chrysler’s costs have increased to more than $600 million from about $350 million a year during the same period.

While the union agreed to create a trust that now manages health care for more than 700,000 retirees, the companies and UAW realize failure to control such costs for current workers could become a serious burden, especially if the U.S. economy slows in coming years.

It was against the backdrop of concerns about rising health care costs that Williams suggested creating a co-op, and the automakers have agreed to research the idea.

Under the agreement, the co-op would have a board comprised of two representatives from each company and two representatives from the Retiree Medical Benefits Trust, which administers health care for the union's more than 700,000 retirees.

The letter, sent to Norwood Jewell, UAW vice president of the FCA department, ends by saying the company will consult with Jewell's department to try to minimize the tax.

It is unlikely the tax or resulting deductibles would apply to Tier 2 workers hired after 2007. They already pay $300 deductibles for individual coverage and families pay a $600 deductible. In addition, Tier 2 individual plans carry a 10% co-insurance contribution up to $700 a year, with family plans incurring co-insurance of up to $1,400 a year.

Bigger health care plans afoot

In a separate letter, Jewell agreed to meet with FCA's chief executive quarterly, beginning in 2017 to review the co-op's progress in reducing costs.

If GM and Ford join, the co-op would have an annual budget of $1.6 million with each participant contributing $400,000 a year. The agreement calls for the co-op to have "a limited staff, a data analysis provider selected by the board and such internal or external resources as the board may determine to be necessary."

The co-op's mission would be to find hospitals and other providers that seem to deliver frequent treatments, for example, knee or hip replacements, that are performed not only at the lowest cost, but also with the fastest rates of patient recovery.

"The co-op shall serve as a forum for the parties to share information, data, knowledge, resources and expertise in an effort to improve delivery and value of health care benefits.

"Where mutually agreed the co-op may also serve as a vehicle for joint purchasing of services."

But there is a long list of activities the co-op will not pursue, including:

Sponsoring an employee benefit plan

Modifying existing benefits

Compeling any of the companies to take any specific action

Communicating with any participants in a medical plan without their consent

Communicating with vendors or service providers

Contact Greg Gardner: 313-222-8762 or ggardner@freepress.com. Follow him on Twitter @GregGardner12

Read or Share this story: http://on.freep.com/1Kv4Egt