(AP Photo/Matt Sayles) (Photo: AP ) Story Highlights Mobile Life Solutions developed a smartphone app that restricts touch screen function in a vehicle

Driver distractions were primary factors in more than 52,500 motor vehicle collisions in Kentucky

Kentucky and West Virginia motorists can download the “TextLimit“ app free of charge through April

Louisville resident David Meers wanted to make sure his teenage daughters could drive without being tempted to use their smartphones.

So Meers and his company, Mobile Life Solutions, developed a smartphone application last year that restricts touch screen and calling functions for a driver in a moving vehicle.

The application works with a smartphone’s global positioning software to determine the speed of the user’s vehicle, Meeks said. When a vehicle reaches a pre-selected speed, the smartphone’s touch-screen is disabled, making texting and other functions impossible. Administrators of the app can set it so people who are passengers in vehicles can still use their phones.

Administrators also can track in real time where the phones they own are and how much battery life they have. The app also alerts its administrators if it has been disabled by a user.

“This is a great tool for parents and business owners who want to see where their child or employee is,” Meers said.

Bill Bell, executive director of Kentucky’s Transportation Cabinet, said in a news release that the cabinet has extensively tested the application, and he believes it will help reduce “escalating incidents of distracted driving deaths and collisions in Kentucky and the U.S.”

Driver distractions were noted as primary factors in more than 52,500 motor vehicle collisions in Kentucky last year, according to a Transportation Cabinet news release. About 9,000 of those collisions caused serious injuries and 163 resulted in deaths.

“These numbers account for 43 percent of the total crashes and 25 percent of the total fatal crashes occurring on Kentucky’s roadways last year,” Bell said.

TextLimit.com works with all Android, Apple and Blackberry 3G and 4G LTE devices, Meers said.

Meers, the former chief operating officer for commercial operations at Vision Airlines, and his company also developed an app last year that can be used to deter drunken driving.

“No DUI Kentucky” has a one-touch dial feature for reporting drunken drivers, a list of local taxi services and sober ride programs, and a blood alcohol content calculator.

Mobile Life Solutions teamed up with the Kentucky Office of Highway Safety to provide the new app free of charge to Kentucky motorists.

“If we can help one person out of an accident, then we’ve done our job,” Meers said.

Kentucky and West Virginia motorists can download the “TextLimit“ app — which normally sells for $24.99 — free of charge throughout April as part of National Distracted Driving Awareness Month.

Reporter Patrick T. Sullivan can be reached at (502) 582-4335 or on Twitter by following @CJ_PSullivan.

Textlimit coupon

The TextLimit application is available free-of-charge to Kentucky residents at TextLimit.com throughout April. The coupon code for the app is NOTEXTKY.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1klyJCz