South Carolina’s junior U.S. Sen. Tim Scott saw his first piece of legislation become law this month, a bipartisan effort that tweaked existing Obamacare regulations and helps small business owners who faced employee insurance premium increases next year.

Online To stay up-to-date on South Carolina politics, go to palmettopolitics.com or download the Palmetto Politics app for iOS or Android.

After the measure was approved by both chambers — done by voice votes each — it was quickly signed by President Barack Obama.

While there was no bill-signing ceremony to mark the occasion, Scott received a congratulatory email from the White House saying it had met with the president’s approval.

“It was a little more painful than it might appear,” said Scott, who introduced the Senate version of the proposal earlier this spring.

The legislation was dubbed the Protecting Affordable Coverage for Employee Act. It’s designed to head off some of the premium increases that smaller businesses were facing in January as the Affordable Care Act, more commonly known as Obamacare, takes hold.

The bill addresses the definition of what the size a small business is considered. Previously, the health law defined small businesses as any operation having up to 50 employees. That figure was scheduled to go up to 100 workers beginning in January.

Scott, R-S.C., who sits on the Senate’s Health and Small Business and Finance committees, agreed with several business organizations that said doubling the definition of what a small business is would increase employer health care costs significantly. For some, it would have meant “owners will have to make a decision” between raises, bonuses and even keeping people on staff, Scott said. The change means companies can stave off the premium increase in employee health insurance of about 18 percent.

The legislation keeps that small business definition at 50 workers but still allows for states to increase the number if they opt to do so.

The effort was endorsed by the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, the National Retail Federation, the National Restaurant Association and the National Federation of Independent Business. New Hampshire Democrat Jeanne Shaheen was a supporter, as well.

S.C. Chamber of Commerce CEO Ted Pitts said Scott’s bill avoids higher health care premiums for about 900 chamber members.

“We applaud Sen. Scott for his leadership on mitigating harmful effects the Affordable Care Act could have on small businesses,” he said, adding that chamber members see the ACA as one of the biggest impediments to growth and job creation.

The passage was seen as a rare point of agreement on Capitol Hill on Obamacare, which Democrats have defended on the presidential campaign trail and Republicans have pledged to dismantle.

It also wasn’t always smooth sailing for the effort. Some Democrats wanted to only delay the jump to 100 employees, not to halt it.

While Scott has had other suggestions become part of passed legislation, this was his first solo effort after joining the Senate in 2013 after Gov. Nikki Haley appointed him to fill the vacancy created when Jim DeMint quit to run the conservative Heritage Foundation.

Even with initiating the change, Scott remains among the Republicans in Washington who want to see Obamacare completely scrapped for good.

“If you can’t get rid of it wholesale, then try to eliminate it piece by piece,” he said.

Reach Schuyler Kropf at (843) 937-5551.