American consumers threw caution to the wind in April and ran up their credit-card balances at the fastest pace in almost 13 years.

The amount of outstanding revolving credit — a figure that’s mostly credit-card debt — rose at a seasonally adjusted annual rate of 12.3% to $870.44 billion in April, according to a Federal Reserve report released Friday. That was the fastest rate of increase since November 2001, when annual growth was 12.33%.

Overall consumer credit, including student and car loans but excluding real-estate loans like mortgages, increased by $20.85 billion, or at a 10.23% annual rate.

The surge in credit-card usage marks a new sign of rising consumer confidence as well as increased willingness by banks to open up their credit spigots.

“To the extent that consumers are feeling more comfortable about taking on debt, that would be a good thing,” said Barclays economist Cooper Howes. “But we’ll need to see more months of data for a confirmation of that trend.”

For most of the recovery, growth in consumer credit has been driven by student lending by the federal government and, more recently, by bank financing for auto purchases.

Pushed by regulators to hold more capital and decrease risk in the aftermath of the recession, lenders have tightened standards for everything from mortgages to credit cards to auto loans.

But five years into the economic recovery, attitudes have been changing. A separate Fed report on Thursday showed that Americans’ wealth hit a fresh record in the first quarter and that households are growing more comfortable about borrowing again. It showed that household borrowing rose at an annualized 2% pace in the first quarter, compared with a 0.2% pace in the fourth quarter.

The Federal Reserve’s latest quarterly survey of bank loan officers, released last month, showed that most respondents reported easing standards for this type of lending in the first three months of this year and that customer demand had improved. Respondents forecast growth in credit-card lending would reach prerecession levels of around 6% by 2016. It grew by less than 1% last year.