To the people of Baltimore and the demonstrators across America: I heard your call for ‘No justice, no peace.’ Your peace is sincerely needed as I work to deliver justice on behalf of this young man.

Reportedly, State’s Attorney Marilyn Mosby has become a rockstar on the left for her announcement of the prosecution of the Baltimore 6, using the catch phrase “No justice, no peace,” favored by race agitator Al Sharpton.

To those that are angry, hurt or have their own experiences of injustice at the hands of police officers I urge you to channel that energy peacefully as we prosecute this case I have heard your calls for ‘No justice, no peace,’ however your peace is sincerely needed as I work to deliver justice on behalf of Freddie Gray.

She has indicated that the motive for her prosecution is appeasement of the mobs that have ravaged Baltimore, not the impartial seeking of justice, handing the defendants’ attorneys grounds for a change of venue, a special prosecutor, and ultimately appeal of any guilty verdicts she might obtain.

It doesn’t take a prophet to foresee that a change of venue would spark more protests in Baltimore, particularly if the venue chosen is in Western Maryland, far less media-saturated than Baltimore and the DC suburb of Montgomery County, both of which have heavy black populations. Race aside, someplace like Frederick, MD is the logical choice, relatively isolated as it is from the passions that have enflamed the Baltimore area.

Mosby’s husband, a Baltimore city councilor, has been very vocal, and could be pointed to as prejudicing her, demanding therefore a special prosecutor, But her lionization by the left could also make her replacement an incitement to the mob. So, too her campaign contributions from the Gray family and their attorney.

She has also explicitly linked this prosecution to a political agenda:

Last but certainly not least, to the youth of the city. I will seek justice on your behalf. This is a moment. This is your moment. Let’s insure we have peaceful and productive rallies that will develop structural and systemic changes for generations to come. You’re at the forefront of this cause and as young people, our time is now.

A thought experiment: imagine a crime committed against a white person by blacks (or a mixed group, like the Baltimore 6), where the prosecutor spoke to the passions of a white mob as Mosby has done. The denunciations would be instantaneous.

I have no idea what happened the caused the death of Freddie Gray, and I do want any criminal behavior brought to justice. But I detest prosecutions driven by politics, not the facts. And that is clearly what is happening under Marilyn Mosby. Her pandering is creating a set of expectations that likely will be unmet. Instead of joining the Al Sharpton faction, she should have promised equal justice before the law for the defendants as well as the late Freddie Gray.