With Alex Tanguay out for an undetermined amount of time because of a facial fracture and Dennis Everberg likely lost for several weeks, the pressure on the Avalanche’s top forwards amps up that much more.

Tanguay was injured Thursday when he was hit in the face by a slap shot from Washington Capitals star Alex Ovechkin. Avs coach Patrick Roy said Tanguay’s jaw isn’t broken, as first feared, but he won’t play Saturday against the Carolina Hurricanes. There is no timetable on a possible return.

Everberg, who has played reasonably well as a rookie winger, suffered a separated shoulder on a third-period hit from Washington’s Tom Wilson.

Tanguay, who turned 35 on Friday, leads the Avalanche with seven goals. His loss means forwards such as Ryan O’Reilly, the team leader last season with 28 goals, must start producing if the Avs are to have hope of being a playoff club. O’Reilly has only two goals in 20 games this season.

“You look at how many one-goal games we’ve had, and if I could step up and contribute more, we’d probably have three or four more wins,” O’Reilly said. “It’s definitely a big issue for myself and something I’m definitely struggling with. It needs to change soon if we want to win some more games.”

O’Reilly has put 45 shots on net, but his 4.4 shooting percentage is lowest among Avalanche forwards. His minus-11 rating also is the lowest among the forwards.

“I have to be better, that’s for sure. What worked for me last year isn’t working for me this year,” O’Reilly said. “You look at all the great athletes in sports, they always find new ways to reinvent themselves, and that’s something that I have to do. It’s not easy right now. It’s not like we’re still winning games. We’re not winning games, and if I can step up, who knows?”

Roy keeps telling his forwards to go harder to the net, screen the goalie and fight for loose pucks. That applies to O’Reilly as much as everyone else.

“These areas offensively need to be better for us if we’re going to score,” Roy said. “And our lengths of our shifts have to be better. When you’re staying out there for a minute and 20 seconds, it’s going to catch up to you. Maybe Ryan isn’t shooting the puck with as much confidence, but as a coach I’m certainly not going to throw him under the bus. He’s not the only one (who isn’t scoring). Yes, last year he scored 28 goals and I’m sure that puts some pressure on him, but he’ll get something soon. He’s working hard and doing a lot of good things out there.”

Said O’Reilly: “It’s got to start inside myself. I’ve got to be physical, use my size and get to the front of the net.”