AP PHOTOS: A selection of pictures from the past week

hello

A security guard walks by the Temple of Debod at sunset in Madrid, Spain, Monday, Feb. 29, 2016. The ancient temple, which was originally built in Egypt, was dismantled and relocated in Madrid as a donation from the Egyptian state to Spain in 1968. Associated Press

In this photo taken through a gap of a television camera tripod, German Chancellor Angela Merkel attends a news conference with the Prime Minister of Croatia Tihomir Oreskovic after talks at the chancellery in Berlin, Germany, Tuesday, March 1, 2016. Associated Press

A Syrian man plays with his one-year-old child as refugees and migrants wait to be allowed to cross the border to Macedonia in the northern Greek border station of Idomeni on Tuesday, March 1, 2016. Some 7,000 migrants, including many from Syria and Iraq, are crammed into a tiny camp at the Greek border village of Idomeni, and hundreds more are arriving daily. Associated Press

Lady Gaga performs "Til It Happens To You" that is nominated for best original song from "The Hunting Ground" at the Oscars on Sunday, Feb. 28, 2016, at the Dolby Theatre in Los Angeles. (Photo by Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP) Associated Press

A woman runs through an artwork created by artist Filippo Minelli, a new work in his series Silence/Shapes, where colorful smoke bombs were let off in Somerset House’s courtyard, in London, Wednesday, March 2, 2016. Photographs of similar performances will be shown in a new street art exhibition, Venturing Beyond: Graffiti and the Everyday Utopias of the Street, which opens to the public at Somerset House on March 3. Associated Press

Russia’s Soyuz TMA-18M space capsule carrying the International Space Station (ISS) crew of U.S. astronaut Scott Kelly and Russian cosmonauts Mikhail Kornienko and Sergey Volkov prepares to land in a remote area outside the town of Dzhezkazgan, Kazakhstan, on Wednesday, March 2, 2016. (Krill Kudryavtsev/Pool photo via AP) Associated Press

A man covered with plastic bag for protection from the wind and cold, fishes through an ice hole in the Finnish Gulf west of St.Petersburg, Russia, Tuesday, March 1, 2016. Associated Press

A hot air balloon is silhouetted against the evening sky as the sun sets north of Phoenix on Wednesday, March 2, 2016. Associated Press

A Pakistani Kushti wrestler looks at himself in a mirror during a training session, in Lahore, Pakistan, Wednesday, March 2, 2016. Kushti, an Indo-Pakistani form of wrestling, is several thousand years old and is the national sport in Pakistan. Associated Press

Pictures of soccer fans are displayed on the ferris wheel as part of the upcoming Euro 2016 tournament, in Paris, Friday, March 4, 2016. The UEFA Euro 2016 soccer tournament is scheduled to be held in France from June 10 to July 10, 2016. Associated Press

Highlights from the weekly AP photo report, a gallery featuring a mix of front-page photography, the odd image you might have missed and lasting moments our editors think you should see.

This week's gallery features pictures of soccer fans displayed on a Ferris wheel as part of the upcoming Euro 2016 tournament in Paris; a Pakistani Kushti wrestler looks at himself in a mirror during a training session in Lahore; and a hot air balloon is silhouetted against the evening sky as the sun sets north of Phoenix.

___

This gallery contains photos published Feb. 28-March 4, 2016.

See the latest AP photo galleries: http://apne.ws/TXeCBN

The Archive: Top photo highlights from previous weeks: http://apne.ws/13QUFKJ

___

Follow AP photographers on Twitter: http://twitter.com/AP/lists/ap-photographers

Follow AP Images on Twitter: http://twitter.com/AP_Images

Visit AP Images online: http://www.apimages.com http://www.apimages.com/

___

This gallery was produced by Courtney Dittmar in New York.