Published May 23, 2015 at 11:06 a.m. Tweet

It takes a lot - a lot - to get a theater audience to sit for almost three hours and then rise to their feet as one when time is up to shower accolades on the people who have captured their imaginations for so long.

But give those three hours to Stephen Sondheim, a wickedly beautiful cast, spectacular costumes by Shima Orans and joyful and passionate direction by Edwin Cahill, and it's as if you've only been seated for a moment or two.

That's the feeling at "Into the Woods," the Sondheim musical that opened at the Skylight Music Theatre Friday night.

To say that this is Sondheim at his most brilliant is to jump off a cliff without a parachute. This is the man who wrote "Company," "Assassins," "Sweeney Todd" and "A Little Night Music." He wrote "Send In The Clowns" and the classic "America" from "West Side Story" for heaven's sake.

There is an argument to be made that Sondheim may well be the greatest of all American composers. You won't find many people who were at the Skylight Friday night who would disagree with that assessment.

"Woods" is a mash up of fairy tales from the Brothers Grimm. The story involves a baker and his wife who want a child and a witch who will give them one, if they can capture four things the witch wants.

Along the way of their search, they meet Little Red Riding Hood, her grandmother and the wolf; Jack, of Jack and the Beanstalk fame; Cinderella, her wicked stepmother and the two wicked sisters; two princes and the golden tressed Rapunzel.

The first act ends on a happily-ever-after note, with everyone getting what they want. Act two teaches lessons about being careful of what you wish for, it may not be all that it's cracked up to be. There are prices to be paid for wish fulfillment.

This musical is not an easy piece of work, and the music direction of Mark Mandarano is especially successful in bringing sense to a challenging score. Sondheim is at his most complex with actors singing different pieces all at the same time. The quick bits from actor to actor to actor come at a rapid fire pace and take great discipline and lots of practice.

Perhaps the greatest strength of Sondheim the composer, and it's on vivid display in this production, is his almost genius-like use of words. The language tumbles out in surprise after surprise and wraps you in a warmth that is stunning.

There is a long list of wonderful songs in this show, but perhaps nothing as poignant and smart as "Children Will Listen." Susan Spencer, who is an absolute smash as the witch, gives this song just a perfect amount of honesty and wisdom as the show nears it's end. Bernadette Peters played the witch in the original Broadway production, and you can she her sing the song here.



The song is a moving and emotional exclamation point at the end of the final show of the season for Skylight.

This production is a perfect example of going out on a high note.

"Into the Woods" runs through June 14 and information on showtimes and tickets is available here.