Neighborhood Health Plan of RI Welcoming Former UnitedHealth Members

Neighborhood Health Plan of Rhode Island announced on Wednesday that it is ready and willing to welcome new members who will have to choose a different health plan once UnitedHealthcare leaves the state's health insurance exchange next year.

“Neighborhood is a Rhode Island-based company that is deeply connected to the people who live and work in this state. Neighborhood’s primary focus is making sure our health plans are accessible and affordable. That’s how we put the needs of our members first. This has been true for decades when it comes to our partnership with the state, and continues to be so now that we offer coverage on the state’s insurance exchange both to individuals and to small businesses,” said Brenda Whittle, Neighborhood’s Vice President of External Affairs.

Neighborhood has received both local and national awards praising it for delivering top quality care that focuses on the individual and not just the bottom line.

Whittle added, “Neighborhood’s primary goals are the same today as they were when we were founded almost a quarter of a century ago. We’re not here to make our shareholders richer, but to make our community stronger.”

UnitedHealth Group Leaving

UnitedHealth announced on Tuesday that they will leave most of the Affordable Care Act in the 34 states that the company participates in.

UnitedHealth cited raising health provider costs, which were reflected in revenue figures which missed expectations in the company's Q1 earnings report, as a major factor in the decision.

Neighborhood Health Plan

Neighborhood Health Plan of Rhode Island is a non-profit HMO that was founded in 1994 to make sure everyone in the state has access to high-quality, affordable health care. Currently serving 185,000 members, Neighborhood has been rated by NCQA as one of the top Medicaid health plans in America every year since ratings began twelve years ago – one of only two organizations in the nation to earn this distinction.

Click Here for more information

Related Articles

Enjoy this post? Share it with others.