Many patients are unaware that their health insurance covers over-the-counter drugs, like Plan B, if they get a prescription. Getty Images/Hero Images

While President Barack Obama's health care law requires insurance companies to cover some over-the-counter medications and devices, a small catch may be causing some patients to forgo care or spend more money than needed: You have to get a doctor's prescription to avoid out-of-pocket costs.

The Affordable Care Act requires that insurers cover 10 so-called essential health benefits, some of which can come with no copay, including methods of contraception and smoking cessation tools approved by the Food and Drug Administration, as well as breast pumps for new moms.

"That used to be a $400 trip to Babies R Us," Jake Sunderland, a spokesman for the Oregon Department of Consumer and Business Services, says of the lactation support benefit.

But because some of these medications or devices are also available over the counter, whether or how health insurance plans can step in to cover their costs can be unclear.

[READ: Supreme Court to Hear Birth Control Challenge to Obamacare]

"There is so much confusion," says Kate Connors, a spokeswoman for the American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists. "Women are going to the pharmacy and sometimes the pharmacist doesn't know what's covered or the insurance companies don't know. Things are very inconsistent."

Advocates say this confusion is in part attributable to the benefits being so new. Mara Gandal-Powers, counsel for health and reproductive rights at the National Women's Law Center, points out that deciphering what they don't have to pay for can be particularly difficult for people who have gotten insurance for the first time under the law, commonly referred to as "Obamacare."

But such logistical questions hold particular weight in the ever-changing health care landscape. California, for example, has moved toward giving pharmacists the ability to prescribe birth control, and Oregon pharmacists will be able to do the same beginning Jan. 1, just as they already can with smoking cessation medications. Members of Congress from both parties also have introduced bills to offer birth control pills over the counter.

Dr. Holly Puritz, an OB-GYN in Norfolk, Virginia, says patients have asked her for prescriptions for over-the-counter pain reliever Motrin or for heartburn drugs Prilosec or Zantac, knowing that with a prescription their insurance will pick up much or all of the tab. "It's very important to patients because many of them face high deductibles, and health care can become very expensive for them," she says.

But patients often don't realize that asking for a prescription is the most cost-effective way to access these and other drugs if they have insurance. Plan B, for instance – a type of emergency contraception known as the morning-after pill – is typically in the family planning section of most drug stores or supermarkets, and can be purchased at the front cashier's register just like Tylenol.

If a doctor calls in a prescription for the emergency contraception, however, then a patient wouldn't have to pay the over-the-counter price of $40 to $50 for Plan B or the cost for its generic counterpart, because the prescription would be covered by insurance with no copay.

"I don't think most people know this stuff," Puritz says. "It's very difficult to find it out."

The American Congress of Obstetricians and Gynecologists and the National Women's Law Center support extending an over-the-counter status similar to Plan B's to the birth control pill, but requiring neither a prescription from a doctor nor a copay.

But taking a doctor out of the equation completely raises other issues. Industry trade group America's Health Insurance Plans, for example, says physicians can help guide a woman to the method of birth control that's best for them. "One of the concerns is whether women are really getting access to the right treatment they need, or to the ones most convenient but not necessarily right for them," says Clare Krusing, a spokeswoman for the organization.

When it comes to any product available both over the counter and with a prescription, it's unclear who is responsible for informing patients about their options – whether federal or state officials, doctors, pharmacists, insurance companies or even drugstore cashiers.

"We can be taught how to play each new game, but when it's the beginning everyone is learning the new rules and patients are getting the short end of the stick," Puritz says. "I don't know who can better inform them."

Gandal-Powers, of the National Women's Law Center, says a pharmacist she knows does inform women who seek emergency contraception that they could get it without a copay if they request a prescription. "I don't think every pharmacist knows that, but there is a lot for them to know," she says. "We are still in the process of doing education and I think we'll get there."

[ALSO: Yes, Death Rates for Middle-Aged Whites Are Rising – but Why?]

Women also have the option of requesting a prescription for emergency contraception during their wellness visits to a physician, she points out. They could simply not get it filled until they need it.

CVS Health, which quit selling tobacco products in its stores last year and replaced them with an assortment of smoking cessation products, has trained pharmacists to discuss customers' options for kicking the habit. But if a customer purchases over-the-counter smoking cessation products like a nicotine patch or gum, cashiers are not responsible for informing people that they could get treatment through insurance without a copay. "That is a conversation that needs to occur between a customer and their doctor," a CVS Health spokesman tells U.S. News in an email.

Still, CVS pharmacies have informational brochures and signs next to smoking cessation products in their stores to draw attention to the services they offer. Such materials note that some methods may be covered by insurance.

Erika Sward, an assistant vice president at the American Lung Association, says that while discussing smoking cessation options with a health care provider can increase the chances that someone would successfully be able to quit, having the methods available over the counter ensures that getting them can be just as easy as picking up a tobacco product, she says.

"We ultimately want to make it as easy as possible for people to get the help they need to quit," she says.

Sunderland says once consumers know what their benefits are, they will be more satisfied with their plans.