In the perpetual struggle to determine playoff teams, it has come down to man against machine. And Colorado has chosen machine.

Take a good look at the Class 5A brackets for boys and girls basketball. They are to be the last of their kind. Big-school postseason outlays in the future will be untouched by human hands.

The seeding committees for hoops have been deemed obsolete.

“I enjoyed it,” said Bob Ottewill, former commissioner of the Colorado High School Activities Association and a regular member of the boys committee who donated his time to seed the field.

“We had a dedicated group of people,”said Rick Hergenreder, a retired teacher in Jefferson County who has been a part of the girls’ side for all 13 years.

But they will be replaced by a formula punched into a computer. So instead of people named Bob and Rick, we will have RPI, an acronym for ratio percentage index, which will take one quarter of a team’s record, add one half of its opponents’ winning percentage and bring in one quarter of your opponents’ winning percentage … or something like that.

Don’t know about you, but this switch alarms me for several reasons.

For one, the RPI, which will be used in team sports, including baseball this spring, is simply a flavor of the month. Look at local history. The NFL instituted a wild-card system. So did Colorado preps. The NCAA started using a seeding committee. So did Colorado preps. And the RPI took hold in college ranks. Sadly, so it will in Colorado preps. Betcha it will change again.

For another, officials conveniently will be able to hide behind RPI numbers once the first sets of playoff teams are set. Look at the numbers, they’ll say, as opposed to taking responsibility.

But where the RPI will really leave a void is in asking and answering questions the seeding committee has been doing since its inception.

For example, the seeding committee can tell us if the Overland boys team has an inside game. The RPI can’t.

The seeding committee isn’t afraid to say athleticism doesn’t bother the Eaglecrest boys team. The RPI won’t.

The seeding committee knows whether the Highlands Ranch girls team’s press will be a big bother to opponents. The RPI doesn’t.

The seeding committee can give a sense about the upstart Greeley West boys team and whether it’s for real. The RPI offers little clue.

The seeding committee, because its members have seen dozens of games, knows whether the Broomfield girls can run a delay game and whether the Grandview girls can convert free throws. The RPI provides no such indications.

And the seeding committee can convey and take into account any team’s problems, depth, injuries and coaching ability. The RPI? Nothing on the subjects.

In addition to driving thousands of miles, Ottewill also has learned in his years as a committee member that “if a system doesn’t weigh the end of the season more heavily than the beginning, that’s a flaw.”

The RPI doesn’t.

Hergenreder insists he has heard from many of the coaches “who wish you guys were still there with your boots on the ground at the games. It’s more important than numbers in a computer.”

I didn’t always agree with the seeding committee, but I respected it because there was personal interest and pride.

If we’re going to RPI, why don’t we just get a Madden program, have local computer programmers provide team entries and watch all of it on our smartphones?

Sadly, the neurotic approach to Colorado prep playoffs lives.

Neil H. Devlin: ndevlin@denverpost.com or @neildevlin