Centerbridge Partners, the investment firm co-founded by the former head of private equity at alternative investment giant Blackstone Group, has attracted more than $11 billion of demand for its $5.75 billion third fund within just six weeks of launching.

The firm, which has offices in New York and London and primarily focuses on private equity and distressed-debt investments, has received more than twice as much demand for Centerbridge Capital Partners III than its upper limit can allow within just six weeks of the fund’s private placement memoranda being issued, according to investors.

This has meant some limited partners have had to scale back the amount that they planned to commit, one of the investors said.

A first close, which could also be a final close, is expected by the end of the year, one of the investors added. A final close by year-end would make it one of the fastest fundraisings of 2014. Private equity and distressed private equity funds globally have taken an average of 16 months to reach a final close so far this year, according to data provider Preqin.

A spokeswoman for Centerbridge declined to comment.

One investor said limited partners rated Centerbridge because of its ability to execute buyout and debt investments in both healthy and distressed companies through the same fund.

The firm’s debut fund, which raised $3 billion in 2006, is currently performing roughly three-times as well as the industry ­average. The fund was generating a net internal rate of return of 21.14% as of September 30, 2013, according to public disclosures from U.S. pension fund California State Teachers’ Retirement System, an investor in the vehicle. This compares to a 6.5% median IRR for private equity funds of that vintage and a 7.7% median IRR for distressed private equity funds of the same vintage, according to Preqin.

Centerbridge was set up in 2006 by Mark Gallogly, former head of the private equity investment team at Blackstone, and Jeffrey Aronson, former head of distressed-debt investing at hedge fund Angelo Gordon. Mr. Gallogly was at Blackstone for 16 years, while Mr. Aronson was at Angelo Gordon for over 17 years.

Centerbridge has since been involved in some of the world’s most high-profile restructurings. It is one of a group of creditors that are owed $24.4 billion by a division of Energy Future Holdings, the private equity-backed Texas-based energy company that filed for Chapter 11 bankruptcy in April. Last year the firm also bought debt in Billabong International, the Australian surfwear maker that sought a rescue package after a debt-fuelled expansion began to unwind during the financial crisis.