The busy life of Mary Nguyen just got busier.

The chef-restaurateur behind Parallel 17 and Street Kitchen Asian Bistro recently opened Olive & Finch (1552 E. 17th Ave., 303-832-8663.) Sitting just two doors down from P17, her popular Vietnamese restaurant, the new spot is a departure from the pan-Asian fare of her other restaurants.

It is a handsome room, with exposed ductwork and recycled wood tables, all anchored by a gorgeous sassafras community table.

Olive & Finch sells breads, cheeses and meats, but it’s quickly gaining a following for its tasty breakfast lineup and a creative array of sandwiches. There are some traditional items, such as a Cubano, but also alternative takes such as the Nanner’s (prosciutto, poached figs, brie and arugula on a baguette) and the Bennett ( basil pesto, roast veggies, goat cheese, olive tapenade, red onions and spinach on ciabatta.)

“Going out to eat in a restaurant is a commitment in time, finances and watching your diet,” says Nguyen, who floats between all three ventures. “I was always looking for food on the go that was not expensive, but still had all the flavor profiles of good restaurant food. I love the Uptown neighborhood — it’s so diverse — and thought there was a place for Olive & Finch.”

And so there is. At some point early this year, she says, the restaurant will start offering three to four hot dishes during the evening.

Holy mole! (Sorry, couldn’t resist.)

Tamayo is launching a mole festival an. 2-March 31, celebrating the classic sauce that is rooted in the state of Puebla in central Mexico. The dish has infinite varieties and ingredients, but is generally rooted in a mix of chiles, nuts and bitter chocolate.

At Tamayo (1400 Larimer St., 720-946-1433), chef-owner Richard Sandoval‘s crew is offering four moles: a mole pipian from Mexico City, blending pumpkin seeds, tomatillos, poblanos and nuts, plus a mole poblano from Puebla, with chiles and Mexican chocolate.

There are also two Oaxacan-style moles. One is a mole rojo with mild guajillo chiles, ancho, cumin and oregano; the other is a mole negro driven by charred tomatoes, avocado leaves and nuts.

You can order the moles with roast chicken, shrimp, grilled skirt steak, pork carnitas or veggies, and there’s also a tasting plate of cheese quesadillas that features the whole quartet.

Sad news for Denverites with a sweet tooth: The Shoppe, a cupcake emporium at East Colfax Avenue and St. Paul Street, has closed.

The Shoppe opened in January 2008 and did a bustling business, especially with students from nearby East High School who would stop by in the morning for pumpkin latte and pralines and cream cupcakes, or one of the sugary, old-school cereals (Trix, Cap’n Crunch, Froot Loops) the place offered.

I wrote about it four months after it opened. Co-owner Emma Skala had been a baker since she was a little girl.

“Cupcakes are so simple, so personal and so sweet,” she told me. “They’re fun. Kids come here and their eyes light up.”

Adults’ eyes, too.

William Porter: 303-954-1877, wporter@denverpost.com or twitter.com/ williamporterdp