Photo by Chip Somodevilla/Getty Images

Ah, Martha Coakley, whose legacy of loserdom lingers on. Four years after she gratuitously surrendered Ted Kennedy’s Massachusetts Senate seat to Scott Brown (and, in the process, almost tanked the Affordable Care Act), Democrats—brilliant strategists that they are—decided to hand Coakley the Massachusetts gubernatorial nomination to blow as well. The former state attorney general did so in November, and now the overwhelmingly Democratic Commonwealth of Massachusetts—which gave us Thanksgiving and gay marriage and kinda-sorta-health-care-for-most-people—is being led by a Romney Republican who’s balancing the budget by slashing funds to early-childhood education.

To address a $1.8 billion budget gap, Gov. Charlie Baker signed the state’s $38.1 billion budget last week, with $162 million in line-item vetoes. Among the most controversial of these vetoes involves $17.6 million in cuts from grants to expand full-day kindergarten throughout the state. (Massachusetts, shockingly, does not have universal full-day kindergarten. Some communities pay for it with cobbled-together grants; in other municipalities, parents pay not-insignificant tuitions ranging from $950 to $4,650 a year.) There is now a mere $1 million in the program.

Advertisement



State Sen. Eric Lesser, a Democrat from Longmeadow, told me he has received more calls about the kindergarten budget cuts than any other item vetoed. “These were grants that were aimed at enhancing kindergarten access in high-poverty urban areas,” Lesser said. In the city of Springfield alone, he said, “It would represent as much as a million dollars in cuts and require significant layoffs of teachers and paraprofessionals who help so much in the early years.”

He went on, “It’s a step in the wrong direction especially when you see so many other areas of the country like New York and D.C. and Connecticut expanding their early childhood education, and it will do lasting damage to the state’s ability to be competitive.” Lesser said that when the Legislature meets next week, it will try to find ways to reverse the kindergarten-grant cuts. The Massachusetts House numbers 125 Democrats to 35 Republicans, and 34 out of the Senate’s 40 members are Democrats (cough, Martha Coakley), so an override is not a huge stretch.