A new company is aiming to make blood testing an on-demand, at-home service.

Founded by a UCF graduate, CHEKD offers an array of blood tests on its Web site and allows consumers to choose a time, date and location for a blood draw, where a phlebotomist meets them. The results of the lab tests are provided on the Web site's secure portal.

Targeting Uber-friendly millennials and health-obsessed consumers, the company is combining the services that existing Web sites offer for blood-test orders and laboratories that offer mobile blood draws.

CHEKD, which has rolled out its services in a dozen states, doesn't take health insurance. The service started in Orlando this month.

"This is a sandbox for personalized medicine," said Aaron Grossman, founder and CEO of CHEKD. "This is for people who don't want to play in traditional medicine."

But while direct-to-consumer tests are becoming more common and accepted by the medical community, they can present new challenges to consumers without solving some of the existing problems – such as access to routine medical care.

"It can be very difficult to interpret blood tests without proper training," said Colin Forward, director of Florida Health Innovators.

"We need to continue to empower consumers with their own health data, but also make it easier to get the necessary care," said Forward, senior vice president of Allogy, a cloud-based IT service company based in Orlando.

Grossman, 29, graduated from UCF in 2008 and got his medical degree at the University of Florida. But instead of becoming a practicing doctor he chose a career in entrepreneurship.

Grossman admitted that the service isn't for everyone. The company is aiming at people who want to keep a close tab on their numbers without having to visit a doctor every time, and potentially individuals who have catastrophic health plans, which are plans that have low monthly premiums but a very high deductible, leaving the consumers paying for most their routine medical expenses.

His company delivers its service through contracts with private labs and employed phlebotomists.

The cost of the tests, which include the on-site concierge service, starts at less than $100 and range from orders of complete blood count and lipid panels to drug screening and STD tests to a test for vitamins and minerals, which runs for almost $400.

Grossman said he has big plans for his company.

He said he's laying the foundation to start offering on-demand telehealth services and will soon start accepting payments from Flexible Spending Accounts and Health Savings Accounts.

nmiller@tribune.com or 407-420-5158