LiveOak Venture Partners closed its inaugural fund at $109 million–$9 million above its target—as the firm aims to ease what it calls the “capital-starved environment” for Texas-based technology startups.

Based in Austin and founded by three veterans of Austin Ventures–Austin’s most prominent venture capital firm–the team plans to invest as much $6 million to $8 million in 15 to 17 early-stage companies.

The fund held a first close in December, and five investments have already been made.

Texas has “all the fundamental building blocks in place” to become a great tech center, said General Partner Krishna Srinivasan, including great universities and tech employers, but it’s “significantly capital-constrained, especially at the early stage. A lot of investors love to come to Texas to invest, but they look for local partners to play a leadership role.”

California dwarfs other U.S. regions for venture investment, according to Dow Jones VentureSource, with $5.3 billion of venture capital invested last quarter. Massachusetts is second with $1 billion, followed by New York at $737 million and Texas at $308 million.

LiveOak will invest across Texas, even though the state’s metropolitan areas have different strengths. Austin is strong in enterprise and infrastructure software, Mr. Srinivasan said, while Dallas specializes in IT and health care, and Houston has both health care IT and energy IT.

The team, which also includes General Partner Ben Scott and General Partner Venu Shamapant, worked together for several years at Austin Ventures and has already co-invested with their old firm.

More than 90% of LiveOak’s limited partners are institutional, which is unusual for a first fund–they include public pension funds, university endowments and foundations and Texas-based family offices.

“They recognize the gap,” Mr. Srinivasan said.

Terms of the fund, called LiveOak Venture Partners I LP, are undisclosed.

Write to Deborah Gage at deborah.gage@wsj.com. Follow her on Twitter at @deborahgage