Print Email Font Resize Font Resize Business trends and stories to watch in Boulder County during 2015

Crews work to demolish the former Butterball turkey processing plant at 150 South Main Street in Longmont on Dec. 12. The first phase of the new project included tearing down the five-story main plant building, which sits on 6.63 acres, and building a 250-unit apartment complex. (Matthew Jonas / Daily Camera) How the predictions fared in 2014: The Daily Camera highlighted 10 business stories to watch in 2014. Below are the companies and business trends included in that list and what developed during the past 12 months. Amgen Inc. The Thousand Oaks, Calif.-based biotech was expected to stop production of Epogen in Longmont; however, the Boulder County region was delivered an unexpected blow when Amgen announced it was closing its Colorado and Washington facilities, resulting in the loss of 430 jobs in Boulder County and generating questions about the Boulder and Longmont facilities' future and the effect on the region's bioscience community. Boulder Junction Work progressed on the 160-acre, mixed-use redevelopment off 30th and Pearl streets and the privately developed Solana apartments opened. The neighboring Depot Square at Boulder Junction neared completed and elements such as the bus station, permanently affordable apartments, hotel and restaurant are expected to open in the coming months. Boulder Junction — which helped to spur other large-scale redevelopments off 30th and Pearl — also was the central focus in broader questions from the community and city leaders about potential negative effects from the development in Boulder. Frasca Food & Wine Late last year, the proprietors of the highly acclaimed Boulder fine dining restaurant launched Pizzeria Locale, a fast-casual quick-serve pizza concept inspired by the Boulder restaurant of the same name. The Pizzeria Locale venture, which was made in partnership with Chipotle, resulted in one restaurant opening in Denver this year and recently announced plans to open a second location — this one in Denver's Highlands neighborhood. Made Movement LLC The Boulder-based creative agency launched Sherpa, a hands-free app to serve as an audio guide for skiers at Copper Mountain. Made Movement also launched its first ads for the rebranding of Church's Chicken. Marijuana industry The legalization of recreational marijuana created plenty of fanfare and some sales tax revenue for cities such as Boulder and Denver. While cities such as Broomfield and Longmont remained cautious about allowing retail marijuana stores, the industry also budded a sub-industry of ancillary businesses that were formed to provide supplies and services to the industry. Superior Town Center Key elements of the 157-acre mixed-use development were expected to be completed at the end of 2014; but the project stalled after Boulder Valley Ice — which intended to open an indoor sports complex and medical center — ran into financial eligibility snags in the bond process. Boulder Valley Ice officials say those issues have been resolved and that their entity's portion of the project could be completed by the summer. Trader Joe's The highly popular specialty grocer opened its first Colorado stores, including a location in Boulder, on Valentine's Day. Since that time, Trader Joe's has expanded with additional stores in Denver and Colorado Springs and inked plans to open a Fort Collins location in 2015. Ubooly Inc. (Smart Toy) The Boulder startup that created a smart phone-powered interactive, educational plush toy was acquired by Culver City, Calif.-based Cartwheel Kids this fall for an undisclosed sum. Smart Toy planned to relocate its local operations to California. Village at the Peaks After some delays, Longmont's Twin Peaks Mall eventually met its date with the wrecking ball on Aug. 1. The developers behind the $85 million Village at the Peaks, the open-air center replacing the Longmont mall, have set an opening date of late 2015. WhiteWave Foods Since spinning off from Dean Foods Co., the Denver-based foods company has notched significant growth in its financials and its stock. WhiteWave, which bases its North American headquarter in Broomfield, also has been highlighted as a potential acquisition target as multinational brands such as General Mills continue to scoop up businesses in the organic industry. The Daily Camera this week is taking its annual gander into the crystal ball and highlighting companies, industries and business trends expected to make news in Boulder and Broomfield counties during the year ahead. Below are five business stories to watch in 2015: Butterball redevelopment Location: Longmont Description: Redevelopment of the former Butterball turkey plant off First Avenue and Main Street. What could come in 2015: Preliminary plans for the site include a couple of hundred apartments as well as retail and office spaces in an urban mid-rise, four-story building. The first phase of the project — 300 multifamily units, about 12,000 square feet of commercial space and a new brewery — could be in place by the early summer. While later phases of the project could bring high-density single-family residences and creative office space, the Butterball redevelopment is expected to play a starring role in a transformation of Longmont's downtown, city officials and developers say, noting projects such as the recently opened Roosevelt Apartments and potential redevelopments of sites including the Times-Call building. The Butterball development would complement public efforts such as the extension of Boston Avenue into downtown, the new Dickens Farm Park and the installation of a transit station near First and Main. Development in Boulder, effects on legacy businesses Location: Boulder Description: As large-scale developments rise across Boulder, a resurgence of a debate on the effects of such projects on businesses and the city's quality of life. What could come in 2015: Projects that include Pearl Place, Google's planned Boulder campus, and the Golden Buff redevelopment, which includes the construction of two hotels off 28th Street and Canyon Boulevard, are expected to break ground. Others such as Reve Pearl, a mixed-use development off 30th and Pearl streets, will continue through the city approval process. This year, the city also will grapple with questions about how to balance the effects of development — creating progress and fueling a strong economy in the city while also maintaining character, history and affordability. Several longtime local businesses shut their doors in 2014 because of rising rents and vanishing affordable options, and lower-to-middle-class residents expressed concern about being pushed out of Boulder because of rising rents and costs. The City Council will weigh the subjects of growth and density while reviewing the Boulder Valley Comprehensive Plan update. Separately, public hearings and code changes could come as soon as February or March on city planners' proposals to spur economic development in the University Hill business district. The city enacted a residential development moratorium through mid-March 2015 as a means of preventing the loss of key properties to high-end student housing prior to them being incorporated in a broader vision of the Hill. Flatirons Community Church swells in Lafayette Location: Lafayette Description: Mega-church Flatirons Community Church continues to expand in Lafayette, this time with the acquisition of the Lafayette Marketplace. What could come in 2015: During the past decade, Flatirons Community Church snapped up land and big-box stores to house the growing ranks of the Lafayette-based church. The latter moves into the vacant Albertsons and Walmart buildings in the heart of Lafayette's economic corridor came amid the recession and a time when city officials changed their previous course of discouraging the church from converting large retail spaces. City officials said the loss of potential sales tax-generating properties could be offset by churchgoers coming in from out of town and spending money in Lafayette. The church's latest move — acquiring the 93,000-square-foot Lafayette Marketplace — puts again into question whether such concessions will prove true and how the city's coffers might be handicapped by the loss another potential retail property to a tenant that does not pay sales taxes. Medtronic's acquisition of Covidien Location: Minneapolis-based Medtronic has a site in Louisville; Ireland-based Covidien bases two divisions in Boulder. Description: Effects of the blockbuster $43 billion medical device makers' deal on Boulder County. What could come in 2015: At the end of 2014, Medtronic and Covidien continued to garner approvals on their $42.9 billion proposed combination. The deal is expected to gain shareholder approval this month, despite controversy that bubbled up last year about the tax inversion structure that would allow the combined firm to have its official headquarters in Ireland, saving money on taxes. Whether such deals could lead to any tax reform in 2015 remains to be seen; however, the transaction likely could have heavy implications locally. Covidien, which bases its Surgical Solutions and Respiratory and Monitoring Solutions businesses in Gunbarrel, has 1,780 full-time employees locally. Medtronic has 450 people at its Louisville operation. Once the transaction closes, it'll become more clear as to how the local employees and sites could be affected. Twitter's role in Boulder Location: Boulder Description: Social media firm Twitter acquired Boulder-based Gnip Inc. for $134 million. What could come in 2015: When Twitter Inc. bought longtime data partner Gnip in the spring of 2014, the deal led to the establishing of Twitter's first office in Colorado. This year should provide a sense as to how Twitter's presence might play out for the Boulder and Colorado tech industries. Some local economic development officials say they wouldn't be surprised if Twitter behaved in the way that Microsoft and Google did when they acquired Vexcel and @Last Software, respectively: Expand the sites and basing additional operations locally. Industry analysts say they're also watching the combination to see how Twitter utilizes and monetizes public social media data. Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia