James Simpson, manager of Teles Properties' new office in Boulder. Teles, a Beverly Hills, California-based residential real estate firm specializing in luxury properties, recently opened an office in downtown Boulder — its first outside its home state. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

Teles Properties, a luxury residential real estate firm based out of Beverly Hills, California, recently opened an office in Boulder.

Teles leased 2,500 square feet of space at 900 Pearl St. in downtown and opened the office on Aug. 11, company officials said.

James Simpson, a Boulder resident and former managing broker with Fuller Sotheby's International Realty, will manage the office. Simpson previously worked for Teles when the firm opened in October 2007.

The seven-person office is Teles' first outside of California and Boulder seemed a likely home because it is becoming a high-end luxury destination, Simpson said.

Simpson spoke with the Daily Camera last week about Teles and his expectations for the high-end market in Boulder and what growth in that sector may mean for the city as a whole.

The following has been edited for clarity and space.

1.) What opportunities spurred you to team back up with Teles?

I think that they have such a strong luxury brand, they have such great marketing tools for brokers such as myself.

Boulder is rapidly becoming a high-end luxury market. (The Boulder properties) mixed with the larger ranch properties coming up (around the area), it's going to be really nice to utilize their brand and their cross-marketing platform.

It will allow us to tap into the personal spheres of all 320 agents in California to market really unique luxury properties in Colorado.

2.) What potential did you see with Boulder?

There are some wealthy folks in California ... that seems to be where a lot of our transplants are coming from.

It's interesting, you have a lot of quietly wealthy people in Boulder who have sort of created or built their dream estate or property. I see a pattern from the age group that's now moving toward the empty nest (stage) and they're looking to downsize. You have all these wonderful properties that have really never been on the market before and have intrinsic values.

... I think there's a great opportunity to increase the ceiling for the high-end market in Boulder.

3.) What types of clients are you working with on these properties?

We're tapping into the Hollywood industry types, wealthy music people and all of those folks looking for a nice getaway.

I think they're going to see some value here.

4.) Sales have picked up on the luxury end of Boulder's market, what are your expectations for that trend in the near-term?

I think we're going to see some big growth at the high end. You can see it from 2012 to 2013. In '12, I think we had roughly 20 properties sold over $2 million. In '13, there were 38. I think we're going to see that trend continue beyond the $2 million mark.

I think we're going to see growth in the over $5 million market. To-date, that has been rarified air.

It wouldn't surprise me if we saw more than $10 million. Look at Caribou Ranch (which recently sold for $32.5 million), that's an incredibly high water mark for the county.

5.) Concerns have been raised about Boulder becoming less affordable for more people. If the high end sees these types of gains, what might that mean for the market as a whole?

A rising tide lifts all ships. Boulder's already a pretty expensive market for a lot of people. You walk downtown on Pearl Street and see the development. You can't argue, the town is going through a pretty substantial boom.

With that comes increasing home values, and it makes it more challenging at the low end.

Overall, I think it's a good thing; but I think some people may get priced out of Boulder.

I hear it, too, when people say the traffic has gotten bad in Boulder. I laugh because the traffic in L.A. is horrendous. Here a long time ago, things were quiet.

That's the problem. When your secret gets out, it's bound to grow.

— Alicia Wallace