BOXED IN: A boy carried a cardboard box on Friday across a United Nations compound in Juba, South Sudan, that has become home to thousands of people displaced by the recent fighting in the area. Associated Press …

FINDING UTOPIA: Attendees at the 30th Chaos Communication Congress in Hamburg, Germany, used their laptops in a foam ball pool. The conference, also known as 30C3, concerns technology, society and utopia. Bodo Marks/DPA/Zuma Press …

HELPING HAND: A man carried an injured woman away from the scene of an explosion in Beirut, Lebanon, Friday that killed a prominent politician and adviser to former Prime Minister Saad Hariri, as well as at least five others. Bilal Hussein/Associated Press …

COLD WORK: A Toronto Hydro worker cleared frozen, ice-encased tree limbs as he worked to restore power in the Scarborough suburb of Toronto Friday. Some 30,000 residents were still without power Friday, after Sunday's ice storm. Mark Blinch/Reuters …

THE FACE OF VICTORY: Bea Rose Santiago, crowned Miss International 2013 in Tokyo earlier this month, snapped a self-portrait during a parade Friday in the business district of Manila in her home country, Philippines. Ezra Acayan/Zuma Press …

RIDING HARD: Shakin It Up, ridden by David Flores, defeated Central Banker and Joe Talamo to win the Malibu Stakes on opening day at at Santa Anita Park in Arcadia, Calif., Thursday. Alex Evers/Eclipse Sportswire/Eclipse/Zuma Press …

VIOLENCE CONTINUES: A man protesting the Muslim Brotherhood took cover during clashes with supporters of the group in Cairo Friday. One person died in the clashes, and 147 people were arrested; the government has designated the Brotherhood a terrorist organization. Khaled Elfiqi/European Pressphoto Agency …

ICEBOUND: An image taken Wednesday by the Australian Maritime Safety Authority shows a Russian-registered ship, carrying 50 tourists and 20 crew members, wedged in thick sheets of sea ice during a multi-day tour of the edge of Antarctica. Three ships, including a Chinese icebreaker, were on their way Friday to help rescue the ship. Australian Maritime Safety Authority/European Pressphoto Agency …

FRIGID FOAM: A girl played in a blizzard of sea foam whipped up by the wind Friday near Trearddur Bay in Anglesey, England. Gale-force winds and heavy rain prompted weather warnings for many parts of Britain. Christopher Furlong/Getty Images …

GRISLY SCENE: A Thai rescue worker retrieved a body Friday from a ravine at the scene of a bus accident in northern Thailand's Phetchabun province. Police said at least 29 people died when the bus, traveling on a mountainous path, crashed into the ravine. European Pressphoto Agency …

WORKING HARD, KEEPING COOL: Workers stabbed iron pikes Friday into the frozen Songhua River, working to extract giant ice cubes to make sculptures for the upcoming 30th Harbin Ice and Snow Festival, in China's Heilongjiang province. Each ice cube weighs about 551 pounds; the festival starts Jan. 5. Sheng Li/Reuters …

FLEEING: Muslims trying to leave Bangui, Central African Republic, sat Friday in the back of a disabled truck under the protection of at least 20 French soldiers as they were surrounded by hundreds of hostile Christian residents of the city's Gobongo neighborhood. In recent days, passenger vehicles carrying fleeing Muslims toward the northern edge of town have repeatedly come under attack by militiamen. Rebecca Blackwell/Associated Press …

MUD MAN: Belgian cyclist Rob Peeters was covered in mud after after the fifth stage in the Bpost Bank Trophy cyclo-cross competition Friday in Loenhout, Belgium. David Stockman/Belga/Zuma Press …

ON EDGE: Turkish protestors clashed with police during an antigovernment protest in Istanbul Friday. Embattled Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan sacked 10 of his 26 ministers late Wednesday, in a bid to ease political uncertainty that has blighted the country since the start of a bribery investigation that has ensnared government officials. Tolga Bozoglu/European Pressphoto Agency …