Topics: Books, caffeine, Coffee, Editor's Picks, excerpts, Innovation News

If I can’t drink my bowl of coffee three times daily, then in my torment I will shrivel up like a piece of roasted goat!

— Johann Sebastian Bach and Christian Friedrich Henrici,

Schweigt stille, plaudert nicht, aka the Coffee Cantata (c. 1734)

In the year 1723, a French merchant ship sat becalmed halfway across the atlantic ocean. For over a month, she drifted with the currents, sails loose and flapping, waiting for a steady breeze. More than two hundred years had passed since Columbus made the same journey, and transatlantic travel was now a matter of course. But sometimes the fate and consequence of a voyage still hinged on seeds. By some accounts, the drifting ship had already faced a troubled passage—outrunning a deadly storm off Gibraltar, and narrowly avoiding capture by tunisian pirates. Now, stuck in that windless equatorial zone known as the doldrums, the ship had run so low on fresh water that the captain ordered strict rationing for crew and passengers alike. Among those travelers, one gentleman felt particularly parched, because he was sharing his small allotment with a thirsty tropical shrub.

“It serves no purpose to go into the details of the infinite care I had to provide that delicate plant,” he wrote, long after the wind picked up and the ship docked safely at the Caribbean island of Martinique. And long after the descendants of his spindly sapling were well on their way to changing economies throughout Central and South America. The plant, of course, was coffee, but just how a young naval officer named Gabriel-Mathieu De Clieu got his hands on it remains a matter of debate.

In one version of the story, De Clieu and a band of masked colleagues scaled the walls of the paris botanical gardens, broke into a greenhouse, uprooted a young coffee tree, and fled into the night. Most historians regard this reported chain of events with suspicion, but no one disputes its location. In the early eighteenth century, the only coffee plant in all of france resided at the Jardin Royal Des Plantes. It was a large, healthy specimen that had been given as a token of esteem to King Louis XIV from the city of amsterdam. De Clieu described his coffee plant as small, “no larger than the slip of a pink,” so it must have been either a cutting or a seedling grown from the sun king’s tree. The royal gardeners had been trying to propagate coffee as a horticultural rarity, but they may not have recognized its huge economic potential. Having traveled widely, De Clieu knew that people in the west no longer regarded coffee as an exotic novelty, a beverage of Turks and Arabs. It was becoming a daily staple from London to Vienna to the colonies, consumed not only in cafes and coffeehouses, but in people’s homes. Dutch plantations on java dominated the world market so completely that the word java would soon become synonymous with the drink itself. Bringing coffee to Martinique, where De Clieu owned a large estate, promised to break the dutch monopoly, bolster the French empire, and earn De Clieu a tidy profit in the process.

“Immediately upon arrival in Martinique,” he later recalled in a letter, “I planted . . . The precious shrub, which had only become dearer to me through the dangers it had known.” Those dangers included more than a water shortage. De Clieu’s correspondence revealed other details: a jealous fellow passenger who repeatedly tried to steal the sapling, and succeeded in tearing off a branch; the constant guard and fence of spikes needed to protect the little plant once it reached his estate; and the hinted possibility that he had obtained his tree not by theft but through romance, that is, by charming a “Lady of High Standing” at the French court. Centuries later, truth and embellishment are impossible to unravel, but in any form De Clieu’s exploits show how far people are willing to go for a good cup of coffee. When his precious shrub finally did bear fruit, all that persistence paid off handsomely. De Clieu shared seeds and cuttings with neighboring plantations, and within a few decades Martinique boasted nearly 20 million highly productive trees.

Though little remembered today (his Wikipedia entry runs fewer than 250 words), Gabriel-Mathieu De Clieu once enjoyed a certain celebrity among coffee drinkers. English poet Charles Lamb paid tribute to him in 1810 with a verse that began:

Whenever I fragrant coffee drink,

I on the generous Frenchman think,

Whose noble perseverance bore,

The tree to Martinico’s shore.

De Clieu wasn’t the only person to carry coffee across the atlantic, but people like lamb gave him credit for every coffee tree from Martinique to Mexico to Brazil, a region that now accounts for over half of world production. That claim exaggerates De Clieu’s role, but The Frenchman did get one thing exactly right: demand for coffee was rising. Since De Clieu’s day, global coffee consumption has skyrocketed. As the 1940 Inkspots classic “Java Jive” pointed out, people are fond of buying “a cheery coffee bean—boy!” that fondness has transformed the seeds of a shrubby african tree into the world’s second most traded commodity. Only oil futures generate more annual revenue. For the estimated 1 billion to 2 billion daily partakers, myself included, the ritual of buying, brewing, and drinking coffee rarely includes a basic question: Why do we bother? If it comes up at all, this query elicits a quick response: caffeine, the mildly addictive stimulant found in abundance in coffee beans. But that answer only invites another question: Why is coffee caffeinated in the first place?

If Charles Lamb had truly wanted to say thanks for his morning cup, he should have penned an ode to various insects, slugs, snails, and fungi. Instead of couplets like, “The islanders his praise resound/ Coffee plantations rise around,” he might have sought a rhyme for the way caffeine slows the heart rates of snails, or how slugs respond with what one research group called “uncoordinated writhing.” the poem should have mentioned hornworms and shot-borer beetles, whose larvae wither at the merest hint of caffeine, and it might have also explained how caffeine slows the growth of fungal pests, from common root rot to witch’s broom. But poets don’t think about larvae and fungi when they make a pot of coffee—nobody does. The fact remains, however, that we wouldn’t be drinking the stuff without them.

“Caffeine is a natural insecticide,” trumpeted a headline in the New York Times, soon after researchers published an early account of its effects. The story was brief, but singled out mosquitoes as particularly susceptible. In fact, caffeine is so effective, and against such a broad range of pests, that coffee wasn’t the only plant to think of it. The seeds of at least three other tropical trees also contain caffeine: cacao, guaraná, and kola nut. Like coffee beans, these can all be ground and mixed with water to make beverages—hot cocoa, the Guaraná sodas of brazil, and a host of drinks marketed as kolas or colas, including the original versions of Coke and Pepsi. caffeine also occurs in the leaves of tea and in a type of South American holly known as maté, pretty much rounding out the list of humanity’s favorite stimulating liquids. It seems that wherever caffeine turns up in nature, people aren’t far behind, holding out our mugs, gourds, and samovars.

Like capsaicin, caffeine is an alkaloid. Producing it requires precious nitrogen that might otherwise be used for growth, so coffee trees make the most of their investment through what amounts to a caffeine-recycling program. They manufacture it only in the most vulnerable tissues, and later transfer that caffeine to the most important place of all, the seeds. The process starts inside young leaves, where caffeine helps fend off insects and snails that prey on tender foliage. But as those leaves grow and toughen, the plant withdraws much of that caffeine and redirects it to protect flowers, fruits, and the developing seeds. The fruit, a reddish berry, also produces caffeine, much of which diffuses inward to the pair of seeds nestled inside. And those seeds not only receive caffeine, they make more, resulting in a concentration potent enough to fend off all but the hardiest attackers. In total, more than nine hundred species of insects and other pests target coffee trees, so it’s logical to assume that caffeine evolved in response. But just as historians can’t agree on the particulars of Gabriel-Mathieu De Clieu’s story, scientists can’t all agree on the evolution of caffeine. It may be a good pesticide, but that’s not the only thing it’s used for.