When President Barack Obama signed the Affordable Care Act (aka Obamacare) into law over six years ago, I, like many Arkansans, was extremely upset.

This law raised 20 federal taxes and moved federal reimbursement dollars from the Medicare budget (care for seniors) to help fund Medicaid expansion. Obamacare also regulates many aspects of the health-care system. While many Americans have been fighting to repeal the law, it's Arkansans who have not only been fighting for repeal, but also developing a model that can be evolved to successfully replace Obamacare.

After Obamacare passed, 49 states chose to implement one of the two choices given to them by the feds. States chose to expand traditional government-run Medicaid or rely on an expensive option I call Emergency Room Care (ER Care). ER Care is based on the 1986 law that created an unfunded mandate for all states to allow people to use the emergency room regardless of ability to pay (the Emergency Medical Treatment and Labor Act, known as EMTALA), so in the absence of another form of care, people just go to the most expensive treatment option that exists, the ER. The costs for this care are then borne by paying customers, hospital and taxpayers of that state.

One state, Arkansas, told the feds that neither option was good enough and that we wanted to customize a solution for our state. The Arkansas solution known as the private option is based on conservative principles like free markets, state-specific customization and cost controls. We negotiated an 1115 waiver with the feds and have essentially been a national learning lab on major aspects of a new health-care model for the past three years.

Results from the Arkansas private option have been outstanding. Fears that our insurance coverage approach (copying what exists in the private sector) would cost too much, that the feds wouldn't deliver on their promises, or that the plan wouldn't improve health-care coverage levels all proved false. Insurance costs came in below federal mandates, D.C. delivered on all major promises (including funding levels), and Arkansas ranked No. 2 of 50 states on increasing the percentage of citizens with health-care coverage.

The results were so strong that supermajorities of the Republican-dominated state Legislature have just approved Arkansas Works legislation (70 percent approval) and the appropriation for funding to continue it. Other states are watching and adapting our approach for their use as well.

It is becoming clear that Arkansas private option/Arkansas Works is a health-care model that the entire country can adopt.

Arkansas Works improves upon the private option by adding recipient payment responsibility (up to $19 a month), job-training referrals and healthy-living incentives. We need even more flexibility to turn Arkansas Works into the ideal conservative replacement for Obamacare, but we will have to wait for a new administration in D.C. to get it.

We need more flexibility in at least three areas to truly evolve our experiment into the ideal health-care solution for America:

• Hand up more than a handout: States need flexibility to limit the amount of time able-bodied recipients can receive 100 percent free health care, and flexibility to adjust the recipient payment responsibility based on his or her earnings progress. We want people to work without fear of losing more in government benefits than they earn at work. Arkansas Works is a framework that can enable continuous adjustments to recipient payment levels to ensure we incentivize work and quality of life.

• Insurance market efficiency and innovation incentives: The current "one size fits all" regulation approach of Obamacare kills efficiency and innovation. For example, D.C. has mandated 10 insurance coverage areas that all policies must include. This does not allow market forces, like competition and people choosing what they want to purchase at a given price, to drive cost reduction and new product innovation.

• Block Grants: Today the feds use the ACA tax increases, program cost shifting and annual deficits to fund an uncapped health-care program. Replacing Obamacare with a national model based on Arkansas Works and giving states block grants will enable the country to stop adding health-care spending to the $19 trillion national debt. The feds can assign block grants based on funds available. States would then have the flexibility and the incentive to limit their expenses, while striving for efficiencies and improvements.

We will partner with the next administration in Washington, D.C., to improve the program as described above. Someday soon, perhaps Arkansas Works will become America Works!

------------v------------

Rep. Charlie Collins of Fayetteville is co-chairman of the Health Reform Legislative Task Force.

Editorial on 05/09/2016