By Mike Fusco

Share This Article:

Do you remember the classic film Ferris Bueller’s Day Off? We all cringe when Cameron famously “goes berserk” and kicks his parents’ Ferrari into the ravine. When I saw the film for the first time, there’s no doubt it made me think about how much trouble I’d be in if my parents’ shiny car had been damaged.

The film came out in 1986 — just a few years into the era of the Millennial — the least likely group to be engaged with insurers, according to a 2014 Gallup Poll. In a survey cited by Property Casualty 360, “only 64 percent of them have car insurance, 10 percent have homeowners insurance and 13 percent have renters insurance.”

Why? What’s holding Millennials back from protecting themselves? What they don’t know might be hurting them.

As the 88th Academy Awards approach on Sunday, and the public looks to a new crop of favorite films, I looked to some of the generation’s most beloved films to explain why Millennials shouldn’t ignore their personal insurance needs.

Ferris Bueller’s Day Off : Auto Insurance — Though it’s less likely you’ll kick your car off a cliff in a fit of rage like Cameron, it’s more likely you’ll get in a fender bender at some point. If you drive a sedan, truck, motorcycle, SUV, hybrid, pickup truck or even a classic car, auto or motorcycle, insurance can offer you financial protection against physical damage and bodily injury resulting from an accident.

The Hobbit: Jewelry Insurance — The wedding industry has built up the importance of the engagement ring in the minds of this generation. The rule of thumb is to spend one to three months salary on the ring, but what happens when the ring owner drops his or her beloved gem down the sink or loses the ring before it’s safely down the aisle? In The Hobbit, Gollum could’ve used insurance when losing the One Ring in the caverns beneath the Misty Mountains. Don’t be like Gollum. Insurance can be purchased as part of your renters or homeowners insurance policy or through a company that specializes in jewelry insurance.

Skyfall: Health Insurance — Only James Bond has 23 lives, er films. But most of us aren’t unconquerable secret agents. Besides the fact that the Affordable Care Act requires health insurance (or a tax penalty), regular preventative checkups, made affordable through health insurance, can ward off illness and save you from potentially crippling healthcare costs down the line.

Home Alone 2: Renters and Homeowners Insurance — In Home Alone 2, Kevin McCallister visits his Uncle Ron’s vacant New York townhouse, damaging the home with concrete powder, bird seed, and kerosene. Although Kevin-like behavior is unlikely at your home, common activities such as forgetting to turn off the faucet or blow out a candle can be damaging. We recently had a client come to us after leaving the water running in their apartment. They didn’t have renters insurance, leaving them liable for the damage to their own personal property and apartment as well as the property belonging to their downstairs neighbor.

Jaws: Watercraft Insurance — In a boating community like San Diego, Millennials should at least be aware that watercraft insurance exists. There is debate about when the Millennial generation begins, but some sources define the generation as being born as far back as 1980, making some of them in their mid-30s and definitely old enough to own water toys. Decisions about watercraft insurance can be complex — are you protected against collisions, fire, theft, vandalism, and 4,500-pound sharks? An insurance agent can walk you through the process.

According to Property Casualty 360, Millennials’ desire for immediacy explains why “18-29-year-olds are 50 percent less likely than their parents to purchase (insurance) from local representatives.” The good news is that today’s insurance industry can meet that reluctance with immediate advice and assistance.

Mike Fusco, a New Jersey native, began his insurance career in 2002 shortly after relocating to San Diego. Prior to his move, he studied at the University of Maryland, and graduated from the Robert H. Smith School of Business. In 2010 he was named president of San Diego-based Fusco & Orsini Insurance Services. His independent insurance agency offers a wide range of business and personal insurance products.

>> Subscribe to Times of San Diego’s free daily email newsletter! Click here

Follow Us: