CCAC adjunct faculty vote to join American Federation of Teachers

Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

Three years after some part-time faculty members at the Community College of Allegheny County began to discuss forming a union, the school's part-time, or adjunct, faculty voted Tuesday to affiliate with the American Federation of Teachers.

A spokeswoman for CCAC declined to comment, saying the college has yet to receive official notification.

The 394-64 vote marks the most recent success in organizing efforts targeting part-time faculties at colleges and universities across the country.

Adjunct faculty groups from Duquesne, Point Park and Robert Morris universities have voted to affiliate with the United Steelworkers of America.

Charles McCollester, a labor historian and professor emeritus at Indiana University of Pennsylvania, said a trend among colleges and universities to lock a growing portion of faculty members into low-paid, part-time positions, is fueling the movement.

According to the U.S. Department of Education, adjunct faculty, who made up about 43 percent of college faculties in 1975, now make up close to three-quarters of the teaching force at those institutions.

“The situation of young people coming into the academic world and teaching in colleges and universities is pretty tough today,” McCollester said.

He said the heavy college debt loads many aspiring college teachers carry from graduate school, coupled with the shrinking possibility of obtaining a tenure-track position have created a separate class of faculty members, who struggle to get by on $30,000 a year and no health care coverage.

“You never get out of debt,” McCollester said.

Jennie Snyder, an adjunct professor of art at CCAC since 2007 and an original organizer of the union drive, said CCAC's decision three years ago to restrict teaching assignments so it could avoid providing adjunct faculty health insurance under the Affordable Care Act, emphasized how little influence the part-time instructors have at a school where they make up a majority of the faculty.

“With organizing, at least, if nothing else, we have the chance for something better,” she said.

The full-time faculty at CCAC has been unionized for more than 40 years.

CCAC employs approximately 800 adjuncts across 10 campuses and centers throughout Allegheny County. Snyder said CCAC has been very cooperative with union organizers.

“They have not put up any roadblocks. Everyone has been very gracious,” she said.

Debra Erdley is a staff writer for Trib Total Media. She can be reached at 412-320-7996 or derdley@tribweb.com.