Allentown School District will likely outsource some of its substitute teaching positions, pending a vote at the Oct. 23 school board meeting.

Administrators introduced plans at Thursday's school board Finance Committee meeting to outsource substitutes who work between 15 and 89 cumulative days for an average of at least 30 hours a week.

The district would continue to employ substitutes who fill short-term assignments, as well as salaried substitutes, who are contracted to work at least 90 consecutive days and are members of the teachers union.

The proposal unanimously passed the Finance Committee, which includes all nine school directors.

Outsourcing would allow the district to more effectively meet its demand for substitute teachers and also avoid the Affordable Care Act mandate to offer health care to substitutes who work an average of 30 hours a week or more, according to the district.

The district currently has a roster of about 300 substitute teachers but only about 200 are actually "available talent," according to the proposal. Through the first month of the school year, the substitute teacher fill rate is under 80 percent at some buildings and 193 districtwide substitute requests have gone unfilled, Director of Human Resources David Elcock said.

"As of now, today, we are getting reports from buildings, multiple buildings, of being understaffed with substitute teachers," Elcock said.

Superintendent Russ Mayo said the district's substitute teacher shortage appears slightly worse than last year, when some schools were forced to combine classes or send students to mass study halls in the gymnasium.

The decision to outsource follows districts such as Easton and Bethlehem that have already made the change. Allentown will use the same provider as Bethlehem, Substitute Teacher Service Inc., which is based in based in Aston, Delaware County, but opened an office in the Lehigh Valley.

STS maintains a larger teacher pool and actively recruits at career fairs and college campuses, Elcock said. The district will pay the company 31 percent more than it currently pays substitutes, he said.

By outsourcing, the district doesn't have to worry about limiting substitutes' hours or facing fines for not providing health care to those who average 30 or more hours a week.

It's not that the district doesn't want to offer health care for those employees, Mayo said, but rather that it has to expend taxpayer money as wisely and efficiently as possible.

Delta-T, another provider of substitute teachers, will be used as a secondary pool in case STS cannot fill all of the district's needs.

In another decision prompted by Obamacare, the Finance Committee approved a proposal to upgrade the district's time card system.

Secretaries, support staff, paraprofessionals and faculty currently record their hours on paper and submit them through the district's mail system. The district plans to change the system so that all employees use a swipe card to track their hours.

adam.clark@mcall.com

610-820-6168