Amgen, Inc. (NASDAQ:AMGN) stock rose 2.81% during Friday's trading to close at $162.34, as the court’s decision in the company’s favor gave out some hope that the company might get lucky in its efforts to block Novartis AG (ADR) (NYSE:NVS) from launching a biosimilar drug version of Neupogen — Amgen’s blockbuster cancer drug.

Amgen's newfound luck in its tussle with Novartis' generic drug unit, Sandoz, may foreshadow an eventual victory for the company. Amgen has been working tirelessly since the beginning of the year to block the launch of the biosimilar drug, Zarxio, which has shown potential and even gone on to win approval from the US Food and Drug Administration (FDA), potentially making it the first ever biosimilar drug to be launched in the US.

March 6, 2015 marked the approval of the first ever biosimilar in the US, as the FDA gave the approval to Zarxio under the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act 2010. The Act authorized the regulator to approve biosimilar drugs after strict scrutiny. However, the approval dealt a severe blow to Amgen, as it meant that sales of the branded Neupogen could decline approximately 8.6% annually, with the drug forecasted to lose its blockbuster status next year.

Amgen began making efforts to push the launch of Novartis' biosimilar as far ahead as possible, so as to protect its drug for a little more time. The company filed a case with the court twice and sued Sandoz, but the court rejected its appeal both the times. However, it was only after the third injunction that the company finally saw a silver lining.

The Federal Circuit granted Amgen's motion for injunction until the court makes a decision on the case, indicating that Novartis cannot launch its biosimilar drug in the US market until June 3, when verbal arguments are scheduled, or until the matter between the two companies is resolved. In granting the injunction, the court agreed that Amgen would suffer irreparable harm if Sandoz launched the biosimilar, yet also thought that Amgen is likely to prevail on the merits of its appeal, said Aude Gerspacher, a Bloomberg Intelligence analyst.

Novartis had filed its application for the biosimilar drug in July last year and had said the company was all set to launch its drug by March 8, 2015. However, Amgen was not ready to give up the revenue generated by Neupogen so early; the company started filing a series of suits against Novartis in attempts to block the biosimilar drug from cannibalizing the sales of its drug.

Amgen filed the first suit against Novartis on February 6, based on patent infringement, but the injunction was denied by the court. Despite the rejection, Amgen filed another suit in March, claiming that Novartis did not comply with disclosure of necessary information under the Biologics Price Competition and Innovation (BPCI) Act; the court, however, denied this injunction as well. Even the FDA refused to support Amgen in its struggle against biosimilar drugs, claiming: “Section 351(1) describes procedures for information exchanges and the resolution of certain patent rights between the biosimilar applicant and the reference product sponsor. These procedures are parallel to, but separate from, the FDA review process. The BPCI Act generally does not describe any FDA involvement in monitoring or enforcing the information exchange by creating a certification process or otherwise.”

According to Bloomberg Intelligence, after granting Amgen's third injunction bid, the Federal Circuit ordered Sandoz to submit its proposed bond amount by May 12 for each day the injunction is in place. Furthermore, the court ruled that Amgen must respond with its own proposal within seven days.

Bonds are used to reimburse the enjoined party for any harm done if, after facts come to light in the litigation, the injunction shouldn't have been granted. For example, Teva Pharmaceutical Industries Ltd (ADR) (NYSE:TEVA) had proposed a $500 million bond when seeking an injunction against Johnson & Johnson (NYSE:JNJ), who had developed a biosimilar drug version of Teva’s blockbuster drug, Copaxone.

After the court’s ruling, the launch of Novartis’ biosimilar drug in the US is pushed to July or even later. Biosimilar drugs, which are similar and slightly cheaper versions of expensive biologic medications, are being sold in the European markets since 2006. Novartis itself has been marketing its biosimilar version of Neupogen in at least 40 countries under the brand name, “Zarzio,” for six years now. Zarzio is among the leading biosimilar drugs globally and enjoys a 30% market share in the European region.

The approval of Zarxio in the US did not only deal a blow to Amgen, but to the entire biotech sector as well, as its launch would trigger sales decline for all the biologic drugs nearing their patent expiration.

According to estimates calculated by RAND Corporation, biosimilar drugs can be expected to reduce drug prices by approximately 50%. Similarly, according to estimates compiled by CVS Health Corp, the availability of the biosimilar drugs in the market can be forecasted to slash the expenditure on biologic drugs, with the biosimilars being priced 40-50% lower than the original biologics.

However, these estimates cannot be completely relied upon as none of the companies have yet announced any pricing strategies for biosimilar drugs; they have also hinted that the biosimilar drugs should not be expected to be sold at a significantly lower price compared to branded biologics, as even the biosimilars are developed using living cells, similar to the development method for biologics, which drives up the manufacturing cost.

Neupogen generated $1.2 billion in sales for Amgen in 2014. However, upon the approval of its biosimilar, the drug’s sales are expected to plunge to $1.05 billion this year and to only $985 million in 2016. Before the approval of the biosimilar Zarxio, Neupogen was expected to generate sales of $1.6 billion.