As a wildland firefighter, I was trained to take responsibility for fighting complex and threatening wildfires. Climate change is leading to more numerous and more dangerous wildfires for firefighters and Western residents alike. That's why I'm relieved that the administration is proposing to decrease carbon pollution, a major contributor to climate change and thus, wildfires.

Even though wildfire has always been a consideration in Colorado, rising temperatures, drought and land management practices have led to more frequent and more severe fires. Last year alone, fires like Black Forest, Royal Gorge and others burned over 100,000 acres, destroyed more than 570 homes, threatened lives and killed two people trying to escape.

June 28th marked the one-year anniversary of Arizona's Yarnell Hill Fire that killed 19 Granite Mountain Hotshots, the most firefighters killed in a single day since 9/11. Flames up to 100 feet high cut off their escape routes and safety zone.

As a result, wilderness fire folks often have a looming sense of dread. Not only do we risk our lives fighting these fires, we also spend a lot of time contemplating worst-case scenario fire threats. And the news gets worse — a recent Harvard study shows that by 2050:

1. The area burned by fires will double;

2. Large fires will triple;

3. The fire season will dominate half the calendar year.

Advertisement

But even though there is reason for us to be terrified by these figures, we firefighters are a practical bunch, too. President Obama's recent action demonstrating definitive acknowledgment of the emergency at hand makes me think we can seize a game-changing opportunity. Mitigating the underlying causes of that rising temperature by cutting carbon emissions 30 percent from 2005 levels by 2030 is a first step to stop the complex situation that threatens to burn up the planet.

Wildfire is growing, turning everything and everyone it touches to ash. Sea levels are rising, threatening the safety of coastal cities. Climate change is happening, whether you agree or disagree that humans are responsible for global warming, whether you're a Democrat, Republican or unaffiliated, whether you're in denial or not. Our climate change strategy can no longer wait on naysayers to agree that a catastrophe is underway — action is needed now if we hope to adapt to it.

It's time to fight climate change — citizens, corporations and foundations, all of us together. We can support the Obama administration's proposal to clean up carbon pollution by:

• Striving for energy efficiency in homes and workplaces;

• Providing tax and other incentives for renewable energy;

• Phasing out fossil-fuel based energy over time.

We are taught to never pull the fire alarm as a joke, because fires are scary and to trigger that fear without just cause is an irresponsible act. But it's time to pull the alarm on climate change — wildland firefighters are on the front lines watching our land burn, but we hope to fight the "Climate Change Fire" together.

Marcus Ryan, a Broomfield resident, is a former firefighter with the Tatanka Hotshots.