I know what you're thinking: only one JCPS board meeting in December? Why, oh why?

But if you've been having board meeting withdrawal, rest assured that Monday's meeting should be lively, at least because it's one of the board's traveling meetings.

The Jefferson County Board of Education will begin its work sessions at 4 p.m. at Ramsey Middle, 6409 Gellhaus Lane. The regular meeting will, as usual, begin at 7 p.m.

When the school board meets at schools instead of district headquarters, they get flooded with presentations from students from different schools in the same area. This meeting will be no different, with scheduled presentations from Ramsey Middle students, Carrithers Middle's musical program, Jeffersontown High's industrial maintenance program and Fern Creek High's communications program.

Here are some of the other highlights on the evening's agenda:

PRIORITY SCHOOLS: The board will start its work sessions at 4 p.m. with an update on the district's 20 priority schools, which is a label for persistently low-achieving schools. As you'll recall, both Fern Creek High and Waggener High managed to shed the dreaded priority label this school year - the first in the district to do so. However, three other JCPS schools entered that status. The work session will focus on other schools that could potentially exit that status and what supports are being given to those that just entered.

The meeting notice said the work session will also give an update on the district's Success Pathways schools, which includes the alternative school Minor Daniels Academy. However, there is no attachment related to the Success Pathways schools on the agenda so far.

DRAFT BUDGET UPDATE: Chief Financial Officer Cordelia Hardin will give the board another update on the development of the draft budget beginning at 4:30 p.m. This is the second of three planned updates to the board on the development of the draft budget.

SETTING TARGETS: The school board at its last meeting approved its vision and strategic plan through 2020 and now will discuss and vote on approving more specific targets and goals to reach by 2020. Among them: raising the graduation rate to 93 percent, increasing minority teacher hiring to 25 percent, and more.

EVALUATING HARGENS: The board is expected to meet briefly before dinner to have a closed-door discussion of how Superintendent Donna Hargens is performing.

ANONYMOUS LETTERS: A community group called Dear JCPS has been soliciting anonymous letters about issues in the state's largest school district. The group plans to present the anonymous letters and some of the concerns they contain to the school board during the non-agenda speakers portion of the meeting.

INTERIM SPOKESWOMAN: JCPS has been paying $190/hr to a public relations firm, Guthrie/Mayes, to provide it an interim spokesperson to deal with media issues. The district has tapped a new chief of communications and community relations, but the new person, Allison Martin, is not expected to start until Jan. 14. So the board will have to vote on whether to approve a $53,000 extension to the Guthrie/Mayes contract so Bonnie Hackbarth can continue as spokeswoman in the interim.

In case you're keeping count: the approval of the contract extension would mean JCPS is spending up to $97,200 for somewhere around 5 or 5.5 months of supposedly part-time work. Extrapolated out, JCPS is paying the equivalent of about $212,000 a year.

CHANGING THE MEETING CALENDAR: The board will also vote whether to change the next scheduled board meeting from Tuesday, Jan. 12 to Monday, Jan. 11. No reason was given in the agenda for the proposed date change.

IMMUNIZATIONS ONLINE: The board will vote to approve a participation agreement with the Kentucky Department for Public Health related to an online immunizations database. The department will maintain and operate the secure site, and JCPS nurses will be able to access and use the database. JCPS spokeswoman Bonnie Hackbarth said the new online registry launched at the beginning of the month. She said the online registry will make it easier for both parents and schools because it will be easier to find immunization records. (By the way, you'll remember that hundreds of JCPS early childhood students missed their first day of school this year because parents hadn't brought in their immunization records.)

...AND MORE: As always, there are other interesting items on the agenda that I didn't specifically pull out, including a memorandum of understanding with the Jiujiang (China) Education Bureau and an internal audit midyear status report. The full JCPS board agenda is available online.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1QCIHj4