County performs well on income maintenance measures

On Tuesday, Stevens County adopted a new flag and logo that will be rolled out on official documents.

On Tuesday, Human Services Director Joanie Murphy gave an update to the Stevens County Board of Commissioners about the county's performance in two measures related to Cash Assistance and the Supplemental Nutrition Assistance Program (SNAP). Stevens County currently has about 250 food support cases.

There are two measures for processing these income maintenance requests. Under expedited requests for clients who need assistance immediately, applications need to be processed immediately. The state threshold is 55 percent. Stevens County processes 62 percent of applications in a timely manner.

Murphy said increasing that number is a learning process for the entire staff, including the front desk, to make sure key questions are asked when residents walk into the agency for the first time.

All other applications need to be processed within 30 days. The county processes 85 percent of applications in that time, above the state threshold of 75 percent. Murphy said most of the applications that are not finished are a result of not getting needed information from applicants.

"I'm pleased that we're moving in the right direction, given the fact that we've had some turnover in income maintenance and people are learning their jobs," said Murphy.

Coordinator meets with SCEIC board

County Coordinator Becky Young told the board Tuesday that she had a productive meeting about operations with the Stevens County Economic Improvement Board of Directors.

Young said the organization was interested in putting some processes in place to improve communication and create procedures for addressing complaints. They may also add someone with administrative experience to the board to help improve these processes.

"Blaine Hill and I have met and we're going to work with that agency to do some different reporting," said Young. "It's a difficult thing to report on because there's a lot of confidentiality involved with people looking at the business piece of it."

After the discussion, the board approved a letter to Michael Haynes, director of the SCEIC, regarding his presentation to the board on Tuesday, March 17.

After his quarterly report in March, Commissioners Donny Wohlers and Ron Staples confronted Haynes about complaints they'd received about the organization.

In the letter to Haynes, Young outlined the result of some investigation into the incident:

"After the SCEIC quarterly report was presented to the commissioners, there was a question asked if you had ever told a potential client to start a business in Swift County instead of Stevens County. At which point you said no. Upon investigation, it was determined that in fact it was another Michael, not related to the SCEIC in any way, that had made the above referenced remark."

"In the future, as our board continue to work together, should any concern arise, it will be directed to the Executive Committee through our County Coordinator," the letter concluded.

Affordable Care Act increases county medical cases

Stevens County currently has 1,093 healthcare cases, about double what the county processed before the Affordable Care Act was implemented, Human Services Director Joanie Murphy told the Board of Commissioners on Tuesday.

Most people who apply for healthcare using MNsure — Murphy estimated 90 percent — qualify for public health insurance. As a result, the county's workload processing applications has dramatically increased.

The biggest challenge, she said, is that the MNsure online system is working well for county social service agencies.

"Given the fact that 90 percent of the applications that come through that process are public healthcare applications, we need for that system to work," said Murphy. "We are very frustrated."

Murphy said county human services directors are working on a letter to send to the MNsure Board of Directors outlining their concerns. She plans to bring that letter to the board for approval in May.

Other business

The board voted to offer a seat on the Stevens County Planning Commission to Stevens County resident Jeff Boyle, operations manager at Riverview Dairy. The board interviewed four candidates for the position.

The board approved a new logo for Stevens County. County Coordinator Becky Young said she asked department heads to slow transition into using the new logo on official documents.

This story originally stated that the SCEIC Board of Directors was looking to add an administrator to their board. In fact, the board is looking at adding someone with administrative experience, like County Coordinator Becky Young or City Manager Blaine Hill, to the executive committee.