The Agenda How small-business issues are shaping politics and policy.

Start-ups — hungry, lean, facing an uncertain future — are different from other businesses. So it is reasonable to think that start-ups might have different needs when it comes to health insurance. Now, one organization istrying to profit from this distinction, real or imagined, by marketing health insurance specifically to start-ups almost anywhere in the country.

On Monday, the Young Entrepreneur Council, an invitation-only network of successful company founders, introduced StartupInsurance.com, a Web site where nascent companies can buy health insurance and supplemental policies like dental insurance. “We’re trying to bring a level of trust and transparency to a community that we understand very well here,” said Scott Gerber, founder of the Young Entrepreneur Council. “We bring the curation and the knowledge of the need of our constituency.” The council has simultaneously introduced FreelancerHealthcare and SmallBusinessInsurance, Web sites that sell insurance to those segments of the market.

Certainly the effort makes sense for the for-profit Young Entrepreneur Council. It has used its network of nearly a thousand entrepreneurs to build an online brand for helping small businesses and will receive a fee for every client it refers to the insurance carriers marketing the plans, principally Assurant Health. Eventually, the council plans to market other business services to small companies. The question is whether the sites and their health offerings make sense for start-ups and other entrepreneurs.

Mr. Gerber said start-ups wanted insurance that was affordable and transparent and that complied with the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, which take effect in 2014. But desiring these would not seem to distinguish start-ups and other entrepreneurs from anybody else — what company would not want to buy insurance that is inexpensive, easy to understand, and compliant with regulations?

But in fact, some of the individual health plans the freelance and start-up sites are offering will not comply with the health care law’s provisions for providing minimum value. That means that the people who buy them will be subject to the penalty of the individual mandate. Mr. Gerber said that some entrepreneurs might prefer to absorb the mandate penalty in exchange for cheaper, if less extensive, coverage. “It’s important to give a choice,” he said.

Asked what particular attributes of insurance would appeal specifically to entrepreneurs and start-ups, he said that they could count on the Young Entrepreneurs Council to represent their interests in a shifting landscape — to figure out the complexities of the changing health insurance markets for them. “We sit in the middle of an ecosystem and literally work with thousands of entrepreneurs a day, so we’re hearing them, but they also trust us,” Mr. Gerber said. “What we’re saying is that if you trust what Y.E.C. has been about and continues to be about, then you understand that we put a tremendous amount of time, energy and resources into putting this entire experience and package together. We’ve done the homework for them.”

Mr. Gerber described his partner, Assurant, as “one of the largest specialty health care providers specifically working with self-employed individuals.” Mr. Gerber said insurance was available in every state except, Maine, Massachusetts, and Vermont.

But Mr. Gerber said that he could not discuss the details of the plans — including what they will cost — for legal reasons, because he is not a broker. A spokeswoman for Assurant, Mary Hinderliter, said that the plans at all three sites were the same plans Assurant already offered. Though the council is marketing the insurance through three different portals, for three different audiences, the sites appear nearly identical. Mr. Gerber said there were some small differences across the sites, but he declined to identify them, except to note that the freelancer portal would not offer group insurance.

Ms. Hinderliter said Assurant’s major medical plans were not meaningfully different from plans that would be available in the insurance markets, known as exchanges, scheduled to begin operating in 2014 under the health care law. (Assurant will not participate in the exchanges until 2015, according to Ms. Hinderliter.) In the exchanges, both individuals and small businesses can comparison shop for insurance across carriers, and plans. Mr. Gerber’s contention is that entrepreneurs have neither the time nor the interest in diving so deeply into an ancillary task. But some of the council’s clients may miss out on an opportunity — individuals and businesses that are eligible for tax credits to offset the cost of health insurance will only be able to use them if they purchase insurance from an exchange.

Asked to comment about this, Mr. Gerber said, “We were going to do this regardless of whether the Affordable Care Act came to be or not, regardless of the state exchanges. This is our take on how to do it.

“There’s a big need here whether the government’s involved or not, and we’re hoping to help as many people as we can.”