The life science industry spans many different markets and includes companies in fields such as medical device, pharmaceuticals, research, bio-agricultures and bio-logistics. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto ) Story Highlights Tennessee’s medical school deans urge increased support for federal research funding.

Due to NIH funding cuts, talented young researchers are leaving the U.S. for other countries.

Medical advances don’t happen by accident, and they don’t happen in the first experiment.

Despite their differences, both political parties agree on an important issue in Washington, D.C.: Medical research in this country is in crisis.

Since 2003, funding for the National Institutes of Health (NIH) has plummeted nearly 25 percent when adjusted for inflation. Thousands of promising research projects that history has proven will yield life-saving treatments for heart disease, stroke, cancer, autism, Alzheimer’s, diabetes and other diseases are rejected each year due to lack of available funding.

Due to NIH funding cuts, talented young researchers are leaving the U.S. for other countries or leaving research altogether. China will outspend the U.S. on all research and development by 2020, while our national health security is threatened by global bioterrorism and pandemics.

Some may ask whether the private sector can pick up the slack? Unfortunately, no.

While our nation’s biotechnology and pharmaceutical industries are currently the envy of the world, the fundamental research our government has supported throughout history are the long-term investments that have never been practical for industry to support.

Marquetta Faulkner, Meharry Medical College (Photo: Submitted)

Leaders in this sector all agree that without the fundamental research funded by NIH, many of the life-saving drugs used today — or filling the pipeline for tomorrow — simply would not exist. The fact is, no other entity in our country — or the world, for that matter — is as important to medical research as the NIH.

Thanks to NIH-funded research, deaths from heart disease have fallen by 50 percent in the past 40 years. Cancer death rates have dropped about 1 percent per year for the past 15 years, and childhood cancer cure rates are now more than 80 percent. Without the NIH, none of this would be possible.

But this amazing progress could grind to a halt. Researchers at universities and businesses in Tennessee, and all 50 states, can’t continue their work if Congress doesn’t fully fund the NIH.

David Stern, University of Tennessee (Photo: Submitted)

Restoring NIH funding will actually help alleviate pressure on the federal budget. Today, the U.S. government spends more than $1 trillion a year for health care delivered through Medicare and Medicaid, not to mention the additional funds needed for veterans health programs, the Children’s Health Insurance program and many others.

For example, Alzheimer’s disease currently costs the U.S. health care system $226 billion a year, and this number is expected to grow to a staggering $1.1 trillion per year by 2050. However, a treatment that would delay the onset of Alzheimer’s by just five years would cut these projected costs by one-third.

Robert Means, East Tennessee State University (Photo: Submitted)

Right now, after years of flat federal budgets and sequestration, Congress has an opportunity to restore funding to the National Institutes of Health. This is an investment that will strengthen our economy, now and for the future.

The economic impact of the NIH is undeniable, especially right here in Tennessee. NIH funding supports more than 400,000 American jobs. In 2014 Tennessee universities and researchers were competitively awarded $466 million in NIH funding. This funding supports nearly 9,000 jobs, and every dollar of NIH funding generates more than $2 in local economic growth in our state. Imagine what additional impact our universities could have right here in Tennessee with more NIH investment.

NIH funding supports the careers of Tennessee-based physicians and researchers developing the new treatments and breakthroughs you read about every day in the news.

These advances don’t happen by accident, and they don’t happen in the first experiment. They emerge only after years of diligent work and investment. Sustained, predictable funding from NIH is essential to make this possible.

Jeff Balser, Vanderbilt University (Photo: Submitted)

We are grateful to leaders in our congressional delegation for supporting NIH and federal biomedical research funding.

We urge the entire Tennessee delegation to pass fiscal year 2016 spending bills that restore funding for the National Institutes of Health.

Marquetta L. Faulkner, M.D., M.B.A., F.A.C.P., F.A.S.N., senior vice president for health affairs, and dean of the School of Medicine

at Meharry Medical College; Jeff Balser, M.D., Ph.D., vice chancellor for health affairs and dean of the Vanderbilt University School of Medicine; Robert T. Means Jr., M.D., dean of medicine of the James H. Quillen College of Medicine at East Tennessee State University; and David Stern, M.D., Robert Kaplan Executive Dean for the College of Medicine at University of Tennessee Health Science Center.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1XWeA6T