Photo

WASHINGTON — President Obama on Tuesday condemned opponents of his signature health care law as “cynical” partisans seeking to deprive Americans of a benefit that has become an integral part of the country’s social safety net, building a tough political case against Republicans as the Supreme Court weighs whether to strike down a key element of the Affordable Care Act.

“This is now part of the fabric of how we care for one another — this is health care in America,” the president said in a speech to the Catholic Health Association, an organization that championed the law and has written a brief asking the high court to uphold it. “It seems so cynical to want to take health care away from millions of people.”

The court is expected to rule before the end of the month on whether to invalidate subsidies for millions of people who signed up for coverage through HealthCare.gov. If they do, millions of Americans could lose their health insurance, and rates for millions more could rise if the insurance markets collapse in the more than 30 states that use the federal insurance exchange.

The speech was something of a victory lap for a health care measure Mr. Obama argued has defied “doom and gloom predictions” and “Chicken Little warnings” of economic calamity and freedoms revoked. But it was also a preview of the sharp political rebukes the president is prepared to deal to Republicans should they seek to upend the law in the wake of an adverse ruling later this month.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Whether or not the court invalidates the subsidies, health care is almost certain to be a central issue in the 2016 presidential campaign.

The Affordable Care Act, Mr. Obama said, is no longer just a piece of legislation or an abstract theory, but “a reality that people on the ground, day to day, are experiencing.”

Video

“Their lives are better,” Mr. Obama said. “Americans support this new reality.”

Republicans were quick to counter Mr. Obama’s speech even before it began, saying the president was divorced from reality and denying the negative effects of a health care overhaul they said had raised costs and caused some people to lose health coverage they liked.

“I imagine the families threatened with double-digit premium increases would beg to differ, as would the millions of families who received cancellation notices for the plans they had and wanted to keep,” said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the majority leader, calling the Affordable Care Act “a law that’s failed.”

“The sooner President Obama can get to grips with that reality, the sooner we can work together to replace the fear and anguish of Obamacare with the hope and promise of true health reform.”

The Republican Party sought to use the health law as a political weapon against the presumed Democratic presidential front-runner.

“Whether it’s skyrocketing costs, canceled insurance plans, or the law’s legal issues, the problems caused by Obamacare rest squarely at the feet of this president, Hillary Clinton and the rest of the Democrat party,” Michael Short, a Republican National Committee spokesman, said in a statement responding to the president’s speech.

In his speech Tuesday, Mr. Obama made a familiar case that the 2010 law has brought huge improvements to the lives of millions of people who had previously been unable to afford basic health care, or who could not obtain coverage because of pre-existing conditions.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

He cited statistics showing that the law has helped slow the growth of health care costs, and noted that the five years since its enactment has coincided with the longest streak of private-sector job growth on record.

“The critics stubbornly ignore reality,” Mr. Obama said.

The Supreme Court case centers on a provision in the law that seems to say subsidies are available only to people living where the insurance exchanges had been “established by the state.”

Speaking on Monday in Germany before returning from a meeting with European leaders, Mr. Obama said he was optimistic that the justices would not invalidate the subsidies with a “contorted reading” of the Affordable Care Act and the intent of lawmakers.

“I’m optimistic that the Supreme Court will play it straight when it comes to the interpretation,” he said. “If it didn’t, Congress could fix this whole thing with a one-sentence provision.”

In fact, Republicans are signaling another drawn-out political fight over fixing the health law if the court rules the subsidies are invalid. Senator John Barrasso of Wyoming, the chairman of the Republican Policy Committee, who called the law an “expensive disaster,” said Tuesday that members of his party “aren’t interested in a one-sentence fix — unless that sentence is: ‘Obamacare is repealed.’ ”

Mr. Obama’s speech was part of a broader effort to shape and define the president’s biggest domestic accomplishment in the face of partisan attacks.

The White House also unveiled a new website intended to put the Affordable Care Act into a broader historical context. The site features a timeline suggesting that efforts to expand health coverage began more than 100 years ago.

Critics and doubters of the Affordable Care Act are unlikely to be swayed by the new promotional materials. But White House officials are hoping that Mr. Obama can make a convincing case that the law is working, and that it is here to stay, before he leaves office in 2017.