Sen. Sara Kyle is a first-term Democrat and former Public Service Commissioner. She represents parts of Memphis. (Photo: Submitted)

Tennesseans may be surprised to learn that the United States stands alone among developed countries in failing to provide any paid time off for workers with a new baby or a seriously ill family member who needs their care.

While the federal Family and Medical Leave Act (FMLA) signed into law 21 years ago provides unpaid leave, helping many workers keep their jobs, it fails to cover almost 40 percent of workers.

Tennessee’s own parental leave law similarly only covers large employers and only provides unpaid leave.

Many workers covered by these laws can’t afford to use them because they can’t afford to go without pay. That means parents are robbed of crucial time with a new child, or forced to lose income or even a job when a daughter undergoes cancer treatment or an aging mother suffers a stroke. This can take a huge financial toll and put families’ economic stability at risk.

The lack of paid family leave is a serious problem for Tennessee families.

As parents of six children and two grandchildren (collectively), we understand how important it is for parents to have the time they need to bond with newborn babies and for mothers to recover from childbirth.

Paid family leave also covers workers who need time to care for a seriously ill spouse, parent or other family member. As our population ages, this family care becomes even more important, and family members who provide it should not be deprived of income they need to survive because they are providing that care.

Because two-thirds of family caregivers are female, this burden usually falls on women, exacerbating the wage gap at a time when so many families depend on women’s wages to make ends meet. To safeguard the family budget, we need to protect our working caregivers.

Public health also benefits when workers can take paid family leave. The availability of family caregiving can prevent complications before they even begin by, for example, ensuring that a patient is taking appropriate doses of preventive medication.

Similarly, paid family leave increases the likelihood and duration of breastfeeding, which improves children’s health. Tennessee ranks 49th in the country for babies ever breastfed, a statistic that we must fight to improve.

One of us, Rep. Fitzhugh, is a small business owner and understands how paid family leave programs offset employer costs. Most proposals for paid family leave create insurance programs funded by very small employee contributions that cost employers nothing.

At the same time, paid family leave benefits the employer’s bottom line by increasing employee retention, morale and productivity. An overwhelming 91 percent of employers in California, where a similar program was enacted 10 years ago, reported that paid family leave had either a positive or neutral effect on profitability.

Policies that support workers caring for family members also benefit our state’s economy. By keeping workers with caregiving needs attached to the workforce, paid family leave decreases reliance on public assistance and other government benefits, which creates significant taxpayer savings.

When family caregivers help ill and aging loved ones recover more quickly and spend less time in hospitals, it leads to financial savings and a decreased burden on overcrowded health care facilities. Reduced Medicaid and Medicare costs will likewise save taxpayers money.

We introduced a bill earlier this month that will make Tennessee a leader in figuring out how to best promote family financial security through a paid family leave program.

The U.S. Department of Labor is planning to use its existing funds to offer grants to some states to conduct paid leave feasibility studies.

HB557/SB663 would allow the state of Tennessee to apply for one of those grants. With additional money to study this growing problem, Tennessee should do what it can to support our workers and those in need of care.

We will reach out to our colleagues in coming weeks and expect to have robust, and bipartisan, support. Tennessee’s workers should not be forced to choose between a paycheck and caring for their family.

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1EDXfqT