More options: Share, Mark as favorite

A supporter of U.S. Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump attends a campaign rally at Oral Roberts University in Tulsa, Oklahoma January 20, 2016. Reuters

Read the PDF

How angry are Americans at Washington? This issue of Political Report looks at levels of public anger over time and particularly going into the 2016 presidential election. With the Supreme Court deliberating controversial cases related to abortion, teachers’ unions, and affirmative action, this issue also examines public opinion of the court and the cases at hand.

How angry are Americans?

Not as angry as Trump: Donald Trump says he is “very, very angry.” Bernie Sanders says he is angry, too. But as the 2016 primary season approaches, Americans’ level of anger is similar to what it was going into the 2012 election: 24 percent say they are “angry about the way the federal government works,” compared to 26 percent in February 2012 (ABC/The Washington Post).

The Supreme Court and its docket

Partisan views of the court: Following high-profile decisions on same-sex marriage and the Affordable Care Act in 2015, the partisan gap in approval of the court is larger than ever before: 58 percentage points in July 2015 and 41 points in September (Gallup). Gallup’s trends show that shifts in partisans’ approval of the Supreme Court correlate with perceptions of the court’s ideology. In 2015, the percentage describing the court as “too liberal” reached a new high at 37 percent, at the same time that Democrats’ approval also increased.

Following high-profile decisions on same-sex marriage and the Affordable Care Act in 2015, the partisan gap in approval of the court is larger than ever before: 58 percentage points in July 2015 and 41 points in September (Gallup). Gallup’s trends show that shifts in partisans’ approval of the Supreme Court correlate with perceptions of the court’s ideology. In 2015, the percentage describing the court as “too liberal” reached a new high at 37 percent, at the same time that Democrats’ approval also increased. Abortion: On March 2, the Supreme Court will hear Whole Woman’s Health v. Cole, a Texas case related to that state’s restrictions on performing abortions. In an Ipsos/Reuters online survey, between 26 and 36 percent answered “Don’t know” to each question bearing on the case, signaling that many people are not closely following the case or have not wrestled with the issues involved.

On March 2, the Supreme Court will hear Whole Woman’s Health v. Cole, a Texas case related to that state’s restrictions on performing abortions. In an Ipsos/Reuters online survey, between 26 and 36 percent answered “Don’t know” to each question bearing on the case, signaling that many people are not closely following the case or have not wrestled with the issues involved. Teachers’ union dues: We have found hardly any survey questions from major pollsters relevant to the central issue of Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, which the court heard in January. In a May 2015 CBS News/The New York Times poll, a majority (54 percent) said that workers should be able to opt out of union fees, even though they receive the benefits.

We have found hardly any survey questions from major pollsters relevant to the central issue of Friedrichs v. California Teachers Association, which the court heard in January. In a May 2015 CBS News/The New York Times poll, a majority (54 percent) said that workers should be able to opt out of union fees, even though they receive the benefits. Affirmative action: Very few pollsters ask regularly about affirmative action, the practice in question in Fisher v. University of Texas at Austin. In 2015, 58 percent said they were in favor of affirmative action programs for minorities (Gallup). In 2013, when the Supreme Court sent Fisher back to the lower court, 64 percent said minorities should not “receive preference in college admissions to make up for past inequalities” (Public Religion Research Institute).

America’s outlook

More optimistic about the future: For the first time since 2002, people are more positive about the country’s future position than about its past. On a ladder with steps numbered from 0 to 10, with 10 being the best possible situation for the country, Americans on average say the United States stood at 5.2 five years ago, stands at 5 today, and will stand at 5.9 five years from now.

To view past issues of AEI’s Political Report, visit our archive here.