in: Mom Stories

By BabyCenter Editorial Team

If all mothers breastfed their babies, it could save the lives of more than 800,000 babies and 20,000 moms (and save $300 billion in healthcare costs) globally every year. So says an analysis of breastfeeding habits around the world published a few days ago in British medical journal The Lancet.

“Breast milk makes the world healthier, smarter, and more equal,” says The Lancet. And the authors of the journal’s analysis suggest that even though it’s well known that breastfeeding is one of the most effective preventive health measures for kids and moms no matter where they live, governments haven’t done nearly enough to support it.

The American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP) agrees that breastfeeding plays a significant role in public health and encourages women to breastfeed their babies for at least 12 months, starting solids at 6 months while continuing to breastfeed as well until age 1. But for many reasons, most U.S. moms don’t nurse their baby for nearly that long.

Some women choose not to breastfeed, and some women are physically unable to. But for the many moms who can and want to nurse, here’s the frustrating thing: It may be hard or impossible to find the guidance, support, and time to do it successfully. The Affordable Care Act tries to ease these hardships by requiring that insurance plans provide free breast pumps and lactation counseling, but it’s not enough.

Guidance & support: New mothers who have never breastfed usually need help learning how. Lactation consultants are experts who can help – but many exhausted new moms don’t use one because they don’t have insurance or know about the benefit. They have no one to show them how to hold their baby comfortably, how to get their baby to “latch on” properly, and how to avoid sore nipples and painful infections. Without support, they may give up in frustration.

Time: If you’re lucky enough to have a job with maternity leave, most likely you’re looking at six weeks paid time off after having a baby. (Of 34 countries with “advanced economies” – and that includes less-prosperous places like Poland and Bulgaria as well as wealthier ones – the United States is the only one that doesn’t require paid maternity leave.) No wonder so many working moms give up by six weeks! Few have the time or privacy to pump once they’re back on the job – even though most women whose employers are covered by The Affordable Care Act are required to offer nursing moms a clean, private space (not a bathroom) and sufficient time for pumping.

Social pressures: In spite of the laws that protect your right to nurse your baby in public, plenty of women face disapproval or worse when they attempt to do so. Families aren’t always supportive, either – if your mother or mother-in-law didn’t nurse her babies, she may not understand how important it is to you.

Only you know what’s best for your baby. Are you a breastfeeding mom or pregnant and planning to nurse your baby? Here’s help:

Photo credits: iStock