Topics: bruce feiler, PBS, pilgrimage, Religion, sacred journeys, Spirituality, News

Each year, millions of people embark on spiritual pilgrimages or journeys that will take them across the globe in search of answers to life’s biggest questions. Bruce Feiler, a renowned expert on religion in modern life, took this feat to the next level, becoming the first person ever (he thinks) to complete six pilgrimages in one calendar year.

Feiler’s six-part PBS series, “Sacred Journeys With Bruce Feiler,” tells the story of his encounters with American pilgrims who traveled to Lourdes, Shikoku, Jerusalem, the Hajj, the Kumbh Mela and Osun Osogbo. Salon spoke with Feiler to learn about his groundbreaking, trying adventure and to learn about humanity’s common quest for spirituality and meaning.

This interview has been lightly edited.

How did this specific project come about?

I’ve been for most of the last 20 years going on religious adventure trips like this, “Walking the Bible,” “Abraham,” “Where God Was Born.” “Walking the Bible” became a three-hour series on PBS in 2006. WGBH, which is the public television station in Boston, came to me five years ago and said they wanted to do a show on pilgrimage, was I interested in partnering with them. And I said no. I said I didn’t want to make a show that was a series of Wikipedia entries about strange people going on strange journeys in strange places. But what I said and what I felt then and what I feel now is: What is the thing you hear most often in religious circles these days? That is, “I’m not religious, I’m spiritual. I’m on a journey of some kind.” And I really wanted to make a series in which whatever journey you’re on you could find that reflected in what you were seeing on the screen.

So we got together. It took us five years. It was a year to plan it, a year to raise the money, a year to find the pilgrims, a year to shoot it–I did all of these journeys in the course of one year. I’m assuming or guessing I’m the only person who has ever done it. It hasn’t been logistically possible in the past. The pilgrim part was very important because in “Walking the Bible,” the TV show, I was in every scene basically and I was the one going through the intellectual and emotional transformation. But I obviously couldn’t be expected to go through the emotional transformation in all these different places, so getting the pilgrims was really important because without the emotional component you’ve got those Wikipedia entries I wanted to avoid.

How did you find the featured pilgrims?

It was challenging because we needed to find people who were going, we needed to find people who were willing to share their story, but I think the power of the series at the end of the day is in their stories. Take Lourdes [France], for example: we traveled, as you know, with 40 wounded warriors. People have their legs blown off, they were blinded, an African-American sniper from Kansas who literally had a grenade go off in his mouth. They make this journey, and to me, the juxtaposition of these grizzled war veterans who have seen some of the worst of human nature and this 14-year-old peasant girl who sees the Virgin Mary 150 years ago, that tension between the purity of that story and the intensity of the veterans is remarkable. And where the emotion of the show comes from.

It then took us a year to get permission from the Pentagon because this had never been put on film before. So we’re not just getting permission from the pilgrims, it was getting permission from all the people around them. So that’s an amazing, remarkable story that I’m thrilled people are going to get a chance to see.

What is the difference between spirituality and religion? How is American religion evolving in relation to that difference?

Well, I think that organized religion is more threatened than ever before. Attendance is down, membership is down, but it’s not down that much. Here’s what I think is going on. The idea that you would go to a building at the time of the building’s choosing and sit in a pew while someone stands up on a high platform like a mountain and tells you what to think and believe from a text that has been closed for hundreds or thousands of years–every part of that is completely anathema to how we live today.

People want to be more interactive, they want to do things on their own schedule, they want to tell their own story, they don’t want to just listen to other people’s story. So what’s going on is that people are pulling away from formal institutions, but they’re not giving up on these core questions about who am I, how do I get through difficult times in my life, what does it mean to have values, how can I serve my community and is there a higher calling in some way. So what happens is people are breaking away from the institution but they are still asking the big questions, and that’s exactly where pilgrimage fits in. Because a pilgrimage is at its core a gesture, or an action. It’s saying that I’m going to take a step. I’m going to figure out what I really believe and I’m going to determine for myself how I want to live my life. Whereas traditional religion is much more passive, going on a sacred journey is much more active. That’s why pilgrimage is so popular today.

There was this U.N. study, the United Nations held the first world conference of tourism in its history in September in Spain, and in conjunction with that they released a report that says a third of all tourists around the world every year are pilgrims. That’s 330 million people a year. This is not some hype machine thing, this is the U.N. So spiritual pilgrimage is much bigger today than it’s ever been before as a phenomenon, and it’s a combination of people determining their own beliefs, coupled with the ease of international travel, coupled with general mobility with which we all live. Bear in mind, 50 percent of Americans will change faith in the course of their lives, four in 10 Americans are in an interfaith marriage, so there is just a lot more fluidity. We no longer just accept the religion that our parents gave us. We each have the opportunity and, in effect, the obligation to decide what we believe for ourselves.