AAP launches 'Jai Kisan Abhiyan' in Haryana from Gurgaon

n Gurgaon, the campaign was led by AAP chief spokesperson and Haryana in-charge was Yogendra Yadav

Aam Aadmi Party (AAP) today launched 'Jai Kisan Abhiyan' from here over alleged "anti-farmer" approach by the BJP governments in the state and Centre and appealed the MPs to oppose the "anti-peasant" Land Acquisition ordinance, when it comes for discussion in the Parliament.

(AAP) today launched 'Jai Kisan Abhiyan' from here over alleged "anti-farmer" approach by the governments in the state and Centre and appealed the MPs to oppose the "anti-peasant" Land Acquisition ordinance, when it comes for discussion in the Parliament.



In the first phase of the protest campaign, a large number of farmers and AAP volunteers took out a procession from Kamla Nehru Park, Gurgaon, to the residence of local BJP MP Rao Inderjit Singh, who is also a Union Minister.



In Gurgaon, the campaign was led by AAP chief spokesperson and Haryana in-charge Yogendra Yadav.



The AAP handed over "packets of salt" at the local MP's residence in his absence as a reminder to him of his responsibilities towards farmers and the pre-poll promises made by his party, the BJP to the peasants.



AAP also submitted a letter signed by farmers requesting him to take a stand on farmers' issues in the upcoming budget session of Parliament.



"The central and state governments of Haryana have been insensitive towards issues concerning farmers. A four-fold cheating has been done in a short tenure of ten months at Centre and four months of the BJP government in the state," Yadav told the gathering.



Slamming the Central government on the Land Acquisition ordinance, he said the Central government passed it "nullifying many pro-farmer rules and making the unjustifiable for farmers".



"Aam Aadmi Party demands that our MPs oppose the anti-farmer ordinance when it comes for discussion in Parliament," he said.



On December 29 last year, the Central government recommended promulgation of an Ordinance making significant changes in the Land Acquisition Act including removal of consent clause for acquiring land for five areas of industrial corridors, PPP projects, rural infrastructure, affordable housing and defence.

Press Trust of India