FQHCs Better Meet Needs Of Medicaid Patients

By Christine Kern, contributing writer

Federally Qualified Health Centers grant higher rates of care to Medicaid and uninsured patients than other PCPs do.

A study posted by Medical Care shows Federally Qualified Health Centers granted new patient appointments to Medicaid beneficiaries and uninsured patients at higher rates than other primary care practices. The study sought to examine the differences in appointment availability and wait-times for new patient visits between FQHCs and other, non-FQHC providers.

According to the study, conducted by researchers at the University of Pennsylvania and underwritten by the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, FQHCs provide a “vital source of primary care for underserved populations” that includes the uninsured and those enrolled in Medicaid. New funding allocations as part of the ACA and the expansion of Medicaid programs in many states also may mean the consequent expansion of the role played by FQHCs in the future.

Using experimental data form a simulated patient study, the researched compared new patient appointment rates across FQHC and non FQHC providers in 10 states in three insurance categories: private, Medicaid, and self-pay. The sample comprised 10,904 calls, including 544 calls to FQHCs.

“The higher acceptance rates of Medicaid and uninsured patients seems to indicate that Federally Qualified Health Centers will be an important source of primary care for these underserved populations moving forward, as more patients become insured under the Affordable Care Act,” said lead study author Michael R. Richards, M.D., according to Health Data Management.

One of the components of the ACA is $11 billion in funding over five years to support the ability of these centers to meet increased demand for primary care services. “This study suggests that FQHCs provide better availability and lower-cost options for these new patients, so it will be important to continue tracking FQHCs’ accommodation of patients from these insurance groups in the early years of health care reform,” Richards explained.

The study found that, using trained auditors posing as patients, “FQHCs grant new patient appointments at high rates, irrespective of patient insurance status. Adjusting for caller, clinic, and area variables, the Medicaid appointment rate at FQHCs is 22 percentage points higher than other primary care practices. Although the appointment rate difference between FQHCs and non-FQHCs is somewhat smaller for the self-pay group, FQHCs are much more likely to provide a lower-cost visit to these patients. Conditional on receiving an appointment, wait-times at FQHCs are comparable with other providers.”

Additionally, while only 40 percent the non-FQHC practices studied provided visits at a cost of $100 or less to uninsured patients, nearly 70 percent of FQHCs offered the discounted pricing.

“It’s encouraging to see that FQHCs are meeting the needs of these individuals in appointment availability, cost and wait times,” said the study’s senior author Daniel Polsky, according to Health Data Management. “There are a considerable number of patients who will be seeking primary care for the first time in many years now that they are insured, so it’s crucial that the system is prepared for this increase, and FQHCs are a key part of the equation.”