OKLAHOMA CITY -Presidential candidate Sen. Ted Cruz, R-Texas, spoke to a large crowd of prospective voters at the Bricktown Events Center.

Large crowd at Chevy Events center for Ted Cruz @kfor pic.twitter.com/uezI1vBIVa — Leslie Rangel (@Leslie_KFOR) February 28, 2016

Ted Cruz supports taking jabs at other candidates @kfor pic.twitter.com/zKL8vHJ7wH — Leslie Rangel (@Leslie_KFOR) February 28, 2016

Cruz was joined by Gov. Mary Fallin and conservative pundit Glenn Beck before he stepped on stage Sunday afternoon.

Fallin spoke about how Cruz knows Oklahoma is the most conservative state in the nation, before letting those in attendance know about the state’s importance in the electoral process.

“Oklahoma matters this Super Tuesday,” Fallin said.

Beck sported a hat similar to Republican presidential candidate Donald Trump’s “Make America Great Again” before telling the crowd to cast their vote for Cruz on Tuesday.

“We must not let hate grow inside of us, we must do the right thing to make America great again,” Beck said.

Cruz took the stage, immediately thanking his supporters before launching into his speech. He spoke about the U.S. Constitution enduring attacks from Democrats and President Obama.

“Our constitutional rights are under assault every day,” Cruz said.

The primary election will be determined by issues of “freedom, jobs, and national security,” Cruz said.

If elected, Cruz said he would repeal the Affordable Health Care Act signed into law by Obama and promises children will receive “multiple offers” for jobs due to the strength of his economic plan.

Cruz spoke about wanting to rebuild the military if he is elected president. Cruz emphasized the need to take on Islamic terrorism.

“If and when military force is needed, we should use overwhelming force, kill the enemy and then get the heck out of there,” Cruz said.

Please enable Javascript to watch this video

Cruz hammered at Trump during multiple parts of his speech.

Currently, Cruz is trailing Trump by nearly 10 percent in some recent Oklahoma Republican primary polling data, according to FiveThirtyEight.

He spoke about how if Trump received the Republican nomination, it "means Hilary [Clinton] wins and we lose this country."

He emphasized how his campaign is the only campaign that has defeated Trump previously during the Iowa caucus.

"If you don't want Donald to be the nominee then stand, united, with us," Cruz said.