But for many conservatives, those expectations for 2016 do not include a continued fight to defund Planned Parenthood.

“I see it, and a lot of folks see it, as shifting into 2017,” Mr. Holler said, when they hope a Republican replaces Mr. Obama.

Carol Tobias, the president of the National Right to Life Committee, wrote in an email: “We won’t be able to remove federal funds from Planned Parenthood while this president is still in office. But we do have a pathway when(!) a pro-life president is elected.”

Showing that pathway is the purpose of the House vote, tentatively scheduled for next Wednesday, on a so-called budget reconciliation bill. The measure includes provisions to ban funds for Planned Parenthood and repeal the Affordable Care Act. House Republicans’ expected approval of the bill, which the Senate passed early this month, would send it to Mr. Obama.

The president has promised a veto. But congressional Republicans say the effort will show they can pass such conservative priorities over Democrats’ opposition — and get them signed into law once a Republican president is elected. They hope Mr. Obama’s veto will elevate the issues of Planned Parenthood and abortion rights more broadly in the 2016 election debate as the parties contend for control of the White House and the Senate. Yet for several vulnerable Senate Republicans from Democratic-leaning states, the less their party says about the issues, the better.

At Planned Parenthood, officials say they know the fight is not over. But a spokesman, Eric Ferrero, said, “It’s a testament to the incredible outpouring of support we’ve seen for Planned Parenthood that after six months of trying, extreme members of Congress weren’t able to sneak a single defunding measure into the final budget.”

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

In the Senate, where Republicans hold 54 seats, appropriations bills and most other legislation need 60 votes to avoid filibusters, a threshold that has allowed Democrats to block many House-passed measures, including against Planned Parenthood.

But budget reconciliation bills pass with a simple majority under special Senate rules. The reconciliation bill awaiting House action passed the Senate, 52 to 47.

“It was long ago decided our best shot at getting a defunding bill to the president’s desk was through reconciliation,” said Brendan Buck, a senior adviser to the speaker.

Initially, that strategy drew fire from influential conservative groups and some lawmakers and prominent talk-radio hosts, who all insisted that only the year-end government funding bill gave Republicans leverage. Mr. Obama could veto the reconciliation bill without political cost, they argued, but vetoing the government-spending bill would make him culpable for a shutdown.

Typically, such opposition might have thwarted Republican leaders. But they had support and political cover from other conservative groups, who were mindful that Republicans received most of the public’s blame for a government shutdown in October 2013. The allies included abortion opponents such as the National Right to Life Committee and the Family Research Council.

The National Right to Life Committee, in a recent newsletter to supporters, acknowledged that it differed with some groups like Heritage Action and with talk show hosts who wanted to tie government funding to a cutoff of Planned Parenthood funds. “But most mainstream pro-life groups,” it said, “saw this as a dead-end strategy.”

According to leadership aides in both parties, Mr. Ryan did press for Democrats to acquiesce to one anti-abortion provision in the government spending measure — a proposed ban on any laws requiring health facilities, medical professionals or insurers to participate in abortion activities. But over a private dinner early this month, Representative Nancy Pelosi of California, the House minority leader, told Mr. Ryan that the provision would cost him the Democratic votes he needed to pass the government spending bill.

“At the end of the day, they got nothing,” Mr. Holler said of Republican leaders.

If next week’s House vote is Republicans’ last try for legislation against Planned Parenthood — for now — there will still be hearings in several committees through 2016 that will keep alive the questions over how fetal tissue from abortions is handled. A little more than half of roughly 700 Planned Parenthood centers perform abortions, and a few of those, in three West Coast states, have arrangements to provide tissue from fetuses or fetal placenta to researchers.

The main event is an investigation by a special House committee that Republicans have named the Select Investigative Panel on Infant Lives and Democrats call the Special Republican Committee to Attack Women’s Health.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Its chairwoman, Representative Marsha Blackburn, Republican of Tennessee, said in an emailed statement that the panel would focus on “abortion industry medical practices” and “the procurement industry” for fetal tissue. Its report is expected to be ready by December — after the November elections.