By L&T Managing Editor Larry Phillips The racist Oprah Winfrey is in the news again. This time, she says in a Nov. 15 interview with the British Broadcasting Company that many Americans now disrespect the office of the president because Obama is black. (It still bothers me all those racists that hate non-blacks call him black. HE IS ONLY HALF BLACK.) “There is a level of disrespect for the office that occurs,” Winfrey said. “And that occurs in some cases and maybe even in many cases because he’s African American. There’s no question about that, and it’s the kind of thing that nobody ever says but everybody is thinking it.” This is only the latest proof Oprah is a dedicated racist. She was called “a liar” by the sales clerk she besmirched in Europe who didn’t assist Oprah fast enough for the ego-maniac “little rich” black girl. I can imagine Oprah laughing all the way to the bank, “I’ve fooled these honkies for years and years and have them eating out of my hand.” Well power to her, I’ve got to admit she has worn sheep’s clothing for a long time and made billions off the fools that “love” her. But, she’s never made a dime off me and never will. In her BBC interview, Oprah pointed to the fact that Congressman Joe Wilson yelled “You lie” during a 2009 speech Obama was giving to Congress. “Winfrey took her comments one step further, saying that the issue of racism is largely generational. Specifically, she said that cultural prejudice in the U.S. will largely recede after the last generation of individuals have died off,” reported Eric Pfeiffer in a Nov. 15 article on Yahoo.com. “‘I said this, you know, for apartheid South Africa, I said this for my own, you know, community in the South — there are still generations of people, older people, who were born and bred and marinated in it, in that prejudice and racism, and they just have to die," Winfrey said,’” Pfeiffer added. She needs to re-think her phoney “evidence” against Rep. Joe Wilson proving racism. Wilson wasn’t being a racist, he was telling the truth. Obama was telling the world that “illegal immigrants would not be getting health care under his proposed Affordable Care Act.” We all know that was not the truth. So what do you call it? “Obama misspoke? No, it was exactly what Wilson said. Now we’re sitting here almost five years later, and some – or “maybe even in many cases” – people have learned Obama is quite adept at spinning yarns, to be kind. (As adept as Winfrey). And Wilson has been vindicated throughout the years – and as late as last month in a piece by Richard Kline on www.americanthinker.com, where Kline looked at facts from Wilson’s shout to what’s happened in the last five years. “As we look back … we see that Obama and his Administration do lie,” Kline wrote. “And they lie a lot.” He pointed to several proven untruths. “Both Eric Holder and Barack Obama stated that ‘Fast and Furious was a program begun in the Bush Administration.’ That was a lie. The Bush Administration had, in fact, shut down any efforts to track illegal shipments of guns to Mexico.” There was the fact that, “Hillary Clinton, Susan Wright and Obama all stated that the attack in Benghazi was caused by Islamists’ spontaneous reaction to an anti-Islamist video produced in the United States.” Obama carried on with this “untruth” for two weeks into the United Nations speech. Obama “… assured us that ‘..... the IRS targeting of conservative groups like the Tea Party...’ was an isolated instance of rogue IRS employees in the Cincinnati office.” We know that was very, very untruthful. Obama “… and the National Director of Intelligence reassured the American people time and time again that the phone calls and emails of Americans were not being monitored and recorded as part of our intelligence programs.” Oops, another little fib. Kline then gets to Obama’s signature legislation – otherwise called an enema – that he and the Democrats forced upon the American people. Kline refers to the rollout of Obamacare as “fertile fields for more lying.” • “If you like your current insurance plan, you can keep it. Period.” • “If you like your current doctor, you can keep that doctor.” • “Your premiums will go down an average of $2,500 per year.” • “The cost of this national healthcare program will be less than $1 trillion.” • “Obamacare would not cover abortions.” • “Obamacare would not cover illegal aliens.” Notice Wilson’s objection in 2009 is listed there again. So, I ask Oprah, ‘Why would you call Rep. Joe Wilson a racist when he spoke the truth?” Her answer might be, “Well nobody has ever done that to a president before.” That can’t be proven in the history of the presidency, but I would counter with, “We have never had a president stand before a joint session of Congress and utter such garbage before either.” That also can’t be proven. But Oprah can take her racism and share it with her rich, black friends, and I hope all the millions of whites she slandered last Friday wake up and see her for what she is: A dedicated (and filthy rich) black racist – who is never challenged by the leftist media, I might add. Shame on her and her ilk.