Education policy draws higher interest as political parties put more resources into races

Bryce Carlson ( Jenny Sparks )

In a public comment at Wednesday night's Thompson School District Board of Education meeting, Windsor's Amie Toerge lit into Bryce Carlson, the board's vice president, accusing him of helping usher partisan politics into the district.

"I was appalled to learn that (Carlson) is currently serving as a member of both the board of the Larimer County GOP and the Thompson board," Toerge said, before berating him for what she viewed as a violation of board policy.

"You should resign from the Thompson school board of education immediately," she concluded, and many in the crowd of about 200 applauded in agreement.

Had Toerge's comments come only eight hours earlier, her case might have been stronger. However, Carlson resigned from the county Republican board shortly before noon Wednesday, stating in an email to the board's chairman that his responsibilities in Thompson have prevented him from devoting adequate attention to his political obligations. Despite resigning before the meeting, Carlson's name was not removed from the Larimer GOP's website until Thursday morning.

And as for the fact that most of the Thompson community learned of his party ties the same day he cut them? "Coincidental," Carlson said. "It wasn't in response to (Toerge's) comment by any means."

The 'conservative slate'

Advertisement

Though Wednesday's meeting alerted many to the strength of his Republican allegiance, it's well known that Carlson leans to the right, as do fellow board majority members Bob Kerrigan, Carl Langner and Donna Rice.

Carlson, Rice, Langner and Rocci Bryan advertised it last fall, in fact, pooling campaign funds to send a mailer asking voters to support Thompson's "conservative slate." The word "Republican" never appeared in that ad, though. Thompson stipulates that "no candidate may run representing a political party," and, technically, no one did.

However, the four candidates had a host of supporters to do their bidding. They were billed as the district's "Republican candidates" in one mailer, and the Larimer GOP itself distributed a "TSD Board of Education Report Card," giving A-plus grades to the conservatives and failing marks to Lori Hvizda Ward, Jeff Berg, Gerald Lauer and Janice Marchman. Only Hvizda Ward won her race.

With the party-funded report card, Carlson might have run afoul of guidelines for Board of Education candidates had he been involved in its design. But that's not the case, according to Larimer GOP Chairman Patrick Albright.

"At that point, Bryce really wasn't participating in our board meetings," he said. "I think September or August is the last time he made a board meeting, and we sent the flier out mid-October. He might have been copied on some emails, but we didn't really ask him for input."

What Carlson knew about the report card flier will likely never be known, said Luis Toro, director of Colorado Ethics Watch, a state-based branch of independent watchdog Citizens for Responsibility and Ethics in Washington.

"I think it shows one of the weaknesses of our system here in Colorado," he said. "We have a completely private system, where individuals need to file a complaint at their own expense. If this happened in another state, then an agency might be able to investigate possible violations, and they could look into it and see if (Carlson) was really more involved. But unless there's access to more evidence, the public will never know if there's a violation. I'm not saying that's what happened here, but it's possible, and we just won't know."

A New Divide

Carlson's case underscores the greater statewide concern stated by some that public education, historically nonpartisan, has become a major political combat zone between Republicans and Democrats.

In December, 14 former Thompson board members, with close to a combined century of experience in school governance, co-signed an open letter lamenting the current board's general "loss of focus on our students."

Marcia Venzke, who read the letter aloud at the board's Dec. 18 meeting, said her colleagues' politics "never came up" in the nine years she served.

"We didn't care," she said. "Each individual's decisions were based on the facts put before us and the values we had, and most of those values were around the kids."

"We former board members are essentially appalled," Venzke added. "We just find this very sad."

Divisive politics in Colorado school board races is no longer uncommon, though, with similar conflicts unfolding in Jefferson and Douglas counties.

"There's never been a law against this," Colorado Ethics Watch's Toro said. "But it's just been the tradition that school boards are set up as nonpartisan, exactly because the idea was that the board members would just work together in the best interests of the community."

But in JeffCo and Douglas, as in Thompson, reform candidates replaced board members from both parties, leaving some Republican constituents feeling marginalized.

Before addressing Carlson on Wednesday, Teorge told the audience she was a "lifelong" GOP devotee. And Berg, a registered Republican, said he finds it increasingly difficult to identify with his party.

"It feels like, as a Republican, there is a movement to restrict diversity of thought," he said. "If you are a little sympathetic to the issue of immigration, for example, all of a sudden you're this crazy liberal who shouldn't have anything to do with the Republican Party anymore because you're not in line. So, in the case of public education, if you are not a 100-percent charter school advocate, and trying to get government out of the lives of kids, then you must be a bad Republican."

A History in Poudre

There is nothing in the law that precludes anyone's right to serve on a school board while maintaining his or her party ties. GOP Chairman Albright, for one, recently wrapped up a term on the Poudre School District board -- the same board on which Nancy Tellez, a Senate chairwoman with the Larimer Democrats, currently sits. For many, the concern lies more in the reform majorities' unapologetic broadcasting of their collective political inclination.

"You don't think the Republican Party set out to take over the Thompson school board?" said William Russell, chairman of the Larimer County Democrats. "It was on the advertisements, the blogs. It certainly looks like a partisan attempt to me."

Alex Burness can be reached at 970-669-5050 ext. 521 or burnessa@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at twitter.com/alex_burness.