Incumbent Bill Woolsey (left) is running for mayor of the Town of James Island against Trent Kernodle (right).

James Island voters will decide Tuesday who they think will best serve the town as it deals with development, traffic and the impact of growth.

Name: Bill Woolsey Age: 58 Occupation: Economics professor at The Citadel. Education: Ph.D. in economics from George Mason University, B.A. in economics from Virginia Tech. Previous elected offices: Member of James Island Town Council, 2002-2004; Mayor of Town of James Island, 2010-2011 and 2012-2014. Family: Married to Kathy Woolsey for 33 years; two sons, William and Andrew. What is your main goal if you are elected: Reunite the town, provide property tax relief, build new sidewalks, pave dirt roads, and allow ordinary citizens to obtain services at Town Hall rather than travel to the county building at Northbridge. Contact information: mayorwoolsey@gmail.com or 697-7020.

Incumbent Mayor Bill Woolsey will face attorney Trent Kernodle in the Town of James Island's mayoral race.

Name: Trent Kernodle Age: 62 Occupation: Attorney. Education: Law degree, University of Memphis; master of business administration and bachelor of arts in political science, University of Tennessee. Previous elected offices held: None. Family: wife Kay Kernodle; four children, Alicia Hutto, and Bay, Sam and Parker Kernodle; two grandchildren. What is your main goal if you are elected: Everybody I talk to says we've got too many houses and too many cars and I have a plan to stop that. Contact information: trent@kernodleformayor.com, 266-7600, kernodleformayor.com, facebook.com/kernodle4mayor.

Voters also will decide who will fill all four Town Council seats. Six candidates are running for the four seats: Mary Beth Berry, Leonard Blank, Garrett Milliken, Darren Troy Mullinax, Lyndy Palmer and Joshua Stokes.

Berry, Blank and Mullinax currently hold Town Council seats.

The town's latest incorporation was in August 2012, and state law requires that it hold an election within two years of its incorporation.

James Island incorporated three times since the 1990s, but each of those efforts were squashed, largely due to lawsuits from the city of Charleston.

Charleston and James Island town supporters have a long history of being at legal odds. All three previous attempts at incorporation were struck down after the city's challenges went to the S.C. Supreme Court.

After the fourth attempt was passed by voters in April 2012, Riley announced the city would not seek to block it.

One of the strongest legal defenses that allowed the new town to survive was that the current version was drawn to be geographically contiguous. That meant the town had to shrink in size from earlier designs, omitting some neighborhoods such as Riverland Terrace.

Reach Diane Knich at 843-937-5491 or on Twitter at @dianeknich.