In 2000, I voted for George W. Bush. In South Carolina, where I live, I voted twice for Mark Sanford to become our governor and helped send Lindsey Graham to the U.S. Senate. In fact, I’ve pulled the lever for more Republicans than Democrats. And I’m exactly the kind of voter the GOP needs to survive the demographic changes the country is undergoing: I’m black.

But my days supporting the GOP are over. I won’t be voting for a Republican for high office for quite some time, if ever. And the reasons that I—and others like me—feel this way are likely to spell trouble for a party that got just 6 percent of the black vote in 2012.

Story Continued Below

In the Obama era, the GOP’s tone and tenure toward African Americans has simply become untenable. Instead of reaching out to voters like me, Republicans are squandering this opportunity by refusing to grapple with the issue of race in a way that resonates with black voters—oftentimes even denying the existence of racial barriers at all. It’s as though the GOP would rather treat us like children who need a stern talking-to by their wiser elders than as a potential voting bloc that can help the party retake the White House.

And, no, Republicans can’t just gain more black voters by supporting or nominating Dr. Ben Carson, whose talk about race sounds more like Ted Nugent than Thurgood Marshall.

I have not always felt this way. There are, or were, plenty of us out there—black voters not loyal to a particular party, making us more gettable for the Republican Party than most. I voted for Barack Obama in 2008 but would have voted against him in 2012 if he wasn’t able to make the Affordable Care Act law. (I thought reforming our broken health care system was that important.) And even though I disagreed with Republicans like Sanford and Graham on a variety of political issues, I thought they were principled men who would place country above party during times of stress.

I have always thought it praiseworthy, too, that the GOP claims the likes of Abraham Lincoln and Frederick Douglass, and it duly received a significant percentage of the black vote through the early 1960s. Even when Republicans cozied up to the likes of Southern senators Strom Thurmond and Jesse Helms, and grew hostile to the kind of civil rights progress the party had once championed, I was never convinced that black voters should only be Democratic. Some of the party’s deepest commitments—family values, religious faith, fiscal responsibility—resonate strongly with the black community. And the GOP’s embrace of figures like Colin Powell, along with Bush’s diverse Cabinet and strong outreach to African nations, were enough to keep me in the fold. While imperfect when it came to race, Republicans seemed to care about handling that issue with care and sensitivity.

That GOP no longer exists. During the Obama era, the Republican Party has morphed into something I couldn’t feel comfortable being associated with. Conservative opposition to this president has not felt like politics as usual. I’ve watched relative moderates like Graham walk in lock-step with an all-out, seemingly monolithic opposition campaign against Obama and his policies—as our country was fighting two ground wars, the economy was in freefall and millions of people went without basic health care. I don’t know if that hyper level of opposition in a time of national crisis always had to do with race. I do know it showed the depths to which the party would go to hate Obama.

And it’s not just Obama himself. The disrespect the GOP has shown toward the nation’s first black president has felt like a proxy war by Republicans against the rest of black America. The party has denigrated black people who don’t adhere to the Republican insistence that we speak of race only as a relic of the past, despite our daily lived experiences. When Trayvon Martin, the black Florida teenager, was shot and killed in 2012 and Obama commented that his own son would have looked like Martin, I heard from numerous conservatives who said the president was unnecessarily pulling out the race card; it never crossed their minds that he was simply trying to humanize a young black man who had been killed.

In the years since, as black parents were holding their kids a little tighter, fearing that they might be the next ones put in the crosshairs of an unbalanced person—or police officer—who believes black people are threats, the Republican Party only wanted to change the subject. A black man is shot by police for picking up an air rifle in a Wal-Mart? A 12-year-old black boy is shot by police within seconds of their arrival as he plays with a toy gun in a park? A black woman is arrested during a stop for a lane-change violation after she refused to put out a cigarette? Each time, all Republicans wanted to talk about was black-on-black crime and a high black unwed mother rate.

That’s because the party has convinced itself that black people talk about race not because we genuinely want or need equality, but to ensure that we forever remain victims. This doesn’t necessarily mean the Republican Party, writ large, is racist—just that it’s race-hostile and unaware, something harder to overcome than purging the overtly racist members from its ranks.

***

The message conservatives have long sent black people is: Work hard, commit to education, take responsibility for yourself and make wise decisions. Implicit in this is the insulting notion that black people would know nothing about such things if they hadn’t been pointed out by white Republicans (and some black conservatives), and that if black people follow this route, conservatives will at least respect, if not embrace, them.

Then along came the Obamas, the personification of such conservative teachings. The couple used education and hard work to rise above meager beginnings, secure good jobs and do just what Rick Santorum loves to preach—get educated, get married, then have kids.

Still, in the eyes of Republicans, Obama was seen as too uppity and pretentious, not worthy of their respect, no matter his accomplishments. Just a few months into Obama’s presidency, it was clear some Republicans were not comfortable with his occupancy of the Oval Office—and would not afford him a basic level of respect they had afforded even past Democratic presidents. There was South Carolina Representative Joe Wilson, a white Republican, who famously yelled “you lie” as Obama gave an address before Congress about his healthcare reform plan. Then, early in the 2012 election cycle, the GOP embraced Newt Gingrich, who won the South Carolina primary in the heart of the Bible Belt—the same Gingrich whose marital and personal life didn’t meet the standard set by conservatives the way Obama’s had, the same Gingrich who labeled Obama “the food stamp president,” echoing Ronald Reagan’s race-tinged “welfare queen” slur.

Now, there’s Donald Trump, who has been atop Republican polls since early this summer. In many ways, Trump stands for everything the GOP claims to hate. Conservatives say personal responsibility is paramount, but Trump has walked away from billions of dollars of obligations through multiple bankruptcies over the course of his business career. Conservatives brag about the primacy of God and the Christian Bible, but when Trump was asked about his favorite Bible verse recently, he couldn’t, or at least said he didn’t want to, name one.