At churches across Denver on Sunday, the nine victims in the South Carolina church massacre last week were remembered as Christians who died in an act of love and worship.

When a 21-year-old white supremacist opened fire Wednesday night at Charleston’s Emanuel African Methodist Episcopal Church, killing nine African-Americans gathered for Bible study, he struck a community that stretches far beyond the walls of that church.

His deadly actions have rung across a community of faith that stretches across generations, across continents, across races, united by a religion centered on forgiveness and the enduring power of love.

For a faith in which reference to “brothers and sisters in Christ” is a common refrain, the pain felt by millions after the shooting was for family lost.

“To those families who don’t know whether to cry or to shout,” senior pastor Kevin Foreman told the Harvest Christian Center congregation, “we send prayers from Denver all the way to Charleston this morning.”

• • •

At Denver’s Campbell Chapel AME Church, Sunday’s service began with a call for forgiveness and ended with members young and old releasing 10 balloons into the bright summer sky — one for each victim, and one for the church’s congregation.

Pastor Andrew Simpson Jr. gave a rousing sermon in which he indicted lingering racism in America and called for a spirit of togetherness across races.

“Together, we can make it,” he said time and again.

“We are one in the spirit. We are one in the Lord, and we pray that our unity will one day be restored,” he said. “And they will know that we are Christians by our love.”

In an opening prayer, the Rev. Almetha Lewis asked healing for the victims’ families as well as the shooter.

“Touch those families that were affected by this tragedy,” she said in an opening prayer. “Touch, Lord, even the one who slayed them.”

“Touch us that we can forgive.”

At that moment, a parishioner shouted out: “It’s who we are.”

• • •

A few hundreds visitors not part of the regular congregation flocked to Denver’s Shorter Community AME Church to gather in support and remembrance.

Pictures of the Charleston victims punctuated announcements of upcoming church events on a large screen in the sanctuary.

The Rev. Timothy E. Tyler, the pastor at Shorter, reminded his congregation that “no matter how evil things seem to be, God is still in charge.”

He said he has received many calls, letters, flowers and even a note on the front door of the church in support of the church during this “dark time.”

Sen. Michael Bennet attended the service with his wife and three children. Rep. Diana DeGette also was there.

“We need to work passionately, relentlessly, for the realization of the American Dream,” Bennet told the gathering. “In these trying times, Colorado stands with you.”

Nearly 100 members of Denver’s Providence Bible Church joined the service.

“It’s our honor and duty to walk with you,” said Providence Pastor Jason Janz. “We are your ally. We don’t want you to be discouraged, afraid, or take any steps backward in your fight for justice.”

Tyler said he will travel to Charleston for the funeral of Emanuel pastor Clementa Pinckney on Friday. He is bringing with him donations for Pinckney’s family collected during Sunday’s service.

“Evil will not win,” Tyler said. “Hate will not have the last word.” Tierra Smith

• • •

The 9:15 a.m. service at the Harvest Christian Center in Aurora was full of energy. Churchgoers were greeted with hugs, singers sang gospel music and the crowd clapped along.

As Foreman stood at the lectern talking passionately about the events that unfolded Wednesday, which he characterized as a terrorist attack, the faces of the victims were shown on screens behind him.

Those who lost their lives inside the Emanuel AME Church were, Foreman said, brothers and sisters of God who died doing what they loved: serving God. He continued by saying they had now found comfort.

He told his followers not to dwell on wounds because it causes one to live in the past. But he said it’s important to recognize wounds to learn from them.

“Without a wound, there is no progress,” he told them. Matthew Leonard

• • •

At the Jefferson Unitarian Church in Golden, the Rev. Eric Banner stood in front of a congregation of about 100 mostly white parishioners and passionately said that there is a volatile problem with racism, gun control and the examples that men and fathers set in their communities.

“I’m not talking about self-defense, and I’m not talking about protecting yourself from violent crimes,” Banner said. “I’m talking about young, white men showing up with their anger and their guns and their lack of understanding of what it means to be a man who lives and models in love and integrity.”

After calling for a single, unified vision of manhood and fatherhood centered on universal acceptance and moral responsibility, dozens of people broke out in fervent applause.

“I appreciate someone on Father’s Day talking about what it means to be a man in this context,” said Lakewood resident Rex Nelson. “My wife and I are from Alabama, and this hits really close to home for us.”

Nelson and his wife, Deda, remember the last time they attended their church in Birmingham in 1969. Their congregation was voting on whether or not to allow a black person to join their parish.

“Nothing has changed in all this time,” Deda Nelson said. “There’s still this infection of apathy that hasn’t gone away. And (society) has not been acting in a way that will solve these issues” of racism and gun control. Megan Mitchell

• • •

Clarence McDavid, deacon at Cure d’Ars Catholic Church in northeast Denver, was the rare faith leader who did not have to put aside a planned sermon Sunday to find a message in response to the Charleston tragedy.

His sermon was pulled from the Book of Job, with a focus on the way fear can shake the foundations of faith. But those who read, teach and live by the Gospel can not only push through the most brutal of life’s struggles but set an example of faith, love and compassion, McDavid said.

“Hate won’t solve anything,” McDavid said. “I believe that the people in South Carolina have shown us how, instead of perpetuating the cycle of anger and revenge, they have shown us how to make it different.

“Where their action is an action of love that says ‘I have read the Gospel, believe the Gospel and am acting in the way of the Gospel.’ “

While the shooting raises concerns about church security, McDavid said those issues have always existed and need to be balanced by the desire to keep the doors of worship open to strangers.

“Are we now supposed to lock our churches as a way to be prepared?” McDavid asked. “That our churches, with our dwindling populations of people, would prevent those that feel the call for that moment from coming in?

“We have to keep our doors open, with the belief that people will come in that otherwise wouldn’t have and will be changed.” Austin Briggs

Matthew Nussbaum: 303-954-1666, mnussbaum@ denverpost.com or twitter.com/ MatthewNussbaum