Buy Photo Sheila Tucker fills prescriptions at the Market Street Pharmacy in Wilmington. About 75 percent of her regulars are on Medicaid, a bulk on Highmark’s plan. Tucker said the changes to reimbursement fees will force her to cut staff. (Photo: KYLE GRANTHAM/THE NEWS JOURNAL)Buy Photo

Delaware’s 45 independent pharmacies, small medical practices and patients are struggling with the state’s efforts to reform health care.

In some cases, those changes are putting the businesses on the precipice of going out of business.

Take pharmacist Sheila Tucker. She thought she had done everything right.

She studied long and hard to become a pharmacist, helping make Market Street Pharmacy a mainstay in downtown Wilmington for the past 11 years. She’s a friendly face in the community and loves her job.

But at the start of the new year she was shocked when she checked her financial statements.

Market Street Pharmacy’s Medicaid dispensing reimbursement fee – a payment for filling each prescription for subsidized patients and a crucial source of operating funds – had dropped without warning from $10 to 85 cents under the Highmark Blue Cross Blue Shield of Delaware Medicaid plan, the state’s new managed care organization for 2015.

About 75 percent of her regular patients are on Medicaid, a bulk on Highmark’s plan. Like many other providers who have a large number of Medicaid patients and customers, Tucker said the changes will force her to cut workers. She said she might even have to close down.

“It’s really a slap in the face to pharmacies,” Tucker said. “They are putting the independent pharmacies out of business. It’s like telling me what I went to school for was a total loss.”

At the end of 2014, the state dropped its contract with Delaware Physicians Care Medicaid in favor of Highmark for the next three years. It kept its Medicaid contract with United Healthcare.

State officials said Highmark and United Healthcare are more closely aligned with their views for reforming health care delivery in Delaware, emphasizing efficient and quality service at a reasonable cost. The two managed care organizations’ contracts total about $1.6 billion in state and federal dollars.

Each has the latitude to set its own Medicaid fee schedules which are then certified by the state and feds. Smaller pharmacies and physicians’ offices have said United’s fee schedule did not change drastically from last year. Only the new Highmark offering has been causing issues.

Delawareans on Medicaid could choose to enroll in either plan or be automatically assigned during open enrollment through last Nov. 26. As of Tuesday, 77,454 Delawareans are on Highmark’s plan and 117,067 are on United Healthcare’s plan.

Pharmacies and doctors who cater to Medicaid patients might be forced to stop, putting the people who need that access the most at risk.

For most seniors and Delawareans on fixed incomes, the choice already comes down to do I buy my medication or pay my electric bill, said Paul Calistro, executive director of the West End Neighborhood House in Wilmington. He sees the struggle every day as the organization helps those scraping to get by find stable employment, housing and health care. People have to hold off buying cancer drugs or immunodefficiency pills.

“I think the seniors and the poor are the pawns in this,” he said. “These are the folks that are most affected by it and caught in the middle.”

He doesn’t think there will be a point where pharmacies in Delaware won’t accept government insurance. But he acknowledged that the average person, whether he or she is on Medicaid or not, will have a lot of trouble navigating the ebb and flow of health care changes. His own employees have had double-digit increases to their health care plans for the last 10 years, even before the Affordable Care Act was signed into law.

“Every year was a different story,” he said.

Private physician and specialist practices are seeing their reimbursement fees sliced just like independent pharmacies under the new Highmark offering. Some practices have stopped taking patients enrolled in Highmark’s Medicaid plan altogether in order to stabilize their finances.

The business models for health care providers should be balanced, said Steve Groff, director of Delaware’s Division of Medicaid and Medical Assistance. He is uncomfortable with providers who are too dependent on government funding for their profit margins.

“That suggests to me that they are either building a business around Medicaid or Medicaid is supplementing what they are receiving from other payers, neither of which is a good thing,” he said.

But the problem is not just about money: If smaller pharmacies and medical practices shut down, patients will have fewer options and could face a lapse in treatment.

Since Jan. 1, Jason Kautz, of Wilmington, has been surviving on a steady supply of three-day emergency Paxil pills from his Walgreens pharmacy. He takes the medication to manage severe seizures.

Kautz, who switched to Highmark’s Medicaid program, has been unable to get his prescription authorized under the new insurer.

“If it’s not covered I don’t know what to do,” he said. “They [the pharmacists] give me three more and pretty much tell me to hope for the best.”

Problems with Highmark’s fee schedule came to a head at the January Delaware Health Care Commission meeting, a monthly forum for doctors, hospital officials, insurance companies, patient advocates and policy analysts.

“You can’t change your budget. We laid off two people,” said Lynne Grajewski, chief operating officer of Women’s First, an organization that manages four obstetric and gynecologic practices throughout the state, to the crowd of stakeholders gathered at Delaware Technical Community College in Dover Jan. 8.

She’s been happy with Highmark’s commercial plans and there have been no problems with United’s reimbursement rates or prescription authorizations, she said. It’s Highmark’s new fee structure for the Medicaid plan that is causing problems.

She said her practices no longer accept new patients on Highmark’s Medicaid plan and are only continuing to see select Highmark patients if they were midway through certain treatments like prenatal well-checks or birth control injections.

“Some of them were due to have their babies in January. We are not going to say go find another doctor when you were due in a week,” she said.

Delaware Health Secretary Rita Landgraf defended Highmark during the meeting, saying Highmark’s rates were “actuarially sound,” fair and approved by the state and federal governments. Due to company policy, Highmark declined to provide its rate structure.

It’s no secret health care costs are rising – higher Medicaid enrollment alone will cost state taxpayers another $24 million – so officials need to get creative to stop the cost from spiraling, she said.

“We need to be really vigilant as to how we drive that cost and get better quality,” Landgraf said in an interview following the meeting.

Providers are getting pinched not only by Medicaid, but by reforms central to the Affordable Care Act, says Kip Piper, a D.C.-based health care consultant and former senior adviser to the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. The quality standard of insurance plans has increased, but the premiums inevitably have to go up to make up the difference.

“You can pass all the laws you want, but you are not changing the laws of gravity,” he said.

“If you are trying to fit millions of more people, while at the same time paying less money, you are narrowing the network. A lot of these smaller providers may be on fewer and fewer plan networks. The plans are driving people into the larger practices.”

Mid-range and larger practices are in a better position to “transform” health care, Piper said. They have more technology, funding and support to deal with market changes.

“For smaller physician practices, it’s harder to do,” he said.

Delaware just secured a $35 million federal grant to fund a state innovation plan to significantly change the way health care is offered and how it is paid for.

The change is centered on becoming more “performance-based,” which goes hand-in-hand with tort reform to reduce unnecessary tests and streamline services so patients do not have to keep repeating their medical histories to doctors.

Since day one, Highmark has been a strong, active participant and supporter of the state’s innovation model, Highmark spokesman Matt Stehl said in an email message.

“As a Medicaid provider, we will meet our obligation to the state by continuing our work in support of the triple aim of improving the health of Delawareans, improving the patient experience of care and reducing health care costs,” he said.

Mike Walsh, owner of a small physical therapy clinic in Dover, said Highmark has delivered in terms of customer service. Medical claims have been processing, and though he hasn’t been paid, one-time patient appointments and medication authorizations have been smooth.

“We are cautiously optimistic, that’s the best way to put it,” Walsh said.

In December, he thought his practice would be inundated with Highmark patients since they are one of only, if not the only, small physical therapy practice in Kent County taking the Highmark Medicaid plan. So far he has eight Highmark Medicaid patients and 24 United patients.

Walsh said he suspects the low number of Highmark patients reflects what is happening on the physician referral side; physicians are not taking Highmark’s Medicaid plan and as a result, the patients go elsewhere.

“We are kind of sitting there holding our breath,” he said.

Highmark says about 85 percent of providers in the commercial market have opted into its Medicaid network, but some physicians say that might not be accurate.

Grajewski said the insurer asked providers to sign letters of intent to be included in the new network directory for patients, without showing the fee schedules. Walsh echoed similar sentiments, saying the public provider directory is still not updated.

“There was a lot of misinformation out there,” Grajewski said.

Groff acknowledged that Highmark “should have gotten the rate schedule out sooner rather than later, but they do have the rate schedule out there now. Providers are free to contract with them or not.”

The state concluded that Highmark and United have sufficient plans in place, but Groff said they will be monitored through the end of March.

After that time, the state will assess the plans to see how many people are enrolled in each, where they live and what types of services are getting reimbursed. If either plan lacks enrollees or providers, the state will step in, Groff said. Penalties could include fines.

“I would certainly hope that wouldn’t happen,” he said.

Even if a practice like Women’s First does not technically take Highmark Medicaid, physicians can still see long-term patients on that plan who need to continue their treatments. After the treatment is complete, however, those patients can no longer be accepted. Patients will have until March 31 to switch Medicaid plans to best fit their needs.

Providers hope the situation gets better.

On Dec. 31, Pat Carroll-Grant, of Cape Pharmacy in Lewes, received a $10 dispensing fee. On Jan. 1, it was $1.50.

“I’m really not able to see what I can do,” Carroll-Grant said. “This is on top of the fact that pharmacies are trying to make this a smooth transition for patients. If you asked me today how I am being paid I would not know the answer.”

She acknowledged there had to be costs cut somewhere, but was not happy with the lack of transparency.

“It’s very disheartening. Because we are a small state, our pharmacists have always stepped up. We try to take care of a lot of issues. Did it just happen to independents or did it happen to the big chains,” she said.

Walgreens operates 64 drugstores in Delaware. A spokesman said “for competitive reasons” he would not disclose its pricing structure or fee schedule.

Highmark’s Stehl said provider relations representatives would work to address any concerns, but didn’t know if that would include amending the Medicaid reimbursement rates.

At the end of the day, the back-and-forth makes it more difficult to take care of patients, said Kevin Musto, owner of Atlantic Apothecary in Smyrna.

“I want to take care of my patients. At the same time, I have to support my overhead, rent, utilities and payroll,” he said.

Practices and pharmacies will have to cut corners in order to make ends meet. Bottles and vials all cost money, he said. Atlantic doesn’t keep a large inventory either; they will put in a medication order in the same week they dispense it.

Who knows, maybe he will have to start handing out medication in plastic cups, he joked.

“When you go to your doctor and get a well visit and sick visit, you expect them to take care of you and make sure you are thoroughly evaluated. If we start to shortchange health care and not pay for the service you need, then some people won’t be as thorough,” Musto said.

“I don’t want patients to go to the hospitals. ... When you diminish the value of the pharmacy I think the patient loses out on the outcome because they may use the medication wrong.”

Wilmington resident Shanice Reed was assigned to Highmark Medicaid after her Delaware Physicians Care ended Dec. 31. She’s already had problems getting prescriptions, and might have to leave the Women’s First practice in Wilmington, an OB/GYN practice she’s gone to for the last five years.

Last Thursday she was in for her last appointment – a Depo-Provera birth control shot.

“I’m going to have to see what I can do,” she said.

Her partner Naaffi Ames kept their daughter, A’Mina, less than a year old, busy while she was seen. He’s frustrated with the insurance situation, too. He said he only got a letter in the mail about the state’s Medicaid switch in November and there was no information about which doctors’ appointments or prescriptions will be covered.

“I can’t survive if I don’t know what tools I have to survive with,” he said.

Read or Share this story: http://delonline.us/1JByHA6