Loveland Fire and Rescue Authority crew rescues mare from frigid water

Rescuers work to help free Sunny the mare from an icy pond west of Loveland. (Jill Gookin)

Rescuers use a special warming blanket to warm a mare that fell into an icy pond Sunday morning. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Sunny, a 13-year-old mare became stuck up to the neck in an icy pond Sunday morning.

After the owner and his neighbor were unable to free the horses themselves, the Loveland Fire Rescue Authority was called in and freed the horse from the frigid water and ice.

"We got a call at about 7 a.m. from our neighbor," said Jill Gookin. "We went over and tried for a little while to get the horse out. When my husband fell in, I was like, 'That's it, I'm calling 9-1-1.' "

Loveland Fire Rescue Authority Battalion Chief Michael Cerovski was happy to talk about the horse rescue.

"We like this kind of exposure because it helps send the message to all animal owners that ice can be very dangerous," he said. "The worst case scenario is an owner hurting themselves trying to rescue their animals themselves."

The pond is located along Quillan Gulch, and is 5 to 6 feet deep. The fire department got the call around 8 a.m. Though it was out of their district, Cerovski said they were still able to make it out to help the horse's owner, Dave Phegley.

"We live up in the middle of nowhere, past Pinewood Lake. It's amazing I know they had to come way the heck up here," Gookin said.

Phegley speculated the horse's tail got tangled in a nearby red twig dogwood, which caused her to try and get free, stepping onto the ice, which broke underneath her.

Sunny was trapped for at least two hours, with the rescue taking around an additional hour to complete.

Advertisement

"We broke away the ice and made a path to the horse and got the horse on a lead and led the horse out of the pond," Cerovski said.

Due to slippery conditions, Sunny did fall back into the water a couple times. Cerovski could tell she was fatigued and cold, so special efforts were made to help stabilize her hindquarters, get her out and warm her up, using a special warming blanket.

Rescuers help lead Sunny the horse out of an icy pond Sunday morning. (Jill Gookin)

"The owner (Dave) was super great to work with," he said. "Animals are pretty smart characters. They can sense when their owners are nervous. The owner was very calm and cooperative to work with."

"Sunny cooperated and had the heart that I know she has," Phegley said.

"I just could not be happier with how well the rescue squad did and how well the rescue went. We got a good group of people working those jobs," Phegley said.

He said he got closer to frostbite than he ever wanted to, but didn't report any pain or signs of health problems. He's going to keep an eye on Sunny after the day's trauma, but he believes she will recover fully.

"The call went very well. We have quality trained people at Fire Rescue. It was a successful day," Cerovski said.

Contact Reporter-Herald Staff Writer James Garcia at 970-635-3630 or garciaj@reporter-herald.com. Follow him at Twitter.com/JamesGarciaRH.