There’s a lot of eye candy — of the totally legitimate, safe-for-work variety — in this story ranking the 50 most beautiful medical school campuses in the United States, which puts the Case Western Reserve University School of Medicine at No. 16.



Online Masters in Public Health says it evaluated “hundreds of medical schools” to come up with the final 50. The list “features medical schools with amazing architecture, structural prowess, campus integration, technological superiority and many other factors that were considered,” Online Masters in Public Health says.



Here’s how it describes the Case medical school’s campus, which was established in 1843 but hardly looks its age:



Like a picture out of the Jetsons, the Case Western Reserve School of Medicine is a space-age, stunning campus that boasts genius design and gorgeous landscaping. Students can enjoy the beautiful surroundings at a lunch in the garden food court or on a leisurely stroll through the eye-catching parks. Lake Erie is right next door, and the school is in close proximity to a variety of culture-rich opportunities.



Case Western Reserve University is the alma mater of several illustrious developers: Paul Buchheit, creator of Gmail; Craig Newmark, mastermind of craigslist.org; and Peter Tippett, originator of Norton AntiVirus. In 2002, the Case Western Reserve School of Medicine became only the third college ever to receive the top review possible from the Liaison Committee on Medical Education, the organization that grants accreditation to U.S. medical degree programs.



There’s only one other Ohio medical school on the list: the University of Cincinnati Academic Health Center, which ranks 22nd.



Topping the list is the Duke University School of Medicine.





This and that

Up for a challenge: A Case Western Reserve connection to health care of a different kind is explored in this Washington Post analysis of a challenge to Obamacare that the Supreme Court takes up this week.



The case, King v. Burwell, was driven by a critique from Case Western Reserve law professor Jonathan Adler and Michael F. Cannon, a health policy expert at the libertarian Cato Institute.





How the justices interpret a six-word phrase in the Affordable Care Act could determine its fate.From the story:The law, adopted in 2010, says the federal government can pay subsidies to help people afford insurance bought through “an Exchange established by the state.”But two-thirds of the states have opted against setting up their own exchanges, and as a result, more Americans have been buying insurance through the federal insurance marketplace. Now, opponents of the law will make their case to the high court that Americans who are not using the state exchanges are ineligible for subsidies. And if they win, insurance premiums could skyrocket and many people might drop their coverage — possibly undermining the whole health-care program.And as the justices weigh whether the health-care law in fact has a fatal glitch, one of the key questions is this: Why did the Obama administration rule-writing officials in the Internal Revenue Service and its parent agency, the Treasury Department, ultimately interpret the language the way they did?Adler has been appearing frequently in public to talk about the case. He notes in this post that today, Monday, March 2, he’ll be debating King with professor Eric Segall of Georgia State University at the University of Pennsylvania School of Law. This debate is co-sponsored by the Penn Law chapters of the American Constitution Society, Federalist Society and the University of Pennsylvania Law Review.Forbes once again released its list of the world’s billionaires, and once again, you’re not on it. (Unless you’re Dan Gilbert or Jimmy Haslam. If you’re reading, gentlemen, thanks.)Quicken Loans chairman/Cavaliers owner Gilbert is No. 341 on the list, with a net worth of $4.7 billion.Haslam, owner of the Browns and CEO of Pilot Flying J, is No. 663, since he’s worth $2.8 billion.This is the 29th year Forbes has ranked the world’s wealthiest people. It found a record 1,826 billionaires with an aggregate net worth of $7.05 trillion, up from $6.4 trillion a year ago. The total includes 290 newcomers — 71 of whom hail from China.And youth are on the rise: A record 46 among the ranks are under age 40.One “earthward note,” Forbes says: The average net worth of list members came in at $3.86 billion, down $60 million from 2014.Bill Gates is once again the richest person on the planet, a title he’s held for 16 of the past 21 years. His fortune grew $3.2 billion since last year to $79.2 billion.It doesn’t seem terribly likely that an Ohioan will be nominated to run for president as a Republican in 2016, but a vice presidential slot is another matter Plugged-in Politico.com reporter Mike Allen’s popular “Playbook” feature lists the top eight GOP VP prospects, and Ohio Gov. John Kasich and Sen. Rob Portman both make it.Kasich is ranked No. 6, mostly for strategic reasons: “If Republicans get Florida, Dems HAVE to take Ohio,” Allen writes.Portman, at No. 7, seems like an afterthought: “If Kasich doesn’t vet,” according to the piece.The top five choices, according to Politico.com, are Sen. Marco Rubio, Jeb Bush, Carly Fiorina, Condoleezza Rice and — wait for it — Mitt Romney.





You also can follow me on Twitter for more news about business and Northeast Ohio.