Will Texas finally take care of its own or keep waiting for big brother? One way or the other, hope and change are coming to the payday loan industry.

Payday loans and auto title loans are a scourge in the state, a legal practice that exploits thousands of the working poor. They borrow $300 for a few weeks and usually end up paying twice as much in fees and interest. Many end up in debt for 11 months of the year.

With lax regulation here and a large share of low-paid workers with weak credit, the industry has exploded. It’s grown from 250 payday stores statewide a decade ago to over 3,000 today. They outnumber McDonald’s by more than 2-to-1, and in 2013, they repossessed more than 700 cars a week on car title loans.

Reform has been talked about for years. And because the Legislature has failed to act, 22 cities have adopted their own ordinances, with Dallas leading the way. Unfortunately, lenders have many work-arounds, from referring repeat customers across the city line to offering online loans.

Federal eyes

Now reformers have an ally in a federal watchdog. The Consumer Financial Protection Bureau recently unveiled a list of potential rules for small-dollar loans, starting with the most basic one: Lenders must determine whether customers can actually repay the loans without borrowing again.

The agency is also considering limits on rollovers and the number of months that a borrower could be in debt. President Barack Obama threw his weight behind the effort.

“One of the main ways to make sure paychecks go farther is to make sure working families don’t get ripped off,” he said at an event in Birmingham, Ala.

To payday lenders that profit by trapping workers in a cycle of debt, he said: “You got to find a new business model.”

The federal push comes while the Legislature is in session in Austin, and many payday loan bills have been filed. Some are aggressive, proposing that city payday rules be extended statewide. Others want to end local regulations altogether, which could lead to softer restrictions.

It’s too soon to know how the national movement will affect state reform.

“I’ve heard talk that Washington will take care of it, so let’s shut it down,” said Rob Norcross, a spokesman for the Consumer Service Alliance of Texas, a group of 17 payday lenders. “But something needs to get done, and there should be more urgency. It makes sense to come up with a compromise in Texas.”

There’s a chance, he said, that Texas changes could influence the federal agency. The consumer bureau will hear from small businesses and consumers before finalizing the rules, a process that could take over a year.

Absent state reform, the industry faces many layers of rules and legal fights with cities. Lenders are also tired of being treated like outlaws, Norcross said, saying they provide thousands of jobs in addition to billions of dollars in loans.

Advocates for consumer and faith-based groups, which have driven the reform effort in Texas, also want to keep moving forward. They see a chance to tighten even more.

The agency rules may serve as the floor for reforms, said Ann Baddour of Texas Appleseed, an advocacy group for low-income residents. Proposed rules would establish key principles, but the agency cannot set interest rates. And rate caps are protecting payday customers elsewhere, such as in Colorado.

Fourteen states and Washington ban payday loans, and most others limit charges. Texas is among a handful of states that don’t cap rates, fees and rollovers.

Caught in a cycle

That’s an even bigger problem when 31 percent of residents have low-wage jobs and almost two-thirds have subprime credit.

They often need to borrow, but the high costs of payday loans usually push people further behind.

“It’s a cycle that feeds itself,” Baddour said.

A typical $300 payday loan costs $177 in Colorado, according to Pew Charitable Trusts. The same loan in Texas costs $701, the highest in the country, the group estimated.

In many ways, Texas is a pro-consumer state. It has limits on home equity loans, and it protects homesteads and wages from most debt collectors. But payday lenders found carve-outs in Texas law. The loopholes weren’t closed, partly due to a shift in ideology, with political leaders embracing free markets and decrying regulation.

Today Texas has all the abusive payday practices the federal agency has highlighted, said Nick Bourke, director of the small-dollar loans project at Pew. But he said it was wrong to portray payday lending as a choice between the market and regulation.

“It’s not either-or,” Bourke said. “It’s both. Good regulations lead to good access to credit. It’ll just work more safely and fairly.”

The either-or question for Texas: Do we fix it, or do the feds?

Follow Mitchell Schnurman on Twitter at @mitchschnurman.

CONSUMER PROTECTIONS

In Texas, over half of payday loan customers refinance an average of five times, driving up the fees. Dallas and 21 cities have adopted protections, and a federal agency is considering new rules nationwide. Examples:

Texas city ordinances

A payday loan may not exceed 20 percent of monthly income.

An auto title loan may not exceed 3 percent of annual income or 70 percent of a vehicle’s value.

Single-payment loans may not be renewed over three times, and proceeds from each renewal must pay at least a quarter of the principal.

Consumer Financial Protection Bureau proposals

Lenders would have to determine that a customer can repay the full amount without reborrowing.

Rollovers would be capped at two, followed by a 60-day cooling-off period.

Rollovers would be permitted only with affordable pay-off options, such as eliminating principal with a third payment.

After three loans in a row, lenders would be prohibited from making new short-term loans to the borrower for 60 days.

SOURCES: Texas Municipal League; Consumer Financial Protection Bureau; Texas Appleseed