Photo

Good morning.

Here’s what you need to know:

• The attorney general is out.

Eric H. Holder Jr. is resigning.

He had previously said he planned to leave office by the end of this year.

• Oil targets in Syria are hit.

The U.S.-led coalition has struck refineries in the third day of airstrikes on Islamic State militants.

ISIS captured most of Syria’s largest oil fields, and is believed to be partly financing its operations by selling the oil on the black market.

• Showing a new attitude.

The United Nations General Debate continues today, with addresses by many world leaders, including President Hassan Rouhani of Iran.

In his speech this morning, Mr. Rouhani said that he welcomed the West’s new alarm over the Islamic State militant group, but disagreed that bombing Syria was the answer.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Stopping the contagion.

Also at the U.N., Secretary General Ban Ki-moon will urge presidents and prime ministers to focus on a greater global response to the Ebola epidemic when he meets with them today.

President Obama will also address the audience.

• How to save the fish — and fishing.

Secretary of State John Kerry hosts a discussion this morning with diplomats and leaders on sustainable fishing and marine-protected areas.

President Obama announced this week that he would expand by six times the size of the Pacific Ocean marine preserve.

• Ukraine’s future.

The country’s president is unveiling today his plan for social and economic reforms, which would allow Ukraine to apply for membership in the European Union in six years.

• Abduction suspect is held.

The search for a University of Virginia student is continuing today, but a suspect was arrested in the case on Wednesday in Texas.

MARKETS

• Wall Street stocks are tumbling. European shares declined steeply, and Asian markets closed mixed.

• The Federal Aviation Administration is likely to grant permits today to seven movie and TV production companies, allowing them to fly drones.

• Ford Motor Company will announce today that it is adding 1,200 workers and another shift to a Missouri plant that makes its new Transit van.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

• Mario Draghi, president of the European Central Bank, is in Lithuania today at a conference about the country’s plans to join the eurozone on Jan. 1.

• TwitPic, a website that allows users to put pictures on Twitter, is not shutting down after a trademark dispute, as we stated earlier.

NOTEWORTHY

• Last time in pinstripes.

Derek Jeter is playing his final game at Yankee Stadium tonight.

It is also his first and only home game with the Yankees eliminated from the postseason. (They were eliminated with a loss on Wednesday.) In 20 seasons, Jeter won five World Series championships.

Also Wednesday night, the Los Angeles Dodgers won a division title, and the Detroit Tigers clinched a playoff spot.

• Barbra Streisand is back on top.

“Partners,” her 34th studio album — featuring duets with Billy Joel, Stevie Wonder, Josh Groban and others — opened at No. 1 on Billboard’s chart.

It is Ms. Streisand’s 10th No. 1 album, and she is the first artist to reach the top spot in each of the last six decades.

• Leading lady.

The Oscar nominee Viola Davis stars in the TV drama “How to Get Away With Murder,” in which she plays a defense lawyer and Ivy League law professor who employs top students to help win cases.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

One of her charges then becomes entangled in a murder plot on campus.

Shonda Rhimes is an executive producer of the ABC show (pilot is on at 10 p.m. Eastern), which will be broadcast after two new episodes from her other hit series, “Grey’s Anatomy” at 8 p.m. and “Scandal” at 9 p.m.

• Lots of candles at their house.

Michael Douglas turns 70 today, while his wife, Catherine Zeta-Jones, turns 45.

BACK STORY

Can a diplomat get away with murder? Or drug-dealing? Or rape?

Such cases have been the stuff of novels, TV episodes and movies.

But in reality? It depends.

What is known as diplomatic immunity was codified by the 1961 Vienna Convention on Diplomatic Relations, a pact to which some 190 countries subscribe. The treaty shields high-ranking diplomats and their families from prosecution.

The infractions are often on the minor end of the spectrum. A perennial frustration in New York (likely to flare up again with the United Nations General Assembly convened this month) is the millions of dollars in unpaid traffic citations.

But when a more serious crime occurs, and they do, the diplomat’s country can give the accused up to local authorities for prosecution; otherwise, the host country can boot the suspect, declaring him or her “persona non grata.”

Last year, an Indian diplomat was arrested in New York on charges that stemmed from accusations of mistreating a domestic worker.

India was outraged over the treatment of the diplomat, and, ultimately, she left the United States without being prosecuted, all under the cover of diplomatic immunity.

Rick Rojas contributed reporting.

Your Morning Briefing is posted weekdays at 6 a.m. Eastern.

What would you like to see here? Email us at briefing@nytimes.com.