WASHINGTON - Add another no vote from the Louisiana delegation for a resolution that would authorize the Obama administration to take military action against Syria. Sen. David Vitter, R-La., announced Thursday that he will oppose a resolution offering up to 60 days of military attacks on Syria, with the possibility of a 30-day extension.

"After a lot of careful thought and prayer, I have decided that I will vote NO on the Syria war resolution," Vitter said in a statement.

"As horrible as events in Syria are, they do not pose a direct threat to the United States or our allies," Vitter continued. "U.S. military action could spark a broader war and/or entangle us in Syria's protracted civil war in which elements of the opposition are even worse than the Assad regime, all while our troops are underfunded.

"There is a very serious and direct threat to us in the region - Iran's development of nuclear weapons. I am extremely concerned that getting involved in Syria, after Iraq and Afghanistan, would make mustering our resolve to stop a nuclear Iran impossible."

Earlier, Rep. John Fleming, R-Minden, said he would vote no and Rep. Rodney Alexander, R-Quitman, said Wednesday through a spokeswoman that he is inclined to vote no, as well. Alexander is leaving Congress on Sept. 30 to take a veterans job with the Jindal administration.

On Wednesday, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee voted 10-7 for a resolution authorizing military action against Syria's Assad regime, with a prohibition on U.S. ground troops.

President Barack Obama has said the United States has a moral obligation to after a chemical attack near the Syrian capital of Damascus left 1,400 dead, including an estimated 400 children.

"The international community's credibility is on the line," Obama said. "And America and Congress' credibility is on the line because we give lip service to the notion that these international norms are important. And when those videos first broke and you saw images of over 400 children subjected to gas, everybody expressed outrage."

"How can this happen in this modern world? Well, it happened because a government chose to deploy these deadly weapons on civilian populations."