House votes on reconciliation today, but its future is uncertain in the Senate

With help from Erin Mershon, Sarah Karlin, Joanne Kenen and Rachana Pradhan

RECONCILIATION UNCERTAINTY IN SENATE — The House is set to approve the reconciliation bill today that guts major pieces of Obamacare and defunds Planned Parenthood for one year. But it’s fate in the Senate is suddenly less certain. Three of the 54 Republican Senators — Mike Lee of Utah and 2016 presidential contenders Marco Rubio of Florida and Ted Cruz of Texas — Thursday opposed the measure because it doesn’t go far enough to fully repeal Obamacare. That means all other Republicans must support the bill in order for it to pass. And moderate Republicans including Maine Sen. Susan Collins and Mark Kirk of Illinois could break ranks because of the Planned Parenthood money. POLITICO’s Seung Min Kim has the story: http://politi.co/1hYvsvm

Story Continued Below

BEN CARSON: GET RID OF MEDICARE — Republican Presidential candidate Ben Carson wants to abolish Medicare and is not ashamed who knows it. The former neurosurgeon acknowledges that he wants to eliminate the program that provides health care to 49 million senior citizens and disabled people. He'd also scrap Medicaid. He'd replace them with a system of savings accounts which would be funded with $2,000 a year in government contributions. POLITICO’s Kyle Cheney and Jason Millman have the story: http://politi.co/1kxyOHy

RYAN IS IN — Wisconsin Rep. Paul Ryan says he is "eager" to be speaker of the House, and he believes the House Republican Conference is "ready to move forward as one, united team." The party vote for speaker of the House is Wednesday, and the vote of the full House is scheduled for Thursday.

— That means a three-way race for Ryan's W&M gavel. Texas Rep. Kevin Brady, Ohio Rep. Pat Tiberi and California Rep. Devin Nunes are all jockeying for the slot.

GOOD FRIDAY MORNING and welcome to PULSE, where we're a week from Halloween and still on the hunt for a good health-themed costume. Can you dress up as partial repeal? Send us your best costume ideas along with those tips and scoops to behley@politico.com and emershon@politico.com

"I don't care if Monday's blue

Tuesday's grey and Wednesday too

Thursday I don't care about you

It's Friday I'm in PULSE"

UNEDITED PLANNED PARENTHOOD VIDEO LEAKED — Full unedited footage from the Planned Parenthood sting by the Center for Medical Progress was published Thursday on the conservative website Got News? The videos were handed over to the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee earlier this month through a subpoena. Got News?’ editor Charles Johnson said he obtained the videos from a House staffer and vowed to wage a legal fight to make them public despite a temporary restraining order obtained by the National Abortion Federation. Pro’s Nancy Cook has the story: http://politico.pro/1MHorY7

ACO COLLABORATIVE FUTURE — Dartmouth and Brookings had been collaborating on an ACO learning network and we were wondering how Mark McClellan's departure from Brooking to Duke will affect that. Both McClellan and Elliott Fisher tell us the work will continue with Duke and Dartmouth expertise, though it's evolved into a more research-focused phase. The effort picked up an interesting third partner a few months ago - Leavitt Partners. It's now called the Accountable Care Learning Collaborative,

"We do intend to continue and expand on the accountable care work as one component of the activities — but with more drawing on the faculty resources and infrastructure at Duke," McClellan emailed.

THIS MORNING: E&C HEARING ON EXCHANGE VULNERABILITIES — The House Energy and Commerce subcommittee on Health will review a new GAO report that concluded that HealthCare.gov and the state-based exchanges remained vulnerable to fraud throughout Obamacare's second enrollment season. The GAO created 18 fake applications and attempted to gain insurance using the federal exchange in New Jersey and North Dakota as well as state-based exchanges in Kentucky and California. Ten of those applications for subsidized coverage successfully gained coverage — though eight failed an initial first check and obtained coverage after providing additional information. Separately, seven fake applicants were able to get Medicaid or alternative subsidized coverage. Co- PULSEr Erin Mershon has the details: http://politico.pro/1GXDATq

HHS RESPONDS TO THE FINDINGS: “It’s important to consider whether it’s likely that uninsured Americans would replicate the next actions the GAO took, namely knowingly and willfully providing false information in violation of federal law, which could subject the individual to up to a $250,000 fine,” HHS spokesperson Meghan Smith told PULSE. She added that both the state based and federal marketplaces have a multi-layer verification process for applications.

ANOTHER CO-OP CRUMBLES — South Carolina's Consumers’ Choice Health Insurance Company will become the ninth co-op to collapse — forcing 67,000 South Carolinians to shop for new coverage plans when the next open enrollment period begins on Nov 1. Pro’s Paul Demko writes, “on paper, Consumers' Choice looked like one of the more successful co-ops, with losses of just over $400,000 during the first six months of this year, according to financial filings. But the South Carolina insurer was badly hurt by the Obama administration's decision to initially pay out just 12.6 percent of anticipated risk corridors payments for 2014.” Paul’s story here: http://politico.pro/1PJdavH

** A message from PhRMA: Through personalized medicine, doctors and researchers are better able to direct patient care across health care, from risk assessment and prevention, to detection, diagnosis, treatment, and disease management. With 42% of new medicines in the biopharmaceutical pipeline having the potential to be personalized, patients can live longer, healthier lives. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1MsxoEy. **

OFFICIALS MUM ON WISCONSIN CO-OP AND 2016 — Wisconsin insurance regulators are being coy about the financial state of the state’s ACA co-op plan, which apart from risk corridor pay shortfalls had to pay roughly $23.2 million for the risk adjustment program. Common Ground Healthcare Cooperative is also one of five that got permission to reclassify start-up loans as surplus to make its balance sheet look better. But state Deputy Commissioner of Insurance Dan Schwartzer told reporters on Thursday, “At this point, every carrier in the state is solvent until we deem otherwise.”

FDA WARNS OF LIVER INJURY WITH HEP C DRUG — Abbvie’s Viekira Pak, a competitor to Gilead’s hepatitis C drugs Sovaldi and Harvoni, took a hit Thursday when FDA warned that the drug can cause serious liver injury in patients with underlying advanced liver disease. Some of the adverse events reported to FDA and Abbvie resulted in liver transplant or death. The news negatively impacted Abbvie’s stock and pharmacy benefits manager Express Scripts who struck a deal with Abbvie’s to get the drug at a lower cost in return for giving it preferred formulary status over Gilead’s drugs. FDA’s announcement: http://1.usa.gov/1LqkYPX

STATES WANT TO STOP SKY-HIGH BILLS — BUT IN THIS CASE, THEY CAN'T — A single air ambulance ride can stick a patient with a bill as high as $60,000 — and prices are rising. But states that want to fix the problem are hamstrung by a federal law that prevents states from regulating prices for any air services. Co-PULSEr Erin Mershon has the story: "Patients who need air ambulance services usually don't have any alternative, nor do they have the luxury of taking time to comparison shop in a dire emergency. … As they're not seeking referrals, the niche providers often have little incentive to join insurer networks or accept cheaper reimbursement rates. And there's scant information about average or reasonable rates for air transport - all of which makes it harder for insurers or even state regulators to address the issue. All of that leaves consumers on the hook."

— North Dakota, for example, passed a law in April that prohibits balance billing for air ambulance rides — but they were sued just a few months later, by a private air ambulance company in the state, Valley Med Flight Inc., which argues that the law violates the Airline Deregulation Act. Other states are interested in trying similar things — but until federal law changes, there's very little they can do. More from Erin: http://politico.pro/1GtrK8x

LAWMAKERS WANT MARK UP ON MENTAL HEALTH BILL NOW — A bipartisan coalition of 30 lawmakers, led by Rep. Tim Murphy, sent a letter to House Ways and Means leadership, asking to schedule a mark up on Murphy’s mental health reform legislation. The letter: http://politico.pro/1LJbRI1

COMING NEXT WEEK: SENATE HELP TALKS MENTAL HEALTH — As promised, the Senate HELP committee has scheduled a hearing on mental health reform, and it's next Thursday. The witness list so far include SAMHSA acting Administrator Kana Enomoto, along with HRSA Acting Administrator Jim Macrae and outgoing NIMH Director Thomas Insel. Rep. Tim Murphy could also make an appearance to testify. But sources tell us a markup isn't likely until January on the bill from Sens. Chris Murphy and Bill Cassidy.

SENATE GREENLIGHTS PROTECTING OUR INFANTS ACT — The Senate unanimously approved the Protecting Our Infants Act on Thursday which promotes best practices for the prevention and treatment of newborns that experience drug withdrawal due to drug exposure in utero.

JOIN US today for our latest #OutsideIn twitter chat on health, tech, and chronic disease. Politico Health Editor @JoanneKenen and EHealth Editor @ArthurAllen202 will moderate. @ 12PM — RSVP here or just start tweeting with us: https://t.co/XgTFl0s0vT

THIS WEEK’S LYRICS:

Monday- U2, “Beautiful Day”

Tuesday- The Beatles, “Money”

Wednesday- Theory of a Dead Man, “Make up your Mind”

Thursday- Lynyrd Skynyrd,“Free Bird”

Friday- The Cure, "Friday I'm in Love"

WHAT WE'RE READING:

The Wall Street Journal profiles Andrew Left, the man who tanked Valeant stock: http://on.wsj.com/1QZC0pu

Olga Khazan in The Atlantic explores what it means to have social anxiety, one of the most common mental illnesses that is still very much misunderstood: http://theatln.tc/1LHUAyY

While the demand for mental health services grows, the Washington Post reports difficult it is for patients to find mental health professionals: http://wapo.st/1GsoHxx

Ahead of the third open enrollment season, Covered California is ramping up a major outreach effort to target the 750,000 uninsured people who are eligible for subsidies but haven’t signed up for coverage, the Associated Press reports: http://bit.ly/1MHLUsl

San Diego-based Imprimis Pharmaceuticals Inc., will begin selling $1 doses of Daraprim — the drug that was jacked up to $750 per pill by Turing Pharmaceuticals last month, the Associated Press reports: http://bit.ly/1jXGceN

** A message from PhRMA: At a time when scientific promise is greater than ever, thoughtful policies are necessary to accelerate advances in personalized medicine to improve care for patients. First, we need strong intellectual property protections and robust funding of the entire R&D ecosystem. Second, we need a clear and transparent regulatory framework for the development of targeted therapies and co-developed diagnostics. Finally, we need value assessments and emerging payment models that are patient-centered and align with the way value emerges/changes over time. Learn more at http://onphr.ma/1MsxoEy. **

** A message from National Community Pharmacists Association (NCPA): Many Medicare drug plans effectively require the use of “preferred” pharmacies that are inconvenient for patients. That means a long trip or higher copays to stick with the pharmacies that patients like. In urban areas, these plans often fail to meet the government’s standard for pharmacy access. In rural areas, “preferred” pharmacies are often 20+ miles away! Support H.R. 793 / S. 1190. This bipartisan legislation is supported by leading consumer advocates and would let patients use any pharmacy willing to accept the “preferred” pharmacy terms and conditions. Learn more at www.ncpanet.org/pharmacychoice. **