The Republican won a spirited special election and runoff in December to complete the term of Ben Harbin, who resigned after 20 years to become a lobbyist. She will have to qualify for re-election and start campaigning all over again the moment the final gavel falls March 24.

Already the mother of two has missed her 8-year-old’s birthday. She relies heavily on her husband, Jason, to keep the household running while she’s away in Atlanta.

It was when her youngest entered school that she had time to take away from the small physical-therapy clinic she and her husband run. She got involved with the local chamber of commerce, which included her only trip to the Capitol before she became a legislator.

“I probably would not have thought to run for office if it were not for the Affor­dable Care Act,” she said.

Her company’s insurance was canceled three times, and the premiums grew with each new policy. The frustration led her to monitor Congress closely, but it was the trip to the Statehouse that led her to think about state government.

Politics was never really foreign to her. Lott’s grandfather was a legislator in Maine, an uncle was also a legislator, and her father was president of her hometown city council.

“I grew up with my dad spending every weekend at city meetings,” she said.

So, she had a realistic idea of how much work was involved. She just wasn’t ready for the volume of information with more than 1,000 bills pending in the House.

“When you get here, you think you can control it all,” she said.

Despite arriving at the office at 6 a.m. except on days when she drives from Evans, she’s discovered that no one can read and master every bill, policy paper and e-mail. Lott is quickly learning to rely on her colleagues for help. Their expertise often comes from their professional backgrounds, so one trick to deciding how to vote on a bill is to find a colleague who works in that field, Lott said.

That’s why she is pleased to have been assigned to the House Committee on Health and Human Services so she can draw from her career knowledge and be a resource for other lawmakers as a nurse running Evans Rehabil­itation.

On Feb. 8, she passed her first bill in the House. The leadership assigned her a noncontroversial “housekeeping” bill to clarify wording in existing law about medical labs that had become an issue in a lawsuit. It passed unanimously, but not before she was initiated with some nonsense questions from the veterans while she was standing alone in the House well for the first time.

“It’s legendary, the fact of having her first bill on the floor of the House in less than a month being in the chamber,” said Rep. Barry Fleming, R-Harlem. “I think she’s going to do a good job for Columbia County.”

He says a host of assets contribute to her success.

“Jodi’s made a very positive impact on the members of the House, in my opinion,” he said “She’s intelligent. She’s always cheerful. She’s catching on very fast to the process.”

Rep. Brian Prince, D-Augusta, who won a special election a month before the 2014 session, says Lott has a key attribute for working with the diverse personalities and policy positions in the House.

“She listens to both sides,” he said. “She’s definitely an asset, not only to Richmond-Columbia County, but she’s going to be somebody useful to the whole state.”

Lott considers herself “just an ordinary working person” determined to represent her district faithfully. By that, she means she hasn’t given up her role as finance manager for the family business, squeezing in attention to that job between legislative meetings that begin at breakfast and continue until sundown or later.

As far as ambition, she says her goal was pushing herself to a new challenge – not necessarily triumphing over the three other candidates.

“I would have been OK with not winning, but not OK with not running,” she said.