A new mobile application launched by the Conifer Area and Platte Canyon chambers of commerce for the areas surrounding the U.S. 285 corridor features maps, event listings, emergency sites and more.

“It will hopefully be something everyone — both residents and tourists — find useful,” said Sharon Trilk, owner of mymountaintown.com who was on the committee that developed and launched the app.

The 285 Tourism app was developed by Indiana-based developer My Mobile Fans and lists businesses, events, emergency information and maps of both Jefferson and Park counties. One function sends users offers for businesses nearby when location services are enabled, and there is also a fan wall where users can post photos and write about their experiences.

The app is an extension of the Foothills Adventure Map, a tourism brochure of businesses and activities in the area. Trilk said the chamber is working on its third edition of the map for next year and is applying for a tourism grant to help get it into more tourist destinations across the Front Range. The app will help with that, Trilk said, as well as get more businesses and community members involved in promotion of the area.

“And really promote our area as a place to g,o because we are only 20 minutes from Denver and we have so much to do,” she added.

The Conifer Recreation Coalition, while separate from the chamber and its mobile app, has been reaching out to the community since November for input for a master plan its calling Project PLACE to help direct fundraising and grant applications for the area.

The Conifer Area Council also recently launched a survey to get community input for Jefferson County’s Conifer community plan, which is being rewritten this year.

They are all efforts to build cohesion, direction and branding among the area’s community and businesses.

Trilk said the Conifer Area Council is doing its best to get community members more involved, and the chamber’s app is one way of doing that.

She added: “We really think that the more people get active and involved, the more they feel like they have a voice, and the better our whole community develops.”

Josie Klemaier: 303-954-2465, jklemaier@denverpost.com

285 tourism app:

On Apple iTunes

Google Play for Android

Mobile Website