Jose Reyes singled home the winning run in the 10th inning, and the host Toronto Blue Jays beat Tampa Bay, 5-4, on Saturday in a game the Rays played under protest.

Rays Manager Joe Maddon protested the game in the fourth after umpires granted Toronto a replay challenge. Tampa Bay designated hitter Wil Myers reached on a one-out single and was called safe by Bill Welke, the first-base umpire, on Mark Buehrle’s pickoff throw. After Yunel Escobar stepped back into the batter’s box and Buehrle returned to the rubber, Blue Jays Manager John Gibbons came out and asked to challenge Welke’s call.

Maddon came out to speak with Bob Davidson, the crew chief and third-base umpire, about the timing of the challenge. When Myers was called out after a video review, Maddon spoke to Davidson again and indicated that the Rays were playing the game under protest.

Baseball’s replay rules state that any challenge must be made before the next play or pitch, which is said to begin “when the pitcher is on the rubber preparing to start his delivery and the batter has entered the batter’s box.” The rules also say, however, that the crew chief has “the final authority to determine whether a manager’s challenge is timely.”

CUBS 7, ORIOLES 2 Chris Coghlan finally solved Bud Norris with a bases-loaded triple in a four-run second inning, leading Chicago to a victory over Baltimore at soggy Wrigley Field. Coghlan was 0 for 15 with six strikeouts against Norris before connecting for his fifth triple of the season. Chicago will try Sunday for its first series sweep since winning three straight at Boston from June 30 to July 2.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

Justin Grimm pitched three and a third hitless innings after a long rain delay as the last-place Cubs won their second straight against the Orioles, the American League East leaders.

Before the game, the Orioles announced that third baseman Manny Machado would have season-ending surgery on his right knee. Dan Duquette, the vice president for baseball operations, said Machado told the team Friday that his knee was not healing well with rest. Duquette said Machado conferred with his doctors and felt that surgery was the best option.

Machado had a similar injury to the other knee last year, when he missed the final week of the season. He then had surgery and did not play in a regular-season game this year until May 1.

PIRATES 10, BREWERS 2 Pedro Alvarez homered twice to break out of a 5-for-34 slump, and visiting Pittsburgh beat Milwaukee.

Alvarez hit a three-run shot in the fourth inning and a solo drive in the fifth against starter Wily Peralta. Russell Martin also connected for a three-run homer off the right-handed Peralta, who held the Pirates hitless for three and two-thirds innings but quickly fell apart and exited after five.

ATHLETICS 2, ANGELS 1 Coco Crisp scored the go-ahead run on Joe Smith’s wild pitch with two outs in the eighth inning, and host Oakland beat Los Angeles to move into a first-place tie in the American League West.

TIGERS MANAGE A SPLIT Justin Verlander labored into the sixth inning, Nick Castellanos had two hits and two R.B.I., and visiting Detroit salvaged a doubleheader split by beating the Minnesota Twins, 8-6. Torii Hunter and J. D. Martinez each had three of Detroit’s 17 hits, and Joe Nathan notched his 27th save in 32 attempts. Verlander improved to 5-0 in seven career starts at Target Field.

Still, with their 12-4 loss in the afternoon, the Tigers dropped a season-worst three games behind first-place Kansas City in the A.L. Central. They also fell a game behind Seattle for the second wild-card spot. In the opener, the Twins rookie Kennys Vargas drove in five runs, and starter Yohan Pino struck out six in five innings.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

ROYALS 6, RANGERS 3 Jeremy Guthrie gave up a home run on his first pitch and not much else, pitching visiting Kansas City past Texas for its 24th win in 30 games. Alex Gordon had two hits, including a first-inning homer, and made a diving catch in left field for the A.L. Central-leading Royals.

REDS 1, BRAVES 0 Mike Leake pitched into the seventh inning and gave Cincinnati’s struggling offense a boost by hitting a double and scoring the game’s only run, and the Reds ended a seven-game losing streak by beating visiting Atlanta. Leake gave up two hits and walked three, leaving with the bases loaded and two outs in the seventh.

MARINERS 7, RED SOX 3 Dustin Ackley’s three-run homer capped a seven-run fourth that carried Seattle to a win over host Boston, sending the Red Sox to their seventh straight loss. It was the ninth win in 12 games for the Mariners, who increased their lead over Detroit for the second A.L. wild-card spot.

Boston designated hitter David Ortiz had his streak of reaching base four times in four straight games halted, but he walked and was hit by a pitch before leaving with a bruised left elbow.

Before the game, Rusney Castillo, a Cuban defector, appeared at Fenway Park, wearing Red Sox shorts and a T-shirt. Castillo chatted with the Mariners’ Robinson Cano on the field before the game, a day after news reports that the Red Sox had agreed with Castillo on a $72.5 million, seven-year contract.

NATIONALS 6, GIANTS 2 Jordan Zimmermann pitched eight strong innings, Asdrubal Cabrera homered, and host Washington kept up its dominance of the two-time Cy Young Award winner Tim Lincecum, beating San Francisco.

Jayson Werth added two run-scoring singles, and Denard Span had a triple and a single for the National League East-leading Nationals, one night after San Francisco ended Washington’s 10-game winning streak.

CARDINALS 6, PHILLIES 5 Matt Carpenter hit a sacrifice fly in the 12th inning, lifting visiting St. Louis over Philadelphia. The Cardinals have won eight of 10 and closed within a half-game of N.L. Central-leading Milwaukee.

DIAMONDBACKS 5, PADRES 2 Arizona blew a lead in the top half of the eighth inning, but Didi Gregorius hit a three-run homer in the bottom half, lifting the host Diamondbacks past San Diego.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

INDIANS 3, ASTROS 2 The rookie Jose Ramirez’s ninth-inning single lifted host Cleveland to a win over Houston. Pinch-hitter Tyler Holt started the inning with a single off Jake Buchanan. After Roberto Perez moved Holt to second with a sacrifice, Michael Bourn walked. Buchanan’s wild pitch moved the runners to second and third before Ramirez lined a 3-2 pitch past third base for the win.