Northeastern Junior College students stage murder trial

The lead prosecutor, Marquinn McGary, delivers his closing argument to the jury, while defense attorneys Reshenae Long, Frank Carpentier and Kelsey Burger, as well as the defendant, Sam Seaside, played by David Griese, look on, during a mock trial conducted by students in NJC's Criminal Justice Club Thursday. The trial was held in an actual courtroom at the Logan County Justice Center. ( Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate )

The judge, played by Ali Wender, a public defender in real life, listens as the prosecutor, played by Kristal Shelton, gives her opening arguments during a mock trial conducted by NJC's Criminal Justice Club. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

STERLING — The courtroom at the Logan County Justice Center was packed Thursday evening, as a murder trial took place. It wasn't a real trial though, it was a mock trial conducted by students in Northeastern Junior College's Criminal Justice Club.

Marquinn McGary, who played the lead prosecutor, has done this kind of thing before, but he enjoyed this experience.

"I did competitions back in high school, but this one was a little more stressful than I thought it would be," he said, adding that "the experience itself, getting everyone to understand the criminal justice system, I think it was a fun experience."

Defense attorney Frank Carpentier questions DNA expert Parker Dee, played by Wynter Williams. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

The trial included all the usual courtroom faces — prosecutors, defense attorneys, a defendant, witnesses, a jury, a bailiff and a judge. Dave Wagner, director of art at NJC, and some of his students even did sketches during the trial.

Serving as the judge for the case, The State of Colorado v. Sam Seaside, was Ali Wender, who is a public defender in real life. She provided lots of input to the students throughout the trial when they raised objections against the opposing side.

The defendant, Sam Seaside, played by David Griese, was charged with committing first degree murder on May 20, 2001, in Boulder County. He pleaded not guilty to the murder of Nicole Shore.

Advertisement

During opening arguments, the second prosecuting attorney, played by Kristal Shelton, spoke about the timeline leading up to the murder.

After the Chautauqua High School Senior Formal several students went to Seaside's home. He was drinking and waiving a revolver around impersonating his father. His parents were out of town for the weekend and when they returned, they learned of the unauthorized party after discovering a broken dining room window, a raided liquor cabinet and a missing gun.

Defense attorneys Reshenae Long, Frank Carpentier and Kelsey Burger confer with each other, while the defedant, Sam Seaside, played by David Griese, looks on. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

In spite of being grounded until the end of the school year, Seaside attended another party the weekend before graduation, at the home of a classmate, Roni Jaywow, played by Grant Nissen.

He was seen at the party arguing with his longtime friend Nicole Shore, because she blabbed about him committing plagiarism. Seaside should have been suspended or expelled for committing plagiarism, but he got out of that by working some hours after school. No one was to know that he had committed plagiarism, because he had an agreement with his grandmother that he would stay out of trouble and she would help him pay for college.

The prosecutors said that was his motive for murdering Shore, because if she revealed to his grandmother he had been caught plagiarizing she would no longer provide financial help to her grandson.

The bailiff, Lyle Koch, administers the oath to the jury at the start of the mock trial. (Callie Jones / Sterling Journal-Advocate)

After the argument, Seaside headed out to Shore's car, where he spent four to five hours waiting to take Shore and her love interest, Jo Situation, home, because he was the sober driver. The prosecution said he spent that time thinking about what he was going to do to Shore and how he was going to do it.

Shore was last seen leaving the party with Situation and getting in her car, where Seaside was. Seaside said he drove Situation home and when they got to Shore's home, she refused to get out of the car, so he drove to a parking lot at a local park, left her there and walked home.

Shore's mother reported her missing the next day. Her car was found in the parking lot, a bullet was found inside, along with blood stains on the passenger-side interior and a bloody T-shirt belonging to Seaside. Shore's body was never found.

Defense lawyers, played by Kelsey Burger, Reshenae Long and Frank Carpentier, argued that there was no evidence within the DNA found and no fingerprints that proved that Shore was in fact dead or that Seaside killed her. They also claimed that Seaside would never kill his childhood best friend over an argument.

Throughout the trial several witnesses were called by both sides. Prosecutors called Devon Blasst, a friend of Shore and Seaside, who testified about their relationship and what he saw at the party.

They also called a DNA analyst, played by Jordan Locke, who testified that the blood on the passenger seat and the T-shirt matched Shore's DNA. She also testified that the blood stains would be consistent with a bullet being fired from the driver's side seat.

A sketch of the jury done by NJC art instructor Dave Wagner during the mock trial conducted by NJC's Criminal Justice Club. (Courtesy photo)

The defense pointed out that the blood could have been deposited on the T-shirt before that night, including during one of the nose bleeds Shore had suffered recently due to a sinus infection.

Prosecutors also called Cameron Paul, played by Marlin Baranyk, a crime scene analyst and ballistic analyst, who processed the car. He testified that no finger prints were found in the car and that the bulled found was a 22 caliber bullet, which could have come from 22 different brands of firearms. Paul also said that he found bullets fired from Seaside's father's missing gun and they matched the bullet found in the car.

The defense attorneys called to the stand Parker Dee, played by Wynter Williams, a DNA and forensics expert, who after seeing pictures of the blood stains on the t-shirt, testified that they could have come from a bloody nose.

They also called Jaywow to the stand, to testify about what he saw at Seaside's earlier party and the party at his own home and the behavior of Seaside and Shore.

Seaside took the stand in his own defense, claiming he did not know what happened to his father's gun, that the T-shirt had blood on it because Shore had a bloody nose and that he did not murder Shore.

Situation did not testify, because he left for the Army before the police could locate him. The police were unable to contact him because he had already reported for fast-tracked combat training and deployment to Afghanistan.

Following closing arguments the jury left for a very brief deliberation period and then came back and delivered a not guilty verdict.

Frank Carpentier, who played a defense attorney, is a psychology major, but after this experience he said he might like to double major in something like criminal justice or sociology, to pursue a career in the criminal justice field.

"I had a ton of fun. I love watching crime shows, so it was cool to be part of something that felt like it and it was nice to win," he said.

Callie Jones: 970-526-9286, cjones@journal-advocate.com