Rams' offense falls flat without leading scorer Gian Clavell

Colorado State guard Antwan Scott (1) scrambles for a loose ball as Kansas State's Dean Wade (32) hits the deck in pursuit. The Rams' defense was stellar, however, they shot just 29 percent in a 61-56 loss in Wichita, Kan. ( Bo Rader / Associated Press )

WICHITA, Kan. — You hear coaches say it all the time. Make shots.

Teams have a hard time pulling out victories when players aren't hitting buckets. Colorado State men's basketball's offense was stagnant from start to finish, ruining an exceptional effort at the other end of the court, falling to Kansas State on the road at Intrust Bank Arena, 61-56, CSU's sixth loss in its past seven games.

It stings even more considering poor defense and lack of rebounding were pointed at as primary culprits for Colorado State's recent struggles, yet the Rams were strong in both areas Saturday, pulling down 36 boards (10 offensive) and limiting the Wildcats to only 43 percent shooting (22 of 51) from the floor.

However, without leading scorer Gian Clavell for the first time this season — who will miss the rest of the year with a broken bone in his off-hand — Colorado State presented a flat offensive effort, shooting just 29 percent (17-for-58) on the afternoon, including 6 of 22 from behind the arc.

"Well I think their length bothered us, but we lost our best player yesterday and he was our leader, too," CSU coach Larry Eustachy said after the loss. "I thought we played well, but every guy out there was in a whole new role for our team. I told the team that we belonged against Kansas State, and you can win this game, and I knew they didn't believe it. But I said 'Soon, you'll settle in and understand you can play with them.' We did, but at the start we dug a hole; probably the difference in the game."

CSU scored just four points in the opening 10 minutes of the game and missed 12 straight 3-pointers at one point to highlight its shooting woes.

Even with the inability to bury shots throughout the entirety of the contest, the Rams trailed by only four points at halftime, 29-25. But things never improved of offense as CSU managed just five points in the opening 10 minutes of the second half and went without a basket for close to 9 minutes midway through the half.

Colorado State forward Tiel Daniels (15) battles for a rebound Saturday against Kansas State forward Wesley Iwundu (25) in Wichita, Kan. (Bo Rader / Associated Press)

CSU did reach the free throw line 21 times in the game, nailing 16 to keep it in the area, yet Kansas State still pulled ahead by double digits in the second half. The Rams would cut a 13-point K-State lead down to 2 in the second, but never could make the plays they needed to overcome their struggles.

Junior forward Emmanuel Omogbo led the Rams with 13 points (5 of 13) while also bringing down a team-best 14 rebounds for the double-double, and senior Tiel Daniels chipped in 10 points, going 8-for-10 from the charity stripe.

Freshman guard Prentiss Nixon poured in another 11 for Colorado State, nailing half of the Rams' 3-pointers.

Kansas State on the other hand committed 13 turnovers, but CSU only picked up eight points off them. The Wildcats dominated the paint, outscoring Colorado State 30-16 and led the game for 33 minutes.

"We're such a work in progress. What came so easy for us early in the year, we just thought we could outscore people, just changing the attitude of the team to get the performance to change, we missed shots we normally make," Eustachy said. "Again, it could be the environment, it could be the team, but we usually shoot it better than that. But what I did like is normally our offense dictates our whole game and us not making shots, we still really got back on the other end. ... I think our team's going to be pretty good before it's over."

CSU returns to the court Monday against USC Upstate at Moby Arena (7 p.m.), looking to stop the bleeding and find its first win since Dec. 9.