It’s true that police in Colorado are rarely prosecuted for the use of excessive force. But is that mainly because prosecutors sympathize with cops within their jurisdictions or because such incidents tend to be ambiguous and it’s hard to convict an officer when testimony conflicts?

Like it or not, the second explanation is probably closer to the truth. Which is one of the reasons why a plan by some lawmakers to mandate a special prosecutor in cop cases is a bad idea.

A few years ago Westword examined police shootings in Denver over a period of 12 years and found 86 cases in which an officer shot a citizen, 40 of whom died. “While some of these instances resulted in departmental discipline,” the report noted, “not one of the officers involved was charged with excessive force.”

No, they weren’t. On the other hand, as Westword also found, “The majority of these [shootings] involved situations where the individual was clearly pointing a gun at officers, putting their lives at risk.” Jurors aren’t naive. They realize police have to make split-second decisions to protect their own safety, and can make an honest mistake about the threat. If an officer’s story is remotely plausible, he’ll probably get the benefit of the doubt.

The Denver district attorney did charge a cop in 1993 for shooting an unarmed man. He was tried and acquitted. The DA also took the tragic death of Frank Lobato, shot in bed after Officer Ranjan Ford allegedly mistook a soda can for a gun, to a grand jury in 2004, but it declined to indict.

A few years later, the Denver DA filed assault charges against Officer Chuck Porter, an utterly unsavory rogue who stomped on a teen’s back, was fired by the city and cost taxpayers $885,000 in a legal settlement. And yet Porter was acquitted.

I do think DAs ought to bring criminal charges against officers more often than they do, even if the odds of conviction aren’t high. Why on Earth, for example, wasn’t Denver Sheriff Deputy Thomas Ford charged with assault after he punched and kicked a jail inmate in July in an incident that can be seen on video? It’s not like his superiors thought Ford was within his rights. They fired him.

But the man who chose not to charge Ford, DA Mitch Morrissey, is ultimately accountable to voters. Do we really want prosecutors who are unaccountable making these decisions? And why would we suppose a special prosecutor’s rulings would be notably different?

One of the most notorious police shootings in the past 20 years occurred in 1999 when a Denver SWAT team broke into the wrong house and shot a Mexican immigrant to death. The case was turned over to the Jefferson County DA, who eventually supported the officers’ version of events.

Boulder County DA Stan Garnett offers another concern. “What if the attorney general is particularly partisan,” he wonders, and yet is tasked with such cases? App0inting an outside DA could raise similar issues, he told me. How would Douglas County react to a Democrat filling the role, or Boulder to a Republican? Boulder voters elected Democrat Garnett because that’s who they want making these calls.

George Brauchler, DA in the 18th Judicial District, told me he’s irritated with “how dominant Denver’s issues become for the rest of the state. We’re going to create a solution to a perceived problem in Denver that’s going to apply statewide?”

Well, we shouldn’t — because the solution probably wouldn’t do much good anyway.

E-mail Vincent Carroll at vcarroll@denverpost.com.

To send a letter to the editor about this article, submit online or check out our guidelines for how to submit by e-mail or mail.