By Adam O'Neal - March 19, 2014

Parsa Ansari sat in the Longworth House Office Building watching C-SPAN. It was a slow Thursday, and the congressional intern had time to observe the Republican-controlled House as it debated repealing the Affordable Care Act. As a committed Democrat who ardently supports the law, he was aghast at the arguments coming from the conservative side.

Not long after he started watching, freshman Rep. Trey Radel of Florida -- a young Tea Party-backed Republican who hadn’t been in Washington much longer than Ansari -- took the House floor. Radel began by blasting “the affordable health care act, which is not affordable.”

Clad in a bespoke suit and skinny blue tie, the former radio host and television personality repeatedly pointed his finger while aggressively assailing the ACA. The excitement and energy that animates the Tea Party, and that helped propel Radel to office the previous year, became tangible as he swayed back and forth, gesturing and emphasizing each word.

“I want you to have a job!” he thundered. “I want you to work more than 39 hours a week! This repeal is about your freedom. I want you to keep more money in your pocket. I want you to have low premiums. I want you to have a choice. Your choice. Not Washington, D.C.’s!”

To Ansari, Radel was a typical Republican, just another well-to-do white male blasting Obamacare. He grew tired of the Sisyphean debate and went on with his day, soon forgetting Radel’s name.

A couple of hours later, Ansari left his office. Approaching the Capitol South Metro station, he saw someone who closely resembled the man on C-SPAN a few hours earlier. Ansari moved closer and spotted a congressional pin on the man’s lapel. It had to be Radel.

Ansari told himself, “You’re probably not supposed to do this, but let’s just talk to this guy.” As Radel hung up from a cellphone conversation, Ansari approached him.

Standing six feet tall, with a booming, heavy voice and jet black hair slicked back, the intern seemed to startle Radel as he shouted, “Congressman!”

Radel turned around. “Oh, hi.”

Ansari introduced himself as a Democratic intern, and laid it all out: “I saw you on the floor today, sir. And I cannot understand how someone can have your opinion. Can you please explain to me what’s going through your mind?”

Radel laughed and asked Ansari his name. They walked into the station together and discovered they were both headed toward DuPont Circle. They began to chat, not as a member of Congress and an intern, but as two regular guys. Radel conceded that he had had to ramp up his rhetoric for the good of the party. Surprised by his honesty, Ansari began to see the congressman as likable and charismatic.

They boarded the train and sat together, chatting for 20 minutes. Though Radel probably did 70 percent of the talking, Ansari was still amazed that he could engage so directly with a House member. After moving on from Obamacare, the two discussed broader questions about equality and opportunity.

“A lot of people, simply because of the circumstances they were born in, don’t have much opportunity,” Ansari asserted. Radel responded that Ansari should “tell that to Marco Rubio,” the senator from Florida who had appeared on the cover of Time magazine as “the Republican savior” a few months prior. (The accompanying profile was headlined: “Marco Rubio: Immigrant Son.”)

Ansari became so engrossed that he took a longer route home to continue their chat. Eventually, after a transfer, and a couple more stops, they reached Radel’s destination. The two walked up the steep, long escalator that rises from the DuPont Circle station, and shook hands. Smiling, Radel told the intern that he was genuinely impressed with him. He said he had to meet his wife and young child, but he invited Ansari to stop by his office to chat in the future. After confirming that Ansari was 21, he even offered to get a beer with him sometime.

Shortly after their conversation, Radel returned to Florida for district business. Ansari never followed up, as he thought it would be unseemly for a Democratic intern to befriend a Republican congressman.

“I kind of regret that,” the young Californian later reflected, noting that in all likelihood he wouldn’t get a similar opportunity during his internship.

***

What attracts interns to the nation’s capital, year in and year out?

After all, Congress does not particularly impress everyday Americans, who perceive it as unwilling or incapable of addressing the nation’s problems. Last year, the institution earned an all-time low average approval rating average of just 13 percent. The number slipped into the single digits during the government shutdown. Public polls usually place Congress’ popularity somewhere below root canals but slightly above the Kardashian family.

Young Americans, who have little memory of more cooperative times, are particularly wary of government. A Harvard Institute of Politics poll, published while Ansari was in Washington, showed 59 percent of adults under 30 believe that elected officials are “motivated by selfish reasons.” Only 18 percent think otherwise. Meanwhile, 47 percent think that contemporary politics can no longer solve the country’s challenges, with just 16 percent saying that politics can work, not a cheering statistic.

But just because the majority of young people don’t believe Washington, D.C., is on the right track doesn’t mean all of them are pessimists. And they certainly don’t ignore Washington’s value -- to both their country and their own careers. While the wave of negative stories floods America’s cultural consciousness, thousands of students still compete to come to Capitol Hill each semester to work as unpaid interns in Congressional offices. Like the politicians they work for, these interns come to the Hill for different reasons.

First, there are the idealists. These are students who are already engaged in, or think about, politics and who almost always work for the party they support. Before coming to D.C., many have volunteered for political campaigns back home. Once here, they usually serve their home state’s congressman or senator. They come to the Hill for experience and networking, because they hope one day make a career out of politics. Most consider the experience genuinely exciting and important, even though they realize they might not be doing much more than clerical work. Many end up working as Capitol Hill staffers, while others take jobs on campaigns or with lobbying firms. The negativity swirling around Congress typically doesn’t faze them. They believe that the Hill’s dysfunction can be attributed to the legislative system’s design, not the people who work there, a notion mostly reinforced by their tenure working on “the Hill.”

Daniel Wein, a senior at the George Washington University, interned for Sen. Mark Kirk shortly after the former representative graduated to the Senate. Like Ansari, Wein always had an interest in politics. The Chicago native -- with perpetual, though somehow not unprofessional, scruff on his cheeks -- cheerily recollects his time in the office of Kirk, an Illinois Republican. Wein says that beyond the personal connections one makes as a Hill intern, he found the experience to be among the most marketable jobs to have when applying for political positions.