The Affordable Care Act is good news for mental health services in the U.S. The law includes, among its essential components, requirements that health plans cover mental and substance-use disorders. In addition, because of existing federal parity legislation, these benefits must be no less (in visits, copays and deductibles, as well as the scope of services) than those offered for general medical and surgical services. The result is that many more individuals and mental health services will be covered because of these two complementary laws.

Media attention, as well, for many years, has been helpful in reducing stigma, particularly for depression, post-traumatic stress disorder and addictions, and in delivering hopeful messages about the effectiveness of treatments for mental health conditions. Hope and destigmatization can contribute to more help-seeking from psychiatrists, among other mental health clinicians.

The problem, however, is that as more people seek care, thanks to affordability, expanded coverage and greater help-seeking, we won't have the psychiatric workforce to meet their growing demand.



[READ: Trying E-Cigarettes May Lead to Smoking, Study Suggests]

The trope used to be that August meant there were no psychiatrists to be found: They were on vacation (especially on Cape Cod for the East Coast contingent). But times have changed. August trends are becoming the new norm – but not because the doctors are on the Cape.

We now have a serious supply problem when it comes to psychiatrists, as well as other mental health professionals. Psychiatrists seem to receive the most attention in the news and from hospitals, clinics and government organizations (like the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs), seeking to recruit them. While people with mental disorders and their families need to be served by an array of practitioners, I will focus here on psychiatrists because they are the lynchpins of mental health care, especially for people with serious mental illnesses (which include major depression, bipolar disorder, PTSD, and schizophrenia). They also are the group in which the greatest shortages exist.

The population of psychiatric physicians has dwindled: The number of total physicians in the U.S. rose by 45 percent from 1995 over 19 years, while psychiatrists rose only by 12 percent. During these years, the nation's population increased by 37 percent, meaning that M.D. supply overall outpaced population growth, but not for psychiatrists. In addition, a 2010 survey of doctors demonstrated that 59 percent of psychiatrists are 55 or older, making doctors like me fourth among specialties with the oldest members; 55 is a landmark that suggests a reduction of work hours or entering the zone of retirement age.



[READ: The Problem and the Promise of Replicating Science Results]

Medical students choosing the field of psychiatry are fewer in number than in decades past. So many graduates face huge debt burdens, and psychiatry is among the lowest-paid of the medical specialties (especially when working in clinics and public hospitals where they are needed the most). The average medical education debt in 2012 was $155,978 for public school graduates and $183,066 for private school graduates. Adding to the growing shortages of psychiatrists is that from 2007 to 2013, the numbers of psychiatrists graduating from residency programs remained essentially flat – though there was an uptick in 2015. We simply are not increasing the supply of medical mental health specialists to meet the nation's needs.

Mental health expenditures are 5.6 percent of the total amount spent for health in the U.S., far below what the prevalence and burden of mental and addictive disorders requires. The limited national spending on mental health services over many years has created a shortage of services, especially for people with serious mental disorders, which may have masked how severe the psychiatric workforce shortage actually is – until now. In those states trying to reverse their erosion of services, there is a need for more psychiatrists, among other mental health clinicians, but growth in services is and will be limited by hefty psychiatric workforce shortages. (There is also a great national mal-distribution of psychiatrists, and other mental health professionals, both within any individual state, with rural areas most adversely affected, and among the states, with coastal locations better supplied but still experiencing shortages.)