A teenager from St. Kitts-Nevis won the hearts and minds of judges and captured top honors in the Caribbean Tourism Organization’s Tourism Youth Congress debate recently.

Nevisian Neila Jones of the Gingerland Secondary School won first place — and an Apple iPad Mini as a prize — in the Youth Congress competition, part of the CTO’s 2013 State of the Industry Conference held Oct. 16 through 18 in Martinique.

Along with first-place honors, Jones received a mini iPad, sponsored by conference presenter OpusSeven. Second-place winner Renita Shirnauth of St. Lucia won an Amazon Kindle Fire tablet. Annick Bedford, another student from St. Kitts-Nevis, was third-place finisher and the recipient of a Barnes & Noble Nook tablet.

St. Kitts Tourism Authority

“As a travel and hospitality professional and former educator, it is extremely gratifying for me to see not one but two students from our twin-island destination recognized for excellence,” said Carolyn James, director of the St. Kitts Tourism Authority in Canada. “It is important that we cultivate interest in tourism in our young people so that they can better understand how the industry acts as an economic driver and hopefully decide to pursue careers in the field so that they can ultimately hold high-level positions in our local tourism authorities.”

Jones, Shirnauth and Bedford were three of 14 youngsters — aged 14 to 17 — from CTO member countries in the debate, which tackled one of two tourism-related topics: Multigenerational Travel of Grand Tripping and Agro Tourism: There’s More To It Than Visiting the Farms — and the surprise topic, Share One Thing You Would Like To Achieve As Junior Minister of Tourism and State Why Achieving or Experiencing This Would be Important to You.

ALL KREYOL, ALL DAY

Under the theme “One Caribbean, One Culture, One People,” International Kreyol Day returns to Brooklyn on Oct. 27, presented by the St. Lucian Cultural Organization.

The event — which will raise money for the Ciceron Children’s Home in St. Lucia, and Port-au-Prince, Haiti, orphanage — will be held at St. Teresa of Avila Church Hall, 563 Sterling Place (between Franklin and Classon Aves.), from 10:30 a.m. to 8 p.m.

“This is not just another “block party”, but a festival of music, dance, drumming, and poetry,” says organizers, adding that the event is “the one true spot for mixing culture and entertainment.”

The day starts with a Kreyol Mass, followed by a Creole brunch/breakfast and festival events. Tickets are $20 for the brunch/breakfast and $5 for the festival.

For information, call (646) 404-1381 or (718) 312-2050.

BENEFIT FOR CARIBBEAN MEDICAL AID

Easing the pain and suffering of Caribbean Americans

affected by HIV/AIDS is the goal of the Caribbean American Outreach Association, which is holding its annual fund-raising, dinner-dance and awards ceremony on Nov. 9 in Queens.

The affair, which will be held at the Hilton Hotel-JFK International Airport, also features a fashion show and a raffle.

This year’s benefit will aid the Mustard Seed Community’s Dare to Care HIV/AIDS Program in Jamaica, the CAOA scholarship fund and the group’s 2014 medical mission to the Caribbean.

Caribbean American Outreach Association

Honorees for the benefit include Dr. Fenton Ferguson, minister of Jamaica’s Ministry of Health; Golden Krust Caribbean Bakery & Grill executive Omar Hawthorne; nurse Jacqueline Jacobs of the Case Management Patient Care Advocacy Program at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; Dr. Stanely Edward Mathews; Conrad Ifill of Conrad’s Bakery; Hyacinth Simms of Simms Tax Services; Pastor Terry Lee of the Byway and Hedges Youth for Christ Ministries and Claudette Powell, president of the Caribbean Nurses Association.

In June, 2013, the 11-year-old Caribbean American Outreach Assocation helped sponsor medical mission to Red Hills, Jamaica, providing an array of medical services to area residents.

For information, call CAOA President Jean Hamilton at (347) 500-4551 or send email to caoainc@yahoo.com.

ETANA & FREDDIE MCGREGOR IN 'SALUTE' TO REGGAE

Singer Etana and singer/songwriter/producer Freddie McGregor are starring in the family-friendly Reggae Culture Salute on Nov. 2 at Nazareth Regional High School, 475 E. 57th St. in Brooklyn, presented Coalition to Preserve Reggae Music organization.

In addition to the headliners, the CPR’s annual and righteous tribute reggae music, will also include Nyahbinghi drumming, African dancing and performances by Don Minott, roots-reggae singer Uwe

Banton; singer Michibella, dub poet Ras Osagyefo and Yanks. The group Widayyah , led by guitarist Noel Jones, will be backup band for the evening.

The affair also recognizes the 83rd anniversary of the coronation of Ethiopia’s Emperor Haile Selassie I and Empress Mennen.

VP RECORDS

VP RECORDS

Etana (called “The Strong One” after the title of her 2008 hit-filled album) has been touring and riding the successes of her latest album, “Better Tomorrow.” The singer-songwriter, who burst onto the reggae music world with her hit tune “Wrong Address,” is showing off her singing and songwriting talents in the Better Tomorrow album, on VP Records. Etana, born Shauna McKenzie, co-wrote all by one of the 14 songs on the 14-track album.

McGregor, a sought-after reggae performer with more than 30 years in the music business and more than 40 albums to show for it, comes to the stage touting his new 16-track VP Records album, “Di Captain.” The studio album features a remake of his 1980 hit “Africa (Here I Come).” And the Reggae Culture Salute. May get a treat from the concert headliners: the album’s version of Let It Be Me sung by McGregor, features Etana.

McGregor’s album also includes a musical salute to for Jamaica’s 50th anniversary of independence titled “Move Up Jamaica.”

Tickets for the Reggae Culture Salute are $30 in advance. Children 12 and under are admitted for free.

For information on Reggae Culture Salute, call (718) 421 6927 or visit www.cprreggae.org.

Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg

NEW HEALTH CARE AND YOU

The Affordable Care Act and What It Means to You, a topic on the minds of millions of Americans, is the subject of a workshop presented by the Society for the Advancement of the Caribbean Diaspora on Oct. 27.

The Affordable Care Act (known by its critics and others as Obamacare) will be discussed by Melissa Chapma of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce, at the session, which will be held at St. Mark’s United Methodist Church, 2017 Beverly Road (at Ocean Ave.), beginning at 1 p.m. For information, call (917) 771-7835 or send email to sacd@sac-diaspora.org.

Mauby Media Services

BIG HONOR FOR ELDERS

Heartwarming doesn’t even come close to describing Yesterday’s Children: A Benefit and Award Ceremony in Honor of Our Elders. For recipients and observers, the Sept. 21 affair and its program were literally soul-stirring.

Presented for the third year by the Mauby Media Services public relations firm, the moving affair honored five Caribbean elders — and symbolically recognizing the contributions and achievements of all praiseworthy senior citizens.

This year's honorees — representing several nations — were Mable Francis, 92, (St. Vincent and the Grenadines); Clemencia Girard-Larcher, 86, (St. Lucia); Agatha Date, 82, (Grenada); James (Sam) Granderson, 82, (Trinidad and Tobago), and Ina Wilson, 79, (Guyana).

“As the African drums rolled and the procession proceeded toward the (St. Jude) community center, hundreds stood to welcome the five elders who were this year’s recipients of the Yesterday’s Children Award,” said Mauby Media Services’ Glenda Cadogon, event’s creator.

The honorees had a star named for them through the International Star Registry. The recipients received gift packages – including picture portraits on canvas from Roderick Warner of Conflicted Geniu and specially-designed African fabric capelets and scarfs from Danella Abbey of Ahsiro Creations – and some special, individualized honors.

Mauby Media Services

Mauby Media Services

For Francis, it was a drum selection by master drummer Corey Quammie of Sons of Thunder. Wilson got the story of the Monkey and Crocodile, recited by Michael Manswell, artistic director of Something Positive dance ensemble. Date was soulfully serenaded by Rev. Andy Edwards’ rendition of the 1960 Brook Benton classic “The Ties That Bind.” Granderson’s tribute came from a song performed by the Caribbean FolkTrees trio – Euston James (Trinidad and Tobago), Pax Hurley (Grenada), and Sophia Alexander (St. Lucia). And finally, Girard-Larcher was acknowledged by a dance performance by 15-year-old Imani Craig.

The elders also receved “You are a Shining Star” awards from Cadogan and personalized Front Page Awards from the New York Daily News. There also audience involvement at the close of the event – Shirma Cadogan of Mambu Inc. presented a scroll inscribed a Shirley Osborne poem, titled “You,” to all attendees over the age of 70.

For information on the Yesterday’s Children awards, send email to triniscribe@aol.com.

MAS MAN MAKES HIS MARK IN MASSACHUSETTS

"Celebration" is the theme of the 2013 Northampton Halloween Parade, a Massachusetts event which gets a bit of its holiday spirit from the creative mind of veteran Caribbean carnival masquerade designer Richie Richardson.

The event begins on Oct 31 at Northampton's Forbes Library and travels down Main St. in the northwestern Massachusetts town.

Artists, designers, costume makers, musicians, street performers, dancers and drummers join the fun, free procession, produced by Richardson – a Caribbean costume designer from Trinidad and Tobago.

“Can you believe its five years already, since I came to New England? And in those five years, I have been producing Halloween consistently,” said Richardson last week. “The first three years in, I produced the parade and costume ball in Brattleboro (Vermont). Last year, I moved to western Massachusetts and found a new home and new community to share the magic of creativity and street theatre with in Northampton.”

Richardson noted that the creative nature of the town reminds him of Greenwich Village, “but smaller.” He described Northampton as “dynamic and very alive in spirit and participation. It’s a very diverse community. It’s is alive and open to people with new ideas and most of all, it is teeming with creatives of all persuasions.”

Although he’s been a New Englander for the past few years, Richardson has managed to keep his hands in the New York Caribbean carnival/costume scene.

The veteran designer traveled down to Brooklyn to participate in last year’s J’Ouvert procession with fellow Trinidadian- American Gregory Young. In 2012, the creative pair presented “Wiu-Tiu Masquerade” at Jouvert City International’s J’Ouvert celebration in Brooklyn.

And with Richardson’s support, the Wiu-Tiu masqeraders were enthusiastically accompanied by Massachusetts-based percussionist Ellen Clegg and The OffBeat Drummers, a women’s percussion ensemble from New England.

For informationon on Richardson, send email to richierichardsondesigns@gmail.com.

Debbie Egan-Chin/New York Daily News

A MARATHON DRIVE FOR BELIZE KIDS

The ING New York City Marathon returning – and so is the annual Belize Toys for Tots Drive and New York City Marathon Breakfast Brunch.

On Nov. 3, when the five-borough race makes its comeback after being sidelined in the aftermath of superstorm Sandy, members of the of Belway Inc. will be collecting new Christmas toys for needy children in Belize.

The collection and the breakfast will be held at 436 Fourth Ave. (between Eighth and Ninth Sts.) starting at 9 a.m. The brunch ends at 2 p.m.

Donated toys must be unwrapped and appropriate for children between of one and 13 years old. The toys can be dropped off at the Fourth Ave. location through Dec. 14.

For information, call F. Richard (Butch) Fairweather at (718) 768-8370

R&B’S MANHATTANS & REGGAE IN BRONX

For many Caribbean music fans, reggae rules, but old school R&B – such as The Manhattans – really rocks! The upcoming “Musical Evening of Love,” at the Lehman Performing Arts Center on Nov. 3 is a perfect example of American R&B sharing the stage with Jamaican reggae.

Reggae stalwart Ken Boothe; Pam Hall, Jamaica’s Song Bird; and the group , L.U.S.T. will take control of the reggae portion of the show.

DJ Roy, of Road International and Irie Jam Radio (95.5 FM), will emcee the show.

“The combination of The Manhattans, Ken Boothe, Pam Hall and L.U.S.T., is designed to bring an exciting and pleasure-filled evening of old and new school romance to the stage for our patrons,” said event promoter Rob Loague, promoter. “We anticipate magical moments during every performance.”

The Mahattans are known for an array of hit songs, including “Kiss and Say Goodbye,” “Shining Star,” and “There’s No Me Without You.”

“The Girl I Left Behind,” “Puppet on a String,” and “Everything I Own” are just some of the many tunes Boote’s fans adore.

Music lovers anticipate the performance by Hall. Known for “Perfidia,” Our Day Will Come,” “No Time To Lose” and other songs, Hall will return to New York after a hiatus. Harmony describes the group L.U.S.T. – singers Lukie D, Trilla, Singing Melody and Tony Curtis – who were formely solo acts before joining he ensemble.

Sponsors of ”A Musical Evening of Love” include Caribbean Links (distributor of Tru Juice and Peanut Punch), Western Union, People’s Choice Furniture, Gen Gen Tax Service, Groovin Radio, Sashe Cosmetics, and the Klassique Bar and Grille.

Doors open at 5 p.m. and showtime is 6 p.m.

For tickets, call the Lehman Performing Arts Center box office at (718) 960- 8833. For information please call (917) 662- 1410 for information.

jmccallister@nydailynews.com