ENLARGE Army's quarterback Angel Santiago is swallowed up by the Navy defense during last season's 34-7 loss Getty Images

WEST POINT, N.Y.— Jeff Monken spent six years as an assistant football coach at Navy, but now he's the head football coach at Army, so he already refers to the Black Knights' most bitter rival, somewhat slyly, as "the other academy."

Now all Monken has to do is to find a way to beat that other academy—something that hasn't happened since 2001. Of course, beating more than a couple of their other 11 opponents, including Buffalo in Saturday's season opener, would help the cause. But beating Navy would be big.

The three coaches who preceded Monken at West Point—Bobby Ross, Stan Brock and Rich Ellerson—all failed in that mission. Ellerson was fired a day after Navy trounced Army for the 12th straight time last December, 34-7.

But Army, the onetime national football power that has recorded one winning season since 1997, has a reason to be optimistic this fall.

That reason is Monken, 47, who was 38-16 in four years as the head coach at Georgia Southern. (He even beat Florida in "the Swamp" last season.) More important, Monken has coached at Navy. His previous experience at a service academy, with its rigorous academic and military requirements, was a critical factor in his hiring, and has been a key component in Army's transition.

"If I didn't have the experience coaching at an academy, there are things that could really frustrate a coach," he said. "But having had the experience at an academy, you learn all those things and you become a part of the culture and environment... Instead of trying to figure out ways to change it, you embrace it and understand why they're important and use them as an advantage. It takes a while to learn that."

Army has been playing football since 1890, but a change this past off-season in the regimen at West Point could be the difference between a winning campaign and a losing one. Military training remains mandatory for all cadets, but Lt. Gen. Robert Caslen, the academy's superintendent since July, decided to allow players to complete training earlier in the summer.

Many of the players believe the change will benefit them in two ways. Larry Dixon, a senior running back from Bremerton, Wash., said the Black Knights entered previous preseason camps "beaten up and tired and worn out" from military training and were never really able to recover.

This year's team has been assembled on campus since mid-June, about seven weeks earlier than in past years. Players have been able to take classes and hit the weights—and add weight, an average of 14 pounds per player, according to Monken.

"I think it gives us a better chance," Monken said.

There has apparently been a psychological benefit, too.

"With this program, we always value the concept of brotherhood," said Raymond Maples, a senior running back from Philadelphia. "I think this summer was actual time we got to bond into a brotherhood."

The team has also gotten to know Monken better. The coach recently accompanied Lt. Gen. Caslen on a trip to Afghanistan and understands football is just one reason why a player goes to West Point. Often, it is far from the most important reason.

That is not to say, however, they can abide losing. Apart from the long streak of futility against Navy, Army has been to one bowl this millennium, in 2010, when the Black Knights beat SMU in the Armed Forces Bowl.

"Our big goals are never going to change," said Joe Drummond, a senior defensive lineman from Pittsford, N.Y. "What's important is that we have to understand the process to get to those big games and get to those goals. It's the little aspects of the game, the little aspects of life, that create the big accomplishments."

Signs prodding the Black Knights to "Beat Navy" or "Beat Air Force" appear all over the U.S. Military Academy's magnificent campus, towering over the Hudson, some 50 miles north of New York City. But Monken is imploring his players to take one task at a time.

"There is some intrinsic motivation in these guys because of the kind of guys they are," he said. "They're certainly more self-motivated individuals than your average college student. But that doesn't mean they don't get tired, or lose focus or motivation, or get frustrated."

Monken said he took the job because he believes he can show his players the way. To beat Navy in Baltimore on Dec. 13 would seem to be the reward, but Monken has noted that this year's Armed Forces Bowl will be played on Jan. 2. The march there is already under way.