The pine kitchen table was getting more rickety by the day. And understandably so. The six-foot workhorse had been through a lot over the years: thousands of meals, hundreds of homework assignments, numerous bill-paying sessions, a million cups of coffee, and six moves through three states.

Come to think of it, I’m a little worse for wear myself.

Each time the table moved, she was taken apart and put back together, until her legs were as wobbly as a new foal’s.

At dinner, someone would cut a piece of chicken, and the whole table would rock until we felt as if we on a roiling sea and squeak like a choir of church mice.

A sturdy table seems to me basic to a good life, like a rainproof roof, solid ground and a loyal dog. A wobbly table shakes your faith in the world and undermines whatever stability you’ve convinced yourself you have.

Fixing it was out of my skill set. It became one more nuisance I just put up with. But I swore to myself: Next time I move, I’m making darn sure that table gets put back together — and it gets done tight and right.

Moving day came last week. So did my well-timed encounter with an all-star fix-it guy.

Chris Tice of Orlando is an electrical engineer by trade and a home-improvement blogger for Examiner.com. I asked him if my job was too small. He showed up in a small car with a big toolbox.

Tice looked at the disassembled table and spotted the problem. The table legs were attached to the table by a large screw that passed through a metal bracket. Time and use had caused the screw to make the bracket hole larger, the way a finger works a hole in a pocket. The screw had also lost its once-tight grip where it sank into the wood.

Two washers (one lock washer for tension and one plain), set between each screw and bracket, and some glue on the screws would tighten things right up, Tice said. Then, in 15 minutes, he ended five years of aggravation.

We turned table over. I gave it a test shake. It didn’t budge. I clapped and sprang up and down on my toes, then asked if he would help me move the piece into my study, where I’d decided to use it as a writing desk.

That’s when I learned that tape measures lie.

“You sure it fits?” he asked.

“Yes. I measured.”

Soon we were stuck wrestling a too-big table into a too-small room, trying not to scuff the walls, flipping and turning the table until … CRACK.

It’s a sickening sound, the sound of a breaking leg.

Next, we were holding our sides laughing, because the alternative was to curse and throw things. (These moments tell you almost all you need to know about a person).

Tice repaired the freshly broken joint with wood glue and a strong clamp, letting it dry overnight. Today, the table is in parts again in the garage, waiting for the next move. When that day comes, I will know exactly how to put it back together. And I will also know that, like a good table, it will be steady.

Syndicated columnist and speaker Marni Jameson is the author of “House of Havoc” and “The House Always Wins” (Da Capo Press). Contact her throughmarnijameson.com.

Lessons from Fix-It 101

Life is short. If something is driving you nuts — the door squeaks, the drawer knob is falling off, furniture wobbles — don’t live with it. Fix it or find someone who can.

Figure out the basic mechanics. “Step 1 to fixing anything,” Tice said, “is to first understand how it works, then figure out what’s not working.” That bears repeating.

Measure twice. Before you commit to moving a big piece into your home, be very sure it’s a fit so you don’t get stuck.

Leave some wiggle room. Also consider the angles before hauling a sofa upstairs and around a corner. You need space to turn around.

Try the simple solution first. In the case of the rickety table, putting simple Elmer’s school glue on the screw before sinking it back into the wood helped stabilize the weak grip. For a squeaky door, Tice say, remove the pins, rub them with a bar of soap, then stick them back in the hinges. It smells better than WD-40.

Have tools and know how to use them. “That right there’s half the battle,” Tice said.