Barbara Southworth, a freelance photographer and teacher, hopes to ease into retirement over the next several years. Has she saved enough? (Photo by Matt McClain/ The Washington Post)

As a freelance photographer and teacher, Barbara Southworth has a lot of flexibility with her schedule.

But with her income fluctuating from year to year, Southworth isn’t sure if she is saving enough to afford a lighter workload as she transitions into retirement and makes more room for environmental activism.

Southworth, 61, hopes to have more time for writing letters, lobbying congressmen and petitioning to stop regional fracking efforts. The Alexandria resident also wants to cut down on her teaching responsibilities during the warmer months so that she can snap more photos while kayaking and hiking around Virginia.

“For me, it’s about providing enough work,” she says.

We shared details of Southworth’s finances with two financial experts, Dallas Salisbury, chief executive of the Employee Benefit Research Institute and Bill Moran, a financial adviser with Merrill Lynch. They offered feedback on what Southworth should consider as she moves into retirement.

The big picture

Because she is a freelancer, the money that Southworth makes through teaching and photography varies from year to year. At the moment, she is making about $20,000 a year, after business expenses, which she tallies at close to $10,000. Several years ago she was making about $30,000.

Still the money’s been enough to cover living expenses and to add to her retirement savings. She paid off her mortgage about five years ago, and her monthly bills — about what she expects to have in retirement — are fairly low. Southworth says she is living with a partner who helps her cover utilities and groceries. Southworth also expects to pay off her car about a year from now.

Having freelanced for a few decades, Southworth hasn’t had access to a workplace savings plan for much of her career. Instead she’s stashed savings in traditional Individual Retirement Accounts as well as Roth IRAs — enough (even with no investment growth) to cover about 25 years of expenses if she can stick to her current modest budget and is spared any major health surprises. Southworth also has enough savings set aside in her emergency cash fund to cover at least a year’s worth of expenses. “She’s done a good job for herself,” Moran says.

The questions

Southworth is hoping to put off collecting Social Security as long as she can. But she wonders about how those payments would be affected, once she starts collecting, if she finds additional freelance work.

As a freelancer Southworth is on her own when it comes to buying insurance. She was covered with a catastrophic health plan a few years ago when she was diagnosed with breast cancer and had to dip into her savings to cover the cost of treatments, along with help from family and friends. Now in remission, she receives a federal subsidy to buy insurance through the exchanges created by the Affordable Care Act and she plans to stay covered in a similar plan until she can enroll in Medicare at 65.

However, Southworth hasn’t bought long-term care insurance, something she might need to cover housing costs and medical care if she lives as long as her father, who is now 95.

There’s also the question of where she should live in retirement. Southworth would like to spend months at a time in Maine once she retires and is debating buying a house there, but she isn’t sure if it’s worth the cost.

Income in retirement

Southworth’s most recent projections from the Social Security Administration estimate that she would receive about $1,350 a month if she began collecting at 66, her full retirement age. Those payments would increase to about $1,800 if she waits until age 70. “Waiting as long as you can makes a lot of sense,” Moran says.

If those projections hold true and if her expenses stay roughly the same, most of Southworth’s bills in retirement would be covered by Social Security benefits, Moran says. That means she would only need to draw a few hundred dollars a month from her savings to cover the rest of her expenses. (If she relied on savings alone, she would have little leeway to handle emergencies.)

Southworth says she might make some extra cash in retirement by taking the occasional freelance job, but that money could affect her Social Security benefits, depending on her age. ”That additional income could create a taxable event for her Social Security benefit, or a portion of it,” Moran says.

If she starts collecting before reaching full retirement age, the administration may deduct $1 of every $2 she earns above the annual earning limit, according to the Social Security Administration. (For 2015, it’s $15,720.) Those deductions would stop at age 66. Some people receiving “substantial” income in retirement from wages, investments and self-employment may have to pay federal income taxes on up to 85 percent of their Social Security benefits.

Prepping for the long run

If Southworth’s retirement is anything like her father’s, she may need to stretch her savings for 20 to 30 years. Because of that, she worries that her savings may be depleted if she faces health issues in her later years because she doesn’t have long-term care insurance — something Salisbury and Moran say she should prepare for. “If she becomes disabled, it’s going to be harder for her to do photography,” Moran says. “The cost of any nursing care facility are definitely going to be greater than her expected expenses in retirement.”

But she may not be too late. Some deferred annuities, also known as longevity annuities because they don’t start paying out until a person reaches age 80 or 85, can be used to pay for assisted living or long-term care costs after several years, Salisbury says.

Southworth has enough saved that she could use a third of her retirement funds to buy this kind of an annuity, he says. Depending on how long she lives, it may deliver more income than if she spends down the money over time, he says.

As for housing, Southworth will have more flexibility if she rents an apartment for the part of the year that she would like to spend in Maine instead of buying a second home, Salisbury says. She may even consider selling her home in Virginia, which would more than double her retirement savings, as a way to pad her nest egg and cover rental payments, he says.

“Be happy you are in such good financial condition– and don’t mess it up,” Salisbury says.

Read More:

Pulling people out of poverty with one-on-one help

Finance Lab: Can this caregiver retire at age 62?

Finance Lab: They have a pension, long-term care insurance and savings. But is it enough?