Caption: New Albany Police Chief Todd Bailey stands in front of the S. Ellen Jones Elementary School gymnasium, where a new police substation begins operations today. By Harold J. Adams,The Courier-Journal (Photo: HAROLD ADAMS)

New Albany Police Sgt. Todd Bailey will serve as Chief of Police after former Chief Sherri Knight stepped down earlier this week.

Mayor Jeff Gahan also appointed chief of detectives Kenneth Fudge to Deputy Chief, according to a news release from the mayor’s office.

Bailey is a 17 year veteran of the department and previously served as chief. He attended New Albany High School before receiving his Bachelor of Science in from the University of Maryland. Bailey also served in the United States Air Force from 1986-1991.

“I intend to focus on assisting the men and women of the New Albany Police Department in whatever manner necessary for them to effectively and professionally perform their duties,” Bailey said in the release.

There was no mention earlier this week of what prompted Knight to step down, but city Police Merit Commission President Edward Hodges previously told the Courier-Journal that rank-and-file officers had complained loudly about Knight to city leaders. “I’ve heard from a lot of officers. They weren’t happy with her. I heard it every day,” Hodges said, adding that Knight “had a tough job.”

Assistant New Albany Police Chief Greg Pennell also requested reassignment Tuesday, according to city spokesman Michael Hall.

Gahan said earlier this week that Knight informed him that it would be in the best interests of her family and herself to transition out of her position, allowing her to spend more time with her family.

She rose rapidly through the department of 65 officers after joining the force 18 years ago, moving from patrol officer to canine handler and then detective. Knight was appointed in December 2011 as Gahan took office for his first term. She’s been a high-profile chief, running a popular gun buyback event, and was at the helm in several investigations, including the case of a mother dying a year ago with her two young children in a New Albany creek.

City Councilman Dan Coffey said a few dozen police officers met last week and voted on sending a letter to Gahan asking for Knight’s removal, adding that a group of them have “never, ever been happy working under anybody. I hope they spend as much time policing as they have tearing down a really good police department.”

Gahan said in the release he is confident Bailey and Fudge “will handle operations within the New Albany Police Department with professionalism and integrity.”

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1k4T1Mz