I first read about Robert A. Dahl’s death earlier this month in the Yale Daily News. Why would the editors of a student newspaper publish a Page 1 obituary of a 98-year-old political science professor who had retired from teaching well before any of today’s undergraduates were born?

The article made the answer obvious, as did obituaries in The Times and elsewhere: Robert Dahl all but created the modern field of political science, anchoring it at Yale, where he served as department chair and took on many other high-level responsibilities. The obituaries emphasized his work on democratic theory and constitutional structure. They gave less, if any, attention to his pathbreaking study of the Supreme Court.

Here is the opening paragraph of one of the best known among his hundreds of academic articles:

“To consider the Supreme Court of the United States strictly as a legal institution is to underestimate its significance in the American political system. For it is also a political institution, an institution, that is to say, for arriving at decisions on controversial questions of national policy. As a political institution, the court is highly unusual, not least because Americans are not quite willing to accept the fact that it is a political institution and not quite capable of denying it; so that frequently we take both positions at once. This is confusing to foreigners, amusing to logicians, and rewarding to ordinary Americans who thus manage to retain the best of both worlds.”

With its clarity of expression, the article, “Decision-Making in a Democracy: The Supreme Court as a National Policy-Maker,” might have been written yesterday (although, on second thought, probably not: modern political science articles are typically jargon-riddled.) In fact, it appeared in the Journal of Public Law 57 years ago. All these years later, it still has much to teach us.

Just think back two years, to the run-up to the Supreme Court’s argument and decision in the Affordable Care Act case. Pollsters wanted to know whether people expected the justices to base their decision on “ideology” or “law.” Presented with this either-or choice, most said ideology while a smaller number said law. It was one of Robert Dahl’s many insights to conclude not only that it’s both, but that a melding of law and politics is to be expected rather than feared or deplored. “It is an essential characteristic of the institution that from time to time its members decide cases where legal criteria are not in any realistic sense adequate to the task,” he wrote.

Advertisement Continue reading the main story

For understanding the Supreme Court’s behavior, Professor Dahl proposed what became known as the ruling-regime thesis. His observation was that “the policy views dominant on the court are never for long out of line with the policy views dominant among the lawmaking majorities of the United States.” His explanation was that through regular turnover and the inherently political process of presidential nomination and Senate confirmation, “the Supreme Court is inevitably a part of the dominant national alliance.”

There are, he acknowledged, exceptions: “short-lived transitional periods when the old alliance is disintegrating and the new one is struggling to take control of political institutions.” (My colleague Jack Balkin argues that we have entered such a period, from which a new constitutional regime will eventually emerge as the Republican Party loses ground against the forces of demographic change; he foresees a long and messy rather than short transition.) It’s also worth noting that Dahl was writing during a period of rapid and regular change in the Supreme Court’s membership; there had been six vacancies in the decade preceding his article’s publication in 1957.