Pawlowski, who faced a challenge of low name recognition in his quest to unseat Republican Gov. Tom Corbett, also announced his endorsement of state Treasurer Rob McCord.

Pawlowski, who was re-elected to a third term as mayor in November, said his duties as mayor of Allentown prevented him from spending the eight to 10 hours a day needed to raise the money necessary for such a competitive statewide race.

"It seemed like every time I sat down to make fundraising calls, another issue with the city would come up ... that required my attention," Pawlowski said.

"I found out the hard way that campaigns are all about raising that money, and my time and focus needs to be concentrated on the continued revitalization of Allentown," he continued during the announcement alongside McCord on the top floor of the Butz Corporate Plaza, 840 W. Hamilton St.



Pawlowski said he has raised about $346,000, far short of the sums approaching $10 million that analysts said he needed to remain competitive in such a challenging race.



By comparison, Allyson Schwartz, the perceived Democratic frontrunner, has raised more than $6.5 million so far, while York businessman Tom Wolf raised more than $13 million, including $10 million of his own money.

"I'm a blue-collar working-class guy," Pawlowski said. "I can't even give $1,000 to my campaign (much) less $1 million."

McCord said Pawlowski will be a "vital partner in a McCord administration," but said he did not make any promises regarding administrative appointments in exchange for Pawlowski leaving the race.

"Let me be clear and blunt: There were no deals of any kind," McCord said.

A regional challenge



Pawlowski compared himself to Democrats from Lehigh Valley such as Northampton County District Attorney John Morganelli, former state Rep. Jennifer Mann and former Lehigh County Executive Don Cunningham who have been unsuccessful in state races due to a lack of institutional support.

"Until we change our perspective in the Democratic party to support these candidates, it's going to be very hard for the Lehigh Valley to get any influence of any consequence in Harrisburg," he said.

Despite its early end, Pawlowski said his campaign -- which included visiting more than 50 counties -- accomplished many of his goals, particularly to draw attention to the need for economic development and more jobs around the state.

Pawlowski expressed confidence McCord will address those priorities if elected, citing his tenure with the state treasury that generated strong investment returns and more than $2.1 billion for the state.

"Mayor Pawlowski and I share a common vision for the future of Pennsylvania," McCord said. "We both believe in the power of education and economic development and the core need for safe neighborhoods."

Pawlowski and McCord stuck to their plan for today's announcement in Center City despite a snow emergency having been declared earlier that day.

Lehighvalleylive.com reported Friday that Pawlowski would withdraw from the race. Gubernatorial candidates began releasing their fundraising numbers Friday, but Pawlowski's have not yet been released by the state.

Name recognition test



Past surveys showed Pawlowski polling on the low end compared with the other Democrats. A Harper Polling survey in November found 81 percent of respondents did not know enough about him to form an opinion.

During his campaign, Pawlowski drew much attention to the estimated $1 billion in Center City construction underway, and emphasized he was the only gubernatorial candidate with executive experience.

Pawlowski had pushed for stable funding for Pennsylvania's public schools, a farmer-friendly agriculture policy and the adoption of the federal Affordable Care Act.

"We brought much-needed attention to the critical issues facing our state, and I learned a lot about the challenges facing every corner of Pennsylvania," he said. "These challenges are not being met by the incumbent."

The Pawlowski campaign had hoped to leverage support and endorsements through contacts Pawlowski has gained as president of the Pennsylvania Municipal League and other mayors' organizations.

Pawlowski said McCord has taken steps to repair the $1.5 billion PA 529 Guaranteed Savings Plan, as well as streamlining operations, cutting costs and dramatically improving the treasury's productivity.

Contact Allentown reporter Colin McEvoy at 484-894-2549 or cmcevoy@express-times.com.

Like Allentown on lehighvalleylive.com on Facebook