By Evan Grossman | Watchdog.org

School choice advocates in Philadelphia are unfazed.

Shaking off a recent court decision that will make funding anything in the city’s cash-strapped school district more of a challenge, education reformers are hopeful the district will still find a way to add more charter schools. Following a Commonwealth Court decision to reinstate the Philly teachers contract, the district is facing an $80 million budget deficit.

“That still doesn’t mean they can’t rearrange the furniture,” said David Hardy, CEO of Boy’s Latin Charter School. Hardy is one of 40 applicants vying for authorization to create a new charter — Girl’s Latin — as demand for the schools is at a rolling boil.

There are more than 40,000 students on waiting lists to get into 84 charter schools around Philadelphia and for the first time since 2007, the city opened the books for brand new charter schools. The authorization process is in its final phases, but a recent Commonwealth Court decision to block a drastic cost-cutting measure may impede that momentum.

In October, facing a looming budget shortfall and after two years of failed negotiations, the School Reform Commission, which controls the city school district, terminated its contract with the Philadelphia Federation of Teachers. The most significant impact of the SRC’s unilateral decision, which was supported by Mayor Michael Nutter at the time, was that it freed up $44 million by asking teachers to pay a portion of their health and retirement benefits.

Most Philadelphia teachers have not had to contribute to their benefits. Philly is one of only three districts in Pennsylvania that dooesn’t pay for health care — the others are Ephrata and Warwick. On average, U.S. citizens are paying $328 per month for middle-tier plans under the Affordable Care Act and the School Reform Commission, which governs the School District of Philadelphia, is asking teachers to pay a portion of their benefits as a way to save more than $200 million over the next five years.

The district was asking them to contribute up to 13 percent of their plan, or about $47 per month.

This month, the Commonwealth Court reversed the SRC’s decision and evaporated those forecasted savings. As a result, the district’s budget deficit more than doubled to $80 million. The SRC has less money to invest in new projects and, as a result, could reject some or all of the charter school applications before it, using the teachers’ contract as a reason to pull its purse strings even tighter.

“I strongly disagree with this logic,” said James Paul, a senior education policy analyst at the Commonwealth Foundation, adding that charter schools spend $1,500 less per pupil than traditional district schools. “But I can imagine the SRC pointing to the court ruling as an excuse for not approving new charters.”

There are currently 84 charter schools with 67,000 students enrolled in Philadelphia, which accounts for nearly one-third of the district.

Gov. Tom Wolf and other Democrats in Harrisburg supported the court’s decision to block the SRC. In Philadelphia, Mayor Michael Nutter has called for the Philadelphia Federation of Teachers and the district to finally work out a deal.

“As the School Reform Commission reviews its next steps, we urge the PFT and the SRC to get back to the bargaining table immediately and do the work needed to reach agreement on a contract that provides for the changes needed to educate better our children and that also respects the teachers in their work,” Nutter said. “We need to move forward, get a contract done and educate our children.”

Teachers union President Jerry Jordan and others hailed the court decision as a victory.

“This is a great decision by the Court that prohibits the SRC from trying to circumvent the collective bargaining process,” Sen. Vincent Hughes, D-Philadelphia, said in a statement. “I am hopeful that the new environment, especially with a new governor in Harrisburg, will lead to a quick resolution. It’s now up to both the SRC and the PFT to come together and get a fair contract negotiated as quickly as possible.”

The court decision is not seen as a total bust for school choice in Philadelphia and Paul believes it may eventually help to make the case for education reform.

“I could see the court’s ruling leading to a growing number of parents opting for private schools or charter schools,” he said. “As more families become aware of the immense academic and financial problems facing the city school district, I envision that there will be increased demand for new charter options — as well as greater interest in private schools.”

Hardy said he is not discouraged by the court’s decision and is undaunted as he and other charter school applicants wait for a decision, which the SRC will announce in February.

“They put this application out because the neighborhood needs new and better schools,” Hardy said. “That hasn’t changed just because the teachers’ contract status changed.”