STORM LAKE, Iowa — When Iowa votes in three weeks, it may hand Ted Cruz a huge win that catapults him to the Republican presidential nomination. But so far, he hasn’t sealed the deal with folks like Thomas and Susan Fitzpatrick.

He’s 63, just sold a car dealership and backs Donald Trump because “we need an outsider in there.” She’s 59, sells insurance and prefers Marco Rubio, deeming him smoother than Cruz and far less crass than the billionaire developer who has dominated the race for months.

But both see Cruz as a fallback. So there they were at a lakeside hotel one night last week with a hundred or so other Iowa Republicans, to kick the tires.

“We’re shopping,” she said. “We’ll see if Cruz knocks either of them out.”

The six-day bus tour Cruz wrapped up late Saturday showed a candidate hitting stride yet with little margin to slack off before the Feb. 1 caucuses. At Storm Lake and 27 other stops, he brought Iowan Republicans to their feet by the scores and by the hundreds, pitching himself as the antidote to Barack Obama. Religious conservatives flocked to small-town coffee houses, pubs and churches for a glimpse, most already with their minds made up, demonstrating that Cruz has a clear edge in the state.

But the tour also exposed vulnerabilities that could hurt Cruz beyond Iowa. Doubts that Trump planted about the Canada-born senator’s eligibility seeped into Q&A sessions. Saturation-level attacks from the ethanol industry prompted pointed questions from Iowans alarmed that Cruz would scrap a federal mandate that props up the price of their corn.

And Cruz’s relentless appeal to evangelical Christians and hard-core conservatives could prove limiting in states to come. His own rhetorical excesses, like floating a “spanking” for Hillary Clinton, reinforced his edgy image.

Cruz edges Trump in the latest Iowa polls, with Rubio in solid third. The rest can’t crack double digits. Cruz has a small army of volunteers from Texas and other states filling two college dorms he rented in Des Moines. He has pastors in every county prodding the faithful to caucus for him. Trump draws bigger crowds but can’t touch that level of organization.

“I feel confident that I’m never going to have a plane with my name painted on it,” Cruz said in a gentle poke at his rival’s swoop-in campaign style. “It is a wonderful thing that the election to be the president of the United States ... begins, and much of it is decided, in Pizza Ranches and junior high gymnasiums and church fellowship halls.”

Traditionally, more than half of the Republicans who take part in the Iowa caucuses identify as evangelical Christians. Cruz, son of a preacher, speaks their language fluently and without hesitation.

He quotes Scripture at length. He exhorts Iowans to pray when they awake and at bedtime, while they’re shaving or heading to lunch. Pray, he suggested time and again last week, to “awaken the body of Christ that we may stand and pull our country back from the cliff.”

It resonates with many Cruz fans.

“I love his Christian values,” said nursing assistant Lisa Goodwin, 37, as Cruz worked the crowd at Charlie’s Steakhouse in Carroll. “If it’s God’s plan, he will use Cruz. America’s in trouble.”

The overt religiosity turns off Linda Carlsen, 66, a retired school principal. She supports Trump, but gave Cruz a look in Pocahontas at a stuffy Pizza Ranch, a popular chain that draws many GOP candidates.

“He says what my neighbors say,” she said. By contrast, “Cruz talks about abortion and gay rights, but when you get out of Iowa, those are not issues that win a general election.”

The evangelical vote meant victory for Mike Huckabee in 2008 and Rick Santorum in 2012. And “it’s going to be exceptionally important in 2016,” predicted Bob Vander Plaats, the state’s most influential Christian activist, who spent the week at Cruz’s side as he was named a national co-chairman of the Texan’s campaign.

“Donald Trump exposed that people are upset with Washington. They want someone to change Washington,” Vander Plaats said. “And now you have to ask, ‘Well, who’s the best prepared to do that?’”

A win in Iowa, even a strong second, would put a hot spotlight on Cruz when the battle shifts to New Hampshire eight days later. That state tends to favor centrists, and much of the GOP field is dug in there.

Cruz will be there this week for the first time in two months. Later, a five-day bus tour is meant to set the stage for Cruz to sop up the anti-Trump, anti-establishment vote — if Iowa goes as well as expected.

Cruz keeps the mood light. He has a storehouse of jokes he tells dozens of times a week, like the one about the West Texas farmer who contradicts Cruz when told that unlike with locusts, you can’t use pesticide to ward off regulators.

“Wanna bet?” the farmer replied.

At a Christian bookstore in Boone, a cellphone interrupted with the theme from The Good, the Bad and the Ugly. Everyone laughed, and Cruz hardly missed a beat.

“I will say to everyone in Washington, ‘When you hang a man, make sure to hang him high,’” he quipped — a reminder not only that he’s a huge movie buff and amateur impressionist, but a pariah in the halls of Congress. That, he wears as a badge of honor.

The humor targeting the president and the Democratic front-runner, Clinton, is biting.

“When it comes to the 10th Amendment,” Cruz likes to say, “or as Barack Obama calls it, ‘the what?’”

He likes to say that to make it easy on Clinton, Democrats set their next debate at Leavenworth — site of a famous military prison. At the Pocahontas stop, a woman fainted just as Cruz was wrapping up.

“Good news, she’s doing OK,” he said once she revived. “Young woman heard the name Hillary Clinton, she immediately fainted.”

Friday night in Charles City, he raised eyebrows asserting that like his own 5-year-old when she lies, Clinton deserves a “spanking” over statements on the Benghazi attacks.

Such comments aren’t a usual part of the half-hour stump speech Cruz delivers four to six times a day, not counting time for questions. And he always sticks around to pose for photos and chats.

The college debate champ so rarely stumbles that when he does it goes nearly unnoticed, as when he vowed one evening in Winterset that “we will end national security.”

“Going 18 hours a day, six days a week … can be tiring,” he acknowledged moments later.

Most days weren’t quite that long. But it was past 10 p.m. when the senator’s luxury bus, decked out as the “Courageous Cruzer,” pulled into Missouri Valley, population 3,000.

Cruz stood behind the counter at Penny’s Diner and puckishly refilled coffee mugs as U.S. Rep. Steve King introduced him. A hundred or so people filled every stool, booth and floor tile. A few had driven three hours from South Dakota.

Despite the hour, Cruz didn’t skimp. They got the full speech, from jabs at the IRS to tough talk on the Islamic State.

“I liked when he was out on the Senate floor [railing overnight against Obamacare] and Senator [John] McCain called him a whacko bird,” said Rex Haner, 76, a retired farmer from Woodbine, Iowa, who showed off his NRA Golden Eagles hat and belt buckle. “He might win it. They’re scared of him.”

Lots of candidates stop at Penny’s. The mayor, Clint Sargent, couldn’t remember the last time it was packed so tight.

“This is pretty hefty turnout this late at night in the middle of the week,” he said. “There’s a lot of interest in what Senator Cruz brings to the table. It’s really lighting up people in Iowa.”

As the week wore on, the “natural born citizen” issue took root. Cruz was forced to spend time reassuring Iowans that while he was born in Canada, he’s eligible for the presidency, thanks to the fact that his mom is American. He even released her Delaware birth certificate Friday to tamp down online rumors.

In Mason City, Rich Hugeback, 68, was one of several hundred people who filled a church to see Cruz. The retired power company executive called it a nonissue.

“That’s what Trump’s good at — stirring stuff up,” he said. “He hates losing. That’s the only reason he’s attacking Cruz.”

But doubts gnawed at Kay Clark, 64, the retired Cerro Gordo County auditor and elections commissioner.

“We need to have someone who’s electable,” she said, “because we need to have a Republican in the White House.”

On Twitter:

@toddgillman