Crist was once a harsh Clinton critic, denouncing him during the impeachment scandal. Clinton and Crist: The odd couple

While everyone’s focused on Hillary Clinton’s next potential campaign, it’s Bill Clinton who’s been racking up frequent-flier miles, trying to get Democrats elected in the midterms.

He’s crisscrossed the country in the past eight months, doing more than 20 events for Democratic hopefuls from Florida to Kentucky to Rhode Island as the party’s most sought-after surrogate and rainmaker. In some cases, he’s gone to bat for candidates who supported his wife six years ago; in others, he’s gotten behind contenders who have long relationships with the former first couple. And the former Arkansas chief has an obvious soft spot for governors, a group that has received little attention from the current president.

Story Continued Below

At a campaign rally in Miami Friday, Clinton will test the strength of a relatively new relationship, with Charlie Crist, the Republican-turned-Democrat who’s running for his old job as Florida’s governor. Crist was once a harsh Clinton critic, denouncing him during the impeachment scandal in the late 1990s — a fact state Republicans have been quick to resurrect.

( Also on POLITICO: The McDonnell verdict's lesson: Politicians beware)

But now, as his wife is eyeing another national campaign, the perennial battleground of Florida looms potentially large for the Clintons. And Bill Clinton and Crist have developed a rapport, speaking a number of times since Crist launched his candidacy, multiple sources familiar with the conversations told POLITICO. Clinton, a famous dispenser of campaign advice with an eye for the granular in a race, has occasionally chewed over Crist’s own bid against GOP Gov. Rick Scott.

“Whoever wins Florida is the next president of the United States,” said John Morgan, a major Democratic donor whose law firm employs Crist. “That’s just math.”

The governor is “extremely important,” Morgan added. “They control the secretary of state, voting days, voting hours.”

It wasn’t until Crist won his primary last week against Nan Rich that Clinton was able to formally back him. Rich was a supporter of Hillary Clinton, Morgan noted, and now that Crist is the nominee “I think [Clinton’s] hands are untied.”

( Also on POLITICO: Podesta eyed for Clinton campaign chair)

Clinton and Crist had their first real dealings in 2010, when Crist was running for the U.S. Senate as an independent. His advisers sought help from Bill Clinton to get the Democrat, Rep. Kendrick Meek, a longtime Clinton ally, to drop out of the race and thwart then-state Sen. Marco Rubio from winning. Clinton tried, but Meek stayed in and Rubio won. Still, it established some level of political discussion between the Clinton and Crist camps.

The appearance with Crist will cap a week of campaigning for Democratic gubernatorial candidates by Clinton. Earlier, he attended events for Connecticut Gov. Dannel Malloy and Maine candidate Mike Michaud. While in Maine, he stopped by Kennebunkport to pay a visit to former President George H.W. Bush, with whom he has forged a bond since working with him on post-Hurricane Katrina relief.

( Also on POLITICO: The POLITICO 50)

Clinton will attend a fundraiser on Saturday for embattled Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu and another one the following weekend for Georgia Democratic Senate hopeful Michelle Nunn.

The former president did an ad for Rhode Island treasurer candidate Seth Magaziner, the son of Clinton’s longtime adviser Ira Magaziner. He is doing a direct mail piece for Nina Turner’s secretary of state race in Ohio, another key presidential proving ground.