Boeing’s Chinook heavy-lifting helicopters at work in Scotland in 2013 Getty Images

A small step forward today in what will eventually become a very large Pentagon spending program: the $100 billion quest for the next generation of army helicopters. Via the WSJ’s Doug Cameron:

The Bell unit of Textron in partnership with Lockheed Martin Corp., and the team of Boeing and Sikorsky Aircraft Co. said Tuesday that they’d been picked to each build a helicopter that flies much faster and further than existing models. The Joint Multi-Role, or JMR, program is part of a broader effort to eventually replace hundreds of workhorse Black Hawk and Apaches models. The Army plans to use the two prototypes as part of its evaluation of a wider helicopter replacement program known as Future Vertical Lift that the Pentagon estimates could cost $100 billion. The long-term plan wouldn’t lead to new helicopters becoming operational before the mid-2030s, and the defense department could still decide the broader project is too complex or costly and opt to upgrade existing rotorcraft with technology harvested from the JMR program. The four companies are already the Pentagon’s main suppliers of rotorcraft and onboard equipment. Sikorsky, a unit of United Technologies, builds Black Hawks and the larger CH-53, while Boeing makes Apaches and Chinooks, as well the distinctive tilt-rotor MV-22 Osprey in partnership with Bell.

As you see in the tickers next to each of the companies above, today’s news did not lead to investors rushing on the companies involved. That’s mainly because there’s no real money in this deal just yet, and there won’t be for a long time–longer than the horizon most in the market are thinking about.

“The financial impact of this program is de minimus in 2014-18,” Capital Alpha Partners wrote in late July, “but awards could shape investor perceptions of which firms can lead in rotary wing markets next decade.”

There also wasn’t much surprise at the choice, with the Pentagon choosing the four largest US players in military helicopters, and leaving the door open for Airbus Group to join in later. Also in the running were two smaller, closely held companies: AVX Aircraft and Karem Aircraft. Picking either of the smaller players to build the new helicopter could have signaled an eventual shake-up in the market, but for now, it’s business as usual.

See the full story here…