South Florida hospitals saw their profits increase by nearly 40 percent for the second straight year between 2013 and 2014, according to newly released data by the state Agency for Health Care Administration.

The data is a tally of operating revenue and net income that 48 public and private hospitals in Broward, Palm Beach and Miami-Dade counties are required to file with the state.

In all, the 48 hospitals reported $13.1 billion in operating revenue and $1.15 billion in net income in 2014. The net income was 39.5 percent more than the previous year.

The year before, the hospitals took in $12.2 billion in operating revenue and $827 million in net income. That followed 2013's $590 million in net income and marked a two-year improvement of 94.6 percent.

The combined net profit rate for the area's hospitals increased from 5 percent in 2012 to 8.8 percent in 2014, according to an analysis of the state data.

"I think it's good news for the industry and good news for the community," said Linda Quick, president of the South Florida Hospital and Healthcare Association. A major reason for the increase, she said, was about 600,000 South Florida residents who were able to purchase health insurance for the first time under the Affordable Care Act. That ensured that more people were able to pay hospitals for care, rather than showing up in emergency rooms and leaving with unpaid bills.

Nearly all of the hospital systems saw their bottom lines improve. HCA Healthcare saw its nine hospitals increase combined profit from 7.3 percent in 2013 to 11.8 percent in 2014. Baptist Health System's six hospitals improved from a combined 8.7 percent to 9.7 percent. Tenet Health's nine hospitals improved from a combined 4.2 percent to 4.8 percent. Jackson Healthcare System improved from 8.9 percent to 9.2 percent. The University of Miami's five hospitals improved from 2.3 percent to 10.8 percent.

Only Broward Health saw a decline. Its four hospitals combined for 3.7 percent profit in 2014, down from 4,8 percent in 2013. Memorial Healthcare System's four hospitals combined to improve from 5.9 percent to 9.4 percent.

Cost-cutting measures underway before the Affordable Care Act plans became available in 2013 also contributed to the improvements, Quick said. Hospital systems are reinvesting the increased profits, she said, into "more professional and continuing education for staff, more community benefits, needs assessments, working with stakeholders on improving community health." They also are investing in home health services, new outpatient centers and restructured services to make them more efficient.

Release of the new data coincided with a report issued this week by an independent analyst showing that 12 of the 27 largest health maintenance organizations in the state lost money in 2014, including four of the nine largest HMOs.

The report, Florida Health Market Review 2015, showed that UnitedHealthcare HMOs, the state's fourth-largest plan with 630,000 members, lost $121 million. Sunshine State Health Plan, fifth largest with 445,312 members, lost $119 million and WellCare, second-largest with 825,570 members, lost $55 million. Humana HMOs, meanwhile, reported net income of $390 million. The HMOs with the heaviest losses also had large percentages enrolled in Medicaid HMO plans, while 39 percent of Humana's HMO members were enrolled in far more lucrative Medicare Advantage and HMO plans.

Florida's decision to move Medicaid recipients into private managed care plans contributed, along with the Affordable Care Act, to a 44 percent increase in the number of Floridians enrolled in HMOs, from 3.7 million to 5.3 million, according to data in the report. Humana, the largest HMO in the state, increased by 535,757 to 1.1 million.

The report divided the state into four metro regions and compared combined profit rates of all hospitals in the regions in 2013. Hospitals in the region stretching between Jacksonville and Gainesville had the highest net profit rate, 10.2 percent, followed by the Tampa/St. Petersburg region, at 9.6 percent. South Florida hospitals were at 6.8 percent, followed by the Orlando area at 6.6 percent.

Analyst Allan Baumgarten, who compiled the report, said in an interview that South Florida's profit rates likely trailed the Jacksonville and Tampa areas because of "the more prominent role of safety-net hospitals" including publicly funded Broward Health, Memorial Healthcare System, and Jackson Health System.

Hospitals in the Tampa and Jacksonville region "don't rely as heavily on outside revenue like government funding and don't have the same extent of uninsured, underinsured and uncompensated care," Baumgarten said.

Meanwhile, HCA, Community Health Systems and Florida Hospital (owned by Adventist Health) are expanding their presence and market power in the state, and while HCA is the only one of those three with significant market share in South Florida, Baumgarten says the others are likely looking for ways to expand their reach south.

Hospital systems and health insurers are turning to expansion and consolidation to hold down costs, increase profits and strengthen their negotiating positions with one another, Baumgarten said. Federal approval of the proposed merger of Humana and Aetna, he said, would give the combined company 31.5 percent of the health insurance market in Florida.

In the report, Baumgarten addresses the perception that the Affordable Care Act has been driving consolidation for both health insurers and hospital systems and physicians. "But that was a trend already underway for many years before that," the report says." Similarly, the growing use of limited provider networks and the increasing penetration of high deductible health plans got a big push from the ACA, but those trends were already seen many years ago."

Baumgarten conducts health market surveys of 11 states, including California, Michigan, Illinois, Texas and Wisconsin and has produced 12 previous Florida reports, primarily for use by industry professionals.

rhurtibise@sun-sentinel.com, 954-356-4071

South Florida hospital systems and 2014 profit margin