Morgan Drexen Inc. of Costa Mesa, which pulled in millions of dollars per year selling debt-settlement and bankruptcy services to attorneys and consumers, filed for Chapter 7 bankruptcy liquidation Thursday in Santa Ana.

The company, which estimates it has 1,000 to 5,000 creditors, listed $8 million in assets against $9.9 million in liabilities. In its bankruptcy filing, the company reported it had revenue of $34.66 million in 2013, but that revenue fell to $22.89 million last year.

The bankruptcy filing came the same day a federal judge in Santa Ana, Josephine Staton, froze Morgan Drexen's assets.

This order came at the request of the federal Consumer Financial Protection Bureau, which in 2013 sued Morgan Drexen over its debt-settlement services. The CFPB is seeking $90.7 million in restitution for nearly 60,000 consumers it says were charged unlawful fees for debt relief services by Morgan Drexen, but received little or no services in return.

In seeking the asset freeze, the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau noted that Judge Staton on April 21 had found that as the lawsuit proceeded, Morgan Drexen had misled the court and its own attorney by falsifying evidence.

Staton found Morgan Drexen had been "engaging in practices that have undermined the integrity of judicial proceedings."

In her asset-freeze order, Staton wrote she restrained Morgan Drexen from transferring, dissipating or concealing assets to ensure funds are available so the court can grant final relief for consumers.

One issue in the CFPB lawsuit was a claim by Morgan Drexen that it was helping consumers by drawing up -- but not necessarily filing -- bankruptcy petitions for clients, which they could use as leverage in trying to settle their debts.

The CFPB complained there was only anecdotal evidence that the threat of bankruptcy results in greater debt reduction and better settlements and argued Morgan Drexen was providing bankruptcy services and preparing bankruptcy petitions simply to charge up-front fees from already struggling customers for debt settlement services.

The CFPB claimed Morgan Drexen was "bundling unnecessary bankruptcy services into the package (of services) to disguise the fact that they continued to charge an upfront fee for what were essentially debt relief services," the judge wrote in an order.

As the lawsuit progressed, the CFPB discovered that Morgan Drexen had tried to bolster its case by manufacturing bankruptcy documents that did not exist prior to the agency filing its suit. The judge looked at the evidence and agreed, writing in an order "defendants blatantly falsified evidence and then concealed this fact from the court, opposing cousel and even their own counsel at every turn."

A day after filing for bankruptcy, Morgan Drexen on Friday suffered yet another legal setback. The U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit upheld a lower-court ruling throwing out Morgan Drexen's lawsuit claiming the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau is an unconstitutional agency.

The appeals court did not rule on the merits of this claim -- it ruled Morgan Drexen lacked standing to pursue that claim in the District of Columbia since it had the opportunity to raise the same claim in the California litigation.

The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act established the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau and in recent years Morgan Drexen has made headlines with its unsuccessful efforts to have the agency ruled unconstitutional.

Morgan Drexen has complained it's unconstitutional because the powers delegated to the CFPB are overly broad, it's headed by a single director removable only for cause, it is funded outside the normal appropriations process and judicial review of its actions is limited. All of this, Morgan Drexen unsuccessfully complained, violates the constitutional theory of separation of powers.

Judge Staton in Santa Ana earlier rejected these claims in the California lawsuit.

Morgan Drexen officials couldn't immediately be reached for comment on the bankruptcy.

On its website, the company said March 30 that attorneys using the proprietary IT platform and software licensed by Morgan Drexen have helped more than 21,000 Americans who were "struggling with their overwhelming debt."

And it complained about the CFPB, charging in a November open letter that ``the very people the CFPB was created to help are being hurt as the CFPB fights to eliminate companies like Morgan Drexen, who provide support services to attorneys, which in turn, allows access to the one thing that can actually help struggling Americans – affordable legal services to combat the abusive tactics being used by skilled, efficiently trained bank collectors."