Preckwinkle launches good-news budget

But tough decisions to come in future years

It's a good-news budget, without higher taxes, fines or fees, designed to smooth the way into next year's election. Preckwinkle is seeking a second term, and all 17 County Board seats are on the ballot.

Cook County Board President Toni Preckwinkle plans to close a $152 million budget gap next year by getting more federal health care funding, cutting spending and hoping more tax money is collected.

Cook County Budget Director Andrea Gibson was on hand Thursday for the presentation of the county's 2014 budget by Board President Toni Preckwinkle. Gibson said Preckwinkle has reduced the budget deficit since she was elected in 2010. (Nancy Stone, Chicago Tribune)

The $3.2 billion budget introduced Thursday also reflects some tough decisions made in previous years, including higher fees and taxes, most notably last year's $1-a-pack cigarette tax increase. The hikes, coupled with spending cuts, compensated for eliminating a much-criticized sales tax increase under Preckwinkle's predecessor. The 2014 budget "is the product of three years of work that we have done together," Preckwinkle told commissioners.

Still, county government faces some tough financial decisions in the coming years, with debt payments scheduled to increase significantly and some tax collections expected to decline. In addition, the county is struggling to find a way to repair an underfunded government worker pension system.

"We're continuing to work on our pensions," Preckwinkle later told the Tribune editorial board, noting that fixing the system would require action at the state Capitol, where legislators are focused on the state's pension woes.

Budget Director Andrea Gibson said that even with debt payments expected to rise, the projected budget gaps in coming years are much smaller than when Preckwinkle came into office.

About $97 million of next year's shortfall would be erased through enrollment of new and existing Health and Hospitals System patients in Medicaid through the federal Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare.

So far the county has accepted nearly 110,000 applications for CountyCare, and it expects to get $278 million next year to care for patients newly enrolled in Medicaid, Preckwinkle said. As a result, the county will provide more services at greater cost but rely less on local tax collections for health care than in previous years, officials said.

To close the rest of the gap, the county would cut spending by $38.6 million, including $14.4 million in employee health and pharmacy costs. About $2.2 million of the health care cuts would be achieved by ending a decades-old deal under which more than 350 Cook County Circuit Court judges get health insurance for less than $1 a month.

An additional $15 million would be saved by eliminating 20 percent of the jobs that are vacant in all branches of county government. In making that move, Preckwinkle rejected a request from Chief Judge Timothy Evans for 100 more employees, noting that he had about 175 unfilled vacancies.

The only other separately elected countywide official who did not agree to the amount of funding was State's Attorney Anita Alvarez, Preckwinkle said. The state's attorney needs the extra money to move cases through the system more quickly, which Preckwinkle wants, an Alvarez spokesman said.

"The bottom line is that you cannot severely underfund a system and then expect it to function most efficiently," Sally Daly said.