During housing shortage, not many in Grand Forks seek funds for affordable homes

During housing shortage, not many in Grand Forks seek funds for affordable homes

During housing shortage, not many in Grand Forks seek funds for affordable homes

Though local leaders have identified a housing shortage, Grand Forks hasn't seen many affordable housing projects through the state Housing Incentive Fund.

The University Flats apartment building planned along University Avenue between North Eighth Street and North Ninth Street recently received a $2.8 million loan from the state fund to provide 37 income-based units, according to a Grand Forks city staff report.

That project is the second Grand Forks affordable housing project to apply for money from the Housing Incentive Fund since the fund was created in 2011. Both a state official and a local official say they're "disappointed" by this low number of applications, considering Grand Forks' need for affordable housing.

"I was disappointed that we didn't see more applications from Grand Forks," said Jolene Kline, executive director of North Dakota's Housing Finance Agency, which administers the Housing Incentive Fund.

The state fund provides low-cost financing to developers of affordable multi-family housing. People or businesses that contribute to the fund receive a dollar-for-dollar state income tax credit.

Money from the fund goes toward affordable housing for low- to moderate-income people or essential service workers, meaning those working for schools, local or state government, medical facilities or other "essential public services."

The fund was originally created to target the severe housing shortage in the Oil Patch, but Kline said "pretty much any community in the state can make the case that they're impacted by the energy development."

Eastern N.D.

Aside from the two incentivized projects in Grand Forks, there have been several other towns outside of the Oil Patch with multiple projects financed with the Housing Incentive Fund.

Four projects in Fargo have received funds since 2011, totalling $4.5 million, according to data from the Housing Finance Agency. Two Devils Lake projects have together received a total of $718,602.

Other communities outside the Oil Patch that received funds include Jamestown, New Rockford, Gwinner and Kulm.

As of May 30, the Housing Incentive Fund awarded about $35 million across North Dakota this year.

Aside from University Flats, the other Grand Forks project that has received funds was Cherrywood Village, a seniors citizens' affordable housing complex at 3350 Cherry St., which was awarded $454,545 in 2011.

The total amount of money from the Housing Incentive Fund awarded to the two Grand Forks projects is about $3.25 million.

Some businesses contribute to the fund in support of specific projects, such as Choice Financial, which recently contributed $300,000 to the fund with $100,000 supporting University Flats, according to a Choice Financial news release.

Why not more?

Officials listed several reasons why there haven't been more Grand Forks applicants to the fund, despite the city's housing shortage.

"There is a great need for affordable housing (in Grand Forks), but you need to be prepared when the funds are on the table" before the money runs out each Legislative biennium, said Terry Hanson, executive director of the Grand Forks Housing Authority, which manages Cherrywood Village.

For example, unlike Grand Forks, Fargo has a nonprofit housing developer, Beyond Shelter Inc., that is working "on a continuous basis" seeking opportunities to build affordable housing, including applying for Housing Incentive Funds, Hanson said. That continuous effort makes it more likely the nonprofit will have a project ready when the funds are available, he said.

Grand Forks developers may also be deterred because they may assume the Housing Incentive Fund favors Oil Patch towns, but that is not true, Kline said.

She also said if developers are able to build market-rate apartments in Grand Forks and still be profitable, they may not feel they need incentives from the state.

"It's a reflection of developer interest," she said.

Kline said there is no other state fund that provides a similar incentive to affordable housing projects, though the state administers some similar federal funds.