Every so often, my local government yells at me. The envelope containing my car tax bill screams, “OPEN IMMEDIATELY!” — written just like that. The all-caps and exclamation point mean serious business, Buster!

A former employer sent me a letter that didn’t yell but did include a threat from the federal government. The employer requested information from me to properly document that my family and I purchased government-approved health insurance. My failure to document compliance with the Obamacare mandate “may result in a financial penalty from the IRS.” Yes, another reminder that Obamacare has changed the rules.

The federal government can now demand that we perform certain behaviors, such as purchasing health insurance, and demand that we document our compliance with its original demand. The government can also use threats to take away money as a means to enforce our compliance with its demands. Is this freedom?

***

Our federal government wasn’t always like this. The Constitution was written for a free people. Unlike living life subject to the whims of a parliament and king they didn’t elect, American citizens lived subject only to those laws their elected representatives enacted. More importantly, the laws were limited to what was specifically written into the Constitution and their state constitutions. Otherwise, the citizens decided how to live.

(The Founders didn’t write these freedoms into the Constitution for women, Indians, blacks, or the poor. Thankfully, we’ve amended the Constitution so that everybody is supposed to have the same freedoms.)

But things didn’t always change for the better. As the modern world grew more complicated, certain people decided that common citizens weren’t capable of navigating it for ourselves. In the 1930s, Franklin Roosevelt’s administration decided that we were no longer able to provide for our own retirement or take care of older relatives in need. They produced Social Security which took money from our paychecks to manage that responsibility for us.

FDR and Congress also decided that we were too irresponsible to pay our own taxes. The federal and, eventually, state governments started withholding our taxes from our paychecks before we even saw the money. We can decide not to have any money withheld, but if we don’t prepay enough taxes before they’re due, we’re fined. As complicated as the tax code is, how can we know if we’ve prepaid enough? It’s easier to let the government withhold the money for us.

In the 1960s, the Johnson administration decided we couldn’t provide for our medical care after retirement or provide medical care for the poor. Medicare and Medicaid now handle those responsibilities.

***

Three decades later (Do these things happen in 30-year cycles?), Hillary Clinton began drawing up the plans for Hillarycare, the aborted health care reform of the 1990s. At that time, the enlightened ones decided that Americans weren’t capable of choosing the health care we need.

Hillary’s reasoning for more government control of citizens’ health care decisions — as opposed to employer-provided health savings accounts that citizens manage for themselves — was that she thinks people will be too focused on saving money and they won’t get the care for their children and themselves that they need. Government needs to make our health-care decisions for us. Do we sit at the kids’ table, too?

Obamacare is the natural progression from what has gone before. It’s part of Obama’s vision of “remaking America,” as he said at his first inauguration. It stops just short of a single-payer system in which money for health care is confiscated from us and paid into a government- administered national health service. Instead, we are told what to do with our money: purchase government-approved health insurance for ourselves and our dependents (up to age 26), whether we want to or not. If we don’t, we pay a large penalty to the government.

So, the government can force us to do what it thinks we should. It has no constitutional limits on that power as long as there is a financial penalty labeled a tax. The Supreme Court said so; therefore, it must be true. But how can a penalty be a tax? Do we pay a speeding tax? Do wife-beaters pay an assault and battery tax?

I’ll do what I can to overturn this loss of freedom, such as Obamacare, and replace it with conservative reforms that actually do reduce the costs of health insurance and health care and don’t cost us any freedom. I’ll campaign for candidates who will work to that end. I’ll work to change public opinion.

For the moment, I must comply. In the words of the poet Edna St. Vincent Millay, “I know. But I do not approve. And I am not resigned.”