More questions answered on Affordable Care Act

Q. My girlfriend has been unemployed for four years. How can she be required to purchase health insurance, or be penalized for not, when she has no money?

In a live chat on OrlandoSentinel.com, Anne Packham, lead navigator for Central Florida for the federal Affordable Care Act, answered questions from readers on how to sign up for insurance.

A. If your girlfriend earns under the poverty level, she should not be penalized.

Q. If I have insurance through my employer or my spouse's employer, should I go on the marketplace?

A. If you have insurance through your employer or your spouse's employer, and it's considered affordable (which means the premiums are less than 9.5 percent of your gross income) you can still go to the marketplace and shop. However, you will not qualify for a subsidy, and it's very unlikely that you will find a plan that is more affordable. Most employers negotiate lower rates than can be found for individuals shopping on their own, and the employer provides some of the cost as a benefit of employment.

Q. Can legal immigrants can get insurance through the exchange?

A. If you have legal permission to be in the United States, you can go on the marketplace. However, if you are in the U.S. without legal status, you will not be eligible. However, if parents are here without documents but want to apply for insurance for their child who is a legal resident/citizen, they can do it on healthcare.gov without fear that the government will look for them for deportation.

Q. I was just let go on my job. I am a 64-year-old female with no income. Cobra would be $550 a month. I have a small melanoma and need to go back to my dermatologist immediately. I have no insurance and understand Obamacare does not actually go into effect until January. What should I do in the meantime?

A. If you live in Central Florida, you can try contacting a local clinic that offers care at a reduced rate. The website is pcanorangecounty.com. However, my advice to you, given that you have an urgent medical condition, is to consider paying the Cobra in the short term. It may wind up being cheaper than any other option.

Q. Once I retire and qualify for Medicare, can I purchase health insurance under the Affordable Care Act?

A. When you are 65, you are eligible for Medicare. Currently you cannot apply for Medicare under the health-insurance marketplace. Eventually that may change.

Q. I recently moved from California to Florida. All my financial data are based on when I lived in California, but I am now a Florida resident. Will the recent move impact the verification and enrollment process?

A. Florida is using the federal marketplace, so your financial information will follow you. It's based on your federal tax returns from last year and your credit history, regardless of where you live.

Q. I know I would not be eligible for a subsidy based on my 2013 income. However, I believe I can arrange my 2014 finances so I will be eligible. Must I wait an entire year to get health insurance?