Beth Israel Medical Center. | Momos Major downsizing at Beth Israel would redraw Manhattan health care map

Mount Sinai Health announced Wednesday a $500 million plan to drastically reduce the size of Beth Israel Medical Center, a politically fraught move that signals a long-term redrawing of the health care map in Manhattan.

The health system is proposing to replace Beth Israel, an 800-bed hospital on 16th Street and First Avenue, with a new facility on 14th Street and 2nd Avenue that has only 70 beds.

Story Continued Below

Those will be supplemented by outpatient facilities and physician practices, and Beth Israel will eventually be sold to recoup Mount Sinai’s investment.

Mount Sinai claims that services would not be cut under the new arrangement.

“For several years, we have been transforming the Mount Sinai Health System toward a new model of care, where we focus on keeping entire communities healthy and out of the hospital,” Ken Davis, president and CEO of the Mount Sinai Health System, said in a press release. “Mount Sinai Downtown is a dramatic next step that will enable us to improve access and increase quality by providing care for residents of downtown Manhattan where they live and work.”

Davis met Wednesday morning with managers from Beth Israel to discuss the hospital’s fate, and has instructed staff not to talk to the media, even as rumors of widespread layoffs and closures spread through the hospital.

In addition to the 70-bed facility, which will have an Emergency Department, Sinai is promising to expand its outpatient presence, touting the Phillips Ambulatory Care Center in Union Square, and offering a network of 16 physician practice locations with more than 600 doctors.

Complex cases will need to be referred to other hospitals in the Mount Sinai system.

The proposal to downsize Beth Israel doesn’t come as a surprise.

The hospital, one of several acquired by Mount Sinai when it purchased Continuum Health Services in 2013, has an aging infrastructure, a poor payer mix and was built for a different era of medicine.

Mount Sinai’s pitch to politicians and the public is that a smaller, more nimble group of facilities that focus on outpatient care is a far more efficient way to manage health care in the 21st century, and that Beth Israel is simply not financially viable in its current form.

It’s the same argument that was made for turning Long Island College Hospital, a former Continuum property, into a freestanding emergency department, supplemented by physician practices.

It has been clear for some time that something would have to change at Beth Israel, too. The passage of the Affordable Care Act in 2010 and the state’s moves toward managed care and other Medicaid reforms made Beth Israel’s model more costly.

By 2012, Stan Brezenoff, CEO of Continuum, was hunting for a partner that could infuse new capital into Beth Israel.

“At the time, the trend lines did not look good for Continuum’s hospitals,” Brezenoff told POLITICO on Tuesday. “The population we served, which included significant [numbers of uninsured], was not the kind that made for optimistic projections. … It was never thought that we could maintain an 800-bed hospital.”

Volume was decreasing, Brezenoff said. The cardiac program was becoming smaller, the neurosurgery program was shrinking.

“What used to be a struggle to balance the budget became Sisyphean,” Brezenoff said.

Davis, of course, would have known all this when he acquired Continuum.

Brezenoff says he wanted to build a new, smaller hospital, but when it became clear he wouldn’t be able to obtain the necessary financing he began looking for a partner.

The first suitor was NYU Langone Medical Center, which has its main campus about one mile north of Beth Israel.

The negotiations were handled by Tony Shorris, who at the time was chief of staff at NYU Langone, and is currently first deputy mayor under Bill de Blasio.

Shorris had worked as Brezenoff's right-hand man during their time together at the Port Authority, and Brezenoff would later become an adviser to the de Blasio administration.

In July, 2012, Langone and Continuum agreed to pursue a merger, which would have created one of the largest health systems in the nation.

Press accounts at the time noted that the big loser in such a deal would be Mount Sinai Health, which would have trouble competing with this new behemoth.

One year later, Mount Sinai officials scuttled the deal with a last-minute offer to Continuum. Their merger, which included acquiring a network of community hospitals such as the two St. Luke’s-Roosevelt campuses, created the largest voluntary health system in New York City, and the largest private employer in the city.

But the underlying financial problems at Beth Israel could not be solved by new management, and its financial losses continued to grow, eclipsing $90 million in 2014, and on pace for an even greater amount in 2015.

Only 60 percent of its licensed beds are occupied and patient volume has decreased by double digits since 2012, according to Mount Sinai officials.

Davis has long known he would have to address Beth Israel and, as POLITICO New York first reported, began courting the de Blasio administration in 2015, speaking directly with Shorris about the need to downsize.

De Blasio, during the Democratic primary, campaigned on keeping hospitals open, was arrested during a demonstration at LICH, and blamed his rival Christine Quinn for allowing the closure of St. Vincent’s (another Manhattan hospital that Davis had also reportedly eyed).

De Blasio, during his first two years in office often spoke of the many hospitals that closed during the Bloomberg administration, highlighting, during his 2015 budget address, Beth Israel’s Singer division, which closed in 2004.

Though Beth Israel will technically remain open while this new facility is being built, a major, century-old health care institution will effectively be shutting down on his watch, to be sold off to a private interest.

Another concern for the de Blasio administration is what impact this change will have on Bellevue Hospital, part of the financially struggling New York City Health + Hospitals system.

Bellevue, less than one mile from Beth Israel, is already at capacity and if patients currently being served there came to rely instead on Bellevue or Metropolitan Hospital, which is farther north on First Avenue, the city’s public hospital system could inherit the very same payer mix that is causing Mount Sinai to lose money.

The de Blasio administration did not immediately respond to a request for comment.

Davis, in addition to meeting repeatedly with Shorris, also courted 1199SEIU promising that all union employees affected by the transformation will be offered other union opportunities at equal pay.

Union leader George Gresham, perhaps sensing the inevitability of Mount Sinai’s plans, lent his support to Davis’ decision, depriving would-be opponents of the downsizing of a potentially powerful ally.

Plans for this expansion must still be approved by the state’s Department of Health.

Authors: