The Affordable Care Act, President Barack Barack Obama’s signature health law, is already boosting household income and spending.

A man looks over the Affordable Care Act signup page. Reuters

The Commerce Department reported Monday that consumer spending rose a better-than-expected 0.4% and personal incomes climbed 0.3% in January. The new health-care law accounted for a big chunk of the increase on both fronts.

On the incomes side, the law’s expanded coverage boosted Medicaid benefits by an estimated $19.2 billion, according to Commerce’s Bureau of Economic Analysis. The ACA also offered several refundable tax credits, including health insurance premium subsidies, which added up to $14.7 billion.

Taken together, the Obamacare provisions are responsible for about three-quarters of January’s overall rise in Americans’ incomes.

Of course, what the government gives, the government can take away. Case in point: The late-December expiration of a federal program that provided extended aid to unemployed Americans reduced benefit payments $16.7 billion.

Excluding special factors, the Commerce Department said personal income increased a more moderate $23.7 billion, or 0.2%, in January, after falling $15.1 billion, or 0.1%, in December. So it hasn’t been a very good winter for American households.

Also worth noting: The payments are categorized as “transfer receipts.” That is, the money is transferred from one household to another via government taxes.

On the spending side, the BEA is assuming Obamacare is responsible for a $29 billion increase in health-care services. Separately, spending on utilities also saw a big jump due to rising demand for heat during the cold stretch.

Outside of the two categories, consumers spent less: Overall spending on goods declined for the second straight month.

“So there is indeed evidence of a shift in the composition in spending — consumers in January spent more on heating bills and health care at the expense of other goods and services,” said Michelle Girard, economist at Royal Bank of Scotland.

To be sure, the health-care numbers only represent the BEA’s best guess based on preliminary data. “Information on Medicaid benefits, on ACA insurance exchange enrollments, and other related information was used to prepare the estimates of consumer spending on these services,” the agency said.

So the figures could be heavily revised as more information — directly about the new health-care law — becomes available.