PHILADELPHIA — Trent Williams was laughing and it wasn’t because he was asked what he thought about Jordan Reed.

Williams laugh was more out of disbelief. The Washington Redskins‘ left tackle had been saying for weeks that Reed was among the best tight ends in the NFL.

Each week, there’s more and more proof to that statement. The latest was on Saturday night, when Reed caught nine passes for 129 yards and two touchdowns in the Redskins 38-24 win over the Philadelphia Eagles to clinch the NFC East title.

“I feel like I say it every week, but yeah, he’s one of the best,” Williams said. “He proves it every time. The training he did this offseason, it’s so evident and it shows every game. To frankly put it, he’s a problem.”

The touchdowns gave Reed 11 on the season, which tied Hall of Famer Bobby Mitchell’s 11 in 1962 for the fifth-most receiving touchdowns in a single season in team history. Reed also broke the Redskins‘ single-season receiving yardage for a tight end with 849 yards, set previously by Chris Cooley in 2008 and 2010 and Jerry Smith in 1967. What is even more impressive about Reed’s numbers is that he missed two games with a concussion earlier this season.

The third-year tight end has enjoyed a breakout season, due largely in part to the fact that he was able to stay healthy this season. Reed has been a constant matchup problem for opposing safeties and a nightmare for linebackers.

In the first quarter, Reed torched cornerback E.J. Biggers for a 28-yard gain. Biggers never had a chance. Three plays later, Reed hauled in a 22-yard touchdown pass and halted the momentum the Eagles’ gained after scoring on the opening drive in less than three minutes. Eagles inside linebacker DeMeco Ryans never had a chance on the play. He bit on Kirk Cousins’ play-action fake and the middle of the field was wide open.

“It just goes to being healthy, being available,” Reed said. “In years past I have been getting hurt. But God blessed me to stay healthy and I took advantage of it.”

On the next drive, Reed hauled in three catches for 37 yards, including a 12-yard touchdown that gave Washington a 13-7 lead.

In the last three games for the Redskins, Reed has caught 26 passes for 333 yards and five touchdowns. Last week, when Williams was voted to the Pro Bowl and Reed an alternate, many felt the Redskins‘ tight end was snubbed. Williams said he told Reed to consider it an honor just to be in the conversation as one of the best in the league.

On Saturday, Reed proved why he legitimately is one of the best.