NEW ORLEANS — A researcher central to the "Pedaling for Parkinson's" study conducted this year in Sarasota was part of a panel discussing the role of exercise in Parkinson's disease treatment at the Gerontological Society of America's annual meeting this week.

Biomedical engineer Jay Alberts came up with the idea of cycling at higher-than-normal rates of speed to diminish tremors, balance problems and other signs of the disease, which is a progressive neurological disorder typically diagnosed around the age of 60. There are some 1.5 million Parkinson's patients in the United States, and another 3 or 4 million cases are believed to be undiagnosed.

The Sarasota clinical trial of Alberts' ideas, conducted in a partnership between the NeuroChallenge Foundation and the YMCA, wound up in April and the results are not yet published. But a lot of the improvements participants reported were echoed in other movement studies discussed in New Orleans. The exercises varied — from tai chi to tango, cycling and treadmill workouts — but the common thread, as Alberts noted, was pushing the individual to do more physical work than came naturally.

"I am convinced that forced, not voluntary, exercise will result in global motor improvement," he said, adding that in his cycling studies it seems to be the rate of speed that leads to better outcomes. "I don't think there's any one type of exercise that's a magic bullet."

One problem with the progression of Parkinson's is that medications help with symptoms in the beginning, but become increasingly less effective. The goal of exercise therapies, Alberts said, "is to find out if we can keep this therapeutic window open longer," and perhaps decrease reliance on drugs.

Joe Nocera, a neurologist at Emory University, has studied the use of highly controlled tai chi movements to improve attention span and the ability to perform multiple tasks. Parkinson's patients have trouble with such apparently simple actions as pulling an item from a grocery store shelf while pushing a cart forward.

"I like to think of walking and working memory as cognitively the same: you plan, monitor and execute a sequence of complex actions," Nocera said, adding that Parkinson's patients often fall if they try to pick up or carry something while walking.

Tai chi helps with this, he said, because "in tai chi, the body is naturally extended and relaxed, and the mind is tranquil but alert. The body is being put into challenging positions, but you're also thinking about these positions."

The same could apply to ballroom dancing, and Madeleine Hackney — also of the Emory School of Medicine — chose an adapted form of Argentine tango to study because it allows a lot of flexibility for a dance therapist.

"Backward walking is actually very dangerous for people with Parkinson's disease," she said. "Practicing these steps over and over again means internally generating movement plans."

Yet another way to improve gait and balance is something called a split-belt treadmill, often used to help people learn to walk again after a stroke. The split forces one leg to move at a different pace from the other, and Chris Hass of the University of Florida wondered if it might alleviate the uneven, shuffling gait that afflicts Parkinson's patients.

"We wondered if we could take advantage of the brain's plasticity, its ability to adapt and improve," he said. On the split-belt treadmill, "You can walk with one leg going three times faster than the other, and basically you induce a limp. The brain will solve this problem, and reactively over time the asymmetry will go away and the brain will look normal."

In four patients, Hass' team saw improvements in walking over ground after using the treadmill, and one person reported that he hadn't worried about stubbing his toe in months.

"Interestingly, we also saw an increase in range of motion of the shoulder, so training the leg is also doing something for the arms," Hass reported. "Doing this is much more cognitively challenging than normal walking, and we saw improvements in executive cognitive function and language.

"One patient does not make good science," he added, "so we are moving forward to expand the study."

Barbara Peters Smith wrote this article with support from a MetLife Foundation Journalists in Aging Fellowship, a program of New America Media and the Gerontological Society of America.