Elmont, N.Y.—There may be no cocktail that’s more associated with horse racing than the mint julep, the bourbon-based sip traditionally served at the Kentucky Derby, the first leg of the famed Triple Crown.

But as far as the organizers of the Belmont Stakes are concerned, the Belmont jewel is ready to take its place at the final pole.

Never heard of the Belmont jewel? You’re perhaps not alone. The drink was first served in 2011 at the stakes, the third and last leg of the Triple Crown held annually at Belmont, on Long Island near the New York City border. But it hasn’t quite gotten the same buzz as the mint julep. And it’s not even the first Belmont-themed cocktail that race organizers have introduced to woo the racing public, to no avail. Previous mixology misfires include the Belmont breeze and the white carnation.

But with a sold-out crowd of 90,000 on hand for Saturday’s Belmont Stakes, drawn in large part by the prospect of seeing American Pharoah become the first horse to win the Triple Crown in more than 30 years, there’s talk that the drink may have found its thirsty fan base. Race officials say they’re prepared to sell 7,500 commemorative drink-filled glasses at $20 a pop (you can have the drink in a nondescript plastic cup for a few bucks less). In 2014, some 5,000 commemorative glasses were sold.

“We’ve put a great deal of effort into promoting the cocktail,” said Peter Matra, a vice president of Centerplate, Belmont’s food and drink service.

So, what goes into a Belmont jewel? The drink is a fairly straightforward mix of Knob Creek bourbon, lemonade and a splash of pomegranate juice. “It’s like a strong version of a whiskey sour,” said Vinny Ledonne, a Belmont bartender. Ledonne added that the commemorative glass, which lists all previous winners of the 148-year-old race, seems to be the key to the drink’s growing popularity. “There are people ordering four or five drinks” just for the keepsake aspect, said Ledonne.

Still, not everyone appeared to be sold. Belmont attendees seemed to be far more likely to have a brew in hand than a Belmont jewel. “I associate sports with beer,” said Henry Austin, 22, a horse racing fan from Rhode Island who was enjoying a can of Heineken as he settled in for the day of racing.

Of course, if the Belmont jewel fails to catch on, Belmont officials may have a different sort of culinary card to play. In addition to promoting the cocktail, they’re also pushing a signature Belmont burger that’s topped with pastrami, that classic New York deli favorite.

More from MarketWatch