Although the Affordable Care Act implemented sweeping changes to the nation’s health care system that support treatment for those with drug and alcohol addiction, two San Mateo County rehabilitation centers are struggling to provide services as the new law had unintended consequences. Project 90 and Our Common Ground are struggling as demand is increasing but other funding sources are drying up since many assumed the federal health care system would now pick up the tab. “We’re getting more and more people applying, but we’ve got less funded space and we’ve been trying to wait for how [the ACA] is going to work itself out, but it’s gotten to the point where we’re going to have to make alterations,” said Jim Stansberry, executive director of the San Mateo-based Project 90. With the ACA now in its second year of implementation, health professionals are hopeful those who need substance abuse treatment will obtain Medicaid or Medi-Cal insurance that for the first time would cover substance abuse treatment costs. Yet navigating the Medicaid system is a challenge for these specialty providers as it doesn’t allot funding for the costly residential portion of inpatient treatment. So while doctor’s or therapist’s fees may be covered under the ACA, rehab centers don’t receive support for housing expenses — which are a particular burden in a region with a high cost of living. Another fact currently hindering local facilities is the ACA maintains a decades-old law prohibiting financial aid for centers that maintain more than 16 beds — a rule originally aimed to deter state mental institutions. Providers are now awaiting a decision on California’s application for a waiver to the ACA that would allow for provider reimbursements based on a region’s cost of doing business and permit funding for treatment facilities with more than 16 beds. Project 90 and Our Common Ground maintain several treatment sites throughout San Mateo County where they serve hundreds of individuals every year while relying on federal, state and county support to keep people off the streets and focused on recovery. Stansberry and Our Common Ground Executive Director Orville Roache said residential treatment services are in great demand due in part to new laws like Proposition 47 that reduced certain drug-related crimes to misdemeanors — meaning those who formerly would have been behind bars are back on the street. Having to await the state’s waiver is proving burdensome because when it comes to substance abuse treatment, time is of the essence, Stansberry said. “They’ve had this waiver in for a period of time, people are assuming it’ll be approved shortly, but in the meantime, everyone’s been on hold trying to determine exactly how to operate their facilities,” Stansberry said. “My fear is that this is going to take two or three years to shake out and it’s trying to determine how to maintain and provide services to those that are in need. … What happens is addiction ends up with people going into institutions or becoming homeless or end up dying. So you hate to not be able to serve those in need.” Not an easy transition Steven Kaplan, director of the county’s Behavioral Health and Recovery Services, said San Mateo County has long worked to craft a partnership with local substance abuse treatment centers to ensure adequate funding is allotted and he’s hopeful the state will receive a response to its waiver request in the coming weeks. Furthermore, with health care at the forefront of policymakers’ minds, the state has also negotiated alternate federal block grant funds that can now be used to pay for the residential portion of treatment, Kaplan said. Prior to the ACA, block funds would contribute toward treatment costs. If the waiver is approved allowing Medicaid dollars to be spent on rehab services, the federal grants can be freed up to pay for housing costs, Kaplan said. “With the waiver coinciding with health care reform, it’s really in my mind, the best opportunity we have for substance abuse treatment to grow to better meet the demand that’s out there, and to better meet the needs of our clients, than we’ve ever had,” Kaplan said. “Not that it’s going to be an easy or painless transition, but the future is as good as I’ve ever seen it in terms of the possibilities to improve our system.” A growing need Stansberry and Roache said they have more beds then they have funding for and a growing wait list for people seeking services. There are about 225 beds at residential substance abuse treatment centers throughout the county with Project 90 and Our Common Ground making up about two-thirds of the area’s resources, Roache said. As the facilities are dependent on the county’s Health System trickling down state and federal funding, Roache said his organization is urging county officials to commit to bridge funding until the ACA can be fully implemented. “We really can’t afford to lose this capacity because once it’s gone, it’s gone forever. So we’re really asking them to support the services,” Roache said. Our Common Ground maintains facilities in East Palo Alto, Redwood City and a transitional housing site in Belmont, Roache said. The organization has already cut back on its youth services as of last year and Roache said it may have to cut back services in Redwood City as well. Stansberry said for every one client Project 90 takes, at least four more drop off the waiting list. On average, Project 90 interviews about 55 to 60 people a month, but can only serve an additional eight or nine clients, Stansberry said. “People with substance abuse, there’s a time when they’re available or a time when there’s an interruption with where they’re at. And the idea of waiting several weeks to get in, many go back to whatever they’re doing or just drop off,” Stansberry said. Project 90 is facing a storm of hardships as two of its main sites on Ninth Avenue in San Mateo are slated for redevelopment. Stansberry fears the organization will struggle to find a suitable alternative. Instead, they may just cut back. And with others assuming the ACA would pick up the costs, Stansberry said he’s seen a reduction in alternate state and private funding sources as well. Kaplan said the county has maintained the same level of funding for these vital services but agreed other state programs have dropped funding since the ACA kicked in. Keeping people off the street While Proposition 47 aims to reduce the prison population, it’s landing non-violent drug offenders on the street with some desperate for treatment. Ultimately, Stanberry and Roache contend those who struggle with substance abuse will likely return to old habits if they don’t have access to treatment. “A large amount of the people we get are also homeless, so part of it is being on the street and also trying not to succumb to addiction,” Stansberry said. “Or they’re in an environment where it leads them to use. Some are coming from families or homes or places or areas where just being in that same area is triggering their continued usage. So [treatment] gives them a chance to interrupt and gives them a stable foundation.” Roache agreed the housing component of rehabilitation centers is vital and remains frustrated that even with the ACA, residential costs won’t receive funding. “So when you now have a building that houses people and treatment is provided in there, it becomes a question of how do you divvy up your electric bill? It becomes very complicated and this all really hasn’t been flushed out yet,” Roache said. Navigating a changing system Kaplan said there will be a learning curve and many providers will have to apply to become Medicaid providers before being allotted funds. If the state’s waiver is approved, counties will have the ability to opt in under the new rules. San Mateo County has long sought waivers to support substance abuse treatment centers and has enacted a robust benefits package. Kaplan said the state’s request draws from the county’s example and is confident the system is changing for the better, it just may take some time to refine the process. Our Common Ground also offers nonresidential treatment and portions are already Medicaid eligible. Roache agreed with Kaplan that the ACA could eventually be a advantageous, but fears those in need may not have time to wait. “Medium to long term, once people get [Medicaid] certified and up and going, to me, in my opinion, it will be a very stable funding source to provide drug treatment,” Roache said. “But you’ve got to get there first.” samantha@smdailyjournal.com (650) 344-5200 ext. 106