By Amanda Eisenberg

Journal Staff Writer

Joined by a bi-state coalition of New York and New Jersey officials, U.S. Senator Robert Menendez called for a ban of Hudson River tourist helicopters yesterday morning.

For the past 18 months, Hudson County residents have been trying to work with helicopter operators based in lower Manhattan, the state’s Dept. of Transportation and the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to limit the number of flights -- and noise -- along the river.

“We can’t have a sky full of helicopters,” the senator said. “There’s no consideration to the communities below their flight path.”

In the past year and a half, the NJDOT and FAA have told politicians they have “limited authority” to control the tourism helicopters, Menendez said.

Unlike an airport, there’s no limitation on the number of flights, Menendez said. “As long as you can lift up and go, you go.”

Menendez added that air traffic has grown from 100 flights to 600 flights a day above the Hudson River, and is on track to hit 1,000 per day.

“We all want tourism, but it can’t come at the expenses of residents who live here,” said Robert Gottheim, district director for Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D-10, of New York.

Menendez was also joined by Hoboken Mayor Dawn Zimmer, Weehawken Mayor Richard Turner, Bayonne Mayor Jimmy Davis, North Bergen Mayor and State Senator Nicholas Sacco, West New York Mayor Felix Roque, and Guttenberg Mayor Gerald Dracheff. Mark Albeiz was present on behalf of Jersey City Mayor Steve Fulop. Hudson County Executive Thomas DeGise, Hudson County Sheriff Frank Schillari and Hudson County Freeholder Anthony Romano were also on hand.

U.S. Rep. Albio Sires has also championed a ban tourist helicopter.

Fifteen minutes into the press conference, DeGise pointed out that nine helicopters had flown nearby, forcing several officials to pause and wait.

However, “Stop the Chop” advocacy group leader Brian Wagner thanked the helicopter industry for “turning up the noise.”

“It’s only Friday,” he said. “Come back tomorrow when there’s two, three, four times the activity starting at 9 a.m.”

Zimmer added that the quality of life has been severely diminished for those living and working along both sides of the Hudson.

“New York didn’t want them,” she said. “New Jersey doesn’t want them either.”

With the help of New York and New Jersey state senators, local mayors and other county officials, Menendez has been working on a legislative solution for a full ban.

“FAA re-authorization laws last for a certain period of time and then lapse,” he said.

The renewal of the law would take place early next year, where there will “be a new FAA law” on tourism helicopters, Menendez said.

In a letter sent yesterday to the heads of the FAA and NJDOT, Menendez and U.S. Sen. Cory Booker and Albio Sires asked the FAA to “provide guidance on additional authority needed to implement and enforce a ban on tour helicopters that present public nuisance and safety concerns.”