See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

See who's been arrested, accused, convicted or released in Southern Arizona this month. An arrest is not a presumption of guilt.

The Southern Arizona Rescue Association has been responding to more calls for help from hikers the past several weeks, according to officials with the agency.

They said the number of rescues has increased to one every few days, and even multiple rescues on the weekends.

Some hikers said they prepare and pack what they need for all of their hikes.

"Fruit and granola bars and water. Usually like a bottle of water for every hour," said Jim Keyes, who hikes multiple times a week.

"We always take water, sometimes we take snacks, and we take our binoculars because we like to look at everything. The other thing we take is our cellphone," said Marty and Dennis Kelly.

But some hikers are less prepared or get injured while enjoying the trails and call for help.

"The hikers can be out of water, dehydrated, injured, sometimes ankle injures sometimes worse than that. Sometimes just heat exhaustion," said Shelley Littin, an EMT with SARA,

Littin, along with the other trained volunteers with the organization say they're ready for any kind of a call. They work along side Pima County Sheriff deputies when a hiker calls 911.

She said they get the most calls in the afternoon and right as it gets dark. Volunteers with SARA are on-call 24 hours a day.

"We provide medical assistance if it's required. Offer them whatever assistance they need to get them out," Littin said.

Littin stresses the importance of being well prepared when heading outdoors. Food, water and a cell phone are a must, but she said it's better to take more than what you think you might need.

"Light, breathable, comfortable clothing for exercise. Good, solid, sturdy shoes. Take lights even if you're not intending to be out after dark.

SARA is made up of volunteers. Littin said there are about 40 active volunteers.

Find more information about SARA here: http://sarci.org/sara/

Copyright 2016 Tucson News Now. All rights reserved.