ROCKIES 9, REDS 3

At Goodyear Ballpark

Goodyear, Ariz. — Christian Bergman, with his long hair and quiet cool, continued to confidently breeze through spring training Sunday.

In his first Cactus League appearance of 2016, a scoreless two-inning start against the Cincinnati Reds, Bergman zipped through eight batters, allowing just one hit and one walk. He went 1-2-3 in the first against Jake Cave, Ivan De Jesus Jr. and Eugenio Suarez, on two flyouts and a groundout to second.

He walked Tyler Holt in the second and allowed only an infield single on a grounder to shortstop. Daniel Descalso back-handed the ball well and threw to first, but he short-hopped Mark Reynolds who missed a scoop.

Bergman is likely headed for a long-relief role in Colorado’s bullpen, the position he took over last season after a stint in the starting rotation.

Among Rockies regulars, Bergman has looked the most ready for their April 4 season-opener through live bullpen sessions and, now, live practice games.

HITS

** Sunday’s game was a potential-riddled look at a bevy of prospects. LHP Jeff Hoffman and RHP Kyle Freeland allowed just two hits between them. OF David Dahl homered in two runs on a line drive to the opposite field in left. And Trevor Story homered in his only at-bat, his second in the Cactus League.

MISSES

** Catcher Dustin Garneau got hit by a pitch twice, once on the brim of his helmet by Pedro Villareal and once on the arm by Ryan Mattheus.

** Shortstop Daniel Descalso struck out three times.

“B” GAME BUMPS

** New Rockies outfielder Ryan Raburn went 2-for-4 with a run scored in an unofficial “B” game against Arizona at Salt River. Pitching prospect Antonio Senzatela was the game’s standout. He threw three innings, with four strikeouts and four groundouts, while allowing two hits.

UP NEXT

Rockies (3-2) host the Chicago Cubs (1-3) at Salt River Fields on Monday at 1:10 p.m.

Rockies pitchers — RH Jon Gray, LH Tyler Anderson, RH Carlos Estevez, RH Simon Castro, RH Brock Huntzinger, LH Sam Moll, RH Gonzalez Germen.

Cubs starter — RH Aaron Brooks.