Once a staple of the American workplace, the annual raise is turning into a relic of the pre-crisis economy as companies turn to creative — and cheaper — ways to compensate their employees.

More businesses are upping their spending on benefits such as one-time bonuses, health care and paid time off, according to recent survey data. Many are rolling out perks such as free gym membership, commuting subsidies, even pet health insurance.

But often, those benefits are being provided in lieu of higher salaries. Government data shows the growth in spending on benefits is outpacing gains in wages. Companies say the structure caters to the growing workforce of finicky millennials who prize flexibility over stability and allows them to reward star employees without increasing fixed costs.

“There’s been this seismic shift,” said Gary Burnison, chief executive of Korn Ferry, an executive search and talent management firm. “And I think one of those is that the raise has gone the way of the gold watch.”

The decline of the raise could help explain one of the most frustrating puzzles of America’s lumbering economic recovery: stagnant wages. Wage growth has been stuck at about 2 percent for the past five years despite a rapid drop in unemployment and a surge in hiring since 2014. Without a bigger bump in their paychecks, many workers feel the recovery remains elusive.

But some economists say the focus on wages is shortsighted. Bonuses and other awards have spiked to the highest level in more than three decades, according to an analysis by Aon Hewitt. A survey this summer by a human resources industry group found about 35 percent of companies increased spending on benefits, up 7 percentage points from the previous year. That included health care, bonuses, vacation time and tuition reimbursement — making up about a third of workers’ total compensation.

“Wages tell you almost nothing,” said John Silvia, chief economist at Wells Fargo. “It has changed over the last 20 to 30 years as companies try to compensate workers in a way that matches their lifestyle.”

When Ashley Chandler went beyond the call of duty at her sales job, she was rewarded not with a bigger paycheck but with something she said was just as valuable: time.

The 25-year-old spent weeks poring over paperwork at the flooring installation company where she works in North Carolina to help one of the managers close some complicated projects on time — the type of dedication that a generation ago might have placed Chandler first in line for a big raise at the end of the year.

But at MonMan, which manufactures and installs high-tech floors, Chandler received three extra days of paid time off.

“Would I like to make more? I think everybody would like to make more,” she said. “But for me, what I liked most about it was the flexibility.”

The shift toward bigger benefits and smaller salary increases accelerated as firms tightened their belts following the financial crisis, experts say, but it is rooted in broader demographic changes in the nation’s workforce. Millennials say they prize the freedom to work away from their cubicles, while businesses have learned that flexible compensation can help the bottom line.

At MonMan, Chandler’s boss, Ryan Hulland, used to give employees 6 percent or 7 percent raises, no questions asked. But that was before the 2008 financial crisis, when the boom in high-tech construction that drove sales of the company’s specialty flooring began to drop off. In downtown Charlotte, N.C., Hulland saw work grind to a halt on the gleaming skyscraper Wachovia Bank once planned to use as its corporate headquarters. The bank was taken over by Wells Fargo, and Hulland was determined that his company would not meet a similar fate.

So he slashed raises to 3 percent and began searching for other ways to reward his best employees.

Hulland started by giving out $100 gift cards and was taken aback by how excited workers were to receive them. Encouraged by the response, Hulland began offering an intangible reward: extra paid time off.

Though the dollar amount didn’t make up for the smaller raises, human resources experts say such rewards provide a more immediate psychological boost, particularly when times are tight.

“That’s why we give people gifts at Christmas and not just bags of money,” said Andrew Chamberlain, an economist at job search firm Glassdoor. “They can build a relationship that goes beyond a paycheck.”

Ylan Q. Mui,

The Washington Post