NEW YORK, May 11, 2015 /PRNewswire-USNewswire/ -- Health Republic Insurance of New York (Health Republic), the fastest growing new health plan start-up in New York, has hired industry veteran Daniel Phillips to be the company's Chief Financial Officer (CFO). In this position, Daniel will oversee Health Republic's financial, accounting and budget operations. Prior to joining Health Republic's leadership team, Daniel served on its Board as the Chair of the Finance Committee.

Daniel comes to Health Republic with more than twenty years of finance experience. Most recently, he was CFO at OrthoNet Holdings Inc., a specialty healthcare management company servicing a number of the state's largest health plans. Previous roles included service as CFO at Health Plus – at one time the largest Medicaid managed care organization in New York – and HealthFirst – a not-for-profit managed care organization, also operating in the Medicare and Medicaid markets, with more than one million members. He also held financial management positions at Magellan Health Services, Kaiser Permanente, and Blue Cross Blue Shield.

"We couldn't be happier that Dan has joined Health Republic," said Debra Friedman, President and CEO of Health Republic Insurance of New York. "He has the financial background and years of experience that will keep Health Republic in a strong position, as well as help us navigate the rapid changes occurring in healthcare that impact the financials of running a successful health plan."

"I've had the unique opportunity to spend the past year actively engaging with Health Republic's Board, management team, and staff," said Daniel Phillips. "I am honored to have the opportunity to lead the organization's financial efforts as we grow and serve more New Yorkers with affordable, high-quality healthcare coverage."

Health Republic Insurance of New York is a true not-for-profit organization and New York's only Consumer Operated and Oriented Plan (CO-OP). CO-OPs are private, member-governed health insurance companies created as part of the Affordable Care Act's effort to increase competition in the healthcare market. Health Republic is the largest of the new CO-OPs and has the largest health market share on the New York State of Health Marketplace for individuals and small groups.

SOURCE Health Republic Insurance of New York