A Milwaukee man was declared dead Tuesday, and his family was notified, but as he was about to be transported to the morgue, he started to move.



First responders are still trying to figure out what happened.



VIDEO: Man pronounced dead starts breathing



Police were called to his high-rise apartment at 11th and Wells streets Tuesday.



The 46-year-old man's girlfriend was worried because she couldn't reach him, and he has an ongoing serious medical condition.



An officer got in his apartment, found him collapsed at the foot of the bed and called for paramedics.



According to the medical examiner’s investigation report obtained by 12 News, a fire crew from Engine 1 arrived on scene just after noon.



"They found him cold to the touch and in rigor," the report said. "They did not attempt to resuscitate him."



"Death was pronounced," and firefighters called the medical examiner, according to the report.



The medical examiner’s office called for a transport. An hour later, the transport crew arrived, and just as they were starting to take him away, there was a shocking turn of events: The man began to breathe and move his right arm and leg.

Firefighters had already left the scene, so the medical examiner's team called 911.



The Milwaukee Fire Department crew returned and found he had a heart rate. They quickly took him to an area hospital.



The victim remains in the Columbia-St. Mary's Hospital Intensive Care.



The report said there were no signs of street drug use or alcohol abuse.



The man's brother told WISN 12 News his brother is "not out of the woods yet." He is in the ICU.



The brother said his brother has a thyroid problem, which put him in a rare coma and dropped his body temperature to 84 degrees. the man's neck and jaw were stiff, and first responders thought rigor was setting in.

Bohr asked the Milwaukee Fire Department about the case. Assistant Chief Gerard Washington told him, "We're doing an internal investigation to make sure that everything we did followed protocol. It's an active investigation, so I can't comment in detail."