Wyden announces Senate Finance Committee staff

By Agri-Pulse staff

© Copyright Agri-Pulse Communications, Inc.

WASHINGTON, March 4, 2014- Senate Finance Committee Chairman Ron Wyden, D-Ore., today announced his leadership team for the committee.

Joshua Sheinkman, Staff Director, comes from the Energy and Natural Resources Committee, where he held the same position. Josh is a longtime Wyden aide who has led the senator's legislative efforts on a wide range of issues, from the tax code to health care and energy policy.

Jocelyn Moore, Deputy Staff Director, comes from Wyden's personal office, where she served as Deputy Chief of Staff and Policy Director. She was a key architect for major provisions of the Affordable Care Act and most recently worked as Legislative Director for Sen. Jay Rockefeller.

Mike Evans, Chief Counsel, was previously a partner in the K&L Gates law firm. Before that, he worked in the Senate for almost 20 years, including a previous stint as Chief Counsel to the Finance Committee and as Democratic Chief Counsel to the Senate Committee on Environment and Public Works.

David Berick, Chief Investigator, held that position for Sen. Wyden on the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee. He previously served as an investigator on the House Government Operations and the Senate Homeland Security and Governmental Affairs Committees and also held senior positions on the personal staff of Sen. Wyden and at the U.S. Department of Energy.

Elizabeth Jurinka, Chief Health Policy Adviser, comes to the Finance Committee from Sen. Wyden's personal office, where she served as his senior health policy adviser for three years.

Laura Berntsen, Senior Human Services Adviser, comes to the Committee from Sen. Wyden's personal office where she has served as his Domestic Policy Adviser since 2011.

Todd Metcalf, Chief Tax Counsel, held the same post in Sen. Wyden's personal office. Metcalf spent nine years in various senior roles in the House of Representatives, including House Floor Director and Counsel to the Majority Whip, Rep. James E. Clyburn.

Jayme White, Chief Adviser for International Competitiveness and Innovation, joined Wyden's staff in 2009, where he served as legislative director and top adviser on international trade and technology issues.

Sarah Bittleman, Legislative Director and Finance Committee Chief Counsel for Energy, Natural Resources and Agriculture, comes from the Environmental Protection Agency, where she served as Agriculture Counselor to the Administrator. Bittleman has also worked as senior adviser to Agriculture Secretary Tom Vilsack, and in a number of senior posts on Capitol Hill, including Natural Resources Counsel for Sen. Wyden.

Wyden also announced his communications team:

Tom Caiazza, spokesman with a focus on Intelligence, Technology/Internet, Defense and Transportation. Keith Chu, spokesman with a focus on Energy, Natural Resources and Trade. Lindsey Held, spokeswoman with a focus on Tax and Investigations. Ken Willis, spokesman with a focus on Health and Domestic Policy. Rebecca Steele, Digital Director.

#30

For more news, go to www.agri-pulse.com