First Lady says your New Years resolution should be to sign up for Obamacare, but it’s not President Obama’s

First Lady Michelle Obama had a suggestion for the American people regarding their New Year’s resolution. But apparently she forgot to alert President Barack Obama of her advice, resulting in a bit of hypocrisy on the part of the First Family.

The Presidemt took questions from the White House press corps during an end-of-the-year news conference Friday before the First Family jets off on a 17-day Hawaii vacation. While there was little talk of the Affordable Care Act — despite the Department of Health and Human Services’ announcement surrounding the legality of catastrophic plans — CNN’s Brianna Keiler did take the time to ask the President what his New Year’s resolution is.

“My New Year’s resolution is to be nicer to the White House press corps,” Obama said. “You know? Absolutely.”

President Obama’s promise for 2014 is far different from First Lady Michelle Obama’s suggested New Years resolution for the rest of America — to sign up for health insurance through the Affordable Care Act.

Apparently the President and First Lady didn’t share talking points.

Appearing on Sirius XM’s “The Joe Madison Show” on Thursday morning, Michelle Obama encouraged young Americans to get covered under Obamacare.

“This act provides a safety net for millions and millions of Americans but we have to take the next step to go check it out, sign up and make sure that we’re covered,” she said. “That should be our New Year’s resolutions to ourselves. That’s it.”

Neither President Obama nor White House Press Secretary Jay Carney have said whether or not the First Family has selected plans through the Affordable Care Act, effectively dodging the question each time it is asked.

But maybe President Obama should take his wife’s advice and have his New Year’s resolution reflect the need for his signature law — the one that bears his name — to succeed.

Check out the President’s exchange below, courtesy of POLITICO.