Two of the largest health care systems in North Texas are aligning with two of the best-known national providers, part of ongoing efforts to improve quality and control the cost of care.

Baylor Scott & White Health said it is about to complete an agreement that will make three of its Dallas-area hospitals part of the Cleveland Clinic’s national cardiology network.

And Methodist Health System plans to partner with the Mayo Clinic, The Dallas Morning News has learned.

Citing nondisclosure agreements, Methodist did not offer details. But it appears that Methodist will join Mayo’s expanding network of affiliates across the country. Affiliates can consult with Mayo specialists, share Mayo know-how and get advice on improving operations.

On a national level, there are no stronger health care provider brands than the Mayo Clinic and the Cleveland Clinic. Both organizations are aggressively trying to extend their reach in a rapidly changing industry.

Mayo, for example, has embarked on a multibillion-dollar expansion in its Rochester, Minn., headquarters. Eventually, there may be only a handful of providers with national scope. Clinic officials are determined to be in that group.

North Texas is an especially attractive market because of its rapid growth.

John McWhorter, a Baylor Scott & White senior vice president and president of Baylor University Medical Center, said his organization’s agreement with the Cleveland Clinic will run at least three years.

The Cleveland Clinic has contracts for cardiac care with large, self-insured national employers, such as Lowe’s and Boeing Co., to cover their employees wherever they work.

Baylor’s agreement is expected to give it exclusivity in much of Texas and parts of Oklahoma and Louisiana, said Joseph Cacchione, chair, operations and strategy, of the Cleveland Clinic Heart & Vascular Institute.

Financial terms were not disclosed. Co-branding and co-marketing plans are still being developed, Baylor said.

“The Cleveland Clinic is the undisputed leader in heart care,” McWhorter said.

The Baylor hospitals included are the Heart Hospital Baylor Plano, Baylor University Medical Center and Baylor Jack and Jane Hamilton Heart and Vascular Hospital. The latter two are near downtown Dallas.

McWhorter said the Cleveland Clinic approached Baylor. He said it was an endorsement of Baylor’s quality because participating facilities and physicians must meet Cleveland Clinic standards for experience and outcomes.

“We knew the product they are delivering there is outstanding,” Cacchione said of Baylor. He said a due diligence review over the past nine months or so confirmed that expectation.

Cacchione said that Baylor should be included in the Cleveland Clinic network by early next year. He hoped that patients here would have their procedures done here. But he acknowledged that some may choose to go to Cleveland for surgery and have their after-care provided here.

“I think this is going to help patients coordinate the bundling of their care,” McWhorter said. He said the arrangement will bolster efforts to prepare patients for what to expect before and after surgery. It will also facilitate second opinions, which are especially important in more complicated cases.

The Cleveland Clinic Heart & Vascular Institute has already partnered with the MedStar Heart Institute in the Washington, D.C., area, Cadence Health in Illinois and North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System in the New York metro area.

“We want to cover the country,” Cacchione said. He estimated that there could eventually be 25 to 30 hospitals or organizations in the Cleveland Clinic’s cardiology network.

The Mayo Clinic, in addition to its Rochester facilities, has large operations in Arizona and Florida. It also has dozens of small community clinics and other facilities in Minnesota, Wisconsin, Iowa and Georgia.

It is rapidly expanding what it calls the Mayo Clinic Care Network throughout the U.S., even into Puerto Rico and Mexico.

On its website, Mayo says its Care Network members are selected “based on a rigorous set of clinical excellence, patient care and quality criteria.”

With full implementation of the Affordable Care Act, some longtime health care executives have said they’ve never seen more rapid change in the industry. Outright mergers and acquisitions continue. And other types of alliances are emerging.

Recently, Baylor and Arlington-based Texas Health Resources announced agreements with drugstores that involve in-store health clinics.

“Everyone is looking for creative ways of expanding their footprint and taking advantage of scale,” Trevor Fetter, CEO of Dallas-based Tenet Healthcare Corp., said this week.