Author is Paula Woodward, longtime investigative specialist for 9News

Paula Woodward

Seventeen years ago Thursday, the first news reports started appearing concerning the violent death of a 6-year-old girl in Boulder named JonBenet Ramsey.

With the case seemingly no closer to a resolution, books on the enduring mystery continue periodically to surface, and orders are being taken now for one that those who have followed the case have been anticipating for several years.

"Mr. Ramsey, Listen Carefully!: Facts, Fictions, Lies and Legends in the Murder of JonBenet Ramsey" will be published next year in paperback by Kensington Publishing Corp. The author is Paula Woodward, former longtime investigative reporter for 9News.

JonBenet Ramsey

Pre-orders for the book -- its title is taken from the opening words of the ransom note in the case -- can now be made through Amazon. Amazon shows a publication date of Aug. 26, 2014, but Woodward said that is not firm.

"I don't know," said Woodward, when asked about the publication date. "That's going to be decided after the holidays."

She added, "It's in really good shape. It's a complicated book to produce, as far as on the production side." It will be in the 400-page range in length, she said.

JonBenet's body was discovered by her father, John Ramsey, in the basement of the family's upscale home Dec. 26, roughly eight hours after her mother, Patsy Ramsey, reported finding a ransom note on a spiral staircase in the home demanding $118,000 for the girl's safe return. The child had suffered a fractured skull and asphyxiation through use of a garrote fashioned from a cord and a broken paintbrush taken from her mother's art supplies.

A grand jury heard evidence in the case for 13 months before being disbanded in October 1999. The results of that grand jury's work remained a mystery until the Daily Camera earlier this year reported that the grand jury had indicted both parents.

Those indictments were finally made public Oct. 25, under a ruling by retired Weld County Judge Robert Lowenbach. They showed that both John and Patsy Ramsey were indicted for child abuse resulting in death and accessory to a crime.

Then-Boulder District Attorney Alex Hunter, however, declined to disclose the indictments' existence at the time and refused to prosecute the case due to his belief that he lacked sufficient evidence to prove the charges beyond reasonable doubt. Both charges carried a three-year statute of limitations.

Patsy Ramsey succumbed to a long battle with cancer in June 2006, and John Ramsey now lives outside the state. The couple always proclaimed their innocence, and former District Attorney Mary Lacy -- Hunter's successor -- issued a letter exonerating the Ramseys in July 2008 based on DNA evidence. That exoneration is not binding on her successors.

'Nobody knows what I think now'

Woodward, who lives in the Denver area, said the book is being written with John Ramsey's cooperation.

"I visited with him in Charlevoix (Mich.) in 2009 and asked him to participate in the book, and explained my reasons for doing the book," she said.

"I have cooperation from John Ramsey, from law enforcement people, from Ramsey attorneys, from people involved on the periphery. A lot of people seemed willing to talk. Some were anonymous, but they are known to me -- and my editor, of course."

Woodward acknowledged that she is perceived by some followers of the case as being convinced of all family members' innocence. But she dismissed any preconceptions about her thoughts concerning the mystery.

"That case was full of misperceptions, and nobody knows what I thought then and after reviewing it for four years, nobody knows what I think now," she said.

She also said, "This is doing investigative reporting: Here's the best information I can get. Decide for yourself."

Tepid expectations voiced by some officials

One student of the case who will likely not read Woodward's book is Boulder Police Chief Mark Beckner, who declined her request to be interviewed for the book for reasons he preferred not to share.

"I know the case pretty intricately, inside and out. And I'm not sure what could appear in a book written by a third party uninvolved in the investigation that I wouldn't already be aware of," Beckner said. "And, if it's something I'm not aware of, it's probably not factual."

Beckner doubts any book about the case could have much impact on its fate, one way or the other.

"I think at this point, not much that can be said about the case or reported about the case or written about the case has any effect anymore," Beckner said. "This is really a cold case. Too much time has passed; too much has already been made public."

He added, "There is always the possibility that as publicity goes out, it maybe causes somebody to come forward with new information. You always have that hope in cold cases. In that respect, publicity isn't a bad thing on a cold case."

District Attorney Stan Garnett, who inherited lead responsibility for the case from Lacy when he took office in 2009, and promptly assigned it back to Beckner's department, made brief comments to Woodward for the book -- but did not appear enthusiastic about its publication.

"I know this case thoroughly and am convinced that my staff and I understand the factual and evidentiary record of this case more thoroughly than any other prosecutors," Garnett wrote in an email.

"There has been far too much speculation about this case, in the press, in books and on the Internet about what the evidence means, or doesn't mean. My views of that evidence, however, will only be stated in open court if a case is filed. Otherwise, my staff and I have nothing to say about another book on the Ramsey case."

Woodward, who is retired from local television, said she still does some work "for the networks" on major breaking stories. But her concentration for the past four years has primarily been on the Ramsey book.

"And the Ramsey case is a hard book to write -- what to include, and what not to include," Woodward said.

She said she learned a lot about Boulder's most notorious unsolved crime, "even after covering it for 17 years."

Woodward shared one hoped-for result of her long-awaited publication: "I hope someone sues me for not getting permission to publish their ransom note."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Charlie Brennan at 303-473-1327, brennanc@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/chasbrennan.