Customized TV Listings are available here: www.latimes.com/tvtimes

Click here to download

TV listings for the week of Sept. 14 - 20, 2014 in PDF format

This week's TV Movies

SUNDAY

The only thing we have to fear is not having the stamina to make it through Ken Burns' exhaustive seven-part documentary series "The Roosevelts: An Intimate History." 8 p.m. KOCE; also Mon.-Sat.

You'll be seeing stars when "American War Generals" interviews current and former military leaders about armed conflicts from Vietnam to the Afghan War. 8 p.m. National Geographic Channel

"The Bachelor's" Chris Harrison and "Good Morning America's" Lara Spencer are master and mistress of ceremonies for "The 2015 Miss America Competition" in Atlantic City, N.J. 9 p.m. ABC

"30 Rock's" Jane Krakowski voices a sexy neighbor on the return of the animated sitcom "American Dad." 9 p.m. Fox

MONDAY

An encore of "Private Screenings: Lauren Bacall" kicks off a salute to the late actress that also includes her film debut in 1944's "To Have and Have Not." 5 and 6 p.m. Turner Classic Movies

"The Fresh Prince of Bel-Air's" Alfonso Ribeiro will likely bust out the Carlton when he joins a fresh crop of celebs on a new cycle of "Dancing With the Stars." 8 p.m. ABC; also Tue.

The new documentary "Terror at the Mall" details last year's siege of a shopping center in Nairobi, Kenya, by Islamist militants. 9 p.m. HBO

Colonizing our nearest celestial neighbor isn't all it's cracked up to be in the failed-pilot-turned-TV-movie "High Moon." 9 p.m. Syfy

TUESDAY

"Alan Alda and the Actor Within You: A YoungArts Masterclass" finds the former "MASH" star offering his expertise to some aspiring thespians. That is all. 7:30 p.m. HBO

Jess (Zooey Deschanel) has a rival (guest star Jessica Biel) for the attentions of the best man at a friend's wedding on the season premiere of "New Girl." 9 p.m. Fox

The Galapagos Islands and Africa's Serengeti plain are among the "Hidden Habitats" revealed in this new nature series. 9 and 9:30 p.m. BBC America

"The Jennie Garth Project" follows the former "Beverly Hills, 90210" star as she renovates a Hollywood Hills fixer-upper for herself and her kids. 9 and 9:30 p.m. HGTV

Two cute: Mindy and Danny (Mindy Kaling, Chris Messina) are now a couple on the return of "The Mindy Project." 9:30 p.m. Fox

Sash? Check. Tiara? Check. The pageant-themed series "Kim of Queens" is back for a second season. 10 p.m. Lifetime

Obamacare comes in for a spoofing on the season premiere of the animated series "Brickleberry." 10:30 p.m. Comedy Central

WEDNESDAY

The performer or performers judged most talented will be announced on the season finale of "America's Got Talent." 8 p.m. NBC

Suffer the children: The pediatric ward of a fictional L.A.-area hospital is the setting for the new comedy-drama series "Red Band Society." Octavia Spencer stars. 9 p.m. Fox

Debra Messing is a cop, a mom and a lyricist working on a new Broadway musical – wait, scratch that last one – in the new series "The Mysteries of Laura." 10 p.m. NBC

THURSDAY

A Boston mobster turned fugitive and onetime Santa Monica resident is profiled in the 2014 doc "Whitey: United States of America v. James J. Bulger." 6 and 8 p.m. CNN

The eight-part drama "The Honorable Woman" reaches its inexorable conclusion. Maggie Gyllenhaal stars. 10 p.m. Sundance

Morgan Spurlock finally gets around to "sloth" on the finale of the documentary series "Seven Deadly Sins." 11 p.m. Showtime

It's past your bedtime, but it's still worth staying up for the new live-action comedy anthology "Tim & Eric's Bedtime Stories." 12:15 a.m. Cartoon Network

FRIDAY