Buy Photo Kristi Noem (Photo: Jay Pickthorn - Argus Leader)Buy Photo

Congress will get back to work in Washington this week with a lengthy list of issues that could have a big impact on South Dakota in 2015, from transportation and taxes to health care.

Lawmakers begin the 114th Congress Tuesday, when South Dakota Sen.-elect Mike Rounds and other colleagues are officially sworn in, leaving both chambers in GOP-control for the first time in eight years. It remains to be seen whether Congress will reach a consensus to act on some of the more controversial topics, or how closely it will work with President Barack Obama, but South Dakota's Washington delegation acknowledges there is a lot of work to do.

"There's an aggressive agenda slated for the next two years," Rep. Kristi Noem, R-S.D., said. "This year has to be different. We have to take the tough votes to produce a government that's more accountable, better-managed, and significantly cheaper."

Bob Burns, a retired political science professor from South Dakota State University, said any action in Congress this year will most likely focus on making changes to legislation already in place. "The best chance for agreement will be found in piecemeal reforms or changes in existing policy rather than sweeping changes," he said.

Here are five issues Congress could tackle in 2015:

1. Republicans have said they will again try to modify or repeal the Affordable Care Act passed in 2010. While the Obama administration is unlikely to sign legislation that would fully repeal the measure, Republicans may push forward with changes such as rolling back the medical device tax and the 30-hour workweek rule. A symbolic vote in the Senate in 2013 showed that 79 senators were willing to repeal the medical device tax.

2. Congress could make a run at overhauling the tax code that some lawmakers, including Republican Sen. John Thune, who will be chairman of the powerful Senate Commerce, Science and Transportation Committee and a member of the Senate Finance Committee, have said is ripe for reform.

"There is a lot to tackle in this new Congress, but I am looking forward to rolling up my sleeves and working on the major issues facing this country," Thune said. He said an overhaul of the tax code was needed to promote economic growth and American competitiveness.

As part of that tax reform effort, there also could be an attempt to issue a longer-term tax incentive package for businesses and consumers that would include tax breaks for research and development and the wind power and biodiesel industries – all issues that would impact South Dakota. In one of its final acts late last year, Congress extended these and more than 45 other tax breaks - but only through the end of 2014. A veto threat from the White House thwarted efforts for a longer-term deal.

3. The much-delayed Keystone XL pipeline is expected to be considered immediately by Republican congressional leaders who hope to pressure the White House to approve the project. The pipeline, which would cross South Dakota on a route from Canada to Gulf Coast refineries, has been under consideration for six years.

Supporters have touted the jobs and other benefits the project would create, including up to 4,000 jobs and $20 million in property taxes to help South Dakota, according to TransCanada Corp., which has proposed building the 1,200-mile pipeline. Opponents complain about adverse environmental impact and say all but a few jobs would be temporary, while the oil is destined for overseas.

The president has delayed a decision on the pipeline, deferring to a State Department review. All three of South Dakota's representatives in Congress, including Rounds, support construction of the pipeline.

"Keystone is probably at the top of the list, not only in South Dakota, but also in D.C. right now. It's going to be one of those items you're going to see activity on fairly quickly," said Rounds, a Republican.

He noted construction of the pipeline also would help South Dakota grain producers in the future by taking oil off the rails, freeing up engines and crew to help users and shippers of corn, soybeans and other commodities.

4. Federal funding for highway construction, maintenance and other surface transportation programs is supposed to come from the Highway Trust Fund, which gets its revenue primarily from the 18.4 cent-per-gallon tax on gasoline and a 24.4 cent-per-gallon tax on diesel fuel. But those tax rates -- last increased in 1993 -- don't generate nearly enough money to cover highway spending. Congress has approved a series of stopgap measures over the years; the most recent expires this May, but lawmakers have looked for a long-term solution, including possibly raising the gas tax.

"Everyone knows there needs to be a fix but they can't seem to find the courage to come up with a new taxing system to bring more revenue to the highway trust fund," Burns said. "South Dakota is very dependent upon federal funding with so many miles of highways and such a sparse population to use those miles of highways and bridges."

5. A final area where Congress and the White House could find some agreement is trade. Both Obama and lawmakers have shown an interest in pursuing two deals that heavily impact trade for South Dakota: the Trans-Pacific Partnership (TPP) and the Transatlantic Trade and Investment Partnership (TTIP).

From 2011 to 2013, South Dakota exported an average of $1 billion annually in goods to markets involved in the TPP and $125 million annually in goods to markets involved in TTIP. Expanding trade with both markets through free-trade agreements could help South Dakota's agriculture and manufacturing industries, opening new markets and opportunities.

Read or Share this story: http://argusne.ws/1BoD6W5