Man, I don't know about you but I am exhausted.

So much happened this week – and so many readers had opinions on it. Let's quickly run through the highlight reel before diving into your responses:

Republican political leaders throughout the South began calling for the Confederate battle flag to come down (and Governor Bentley went ahead and took it down).

Not to be outdone, a glut of businesses began pulling the flag from their shelves (both literal and online) and Warner Bros. even said they were pulling it from future models of the Dukes of Hazards' General Lee.

The Supreme Court found that unintentional housing discrimination was still housing discrimination, altering the way communities will look at Low-Income Housing Tax Credits.

The Supreme Court reaffirmed that Obamacare would be the law of the land.

The Supreme Court established that same-sex marriage would be legalized and recognized in all 50 states.

President Obama led a grieving Charleston community in a stirring rendition of "Amazing Grace" at the conclusion of a eulogy for the Charleston Nine.

The US Women's National Team beat the Chinese in a 1-0 nailbiter Friday night and will face the Germans in a semifinal bout on Tuesday.

Ted 2 debuted in theaters.

Someday soon, Alabama will probably shock the world by having a Confederate-themed gay wedding.

But, let's be real, most of y'all wanted to talk about the flag...

Roger K. Broxton of Andalusia, president of the Confederate Heritage Fund, offers a reminder that Abraham Lincoln said the "war was caused by taxes only, and not by slavery." My two cents? The North was fighting to preserve the Union, not to end slavery. That's true. But the South was fighting to maintain an economic empire built on slavery. The two ideas aren't mutually exclusive. If we're going to look at Lincoln, might as well look at Jefferson Davis too.

Now the question arises: What led to the flag's removal this week? R.K. "Rocky" White suggests it's caused by knee-jerk liberals (like Bentley and Nikki Haley, I guess), while A.L. Bailey suggests it's a symptom of a South that realizes it has a "marketing problem."

Jefferson J. Drew, the son of a prominent Birmingham civil rights family, suggests that changing "superficial laws about gun control and the Confederate flag will not change the cause and effect of racially motivated violence" and urges Americans (Northerner and Southerner alike) to focus on a flag that unites us, not divides us. Meanwhile, Courtney Daniels, a Birmingham native, former U.S. Marine and veteran of Operation Enduring Freedom, talks about the pride of seeing that emblem of the South when fighting overseas, despite the dark color of his skin.

Speaking of pride, it was a monumental week for LGBT Americans, but in a heartfelt, entertaining letter to his "15-year-old self" Michael Patrick reminds the world that marriage equality isn't the end of the fight.

Can't wait to see what happens next week.