Five family members are dead after their vehicle was driven into Tempe Town Lake just after midnight Sunday.

Tempe police say emergency rescuers were called to the Tempe Town Lake at around 12:15 a.m. Sunday after several people fishing spotted the vehicle enter the north side of lake under the Scottsdale Road bridge.

On Sunday afternoon, Tempe police identified the dead as Glenn Edward Baxter, 27, Danica Baxter, 25, Reighn Baxter, 3, Nazyiah Baxter, 2 and Zariyah Baxter, 1.

Police said that when officers jumped into the lake they pulled out two children, identified as Zariyah and Nazyiah. Officers also pulled their parents, Glenn Edward Baxter and Danica Baxter, from the water. Police said Glen Baxter was located in the driver seat and Danica Baxter was located in the front passenger seat.

All four were unconscious and taken to a hospital where they later died.

Police said that when Danica Baxter was identified, it was discovered that she and Glenn Baxter had another child, identified as Reighn Baxter. About 10 a.m., police, with the assistance of the Tempe Fire Dive Team, located that child's body.

"It's just a horrific scene, a horrific incident," Tempe Police Lt. Michael Pooley said. "These are the types of things our officers are going to carry with them for some time."

[IMAGES: 4 dead after driving SUV into Tempe Town Lake]

Pictures from the scene showed the vehicle upside down in the lake and partially submerged.

"All the children were buckled into their seats," Pooley said.

Officers remained at the scene Sunday afternoon, trying to figure out all the circumstances behind the incident. They are also trying to determine how fast the vehicle was traveling.

“We don’t know what caused them to do this," Pooley said. "We don’t know what happened. We don’t know really who they are yet. We have a good idea of who they could be but we’re still working on that, trying to find out where they were coming from, trying to contact anybody that may have been with them earlier."

“It’s one of those things we want people to know we’re doing everything we can to find out some answers for the family,” Pooley said. “We want to do everything we can to make sure we respect the children and people whose lives were lost out here.”

Dozens of special events happen at Town Lake annually, including Ironman Arizona, the Fantasy of Lights Boat Parade and the state's largest Independence Day celebration

On Sunday, a half-ironman race took place, leading up to the full-distance race in November.

“There’s no way you can’t feel anything but heartbreak when you hear this," Pooley said. "These are three little kids completely innocent with no way to save themselves.”

Copyright 2015 KPHO/KTVK (KPHO Broadcasting Corporation). All rights reserved.