The depth of healthcare's location data crisis can be seen in Yext's recent analysis of 1,800 physicians and healthcare facilities across 15,000 listings in which it was discovered that:

Nearly one-third (31.5%) lacked an online, local listing. That's 3.6x greater than the unlisted percentage of other businesses (8.68%).

Of the listed healthcare facilities, 48% contained basic address errors that could result in misdirected patients.

29% of healthcare facilities were also missing accurate phone numbers.

In other industries, bad online information may result in a lost sale or frustrated customer. However, when one's health is at stake, bad location data can put patients at risk. Indeed, recent research from the Pew Research Center found that 62% of smartphone owners have used their phone in the past year to look up information about a health condition while 67% use their smartphone for turn-by-turn directions.

BAYADA Home Health Care is experiencing first-hand how mobile search is transforming the way they do business, "When I started, mobile users were 40% of our site traffic. A year and a half later they're 50% and still growing," said Richard Ortiz, BAYADA Senior Associate, Business Analytics. "It's a huge priority for us to ensure all our digital marketing strategies revolve around mobile optimization."

"The reality is that our business is constantly changing — office addresses, phone numbers, and types of services being updated," Ortiz continued. "Before we engaged Yext, there was a ton of outdated information out there, and we just couldn't keep up. Now, with Yext for Healthcare, we've seen a 600% increase in our local office page views. We chalk this up to finally having a single source of truth for all of our office location data that helps us serve existing clients better while increasing brand awareness from local search."

With Yext For Healthcare as the source of truth for office, facility, and physician location data, healthcare providers of all sizes can:

Improve the patient experience with accurate location data online, all the time, across desktop and mobile devices.

Attract and retain more patients with a seamless journey from local search to in-person appointment.

Save time and money by eliminating the internal inefficiencies caused by location data conflicts.

Ensure physician specialties, contact information, and facility affiliations are up-to-date.

Eliminate duplicative location data that hinders local search performance.

"Healthcare is an inherently local service, and smartphones have fundamentally changed how patients find and engage with local healthcare providers," said Howard Lerman, Yext Co-Founder & CEO. "We're proud that Yext For Healthcare not only helps healthcare providers navigate the changing informational landscape but also allows them to focus on what they do best: serving patients in times of need."

Visit www.yext.com/healthcare to learn more about Yext For Healthcare and to set up a demo.

About Yext

Yext is the global location data management leader, and our mission is to help people go places. The award-winning Yext Location Management Platform enables companies of all sizes to manage location data across their websites, mobile apps, internal systems, and the industry's largest ecosystem of maps, apps, social networks, directories, and search engines including Google, Apple, Facebook, Bing, and Yahoo. Our products—PowerListings®, Pages, and Xone™—enable the world's 50 million businesses to drive face-to-face and digital interactions that boost brand awareness, drive foot traffic, and increase sales.

Based in the heart of New York City with a growing team of over 475 employees worldwide, Yext has been recognized as one of America's fastest growing companies by the Inc. 500 (#212 in 2015), one of Forbes' Most Promising Companies (2014 & 2015) and one of Fortune's Best Places to Work (2014 & 2015). Learn more about how we help people go places at www.yext.com.

Logo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20150223/177279LOGO

To view the original version on PR Newswire, visit:http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/introducing-yext-for-healthcare-300254598.html

SOURCE Yext

Related Links

http://www.yext.com