Children of the working poor remain on the outside looking in. (Photo: Anthony Kelly)

You knew this was coming.

The governor promised tax cuts so there were going to be some form of tax cuts, no matter what. Perhaps because somewhere down the line when he is running for something else he'll be able to say he cut taxes.

Although, should the governor seek another office at some point he'd be wise to leave out the part about tapping into the state land trust fund (for 10 years) and leaving the financial ramifications of that to some future governor. And the part where poor kids got left out in the cold. Or the heat. Or wherever.

Apparently, the budget deal being cut behind closed doors at the Capitol doesn't yet reinstate the Children's Health Insurance Program, also known as CHIP, that has been held up by Senate President Andy Biggs, who opposes the program.

I say "yet" because there's still hope.

For now, Arizona remains the only state that does not have such a program, which would provide health-care coverage to more than 30,000 kids who are ineligible now.

We're talking about children whose parents make too much to qualify for Medicaid and too little to buy into Obamacare.

The fight to have the program isn't over. Ducey can push for it. He can demand it. As he did with those tax cuts.

Republican Rep. Justin Olson, House Appropriations chairman, told The Republic, “The governor campaigned on a promise to cut taxes every year that he’s in office and expect that he wants to keep that promise to his constituents."

Of course those cuts are of a more targeted variety. (Meaning, probably, businesses. Not you. Or me.)

And then there's the ongoing fight over education funding. We'll be behind most other states no matter what happens with Proposition 123.

It's those pesky kids again, wondering if their government will do what it can to see that they are educated and healthy.

Or, as they might put it in their generation's social media shorthand:

#priorities?

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1SxmKQB