WASHINGTON -- President Barack Obama Saturday took aim at Republican governors who have refused to implement his health care law's Medicaid expansion.

"It always puzzles me when you decide to take a stand to make sure poor folks in your state can't get health insurance even though it doesn't cost you a dime," Obama said during an address to the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation dinner. "That doesn't make much sense to me...It's easy to take a stand when you've got health insurance."

At that point, the president said he was gong "off script." Under the Affordable Care Act's Medicaid expansion, the federal government picks up the entire tab for the first three years, and after that no less than 90 percent of the cost.

On Friday and Saturday, Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal, one of those governors who refused to implement the Medicaid expansion, and other potential GOP presidential candidates sharply criticized Obama during separate speeches before the Family Research Council's Values Voter Summit.

Said Jindal: "When viewing the Obama administration, are we witnessing the most incompetent administration in our lifetimes? Or are we witnessing the most extremely ideologically liberal administration in our lifetimes?"

The president delivered a strong defense of his presidency during his well-received speech before the Congressional Black Caucus Foundation.

"America is leading the effort to rally the world against Russian aggression in Ukraine," Obama said. "America is leading the fight to contain and combat Ebola in Africa. America is building and leading the coalition that will degrade and ultimately destroy the terrorist group known as ISIL. As Americans, we are leading, and we don't shy away from these responsibilities; we welcome them. That's what America does. And we are grateful to the men and women in uniform who put themselves in harm's way in service of the country that we all love."

"So we've got unfinished work overseas, but we've got some unfinished work right here at home. After the worst economic crisis since the Great Depression, our businesses have now created 10 million new jobs over the last 54 months. This is the longest uninterrupted stretch of job growth in our history. In our history. But we understand our work is not done until we get the kind of job creation that means everybody who wants work can a find job."

Speaking to an audience that included the parents of Michael Brown, who was shot to death by a police officer in Ferguson, Mo., the President said distrust of law enforcement, particularly by African Americans, is having a corrosive impact on society.

"Too many young men of color feel targeted by law enforcement, guilty of walking while black, or driving while black, judged by stereotypes that fuel fear and resentment and hopelessness," Obama said. "We know that, statistically, in everything from enforcing drug policy to applying the death penalty to pulling people over, there are significant racial disparities. That's just the statistics. One recent poll showed that the majority of Americans think the criminal justice system doesn't treat people of all races equally. Think about that. That's not just blacks, not just Latinos or Asians or Native Americans saying things may not be unfair. That's most Americans.

"And that has a corrosive effect -- not just on the black community; it has a corrosive effect on America. It harms the communities that need law enforcement the most."