President Barack Obama walks across the South Lawn of the White House in Washington, Tuesday, Oct. 7, 2014, to board Marine One for a short trip to Andrews Air Force Base, Md., before traveling to New York. (AP Photo/Carolyn Kaster)

In a very long Rolling Stone piece making the case that Barack Obama has been a great -- or, at least, very consequential -- president, New York Times columnist Paul Krugman writes this intriguing paragraph:

Yes, Obama has a low approval rating compared with earlier presidents. But there are a number of reasons to believe that presidential approval doesn't mean the same thing that it used to: There is much more party-sorting (in which Republicans never, ever have a good word for a Democratic president, and vice versa), the public is negative on politicians in general, and so on. Obviously the midterm election hasn't happened yet, but in a year when Republicans have a huge structural advantage – Democrats are defending a disproportionate number of Senate seats in deep-red states – most analyses suggest that control of the Senate is in doubt, with Democrats doing considerably better than they were supposed to. This isn't what you'd expect to see if a failing president were dragging his party down.

The second part of that paragraph -- that if Obama is such a drag then why are Democrats still in contention to hold the Senate -- doesn't really hold up if you talk to any Democratic strategist closely monitoring Senate races. The prevailing sentiment among that crowd is that Democrats are still in the mix -- although the Post's Election Lab model now shows Republicans with a 94 percent probability of taking the majority -- in spite of Obama not because of him.

But it's the first part of Krugman's statement that intrigues me -- the idea that presidential approval may be dying off as a viable indicator of the relative success or failure of a presidency due to the increasing polarization in the country. That is, any president going forward will start with 47-ish percent of the country giving him the side eye on everything he says or does simply because he is a member of the"wrong" party. Success under such a dynamic, argues Krugman, can't then be defined by sky-high approval ratings since they will never happen. Judging presidents by whether they have an approval rating in the 60s (or even higher) will doom them all to be failures.

I've thought -- and written -- a lot about this idea over the past few years. ( I wrote a piece in July making the case that succeeding as president in the modern era is virtually impossible.) Let's unpack it a bit.

It is absolutely true that we are in unique times when it comes to partisanship. Pew's massive study on polarization, released in June, persuasively makes the case that the two parties are further apart from each other than they have ever been before. Tellingly, Pew notes that a) the differences between the two parties are more pronounced among those who are most active and engaged in the political process and b) the number of people describing themselves as consistently conservative or consistently liberal has doubled in the past two decades.

As our tendency to see everything through which partisan glasses we wear has both increased and distanced us from people with whom we disagree, the way in which presidents are perceived has followed suit. Every year, Gallup gathers its data to compare the relative views of presidents by party. Of the 12 most polarized years -- defined as the years with the largest gaps between how the two parties see the president -- in Gallup's history, 10 of them have come during the tenures of George W. Bush and Barack Obama.

It is of course possible that Bush and Obama just happen to be presidents who inspire uniquely large amounts of partisanship -- both for and against them. But, that's probably not it -- especially given how the country as a whole has grown so much more polarized over the times that directly track with the two mens' presidencies.

What polarization is in the process of doing -- and I've had this conversation with Democratic and Republican pollsters -- is redefining how we look at the traditional success markers of any president. Sixty percent-plus approval ratings -- unless they come at the very start of a presidency or in the wake of a national disaster or tragedy -- are things of the past for as long as the current partisanship gripping the country holds on. Given how vast the gap is between how the two parties view the right next steps for the country -- not to mention how negatively they view the other side -- it's impossible to imagine a president enjoying any sort of broad (or even narrow) bipartisan support for any extended period of his or her presidency.

Increasingly, there are two political countries in the U.S.. One, a liberal one, is governed by Barack Obama. The other lacks a clear leader but views itself as at war with Obama's America. And, there's no reason to think that if, say, Florida Republican Sen. Marco Rubio gets elected president in 2016, things will be any different. Rubio will be president of a conservative America. The liberal America will see itself in diametric opposition to that America.

So, Krugman is right. Approval rating is an increasingly unhelpful way to judge presidential success. How then can success be defined? Krugman chooses to call Obama successful because of the Affordable Care Act, his work to preserve the social safety net and his policies on the environment -- among other things. Of course, to conservative America those are the pillars of Obama's failure as president.

Welcome to our new political reality.