- Michael Moss broke a tooth over the weekend, but because he lacks insurance coverage, he had few options. Moss, of Mobile, heard about the nonprofit Hope Center Dental Clinic opening off Sage Avenue in Midtown and called for an appointment on the clinic's first day.

"I lost insurance 2 ½ years ago," said Moss, 63, who is on medical disability. "It has been hard to get medical help and what have you."

For Moss, the clinic was a lifesaver. For volunteers at the Hope Center, which is a ministry of 3Circle Church Midtown, it's a way to help the community and share the Gospel. "That is the foundation of why we're here and what we do," said Dana Smith, clinic manager. "We want to be the hands and feet of Jesus."

3Circle Church has been operating a Hope Center at its main campus in Fairhope for five years, where volunteer physicians, nurses, dentists and counselors offer medical, dental and counseling services at a reduced cost. When Sage Avenue Baptist Church merged with 3Circle recently, becoming its Midtown campus, church leaders decided to expand the nonprofit ministry to Mobile. Workers renovated a Sunday school room, adding a dividing wall, two donated dental chairs and a waiting area.

"We looked at the population that was here," said Smith, who also manages the Fairhope clinic. "There are so many people who fall through the cracks with dental. They might have medical through the Affordable Care Act or Medicare or Medicaid."

The news of the new clinic spread through word of mouth. "When we put up the sign, people started calling," Smith said. Only patients without insurance are accepted, and services are offered at a reduced rate -- $50 for a comprehensive first visit and $35 after that.

On Thursday, the clinic treated eight patients, with the help of volunteer hygienists and missionary dentist Dr. Jacob Baker, who is affiliated with the Fairhope church. The next available day, Dec. 9, is already booked.

Smith said the clinic plans to offer social services - basically, referring people to established centers in Mobile to meet other needs, such as medical care. Eventually, Smith said, there could be an opportunity to partner with another nonprofit to provide hot meals.

"While I've been here painting and working with the construction, I've met so many people who have come to the window," she said. "The majority of the time, they're asking for food. God has really put that on my heart."

(People seeking appointments at the clinic should call 251-445-2273.)