Our friend Tony Lee over at Breitbart has a great report on the Kentucky Republican Senate primary between incumbent establishment Senator Mitch McConnell and Tea Party backed conservative Matt Bevin that gives some important evidence to support what CHQ Chairman Richard Viguerie has been saying for years – Republicans never win big elections unless they draw a sharp distinction between the conservative world view and the liberal world view.

Mr. Viguerie regularly tells audiences for his speeches and in his CHQ columns that to win Republicans must frame the campaign as a fight for traditional values, lower taxes, smaller, less intrusive government and respect for the individual and constitutional liberty. Nationalizing the election isn’t an automatic guarantee of victory, but the “stand for nothing” strategy usually adopted by establishment Republicans IS a guarantee of defeat.

Tony Lee reports that Matt Walsh, who has a conservative talk show on radio station WLAP and blogs at TheMattWalshBlog.com has much the same analysis of the Bevin vs. McConnell primary.

Appearing on Breitbart News Sunday on Sirius XM Patriot channel 125 with host and Breitbart News Executive Chairman Stephen K. Bannon, Walsh noted that a female Democrat like the Democrats’ Kentucky Senate candidate Alison Lundergan Grimes can win when establishment Republicans do not fight back on the false "war on women" rhetoric, and he feared McConnell would not fight back against Grimes while Bevin would.

Walsh also said Democrat Grimes "shrinks away" from issues, and even though she "might bring Hollywood money" to Kentucky, she still has to connect with voters in the arena, which Grimes has not shown the ability to do yet.”

Shrinking away from the issues makes Grimes the perfect empty vessel into which the national Democrats can pour the despicable rhetoric of their “war on women” campaign.

Walsh also said all Grimes really has going for her is that she is a "woman, kind of attractive, [and] young."

"She doesn't have ideas as far as I can tell," he said, noting that Grimes hides out on Obamacare and all the other big issues.

We would tend to offer the same analysis of Mitch McConnell’s record – he brings a lot of inside-the-Beltway special interest money to the campaign and a reputation for bringing a lot of pork to Kentucky.

McConnell's favorability ratings in Kentucky have been extremely low, thus making him vulnerable in a general election. Even though McConnell is adept at maneuvering pork back home to Kentucky he’s never going to outbid the Democrats for the votes of the clients of big government or defeat the Democrats’ war on women campaign with another dam on the Ohio River.

Beyond pork, on the big issues that nationalize a campaign and draw a sharp distinction between the conservative world view and the liberal world view Mitch McConnell is in trouble because -- let’s face it – McConnell is not a conservative.