May 11 -- Missouri may soon have the authority to review the prices of some health insurance plans before they're sold to consumers in the state.

A measure to enact the change was approved Tuesday by the Legislature, and it's headed to Gov. Jay Nixon's desk.

Health care and consumer advocates say the measure represents a significant step for Missouri , which was one of a few states that lacked an effective rate review program.

"It's a big step in the right direction," said Jen Bersdale, executive director of Missouri Health Care for All, which backed the legislation.

Up until now, almost all other states required insurance carriers to disclose the prices they planned to charge customers for health insurance plans prior to open enrollment. State insurance departments then review the pricing and the justification for those prices, and determine whether the pricing is reasonable. Some states' authority goes even further, and they have the ability to deny rates if they're deemed excessive.

There's a special interest in rate review authority now because the Affordable Care Act requires most U.S. citizens to have health insurance. And, under the Affordable Care Act, Americans have greater access to purchasing health insurance through the online insurance exchange, HealthCare.gov.

For plans starting Jan. 1, 2018 , the legislation requires health insurance carriers offering small group and individual plans to submit rates with the Missouri Department of Insurance, Financial Institutions & Professional Registration .

The department then will have 60 days to review the rates and determine whether the pricing is reasonable or unreasonable.

If it's deemed unreasonable, the department will have to explain its reasoning in a written letter to the insurance carrier, who can voluntarily change its pricing.

"If we have the ability to have the rate review and have that information given to the Department of Insurance , it will curtail some of the larger increases," said state Rep. Charlie Davis , R- Webb City , one of the bill's sponsors.

Rep. Margo McNeil , D- Florissant , and Rep. Bill White , R- Joplin also sponsored the bill in the House; the bill was folded into a Senate bill, sponsored by Sen. David Sater , R- Cassville , as an amendment to a broader bill that addresses a number of health care issues.

Although the bill does not give the state the ability to deny rates, particularly those that are found excessive, advocates says it still encourages more competitive pricing.

Another important aspect is it will bring some transparency to the industry, said Sidney Watson , health law professor at St. Louis University .

"There will be transparency and accountability in the small and individual market for how premiums are set," Watson said. "We'll also start to get information on why we have premium differences across the state."

And, there will be a comment period where the public can weigh in on the pricing.

Scott Holste , a spokesman for the governor, said the bill would undergo "a fair and comprehensive review" before the governor takes any action.

Samantha Liss --314-340-8017

@samanthann on Twitter

[email protected]

___

(c)2016 the St. Louis Post-Dispatch

Visit the St. Louis Post-Dispatch at www.stltoday.com

Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.