Buy Photo James Bertel of Sewell traveled to New Guinea in July to search for the plane and grave sites of the crew of the Photo Queen. The crew, pictured, include his uncle Sgt. James R. Reynolds of Gibbstown, in the middle of the bottom row. Sgt. Herbert G. Julian of North Jersey is second from the left in the top row left. (Photo: Chris LaChall/Staff Photographer)Buy Photo

It's called the Photo Queen. And the mystery surrounding the missing war plane is beyond intriguing to a Gloucester County doctor and an Ocean County lawyer.

Determined to find out what happened to the Queen, a B-24 bomber of World War II with an 11-man crew, an obsessed Dr. James Bertel flew in July to a remote jungle in New Guinea to search for the plane, crew members' remains or other traces.

After hacking his way with a native guide through dense jungle infested with crocodiles, leeches and insects in the Sarmi area, the Sewell man believes he might have found the graves of four crew members lying between coconut trees along the Verkam River.

A family connection sparked the curiosity of Bertel and lawyer Paul Julian of the Ortley Beach section of Toms River in the 71-year-old cold case.

Each had an uncle in the crew — Tech. Sgt. James R. Reynolds Jr. of Gibbstown, the radio operator, and Sgt. Herbert G. Julian of Belleville and Orange, a gunner.

But they might not be who's buried in what appears to be a grave found by Bertel, who realizes some remains will never be found.

"There it was: A small mound in the ground between two coconut trees just like villagers had told me. The said natives had buried two Americans after they were killed fighting the Japanese and had marked their graves with the two coconut trees," said Bertel, 68, a Vietnam veteran who served in the Marines.

"I'd like to return next summer, but what Paul and I want now is for the government to send a search team there to find the plane and exhume the mound I found. With new technology, they could find a plane."

They hope to enlist the aid of their U.S. senators to make their request.

The doctor said he searched without success along the river for the Photo Queen, which had a nose cartoon pin-up of a nude woman photographer peering under the curtain of a camera on a high tripod. He did come across a metal debris field from another plane that he suspects crashed, but said its propeller was too short to have come from a B-24.

"The jungle conditions were horrendous and we had to cut our way through the tropical forests," Bertel said.

"My wife was very upset. She was sure I would die there and never come back, but I took everything with me that I needed from food and gear to water filters, antibiotics and other medicine, and I pitched a tent on the Verkam in the village of Ferkemi," he said of the three-week trip he financed.

"The natives were very good to me and helpful. They told me the story of four crewmen killed by the Japanese after fighting along the coasts. They have no written language, but use oral history to pass down events and traditions."

Though the official Army Air Corps report of the B-24's fateful 2,200-mile aerial photo reconnaissance mission on Sept. 30, 1944, remains the same — the crew was missing in action and presumed killed when the plane disappeared over the Pacific Ocean — years of investigation have uncovered new information the families of crew members were never told.

Search planes sent over the Pacific in the suspected crash area never found a trace.

"That's because the Photo Queen never crashed into the ocean," Bertel insists.

Buy Photo Dr. James Bertel of Sewell, holds a photograph of missing crewmen from the Photo Queen, a B-24 bomber lost in a World War II crash. Bertel traveled to New Guinea in July to search for the graves of the crewmen. (Photo: Chris LaChall/Staff Photographer)

He said at least some of the crew bailed out before the B-24 was forced to land in enemy territory in northern New Guinea. It had run into a typhoon on its way back from its photo reconnaissance mission to Leyte from Mokmer Drome airbase on Biak Island, was blown off course, lost its heading and was running out of fuel when it crashed somewhere a few miles inland from the coast and not far from another U.S. airbase at Wakde Island, he said.

Bertel and Julian discovered this in subsequent military documents from investigations by the Dutch and Australians in 1945 and a few years after that, when the foreign militaries interrogated captured Japanese officers on New Guinea. The officers talked about American airmen, some of whom were captured, interrogated and then killed.

One of those names was Sgt. Julian, The others were Lt. Thomas Rafael, co-pilot to Capt. Royce Harms, and Sgt. Samuel T.Caitlin, a gunner.The crew was in the 5th Air Force, 6th Photographic Reconnaissance Group, 20th Combat Mapping Squadron.

A 1947 Australian search team was told by natives the plane crashed on the upper reaches of the Verkam River about 3 miles from the coast.

The two war-history sleuths met in 2013 via a former military intelligence analyst who knew both were investigating the case separately. Julian has been researching the crash seriously for more than 10 years, but since childhood had asked questions of his family about the crash that fascinated him. Bertel had started his own probe in 2012.

James Bertel of Sewell during his trip to New Guinea in July. (Photo: PROVIDED)

In looking for initial information, Bertel and Julian separately came across a nongovernment website on Pacific air crashes, www.pacificwrecks.com, that carried more information on the Photo Queen than their families ever knew.

"It just floored me, so from then on I decided to find out what happened to these men," Bertel said.

Julian had a similar reaction to the website's revelations.

"What it said shocked me! A letter to my mother's family that I still have said her brother, my uncle, was missing in the Pacific, but the Army knew beyond any question in 1945 that my uncle and Lt. Rafael had been murdered by the Japanese," said Julian, 68, an attorney who represents the entertainment industry.

The website states: "In fact, it (Photo Queen) was lost in severe weather and force landed in a swampy area in the Sarmi area. All crew survived the forced landing, but did not survive the war. Reports indicated that Rafael and Julian survived the crash but were captured by the Japanese and beheaded."

The web information, later confirmed by Bertel and Julian after each obtained the interrogation documents, also gave an account of a Capt. Ono. He was a Japanese commander who was turned over to the Americans, convicted of war crimes in Manila in 1946 and executed by hanging for the murders of those two crewmen.

However, a 1947 exhumation of two unidentified bodies in Manila American Cemetery concluded they were not the Photo Queen crew, an updated fact not on the website but which the doctor and lawyer have since learned.

Paul Julian of Ortley Beach, who has partnered with James Bertel of Sewell in a quest to solve the mystery of the downed Photo Queen. (Photo: PROVIDED)

Julian, himself an Air Force veteran, said there could be plausible explanations for why the families were never told any of this.

"It could have been the right hand did not know what the left was doing, or the families could have been left with just the more benign misinformation to spare them of the notion that their loved ones were beheaded when the military could not produce the bodies," he said.

Julian said Capt. Ono eventually turned over the Japanese interrogation reports of his uncle and the co-pilot containing biographical and other data that they could not have fabricated and which has led him to an inescapable conclusion: "They clearly had those men."

"We know Sgt.Caitlin and Lt. Rafael and my Uncle Bert were captured by the Japanese," Julian said. "The intelligence commander for the Japanese had a written order that downed airmen were to be interrogated, and following that they were to be killed out of sight of the natives."

Bertel is writing a book, "Search for the Photo Queen," about the plane's history, disappearance and flight crew. It also will discuss mechanic Al Merkling of Newark, who drew the nose art.

"I grew up with this family memory of my uncle," Bertel said. "There are a lot of Jersey connections to this story, and more of the whole story needs to be told."

Reach Carol Comegno at (856) 486-2473; or comegno@gannettnj.com

Last hours of B-24 Photo Queen on Sept. 30, 1944:

5:15 a.m. — Departs Biak Island for 2,200-mile flight to Leyte.

Noon — Reaches target of aerial photo mission.

12:15 p.m. — Completes mission over Leyte.

1:15 p.m. — Rendezvous with second bomber.

1:45 p.m. — Encounters typhoon over Pacific.

6 p.m. — Estimated time of arrival.

6:25 p.m. — Requests homing signal from Biak ( 25 minutes overdue).

6:28 p.m. — Urgently calls Biak; base response unacknowledged.

6:29 p.m. — "Mayday" distress call heard by fighter sector but unable to establish contact.

6:55 p.m. — Another aircraft hears the "Mayday," but again unable to contact distressed B-24

Source: U.S. Army

Don't miss a thing Download our apps and get alerts for local news, weather, traffic and more. Search "Asbury Park Press" in your app store or use these links from your device: iPhone app | Android app for phone and tablet | iPad app Don't forget to 'like' us on Facebook!

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1EKbM9h