The Revolution will not be brought to you by Coke. It will be brought to you by a creepy horde of left-wing activists embedded in the bureaucracy who will monitor everything you eat and drink to make sure that you don't have a Coke.

The federal government helped finance the creation of a so-called “diet choker” that monitors the eating habits of the wearer. WearSens, created by engineers at the University of California Los Angeles (UCLA), is a necklace that can automatically detect when a person is eating or smoking, and can send alerts to a smart phone telling the user to stop. The invention received a $148,379 grant from the National Science Foundation (NSF) in 2013 to create a sensory necklace to “fill the need of automatically detecting swallows and eating patterns.” Researchers at UCLA, led by Majid Sarrafzadeh, the director of the Embedded and Reconfigurable Computing Lab of the university’s computer science department, released the findings of a pilot study on the necklace this month. “These sensors track the vibration that occurs in the neck when a person chews food and swallows their drink,” the report said. “This ‘diet choker,’ designed by engineers at University of California Los Angeles, can even sense what type of food you’re eating since something crunchy is likely to make the neck vibrate more than food that’s soft. The sensors can also determine if a person is downing a hot or cold drink.”

While this has obvious applications in North Korea and during Ramadan, it's also a great treat to stuff into ObamaCare enabling policies that fine users for not wearing diet chokers.

We are dealing with some very creepy people who are obsessed with outlawing food. That's not an exaggeration.

The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is creating a $2 million research center to study how the government can “nudge” Americans toward making healthier eating habits. The agency is currently accepting grant applications to establish a “Center for Behavioral Economics and Healthy Food Choice Research,” which will facilitate studies such as how breaking up combo meals at fast food restaurants would influence customers.

They've already rammed up food prices.

Bacon was at $3.60 a lb under Bush. It’s now up to $5.60 a lb under Obama. The price of a whole frozen Thanksgiving turkey was at $1.32 a lb under Bush. It’s up to $1.81 under Obama giving Americans that much less to be thankful for this Thanksgiving. The price of a tub of margarine went up from $1.50 to $2.10. But that won’t be a problem for long because thanks to Obama it may soon become hard to get margarine at any price. Obama’s FDA is considering a ban on trans fat in foods. Like incandescent bulbs and cheap free market health insurance, margarine may become one of those things that you can no longer buy anymore.

So now we can go full Brave New World. Maybe the Diet Choker can even be set to mete out electric shocks.