By

997 Former U.S. Army staff sergeant Travis Palmer was led to believe they were on their way to a follow up Operation FINALLY HOME (OFH) applicant interview. Being driven by an OFH official to what was soon to become the Palmer family’s new subdivision, the vehicle passed by flag waving throngs lining the streets.

“I was told we were driving around because we were waiting for board members to show up for the interview,” Palmer said. “But I did not suspect anything out of the ordinary.”



Only when the OFH official announced, “Brother, you’re getting the home,” did Palmer realize he was being granted an OFH custom mortgage free dwelling, Palmer said.



Building homes for wounded veterans across the nation since 2005, OFH is now making a grand entrance into Wisconsin with the building of two side-by-side homes in Cranberry Creek Subdivision in Jackson, thanks to a host of local builders, suppliers, contractors and other community supporters. Latest to join the cause are Sherwin-Williams Paint Company – Milwaukee District, Water Doctors of Waukesha, Paragon Media Group, LLC in Oconomowoc, Lammscapes! in Jackson and LandMark Engineering Sciences, Inc. in Waukesha.

“It was surreal. Unbelievable,” Palmer said of “The Surprise,” one of five “pillar” OFH events. “My wife, Toniek, and I both started crying tears of joy.”



Their happiness was an unbelievable contrast to what the 41 year old father of four had endured since being severely injured while serving in Iraq.

“I only know what happened through what people told me because I blacked out. We were ambushed. I lost a guy that day. My Humvee was blown up with two 500 pound bombs underneath it. But we made it through,” Palmer said.

As a result of the “horrific incident,” Palmer, of Tomball, Texas, struggles with degenerative disk disease, chronic pain, posttraumatic stress disorder and other health complications. “I have to take a lot of medicines every day,” he said.



Pillar events

For each home, national OFH works with the builder and other local OFH team members to customize events so it is personalized to their build, said Molly Halliday, OFH vice president of marketing. “From a recipient’s point of view, they really don’t know the pillar events have been established until the final step – the dedication.”

Wisconsin pillar events began with “Town Meeting” on May 27, 2015 at Metropolitan Builders Association. OFH vice president of construction Lee Kirgan was introduced before a crowd of nearly 50 building industry representatives. To create awareness for the project, Kirgan provided an overview of OFH’s mission, builds and what is needed from trades and subcontractors – from products and services to monetary contributions.

Next events are “The Surprise,” followed by “Groundbreaking Ceremony,” “Notes of Love” and “Dedication.”

OFH works with builders and the community to schedule the surprise. Expected local time frame is July or August 2015. “ Successful reveal events have ranged from those coordinated around a high traffic public event with media already onsite, such as a concert or professional sports game, to those planned organically such as a combined surprise/groundbreaking at the home site,” Halliday said.



The build team meets the family for the first time at the surprise event, which is a pivotal point for the family, said Daniel Vargas, OFH vice president of family matters and community outreach. “You can actually see the change in the family starting to take place. Their stress and anxiety disappear… it’s a great way to introduce them to the community while showing America still cares.”

“This is a huge part of the family’s healing process. For Travis, it was a total surprise, as well as for his wife. She had become his caretaker and also takes care of the kids. Now, no matter what happens, they are always going to have a roof over their heads.”



Palmer said, second to a few other days, the surprise was the happiest day in his family’s life.



Next, OFH works with builders and sponsors to kick off construction with a groundbreaking event. Held at build sites, the event is intended to foster support of the build and family within the local community while also raising awareness for the project, Halliday said. Prominent members of the community are invited to speak. The family then joins all participating organizations in a ceremonial groundbreaking.



Once building has commenced prior to sheetrock being placed, all involved in the project are invited to write on studs, or anything to be covered. “We write notes of appreciation and encouragement for the family, forever wrapping the house in love,” Kirgan said. “It has become one of our primary ceremonies. Families have come to me after they’ve been in the house and said, ‘I woke up last night and realized for the first time since I’ve come back home, I have this feeling of peace and security. I can lay in bed, thinking about all the notes from all the people who care about me.’ It really blows me away they don’t feel safe and secure after returning from a combat mission. This has been a difficult thing for me to understand. But after 10 years of doing this, I know it’s real.”



When the home is complete, a dedication ceremony takes place to hand over keys to the veteran’s family. “This is the culmination of many months of work for the builder and community,” Halliday said. “The family now has a mortgage free, custom built home to call their own.”

Each home build and series of pillar events is different depending on donations and level of community involvement, Vargas said. “It’s a 21st century barn raising.”



To inquire about sponsorships, donations or other opportunities contact 262-522-3624

#ofhwi

https://www.facebook.com/OFHWisconsin

Coming up … Part Four: The Surprise