Buy Photo Indianapolis resident Denise Calpin (center) gets the lowdown on federal health insurance from Konah Williams (left) and Michelle Hallmark at the Little Red Door Cancer Agency. Employees of Little Red Door serve as “navigators,” providing free advice on applying for insurance on the Health Insurance Marketplace. (Photo: Kelly Wilkinson/The Star)Buy Photo

Navigating the Health Insurance Marketplace has been turbulent.

Computer glitches, confusion over pricing and coverage options, and fewer-than-expected signups dogged the Affordable Care Act in the early days after its rollout Oct. 1. Health-reform advocates say states like Indiana, which opted not to set up their own exchanges, have had an even bumpier experience.

But help is out there.

Earlier this year, the government doled out $67 million in grants to create an army of "navigators" nationwide, who could sit down with those searching for insurance and provide unbiased assistance. The legislation also allows for agents and insurance brokers, who may charge a fee, to help families find insurance both on and off the federal exchange.

That help could be crucial because people here have few options other than purchasing an insurance plan by March 31, or pay a fee of $95 or 1 percent of their income initially. Those who sign up by Dec. 23 — a deadline that the government extended last month — can have health coverage starting on Jan. 1.

People who make up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level may receive subsidies to defray the costs of health care on the marketplace. Others who exceed that threshold can buy insurance off-exchange. And under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies can't deny new customers with pre-existing conditions or charge them more than healthier policyholders.

As of this week, nearly 4,000 Indiana residents had chosen a health plan through the federal exchange. Another estimated 525,000 Hoosiers are eligible to buy insurance through the exchange because they don't have coverage through their employer or another government program.

Here are stories from two Central Indiana families who have tested the waters — with varying degrees of success.

Unexpected challenges

For years, Denise Calpin had no worries about health insurance, since she was covered on her husband's policy. But when he died suddenly in October of 2006, at the age of 58, the Eastside resident soon found herself facing no insurance. When the year ended, she lost her health benefits.

At first, Calpin, now 61, paid for health expenses out of pocket.

Then everything changed.

"I did manage to get cancer," she said.

In January of 2012, she was diagnosed with anal-rectal cancer after she went to her family doctor — whom she always paid in cash — when she experienced bleeding.

Without any means to pay for the costly life-saving treatment she required, Calpin qualified for Wishard Advantage, which covered some but not all of the costs associated with her treatment for cancer and the blood clots she developed early this year after undergoing radiation treatment.

Calpin applied for Medicaid but was denied because she owns her own home. Another financial counselor recommended she apply to the state's Healthy Indiana Plan. This time she was denied because she was a single person without dependent children.

Calpin desperately wanted health insurance.

By this fall, she had a steady part-time job as a test proctor, but not health insurance. And the Affordable Care Act — and its penalties for the uninsured — loomed.

But just like all her other experiences with insurance, getting a plan through the marketplace proved challenging. She applied in early October over the phone.

Again, nothing.

About to despair, Calpin saw a flyer from the Little Red Door Cancer Agency that arrived in the mail, offering to help for free.

She paid a visit to the downtown agency, where she met with Konah Williams, one of the six navigators on staff. With Williams by her side, Calpin once more called the health insurance marketplace's help line on Nov. 6 with hope of determining her eligibility for a plan that would work. Again, she walked through the enrollment process with the person on the other end of the line.

Twice more she visited Little Red Door, and she and Williams called. On her fourth call, the person in the call center told her she already had health coverage — news to her. When she expressed surprise, they said that they would call back. They did but left a recorded message, precisely at the time that Calpin had said she would be out at her job.

Calpin's case is unusually complicated to resolve, Williams said. When the website for the government's health insurance marketplace first went live at the start of October, many people had trouble using it. More recently, however, Williams and her colleagues have had more luck helping people.

Any United States citizen who is not incarcerated can use the marketplace. Lower-income individuals, who make from 100 to 400 percent of the federal poverty level ($11,490 to $45,960 for individuals or up to $94,200 for family of four) will likely qualify for some subsidy, on the federal exchange.

One woman whom Williams helped sign up found out she would need to spend only an extra $23 for health insurance if she used her tax refund. Another man would have had his costs covered entirely by his subsidy.

But the prospect of losing her tax refund, assuming she ever successfully signed up for health insurance irks Calpin.

"This is supposed to be a tax credit and they're taking your tax refund away from you to pay for it," she said. "I have worked really hard to pay my medical bills that I have gotten, so that I possibly would have a tax refund to help me pay for my car."

That all pales, however, in comparison with how annoying the quest for insurance has been, Calpin said. One of Calpin's friends estimates that she and her husband have spent 30 to 40 hours online trying to decode the information.

As this week, Calpin was still waiting for a resolution in her case. The last she heard, somehow she was registered as already having insurance through her employer -- although she has sent documentation saying that not's true. Once more, she dropped the document in the mail. She has no idea how much time she has devoted to this process.

She does know one thing, however: "I'm getting really tired of it."

They liked their old plan

Northsiders Courtney and Tolga Ercan, 37 and 36, liked their Health Savings Style plan which Tolga got when he left his job a year and a half ago to start his own business. But the COBRA law that allowed those who leave a job to retain their health coverage at group rates also carries an expiration date of 18 months.

With that deadline looming, Courtney and Tolga Ercan, 37 and 36, realized this fall that they would have to enter the health insurance fray to find a plan to cover themselves as well as their elementary-age children.

Just one year ago, the Elcans would have had far fewer options for health insurance. Courtney has breast cancer and before the Affordable Care Act went into effect, she might have found herself either paying more for insurance or being denied plans outright because of the pre-existing condition.

Hoping that health-care reform would improve their options, the Ercans sought assistance from Bernard Health, a health-care retail store, which opened its first store in 2006 in Tennessee.

Originally the store geared efforts towards helping businesses find insurance for their employees. About a year and a half ago, however, they opened a retail store, comparable to H&R Block.

"We just saw that the cost and complexity of the health-care decision really needs to be treated more like tax advice than car insurance," said Matt Kleymeyer, who heads up Bernard's Indiana operations. "It's an expensive decision but not one that many people are well-versed in."

The store charges a flat fee of $199 for individuals, $249 for a couple and $299 for a family. Clients also can opt to buy an annual subscription, costing up to $29 a month, which gives them access to help should they run into a claim or billing them issue during the year.

On average, clients save about $2,000 a year on insurance costs over what they paid before seeking Bernard's assistance, Kleymeyer said.

And often clients, especially those who had insurance through their employer, leave surprised by what they learn.

"We have seen quite a bit of sticker shock," said Leah Akers, one of the store's advisers. "People had the idea this would be a lot more affordable."

The Ercans did not know quite what to expect. They knew because their household income exceeds $94,000, they would not be eligible for a subsidy on the Health Insurance Marketplace and therefore it would likely make more sense to buy off the exchange.

Still, they wanted to make sure that they could find health insurance for their family of four that would allow Courtney to continue seeing her doctors at IU Health.

In Central Indiana, about 45 different carriers offer a range of about 100 plans. The Ercans, however, would be choosing from much fewer, Akers said, since Courtney wanted to stay with IU Health.

After Akers crunched some numbers, the Ercans studied their options.

They chose a plan that allowed Courtney to see her doctors. Another key feature turned out to be a plan with individual deductibles, rather than one with a combined family deductible. This way Courtney, who will likely accrue more health-care bills faster than other family members, will meet the out-of-pocket maximum faster than she would with a higher family limit.

Assurant Health's silver plan most closely matched the one that they had had with Anthem.

Only time will tell, however, how well it will duplicate Courtney's beloved plan.

"It's close; we'll see how it works in practice," Tolga Ercan said.

And while Courtney Ercan is not a whole-hearted supporter of the new health system, she recognized that it allowed for Tolga to continue running his own technology consulting company.

If not for health reform, the Ercan family would have had only one option: "He would have gone back to his old job," she said.

Call Star reporter Shari Rudavsky at (317) 444-6354. Follow her on Twitter @srudavsky.

Tips on navigating the exchange

• People who make up to 400 percent of the federal poverty level — which would be $94,200 for a family of four — may qualify for a subsidy to defray the costs of health care on the marketplace. Others who exceed that threshold can buy insurance off-exchange. And under the Affordable Care Act, insurance companies can't deny new customers with pre-existing conditions or charge them more than healthier policyholders.

• Those who earn more can purchase insurance outside the federal health insurance exchange on the individual market, but unlike in the past, insurers cannot deny insurance on the basis of pre-existing health conditions or charge more to those individuals.

• Insurance must be obtained by March 31 to avoid paying a penalty of $95 per adult and $47.50 per child or 1 percent of your taxable income — whichever is greater. That penalty will rise in subsequent years.

Sources for help

• People who need assistance understanding the health insurance marketplace can find help locally at a number of organizations including:

• The Little Red Door Cancer Agency, 1801 N. Meridian Street. Call (317) 925-5595 for hours and more information.

• A full list of Marion County organizations providing help with navigation can be found at http://www.in.gov/healthcarereform/2416.htm.

For more information on the health insurance marketplace, visit www.healthcare.gov/marketplace.

For more information on Bernard Health, visit www.bernardhealth.com.

Sources: The Star, Gannett Washington Bureau

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1bFeLdF