78 DAYS TO MIDTERMS – NATIONAL GUARD to Ferguson – HRC’s suite tooth -- DAVID GREGORY got $4m to go – PAUL STEINHAUSER leaves CNN -- RORY COOPER to Purple – JOSH VLASTO baby

BULLETIN – MISSOURI GOV. CALLS IN NATIONAL GUARD –Gov. Jay Nixon executive order, via St. Louis Post-Dispatch: “Given these deliberate, coordinated and intensifying violent attacks on lives and property in Ferguson, I am directing the highly capable men and women of the Missouri National Guard to assist Colonel Ron Replogle and the Unified Command in restoring peace and order to this community.” http://bit.ly/1pxA4sV

DRIVING THE DAY -- N .Y. Times, 2-col. lead, “Missouri Shooting Victim Was Hit at Least 6 Times [twice in the head]: Ex-New York Medical Examiner Releases Details of Autopsy He Conducted,” by Frances Robles and Julie Bosman in Ferguson: “[A] preliminary private autopsy performed on Sunday found [that one] of the bullets entered the top of [Michael] Brown’s skull, suggesting his head was bent forward when it struck him and caused a fatal injury, according to Dr. Michael M. Baden, the former chief medical examiner for the City of New York, who flew to Missouri … at the family’s request …

Story Continued Below

“Brown, 18, was also shot four times in the right arm … The bullets did not appear to have been shot from very close range because no gunpowder was present on his body. … Some of the bullets entered and exited several times, including one that left at least five different wounds.” http://nyti.ms/Vyl16n

--“Valerie Jarrett Talks Ferguson,” and tells April Ryan of American Urban Radio Networks POTUS’ latest thinking on Ferguson. 2 min. audio clip http://bit.ly/1o4bHyf

HOT ONLINE -- “How we'd cover Ferguson if it happened in another country,” by Vox’s Max Fisher: “Here … is a satirical take on the story you might be reading if Ferguson were in, say, Iraq or Pakistan. FERGUSON — Chinese and Russian officials are warning of a potential humanitarian crisis in the restive American province of Missouri, where ancient communal tensions have boiled over into full-blown violence. … The crisis began a week ago in Ferguson, a remote Missouri village that has been a hotbed of sectarian tension.

“State security forces shot and killed an unarmed man, which regional analysts say has angered the local population by surfacing deep-seated sectarian grievances. Regime security forces cracked down brutally on largely peaceful protests, worsening the crisis. … A lawless expanse of dogwood trees and beer breweries, Missouri is located in a central United States region that Americans refer to, curiously, as the ‘MidWest’ though it is nearer to the country's east.” http://bit.ly/1AqtLuY (h/t MarginalRevolution.com)

TWEETS DU JOUR - Andrew Kaczynski @BuzzFeedAndrew: “Missouri to change slogan from ‘the show me state’ to ‘the show me your hands state.’” … ‏@AlecMacGillis “Stunning stat, apropos #Ferguson: in 1900, St Louis was the 4th biggest city in the country. It's now the 58th.” … ‏@rupertmurdoch: “Will Congress act on demilitarisation of police when it reconvenes”

FIRST PERSON -- “What I Did After Police Killed My Son: Ten years later, we in Wisconsin passed the nation’s first law calling for outside reviews,” by Michael Bell in Politico Magazine: “After police in Kenosha, Wis., shot my 21-year-old son to death outside his house ten years ago — and then immediately cleared themselves of all wrongdoing — an African-American man approached me and said: ‘If they can shoot a white boy like a dog, imagine what we’ve been going through.’ … Our country is simply not paying enough attention to the terrible lack of accountability of police departments and the way it affects all of us—regardless of race or ethnicity.” http://politi.co/VykH7I

HOW IT’S PLAYING: N.Y. Daily News cover, “SHOT SIX TIMES” … N.Y. Times A1 sidebar to autopsy lead, “Violence Flares After Appeals For Harmony” … USA Today lead, “GROUPS: FERGUSON CURFEW MUST END: Rallies continue; one in St. Louis supports officer” … WashPost A1, above fold, Justice Dept. steps up role in Ferguson: New autopsy of teen is ordered; hundreds of police respond to protests

--OTHER PRINT-EDITION LEADS: WashPost (2 cols.), “With U.S. help, Iraqis are close to retaking dam: MILITANTS HAD CAPTURED FACILITY -- American airstrikes preceded ground attack” …

ON THE GROUND – Weekend banner headlines in Missouri papers: St. Louis Post-Dispatch: Sat., “STORM AFTER CALM” … Sun., “CURFEW DEFIED” … Kansas City Star: Sat., “OUTRAGE IS REKINDLED WITH ROBBERY REPORT” … Sun., “IT DIDN’T HAVE TO HAPPEN: Authorities’ missteps, on top of years of racial tension, fueled unrest in Ferguson. Experts say the keys to healing will be talk, time and a new plan to develop trust,” by Eric Adler and Jason Hancock. Read the story: http://bit.ly/1o4znT9

TOP TALKER -- “Gregory got $4M to quietly leave NBC,” by N.Y. Post’s Emily Smith and Stephanie Smith: “Ousted ‘Meet the Press’ anchor David Gregory was paid $4 million to leave NBC and signed a contract not to speak out against the network, sources told Page Six. … A source said Gregory’s contract extended into next year, so NBC had to pay him for the rest of the term, plus an extra fee to ensure his silence. In return, he was asked to sign a nondisparagement clause.” http://pge.sx/1oTzHUK

HOT DOC -- “High fashion, expense for Hillary travel,” by Las Vegas Review Journal’s Laura Myers: “Hillary Rodham Clinton … insists on staying in the ‘presidential suite’ of luxury hotels … She usually requires those who pay her six-figure fees for speeches to also provide a private jet for transportation — only a $39 million, 16-passenger Gulfstream G450 or larger will do. ” http://bit.ly/1n09DHY See the contract: http://bit.ly/1tebs87

ABOUT LAST NIGHT – Obama attends Jazz on the Vineyard -- White House pool reports by Colleen McCain Nelson: “After a short drive in the motorcade, President Obama arrived at Featherstone Center for the Arts in Oak Bluffs. … Ten seconds of googling suggests that Rachelle Ferrell is performing this evening. … [Two hours later] President Obama's motorcade departed the outdoor concert venue at 9:00 p.m. The pool was kept at a distance and did not experience what surely was a lovely concert at dusk. On several occasions, raucous cheers went up from the crowd, and a hint of jazzy tones could be heard in the distance.”

SPOTTED last night, dining on the porch at Le Diplomate: Vice President Biden (in blue blazer) and Dr. Jill Biden, just back from the Hamptons.

SPOTTED, in London: Harvard IOP alum David Muir (fall 2011 fellow) and Sophie Fry (Class of 2013), at Christina Bellantoni and Patrick Khoo's engagement party at the London Cocktail Club on Saturday night in Oxford Circus. The celebration with the groom-to-be's friends comes ahead of the Jan. 2 wedding in his hometown of Adelaide, South Australia.

PAUL STEINHAUSER is leaving CNN after 28 years to become political director and anchor for NH1, a New Hampshire media start-up. He starts next month. CNN Washington Bureau Chief Sam Feist: “Paul and I have talked for many years of his love for all things New Hampshire, not the least of which includes his New Hampshire-native bride. … Paul has done it all in his 28 years at CNN: PA, AP, line-producer, show EP, deputy political director, and now political editor. … We’ll miss his good humor and his political insight.”

RORY COOPER, former Eric Cantor communications director, starts today at Purple Strategies as a managing director, responsible for leading campaigns and strategies for the firm's clients.

--HAPPENING TODAY, per @AP_Planner: “@EricCantor’s resignation from Congress effective.”

WELCOME TO THE WORLD: Josh and Meg Vlasto (a proud Schumer marriage -- she was his scheduler when he was press sec.) announce their first: Edward Paul Vlasto was born Friday, a healthy and happy 8 lb. 9oz. Pic http://bit.ly/1oIPOdS

**A message about BP’s Commitment to America: We’re proud to be America’s largest energy investor. BP has invested nearly $50 billion in the U.S. over the past 5 years. And we support nearly 260,000 American jobs. That’s over $147 billion in economic value generated per year. Take 90 seconds to watch how BP fuels the American economy: http://bit.ly/BPinAmerica **

BREAKING – BBC: “Wikileaks founder Julian Assange says he will leave London's Ecuadoran embassy ‘soon’ after two years of refuge. … Reports in UK newspapers at the weekend said Mr Assange had developed a heart defect and a chronic lung condition … Speaking at a news conference, Mr Assange said his health had suffered during his time inside the embassy.” http://bbc.in/XugkMM

--“Kurds retake key Iraq dam, Sunnis hit jihadists” -- AFP/Irbil: “Iraqi Kurdish fighters backed by US warplanes press a counter-offensive against jihadists after winning back control of the country's largest dam, as the United States and Britain step up their military involvement.”

COMING ATTRACTIONS – “White House meets with big biz on immigration,” by Anna Palmer and Carrie Budoff Brown: “Senior White House officials are in talks with business leaders that could expand the executive actions President Obama takes on immigration. Obama was initially expected to focus only on slowing deportations of potentially millions of undocumented immigrants and altering federal enforcement policies. Now top aides are talking with leaders in big companies like Cisco, Intel and Accenture, hoping to add more changes that would get them on board.

“Representatives for high-tech, agriculture and construction interests have put forward a range of fixes, from recapturing unused green cards to tweaking existing work authorization programs. The outreach is an effort to broaden the political support for Obama’s decision to go it alone on immigration — another sign that suggests the White House fears a backlash in November, particularly among independent voters in battleground Senate races where Republicans are seizing on the issue.” http://politi.co/1o4FJSv

2014 -- 50-50 SENATE? – “Joe Biden, Senate tiebreaker?” by Edward-Isaac Dovere: “[W]ere the Senate to be divided straight down the middle, it would make Biden the ultimate tie-breaker — a dream come true for a guy who spent 36 years in the institution and a potential opportunity for a V.P. who hasn’t ruled out running for president. ‘He’d like two years of being the deciding vote, back in the cloakroom, in the Senate gym,’ said former Sen. Ted Kaufman (D-Del.), Biden’s longtime chief of staff and still a close friend. …

“To hit a tie, Democrats would need a net loss of five seats, and most of them have already written off the seats in Montana, South Dakota and West Virginia. That leaves two, and between the races they’re facing in Iowa, Arkansas, Louisiana and North Carolina, Democrats say losing two seems a pretty safe bet. They’re not counting on pickups in either Kentucky or Georgia, where their prospects are best. ‘When you look at the map, it’s totally feasible,’ said a national Democratic strategist. …

“Many, Reid included, remain unhappy with deals [Biden] reached with McConnell on the Bush tax cuts and others, and he was cut out of talks surrounding last year’s government shutdown. … There have been only 244 vice presidential tie-breakers in the entire history of the Senate. The last time the Senate was 50-50, after the 2000 elections, Dick Cheney only cast eight, including the one to give Republicans the majority.” http://politi.co/1v77jUM

VIDEO DU JOUR – “Tom Steyer’s ads test the boundaries of the ‘bizarre,’” by Darren Goode: “Steyer is trying to sway national climate policy and the midterm elections with an ad campaign that is raising eyebrows among independent fact-checkers, some television stations, his political opponents and even a few allies — using an approach that strikes observers as anywhere from groundbreaking to downright bizarre. … [Chris] Lehane, who wrote much of the ads’ scripts, said they are born from creative sessions after Steyer’s team has identified its target audience and message.” http://politi.co/1t9zgMc

COVERING 2016 – “Ronayne hired by AP as NH state politics reporter” – AP/Concord: “Kathleen Ronayne … has been hired by [AP] as a reporter in the New Hampshire statehouse. Ronayne comes to the AP after two years at the Concord Monitor … Ronayne, 24, is originally from upstate New York and now lives in Concord. She is a graduate of Syracuse University.” http://bit.ly/1uLWvOs

CHRISTIE CHRONICLES --“Gov. Christie busts a move at Hamptons party,” by N.Y. Post’s Emily Smith: “Gyrating governor Chris Christie wowed a power crowd with his energetic dance with Jamie Foxx at the starry Apollo in the Hamptons benefit Saturday night. The New Jersey gov … strutted onstage with Foxx in front of an audience that included Barbra Streisand and James Brolin, Sir Paul McCartney, Jack Nicholson, Anjelica Huston and Robert DeNiro.

“After [various] performances … at Ronald Perelman’s East Hampton estate, Oscar winner Foxx called out to Christie in the audience, ‘I know you’ve got a dance in you, Chris Christie.’ Christie, there as a guest of Bon Jovi, raced to the stage for some rambunctious gyrating. Not to be upstaged, Sen. John McCain then joined Foxx and performed the robot dance before Paul McCartney and Spike Lee showed off more muted moves.” Video, pics http://pge.sx/1AquTyN

TECHWATCH -- “Facebook Testing 'Satire' Tags for Sites Like The Onion,” by Mashable’s Chelsea Stark: “Facebook is testing out a feature that marks fake news stories from sites such as The Onion with ‘satire’ in its News Feed, a feature requested by some users … ‘We are running a small test which shows the text ‘[Satire]’ in front of links to satirical articles in the related articles unit in News Feed. This is because we received feedback that people wanted a clearer way to distinguish satirical articles from others in these units,’ a Facebook representative told Mashable.” http://on.mash.to/1v6GWOX

MEDIAWATCH – “Brian Williams taking on new competition,” by AP Television Writer David Bauder: “[N]early 10 years after Williams succeeded [Tom] Brokaw as NBC ‘Nightly News’ anchor[,] Williams, 55, faces new competition from both ABC and CBS as they look to end NBC's 256-week streak … David Muir takes over after Labor Day as anchor of the second-place ‘World News’ at ABC. Steve Capus, former NBC news president and longtime Williams producer, is in charge behind the scenes as Scott Pelley's executive producer at the ‘CBS Evening News.’

“‘When I started my competition was Dan (Rather) and Peter (Jennings),’Williams said. ‘That makes me feel old. That gets me on the treadmill every night after work. I am proud of what we've built here.’ So far this year, ‘Nightly News’ has averaged 8.9 million viewers and widened its lead over ABC (8 million) and CBS (6.8 million). ABC has gained lately in the 25-to-54-year-old demographic … ABC occasionally wins in that category and, in July, was up 5 percent over last year while NBC was down 4 percent …

“[S]ome at NBC express incredulity over some news decisions made over at ABC -- such as a recent day when NBC led its newscast with the shooting death of an American two-star general in Afghanistan while "World News" opened with a collision between double-decker buses in New York's Times Square. These decisions bear watching, though, since ABC overtook NBC in the morning partly because of a breezier approach that caught NBC flat-footed.” http://apne.ws/1pEiq78

--“Brian Williams shares in daughter's acting success” – AP: “The … anchor and proud father said he emailed family members to see if they approved of him reporting on his daughter [26-year-old ‘Girls’ actress Allison Williams] being cast in the lead role of ‘Peter Pan.’ NBC is airing a new version of the musical live on Dec. 4.” http://bit.ly/1rM0QfE

--Bloomberg’s Peter Hirschberg joins Reuters -- Global Enterprise Editor Mike Williams emails the staff: “Peter Hirschberg has joined Reuters as Asia Investigative Editor, based in Hong Kong. … Peter joins us from Bloomberg, where he spent nearly six years as a reporter and editor. Most recently, he was deputy managing editor for Asian economics and government coverage in Hong Kong. He was a lead editor on the newswire’s groundbreaking investigation of the secret wealth of the Chinese leadership, ‘Revolution to Riches.’”

SPORTS BLINK -- Top 25 teams in AP preseason college football poll: 1. Florida St. … 2. Alabama … 3. Oregon … 4. Oklahoma … 5. Ohio St. … 6. Auburn … 7. UCLA … 8. Michigan St. … 9. South Carolina … 10. Baylor … 11. Stanford … 12. Georgia … 13. LSU … 14. Wisconsin … 15. Southern Cal … 16. Clemson … 17. Notre Dame … 18. Mississippi … 19. Arizona St. … 20. Kansas St. … 21. Texas A&M … 22. Nebraska … 23. North Carolina … 24. Missouri … 25. Washington.

BIRTHDAYS: Econ-team trifecta: Jason Furman … Austan Goolsbee … Tim Geithner is 53 … Bob Woodruff is 53 … POLITICO’s Bill Tomson … Lincoln Foran (h/ts @DLippman) … Andy Federick, the DGA's man in Buffalo (h/t Greg Scanlon) ... CQ's Megan Scully ... NewsHour's Simone Pathe ... Dow Jones' Martin Vaughn (h/ts Christina Bellantoni) ... Rosalynn Carter is 87 … Roman Polanski is 81 … Vincent Bugliosi is 80 … Olympic gold medal decathlete Rafer Johnson is 79 … Robert Redford is 78 … Martin Mull is 71 ... The former president of Mexico, Felipe Calderon, is 52 … Christian Slater is 45 … Edward Norton is 45 … Malcolm-Jamal Warner is 44 … Andy Samberg is 36 (h/ts AP)

DESSERT -- “Downton Abbey Cast Laughs Off Water Bottle Gaffe on Instagram,” by TIME.com’s Nolan Feeney: “The actors posed for a group photo shoot [each holding a bottle of water] to raise awareness about limited access to clean water in developing countries. The stuffy aristocrats of Downton Abbey have a sense of humor after all. Last week, an uncropped publicity photo of Downton Abbey characters Robert, Earl of Grantham (Hugh Bonneville) and Lady Edith Crawley (Laura Carmichael) revealed an embarrassing anachronism: a plastic water bottle that was clearly out of a place in a show set in the 1910s and ’20s.” With a picture: http://ti.me/1sOwj5g

**A message about BP’s Commitment to America: We're generating about $147 billion in economic value for the U.S. every year. Across the country, BP supports more than 260,000 jobs. And no energy company invests more in the U.S. than BP – nearly $50 billion over the last 5 years.

When we set up operation in one part of the country, people in other parts go to work. That’s not a coincidence. It’s one more part of our commitment to America.

Interested in how BP fuels your state’s economy? Check out our BP in America interactive map: http://bit.ly/Americamap **

** A message from BP: Safety is never being satisfied – and always working to be better. That’s why at BP, we’re working every day to improve our training, our technology, our culture. See real examples of our progress: on.bp.com/safety **