BAY CITY, MI — Two years of negotiations and planning has led to the Jan. 2 launch of the Bay County Wellness Center, a partnership with the Bay City-based Total Family Healthcare and Dr. Jeffrey Potts to provide reduced-cost healthcare to Bay County employees and their dependents.

The clinic, which offers no copay to county workers for an office visit or for generic medication, is an effort to provide less-expensive care and to encourage them to live healthier lifestyles, which will in turn save the county money.

"What it does for employees is, it offers them an opportunity to actually reduce their cost of healthcare, reduce the wait time they have before they see a healthcare provider, and increase their long-term well-being," said Tim Quinn, director of personnel and employee relations.

Since the 1970s, Bay County has worked with Blue Cross Blue Shield to provide an insurance plan for employees that currently entails a copay for office visits, a $10 charge for generic medications and a $30-$50 charge for non-generic drugs. While that policy is still provided for employees, as of Jan. 2, they now have the option to visit Dr. Potts.

According to a statement released by Total Family Healthcare, Dr. Potts has practiced in the bay area for more than a decade. Bay County documents note that service will be provided by he and his staff at three locations: 200 S. Wenona Ave., Suite 225; in Auburn at 946 W. Midland Road, Suite A; and in Midland at 720 W. Wackerly St., Suite 8. Coverage includes non-Medicaid, retired employees under the age of 65.

The deal will cost the county approximately $325,000 for access each year – a $178,000 administrative fee plus a base cost of healthcare to 125 households at $44.25 each. However, Quinn noted that Bay County's employee healthcare costs currently stands at more than $6 million per year, and that he expects the deal to save the county money.

"Every time somebody goes to the clinic, we're not paying Blue Cross for that," Quinn said. "We expect the clinic to pay for itself in that way."

Quinn said the measure should also boost patient health, which will decrease long-term costs as well. Employees who would like to use the wellness center are asked to take a blood test and fill out a health risk assessment form before receiving care, part of measures he says will save the county health care costs down the road.

"It makes people aware of the problems they may have—slightly high blood sugar, high blood pressure, things like that," Quinn said. "That'll save us in the long run, because many of our medical costs are associated with long-term diseases."

In addition, Quinn said the measure's efforts to guarantee service will help county employees receive care as demand for services increases.

"With the Affordable Care Act kicking in yesterday, that's going to create a lot more demand in the system, and we anticipate it's going to be a lot tougher to get in to see a family doctor in the future because of that," he said. "For this, they're guaranteeing us access for our employees and their dependents, so accessibility for us will be a big plus going forward."

—Sam Easter is a general assignment reporter for The Bay City Times and the Saginaw News. He can be reached at seaster@mlive.com.