Newark mayor and Senate candidate Cory Booker leaves a polling station after casting his ballot during the special election in New Jersey, Wednesday. REUTERS/Eduardo Munoz

Democrat Cory Booker, the mayor of Newark, won the U.S. Senate election in New Jersey on Wednesday, handily defeating Republican opponent Steve Lonegan, a former small-town New Jersey mayor, with 55 percent of the vote, according to polls.

Booker becomes the second African-American in the Senate along with Republican Tim Scott of South Carolina.

"Thank you so much, New Jersey. I'm proud to be your senator-elect," Booker posted to Twitter Wednesday night. The mayor is an active user of the social media site.

Voters in New Jersey headed to the polls Wednesday to cast ballots in the special election to fill a vacant U.S. Senate seat, left open after the death of Democratic Sen. Frank Lautenberg in June.

Booker, who was heavily favored to win, characterized the race as a referendum on the partisan gridlock that has paralyzed Washington in recent weeks, while Lonegan argued in support of the partial federal government shutdown that began more than two weeks ago.

Polling this week gave Booker leads ranging from 14 points to 22 points over Lonegan.

The election was the first since the partial shutdown began. It came the same day Senate leaders passed a bill to reopen the government and avert a Treasury default. The bill was sent Wednesday evening to the House of Representatives for a vote.

"This is the only election in America right now where we will get a chance to make a statement about what is going on in Washington," Booker said after voting in downtown Newark. "This is a chance for us to send a message about the shutdown, about the gridlock, about all those forces that my opponent represents — the tea party — that says we shouldn't compromise, we shouldn't work together."

Lonegan supported the shutdown, arguing that President Barack Obama's health care law, the Affordable Care Act, should be delayed a year and objecting to the concept of government-directed health insurance. In recent days, he has accused Booker of not even living in Newark.

After voting in Bogota, which he led as mayor for three terms, Lonegan said he has been able to unite Republicans of all stripes.

"We've unified and I'm proud of that," he said. "The entire Republican Party, from the tea party to the moderate wing to pro-life and not so pro-life. Everybody who cares about individual liberty."