While it may be serving the people of Africa, a long-standing non-profit has found a new home in Longmont.

Lalmba Association, a small non-profit that provides medical aid and other long-term help to rural African villages, is more than 50 years old and was founded and run by Hugh and Marty Downey of Arvada. But in 2013, the couple decided it was time to retire and pass along their work to Jeff and Hillary James.

The James' weren't strangers to the foundation. Shortly after getting married in 2003, the two volunteered in Ethiopia for two years as project managers. They stayed involved with Lalmba over the years, and when the Downeys looked for successors, they knew who to call.

Learn more about Lalmba www.lalmba.org

"They called us up out of the blue, six years (after we volunteered), and said, we're ready to retire we're looking for replacements," Hillary James said.

At the time her family was in Virginia, but the couple decided to say yes, and spent six months in the area looking for a new home before settling in Longmont. While the decision to take over the non-profit, and move its base from Arvada to Longmont was "scary," James said she knew it was the right move.

"We believe wholeheartedly in the work," she said. "It's fabulous work. Being really small gives us a lot of flexibility so we can do things that really make a difference for these communities out in Africa."

Advertisement

Hillary and Jeff are currently the only official employees of Lalmba, and they run it all out of their home, as most of the work occurs half-way across the world, in Kenya and Ethiopia.

With volunteers, many of whom are medical professionals, Lalmba provides medical care, a clinic and hands-on health training and education to locals to help improve their communities. Volunteers go abroad to the sites in both countries for one to two years to help out.

Lalmba has been working in Kenya for more than 30 years and in Ethiopia for 16. Hillary James said the next plan is to start providing more education to the communities.

"We see (education) as sort of the future," she said. "If they can be educated then you have a community that's educated, then you can get yourselves out of poverty."

Considering the non-profit is under new leadership with a new home base, right now the James' are focused on re-introducing Lalmba to the community, and moving it into the future.

"Most of the supporters are Hugh and Marty's age, which is really challenging when you're trying to move forward, so we're trying to get a younger donor base a different donor base," she said. "Just kind of put the 21st century stamp on it."

While Lalmba is always seeking funds (they are currently hoping to raise $200,00 in the next six months) their next big project is taking dedicated donors on an African adventure to the site in Kenya.

"Jeff is going to lead a group of 10 supporters on a 10 day walk across Kenya," she said. The supporters will end up at their project site on the shores of Lake Victoria.

While Lalmba will continue sending American volunteers as needed, James said the ultimate plan is to have a base operation out of Longmont, with all the African operations run by locals so they can improve their own communities.

"Ultimately we would like the projects run by the locals," she said.

Isa Jones: 303-684-5274, jonesi@timescall.com or twitter.com/theisajones