Topics: Capitalism, collective bargaining, Corporatism, crony capitalism, Finance, financialism, industry, Labor, lexicon, Teddy Roosevelt, Business News, Politics News

The term “corporatism” is in the news. Some on the left use it as an epithet, distinguishing between a progressive and a “corporatist” wing of the Democratic Party. At the same time, as Mike Konczal of the Roosevelt Institute has noted in the New Republic, some on the right accuse the Obama administration of a “corporatist” agenda of furthering the interests of well-connected corporations, at the expense of free enterprise. Conservatives and libertarians continue to describe the New Deal as a sinister “corporatist” arrangement allegedly inspired by Benito Mussolini’s fascism. And one Nobel Prize winner in economics, Edmund Phelps, has sought to stigmatize all modern industrial capitalist economies that do not fit his utopian libertarian ideal of a laissez-faire market system as “corporatist.”

When a word has too many meanings, it ends up spreading confusion rather than clarity. Confucius said that reform must begin with “the rectification of names,” that is, assuring that words and meanings be used consistently. It is high time to distinguish among the multiple meanings of “corporatism,” as a preliminary to deciding whether the phrase is useful or useless.

There are at least four different and incompatible meanings of “corporatism”: political representation by vocational groups; centralized collective bargaining among employers and organized labor; modern industrial capitalism; and “crony capitalism” or the corruption of public policy by special interests.

Corporatism as political representation by vocational groups. In the 19th century, some conservative romantic opponents of the Enlightenment and liberal democracy called for a neo-medieval system in which everybody would be represented by economic guilds, rather than political parties. This kind of functional representation was one of many reactionary ideas that influenced fascism, though Mussolini’s Italy and Hitler’s Germany were short-lived and incoherent rather than highly systematic. Corporatism in this sense has never had any relevance in the U.S. context; apart from critics satirizing Washington lobbying, no American has ever suggested that Congress should directly represent the pharmaceutical industry association or the AFL-CIO.

Corporatism as centralized collective bargaining among employers and organized labor. This kind of corporatism has been a feature of many modern democratic societies and has nothing whatever to do with substituting guilds for political parties or free elections. In the 20th century many democracies adopted systems in which government encouraged or compelled employers in particular industries to engage in collective bargaining with labor unions to set industry-wide wages and benefits. In many cases the bargaining was carried out by national or regional-level business trade associations and centralized labor unions.

This kind of business-labor corporatism continues to exist in many European and Asian nations, including many that are models of liberal democracy and successful capitalism. The purpose of Franklin Roosevelt’s much-maligned National Recovery Administration (NRA), struck down by the Supreme Court on constitutional grounds in 1935, was to oversee the creation of similar centralized collective bargaining in most American industries. Ironically, the purpose of this kind of corporatism — in the U.S. as in Europe and Asia — has been to avoid more direct government intervention in the market, by leaving companies and their employees to work out their own industry-specific arrangements. For example, it was only after the NRA was struck down that the Roosevelt administration moved to impose economy-wide minimum wages, Social Security and minimum hours laws. If the NRA had survived to the present, different industries in the U.S. today might have their own, privately negotiated and publicly approved, industry-wide minimum wages and retirement benefits — and levels of unionization in the U.S. would probably be much higher.

Historically illiterate conservatives and libertarians, like Jonah “Liberal Fascism” Goldberg, confuse collective-bargaining corporatism with fascist-style guild representation. You can criticize centralized collective bargaining — but not on the spurious basis that it is somehow “fascist.”