NORWALK, Conn.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Xerox (NYSE: XRX) today announced its acquisition of Healthy Communities Institute (HCI), a Berkeley, Calif.-based company with a leading cloud platform that puts socioeconomic and community health information at the fingertips of hospitals, public health agencies and community coalitions.

“The Affordable Care Act and demand for improved quality of care are factors driving opportunities for Xerox, and population-based insights are critical as the healthcare system shifts to a value-based model,” said Justin Lanning, senior vice president and managing director, Midas+, A Xerox Company. “With this acquisition, we are enriching our healthcare business, evolving our offerings and innovating to address market changes. Our clients will be able to identify at-risk populations, which will lead to timelier and more personalized clinical interventions. This can reduce costs and improve care.”

Midas+ serves over 2,200 healthcare provider facilities and is the market leader in workflow solutions, quality, regulatory management and actionable insights that improve patient care.

HCI’s software-as-a-service platform centralizes proprietary, healthcare and community data to help hospitals and other health organizations manage population health. By tapping data derived from clinical visits, healthcare claims, and community-level assessments, healthcare providers and others can better understand community demographics, risk factors and disease distribution. HCI supports more than 250 hospitals, public health organizations and community health and employer coalitions across 36 states and covers over 100 million lives across the United States.

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recognizes that this data is the largest determinant of population health and can be used to improve overall health status and reduce chronic conditions1.

HCI’s data and insight will be integrated with Midas+’s JuvoTM Care Performance analytics platform, creating the largest repository for insight on factors that impact population health. It will also provide socioeconomic and environmental context for individual clinical care information. This combination creates a comprehensive view of patient care and puts evidence-based actionable recommendations into the hands of providers, with the aim of producing better healthcare outcomes.

HCI’s current clients include 75 public health departments at the city, county and state level.

“Health organizations are under pressure to more actively engage patients and the communities they serve,” said Lanning. “HCI offers valuable insight on specific populations so health organizations can tailor community programs to efficiently meet the demands of today’s healthcare challenges.”

“Community-level insight is a critical component of population health management,” said Deryk Van Brunt, DrPH, president and CEO, Healthy Communities Institute. “By joining Xerox, HCI and our clients will benefit from the global company’s powerful brand and its advanced analytics across the entire healthcare ecosystem.”

The Healthy Communities Institute management team and its employees will remain with the company.

Terms of the transaction were not disclosed.

Click to Tweet

About Xerox

Xerox is a global business services, technology and document management company helping organizations transform the way they manage their business processes and information. Headquartered in Norwalk, Conn., we have more than 140,000 Xerox employees and do business in more than 180 countries. Together, we provide business process services, printing equipment, hardware and software technology for managing information -- from data to documents. Learn more at www.xerox.com.

1 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social Determinants of Health. http://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/FAQ.html.

Note: To receive RSS news feeds, visit http://news.xerox.com. For open commentary, industry perspectives and views visit http://www.linkedin.com/company/xerox, http://twitter.com/xeroxcorp, http://simplifywork.blogs.xerox.com, http://www.facebook.com/XeroxCorp or http://www.youtube.com/XeroxCorp.

Xerox®, Xerox and Design®, and JuvoTM are trademarks of Xerox in the United States and/or other countries.