John Axford’s 2-year-old son continues to struggle after suffering a rattlesnake bite, so the Rockies on Sunday moved Axford off their active roster.

Axford, a right-handed reliever, was put on the family medical emergency list for a minimum of three days and a maximum of seven.

The Rockies replaced him with 25-year-old right-hander Scott Oberg, who will make his major league debut. The team also moved Charlie Culberson to the 60-day disabled list to make room on the 40-man roster for Oberg.

Axford’s son, Jameson, was bitten on his right foot by a rattlesnake last month in the backyard of their rental house near Scottsdale during spring training. He’s been in the hospital ever since.

“He’s stable, but there are still a lot of issues,” Axford said.

Jameson underwent an initial surgery on Monday. But doctors found a staph infection that was more serious than they expected. They removed all the tissue and skin at the spot of the bite, down to the tendon and bone.

“My wife couldn’t actually even tell me on the phone because of how tough the news was for her,” Axford said. “She’s been by his side the entire time in the hospital. So it was difficult to hear that, but I just keep going back to the memories of how happy he was in his good moods and his good spots.”

Jameson needs another surgery to repair the muscle and graft on new skin. So he will be moved from a Phoenix-area hospital to Denver on a medical emergency flight to meet a recommended surgeon in Colorado.

“At least I’ll get to be closer to him,” Axford said.

Axford’s wife, Nicole, and their 3-year-old son J.B., have stayed with Jameson since last month. And Axford left the team for a week during spring training to be with his family. He returned late in spring and pitched a hitless inning Wednesday at Milwaukee in his season debut.

Jameson, obviously, has weighed heavy on his mind, Axford said.

“Anybody who has kids, you get to see your toddler running around, it’s an amazing thing to see,” Axford said.

“But when your son has been laying in a bed for more than two weeks and can’t move and he probably won’t be able to walk for another couple of months, what you want is just for him to walk.”

Nick Groke: ngroke@denverpost.com or twitter.com/nickgroke