Good Friday Morning, Fellow Seekers.

It's been nearly a decade since Democratic U.S. Senate candidate Joe Sestak retired from the Navy, but he still prefers to be called "Admiral."

And as our pal Salena Zito from The Tribune-Review reports, that could prove to be something of a barnacle for the former Congressman from Pennsylvania's 7th District.

That's because Pentagon ethics guidelines allow retirees who are not on active duty to mention their service when they're campaigning for a federal office, but they have to make it clear that they're retired, Zito writes.

That's not always the case with Sestak, a 31-year Navy veteran, who refers to himself as "Admiral' in his campaign literature and in emails to reporters, such as this communication we received the other week asking us to run "Admiral Joe Sestak's op-ed on the Affordable Care Act."

According to Zito, the rules weree intended to avoid making it look like there was any "official endorsement or approval of military members' participation in political activity."

At an event in Cambria County earlier this week, Zito says Sestak refused to answer questions about "why his campaign literature doesn't prominently indicate he retired as a two-star rear admiral.

"I don't know what you are talking about," Sestak told Zito.

He referred comment to campaign spokeswoman Danielle Lynch, who similarly declined to comment. When Zito reminded Sestak of the military's ethics rules, she says the Democratic hopeful responded, "Mmmm. Send us something on that, would you?"

The rest of the day's news starts now.

Speaking of Joe Sestak, he's mostly unknown to Pa. voters in this week's Franklin & Marshall College poll, PoliticsPA reports.

Paycheck Protection gone wild? State Sen. Don White, R-Indiana, is circulating a gag bill that would require political dues to be deducted from Senate employees' paychecks and deposited into Senate GOP campaign coffers, The PAIndependent reports.

SEPTA will run anti-Islam ads, because free speech (ugh), PhillyMag reports.

The Philly School Reform Commission is gunning for a nearly $3 billion budget for the coming year, PhillyMag also reports.

April Fool's a bit early, continued: Philly Mayoral candidate Doug Oliver has released a gag poll, trolling rival Lynne Abraham, who released a poll showing her winning, BillyPenn reports.

The number of schoolkids opting out of standardized tests has quadrupled in the last three years, WITF-FM reports.

An independent expenditure group backing Philly mayoral candidate Tony Williams is dropping $500k on an ad campaign, WHYY-FM reports.

The U.S. House has approved a long-term fix for Medicare payments to physicians, The Morning Call reports.

U.S. Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., will not seek re-election, Politico reports.

To balance budgets, some state governments are cutting higher education, Stateline.org reports.

The National Journal goes inside Jeb Bush's "stealth" campaign to woo Christian conservatives.

WolfWatch.

Gov. Tom Wolf keeps his budget cavalcade going today with a 9:45 a.m. stop at Cedar Crest High School in Lebanon (Yes, they have one too) and a 2 p.m. stop at a plastics firm in Scranton.

You Say It's Your Birthday Dept.

Best wishes go out this morning to our PennLive colleague David Wenner and to lobbyist Dan Hayward. Congrats, gents.

Heavy Rotation.

If you love Joy Division (and we do) and love The Teletubbies (which some of you might), this is the best thing you will see today.

Friday's Gratuitous Baseball Link.

Alas, the Os dropped a 6-4 decision to Detroit on Thursday. Win some, lose some.

And now you're up to date. See you all back here in a bit.