State Senator Jim Nielsen is treated by Amber Denna at Paradise Drug Friday morning. Nielsen cut his finger before visiting the Paradise business and the wound opened up again during his visit. Trevor Warner - Paradise post

Paradise Drug got a visit from California Senator Jim Nielsen Friday morning, and offered a little impromptu care while he was there.

Coordinated by advocacy group Pharmacy Choice and Access Now, the visit gave Nielsen a closer look at some of the concerns small pharmacies are facing in the health care industry. Paradise Drug owner Janet Balbutin said low prescription reimbursements to physicians and pharmacies from insurance companies and medical are a big hurdle.

So is a requirement for customers to refill their prescriptions “30 days on-the-nose.” She said it is too hard for customers to be there for refills exactly 30 days every time and there should be a two-to-three day buffer.

She added that insurers frequently switch coverage of product brands, leaving pharmacies with stock that is hard to sell once insurers change their coverage.

And that was just a few things off the top of her head. Balbutin gave several pages of concerns to Neilsen, who sits on the state’s health committee, including conflicts of interest, mandatory mail orders, higher copays for independent pharmacies, massive increases in generic products sometimes amounting to 300-400 percent, time-consuming authorizations, and more.

She said the complexity and confusion for pharmacies and customers has increased over the last three years.

Nielsen said HMOs and now the Affordable Care Act have “interfered with the doctor-patient relationships.”

He said there is a “human dimension to medicine” that is being lost and the “value of personal contact between a patient and a pharmacist” is important.

Nielsen got a touch of that personal contact while he was at Paradise Drug when he started bleeding through a bandage on his little finger.

Nielsen cut his finger at home while cleaning before he visited Paradise Drug. While shaking hands during a tour of the business, the bandage came loose and the cut was deep enough that it started to bleed again.

Paradise Drug manager Amber Denna was all too happy to re-dress and bandage the wound and Nielsen finished the tour.

During the tour, Nielsen met Paradise resident Oscar Leonard, who is on staff at Paradise Drug. At 95 years old, Leonard is believed to be the oldest practicing pharmacist in the United States. Leonard was also a POW for 42 months during World War II. Along with his wife Mary, he recounted war stories with Nielsen during the visit.