Former Boulder police Officer Sam Carter poses with the elk shot Jan. 1 on Mapleton Hill, an incident that sparked community outrage over the animal s death and two police officer s alleged role in the killing. (Courtesy Roger Koenig)

Camera's Top 10 local news stories of 2013 Editor's note: The Camera is counting down the Top 10 local news stories of 2013 as chosen by newsroom staff. Readers also voted for their top picks. 10. Patti Adler controversy 9. Boulder grapples with bears 8. U.S. 36 overhaul continues 7. CU hires new athletic director 6. Killing of the Mapleton elk Readers' picks 10. U.S. 36 overhaul 9. CU-Boulder's MAVEN mission to Mars 8. Rare northern river otter sighting 7. Drunken horseback arrest 6. Rash of car vs. cyclist accidents

"Elk down."

That's the text former Boulder police officers Sam Carter and Brent Curnow exchanged just before midnight this past Jan. 1, after prosecutors say Carter shot and killed a trophy elk that had been wandering the Mapleton Hill neighborhood.

The following day, Boulder police initially said there was no record of any such shooting. Then a photo surfaced of Carter, in uniform, posing with the animal as it lay dead on the ground.

Evidence would emerge, Boulder prosecutors allege, that shows the shooting was premeditated. There were texts sent hours before the shooting talking about killing the elk. Carter failed to report the shooting or tell dispatchers where he was, and Curnow had called in sick before showing up to load the carcass into his truck.

As these allegations came to light over the following weeks, the death of the elk -- dubbed "Big Boy" by some residents who say the animal was a regular and beloved visitor to the area -- sparked outrage in the Boulder community.

There were candlelight vigils, silent marches, cruiser rides and even songs penned for the elk. City Council members asked police Chief Mark Beckner whether the Boulder's cops were out of touch with the city they worked in.

Less than a month after the shooting, prosecutors filed nine charges -- including three felonies -- against the two officers, both of whom then resigned from the Boulder Police Department.

Curnow took a plea deal in September and was sentenced to probation and 60 days of house arrest after prosecutors said he was "less culpable" in the shooting than Carter, who is alleged to have pulled the trigger.

Prosecutors said they did not offer a deal to Carter, and almost a year after the shooting, he remains on track for a trial in January, as he maintains that he put down the elk after it was injured.

The attention the case garnered was so great Carter's attorney tried to get his client's trial moved to a different county, arguing the attention and vitriol the case generated from Boulder County residents made a fair trial impossible.

But a judge ruled the case will remain in the 20th Judicial District. Carter is scheduled to go to trial the week of Jan. 21, when 12 members of the Boulder County community will decide if what happened in the hours before "Elk down" was a crime.

Contact Camera Staff Writer Mitchell Byars at 303-473-1329, byarsm@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/mitchellbyars.