Delmont, Sd

When the late-morning tornado hit Delmont, many people were in church on Sunday.

Seventeen-year-old Drew Kurtz was teaching Sunday school at a local church when he got the call a tornado was headed his way.

"We all get in the bathrooms and all of the little kids were in there and some of them were crying and they were freaking out. Then we just heard really loud gusts of wind," Kurtz said.

No one was hurt as the group huddled in the basement, according to Kurtz. At least three people were sent to the local hospital according to an Avera spokesperson, who says the patients have been released.

There are no reports of deaths.

State officials say 20 buildings are damaged, many of them homes.

"It's just rubble and there is nothing standing walls-wise or anything from the ones that I saw. One couple, she's got three kids and she was taking her husband to work and their house was totally destroyed," David Mathews said.

Glenn Kantrell owns a local business in Delmont and says the tornado cherry-picked homes in the south side of town.

"There are two houses down there. One of them didn't get touched but the other one, the couples were in the basement. It picked the house up and sat it five or six feet off of the foundation," Kantrell said.

The new fire hall was built in 2015 and is damaged, according to reports. The century-old Zion Lutheran Church is also destroyed.

General {{Title}} Remove Change News General Courts Web Only Crime Outdoors Events Center Non-Homepage Boredom Busters Pipeline Positively KELOLAND Technology Hunger Affordable Care Act Shops Flooding Remembering 9/11 Drought JazzFest Spring Storm Honor Flight Spencer Anniversary

DoApp Health News Business News Sports

Agriculture Markets Livestock Crops Politics

HealthBeat Cancer Children's Health Heart Health Wellness & Nutrition General Health Beat Women's Health RX Resources What's Going Around OTC Diabetes Recalls Dental Health Men's Health

Politics South Dakota Legislature Budget Congress Taxes General Local Campaign President US Senate New Laws US House Iowa Ballot Issues Local Races Minnesota Gubernatorial

Education Funding College Elementary High School Pre K School Supplies Middle School

Sports Professional College High School Sports Zone Headlines Summit League Tournament Olympics

Business Industry Your Money Matters Development Gas & Energy Legislation Economy/Stocks Employment General Health Care Technology Education Funding Tourism Banking/Finance Housing Transportation Insurance Meetings & Events Retail & Restaurants All Industries On The Move Shops Agriculture

Featured Stories Eye on KELOLAND Inside KELOLAND

Weather Snow Forecast Records Rain Flooding Drought WX Corner General

World News

Investigates GEAR UP

Sponsored Done

© 2016 KELOLAND TV. All Rights Reserved.