Three Russian dogs are expected to complete their improbable journey from Sochi to the United States on Sunday to start a new life as pampered pups in Colorado.

The dogs arrived in New York City last Wednesday, and Sunday night Jake, Mishka and Mom were set to arrive at Denver International Airport.

Gus Kenworthy of Telluride, a silver medalist in slopestyle skiing, in the Winter Games, was moved by the abundance of stray dogs in the host city.

He and friend Robin Macdonald, a photographer from Whistler, British Columbia, began working with Humane Society International to rescue the dogs and bring them to the United States, as well as make life better for those left behind. Their plans include more shelters and better adoption programs in Russia.

The pair also is urging fans to adopt dogs in their home cities, as well.

One of the dogs Kenworthy and Macdonald tried to save, a female named Sochi, died before they could get her to the United States for treatment. Another, Stryder, was adopted in Washington.

As Kenworthy returned to the United States, Macdonald stayed behind for almost a month to do the paperwork and care for the dogs. Macdonald and the dogs left Russia on Tuesday, with a stopover in New York City, where they reunited with Kenworthy and appeared on the “Today Show” on Friday.

Macdonald has logged the dog’s journey on his Twitter feed. Kenworthy’s Twitter posts include pictures and accounts from many of his media interviews, and his gratitude to companies that have donated food and toys for the dogs.

“These pups are gonna be spoiled rotten!” tweeted the 22-year-old, who grew up in Telluride and became a pro skier at 16.

On March 4, as the Twitter feed shows pictures and comments about his time with singer Miley Cyrus, Kenworthy tweeted to Macdonald, “wish you were here w/ us dude! You’re my hero for stayin in Russia & making sure the dogs get home safe.”

Humane Society International has set up a Web page with instructions on how to adopt other Sochi street dogs or donate to the effort to help them.

Kitty Block, Humane Society International’s vice president, issued a statement Friday on the dogs’ journey, thanking Kenworthy.

“The dogs were saved from almost certain doom during the city’s campaign to rid itself of street dogs ahead of the Olympic Games,” Block stated. “We know the dogs are now in the safe, loving hands of Gus and wish them a lifetime of happiness in their new home.”

Joey Bunch: 303-954-1174, jbunch@denverpost.com or twitter.com/joeybunch