Still Time to Register to Hear the Best Ideas, Innovation, Inspiration - October 23-24 One in Four Convening on Unaccompanied Homeless Women at Harvard University

Lisa Watson, Downtown Women's Center

Tue, Oct 7, 2014 at 1:24 PM

Reply-To: philip.f.mangano@abolitionistroundtable.com

To: hasson.rashid@gmail.com

ONE IN FOUR CONVENING ON UNACCOMPANIED HOMELESS WOMEN

Join Leading Researchers, Key Policymakers, and Practitioners from more than 50 programs across the country! Be part of a robust exchange of ideas, innovation, and inspiration at the inaugural One in Four Convening on Unaccompanied Homeless Women at Harvard on October 23 - 24. Have you registered? There's still time ( See Attachment)!

REGISTER NOW! A BEST/NEXT PRACTICES CONVENING ON RESEARCH, POLICY, PRACTICE, AND RESOURCES.

One in Four Convening Partner Phillips Brooks House Association at Harvard University announces PBHA's 8th Annual Robert Coles "Call of Service" Lecture and Award Honoring Bob Moses Civil Rights Leader Founder and President of the Algebra Project. The Robert Coles Lecture and Award is the concluding event of the One in Four Convening. We hope you will join in this event. With his lifelong commitment to civil rights, Bob Moses embodies the spirit of the Robert Coles "Call of Spirit" Award. Activist and organizer with the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee and Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party Awarded a MacArthur "Genius Grant" Founded the Algebra Project in Cambridge, Massachusetts, envisioning education as an extension of the civil rights campaigns of the 1960s. Author of Radical Equations: Civil Rights from Mississippi to the Algebra Project.

On the 50th anniversary of Freedom Summer, PBHA honored to reward this civil rights leader who has been a model of servant-leadership since the 1960s.8th Annual Robert Coles "Call of Service" Lecture & Award, Keynote Address by Bob Moses

Friday, October 24th., First Parish Church, Harvard Square

One in Four Convening Faculty. A National Faculty addressing key themes identified in the field, including Permanent Housing; A Sense of Belonging; Trauma Informed Care and Recovery; Education, Employment, Empowerment; Primary and Behavioral Health Care; Aging, Reentry, Veterans; and Young Adult Populations, Organizational Issues, Social Enterprise.

Convening Faculty, Dr. Stephen Gaetz, Professor, Faculty of Education, York University, Toronto, Director of the Canadian Observatory on Homelessness and the online Homeless Hub; President, Raising the Roof/Chez Toit, seeking long term solutions to homelessness in Canada.

Anisa Mendizabal, Rochester County Director Center for Employment Opportunities (CEO) Rochester, NY. Author, Capturing Our Strengths: Smart Practices in Serving Homeless Women.

Dr. Suzanne L. Wenzel, University of Southern California School of Social Work, Director, Homelessness, Housing and Social Environment Research Cluster

Rev. Cristina Rathbone, Cathedral Church of St. Paul, Boston Priest to the Cathedral's homeless congregation. Author of A World Apart: Women, Prison, and Life Behind Bars.

Dr. Dennis Culhane, University of Pennsylvania VA National Center on Homelessness among Veterans.

Dr. Sofia Herrera, Associate Director, Office for Urban Initiatives; Research Assistant Professor; Fuller Graduate School of Psychology; Fuller Theological Seminary; Pasadena, California.

Molly Moen, COO, Downtown Women's Center, Los Angeles. Molly Moen is responsible for guiding the day-to-day business operations of the Center and providing strategic leadership to DWC's planning, financial analysis, fundraising, communications, human resources, volunteer, and facilities management efforts. During her tenure, she has managed DWC through a period of unprecedented growth in budget, staff, and numbers served. She spearheaded two capital campaigns which raised a total of $40 million and enabled the development of 119 units of permanent supportive housing.

Amy Turk, Chief Program Officer, Downtown Women's Center, Los Angeles. Amy Turk oversees DWC's Clinical Health Services, Vocational Education, Social Enterprises, Day Center, and Permanent Supportive Housing serving nearly 4,000 low-income and homeless women annually. She worked for 12 years at Ocean Park Community Center (OPCC) in Santa Monica, CA where she served the last seven years as the Director of Daybreak, offering continuum of care services for adult homeless women living with mental disabilities.

Lisa Marsh, Executive Director, Piece by Piece, Los Angeles, a social enterprise in Los Angeles Skid Row.

Darlene Assencoa-Mazurek, South Middlesex Opportunity Council Susan Gentili, South Middlesex Opportunity Council The South Middlesex Opportunity Council (SMOC) works in communities across Massachusetts to provide opportunities to enhance self-sufficiency and to create a safety net of support. Founded in 1965, SMOC is the designated community-based anti-poverty agency for ten local jurisdictions. SMOC serves unaccompanied homeless women through triage/diversion/emergency housing/rapid rehousing; residential recovery programs; women's supportive housing; and wraparound services. SMOC Housing Corporation has developed, owns, and manages a real estate portfolio of over 120 properties with over 1,400 units in 18 communities across the Commonwealth.

Julie Batten, Director of the Glass House Shelter Project in Massachusetts, on her work bringing accredited college level English courses into homeless shelters to encourage residents, through narrative discussion and personal essay, to see themselves as part of the larger collective. Batten teaches accredited courses through Salem State University and the University of Massachusetts in Boston.

Jean-Michel Giraud, Friendship Place, Washington, DC, on ending homelessness through a focus on program re-design for consumer empowerment and unaccompanied young women in the Under Thirty program.

Dr. Monica Bharel, Chief Medical Officer, Boston Health Care for the Homeless Program, on research, strategies, and opportunities to end homelessness through Medicaid expansion under the Affordable Care Act,and issues of aging in the homeless population.

Dr. Carol L. M. Caton, Professor, Columbia University Medical Center. Dr. Caton's research has focused on homeless women, chronic homelessness, and behavioral and primary health issues. Click here to see Dr. Caton's research

on gender differences among single homeless adults.

Vincent Kane, Director, VA National Center on Homelessness among Veterans, on planning to end homelessness, VA resources for housing and services, and initiatives targeted to homeless women veterans.

Lisa Watson, CEO, Downtown Women's Center, Los Angeles. Downtown Women's Center is a nationally recognized program for women living in extreme poverty on Los Angeles' Skid Row. The Center's resources include a Day Center and 119 units of permanent supportive housing. DWC has made important contributions to highlighting the needs of unaccompanied women as a leader of the ongoing community-based research initiative, the Downtown Women's Needs Assessment, and through a national survey of best practices in serving unaccompanied women.

Roseanna H. Means, MD, Founder and Chief Medical Officer, Women of Means. Women of Means provides a gender-specific and barrier-free medical access model for homeless women, with a core group of volunteer physicians from many specialties who volunteer in seven Boston area shelters. In 2013, Women of Means launched one of the nation's first ACO (Accountable Care Organization) contracts to pilot a program of enhanced primary care and care coordination for a cohort of 50 homeless/marginally housed women aged 65 and older.

The Aileen Getty Foundation; Downtown Women's Center of Los Angeles; Institute for Urban Initiatives of Southern California; Massachusetts Housing and Shelter Alliance; South Middlesex Opportunity Council of Massachusetts; Phillips Brooks House Association at Harvard University; American Round Table to Abolish Homelessness and other sponsoring groups invite you to the Inaugural Convening of Programs that Serve Unaccompanied Women. This gathering will bring together national leaders and researchers, Executive Directors and senior staff, Board members, and innovative practitioners to learn from one another and to look to the future together. SEE ATTACHMENT to register!

Please share! Are you a CoC leader, regional contact, or coalition leader? Feel free to share this information with partners who serve unaccompanied women - Executive Directors, senior staff, Board members, elected and appointed officials, Ten Year Plan leaders, and program directors - all are appropriate attendees for this event.

One in four sheltered homeless adults is an unaccompanied woman. It's about time we convened to focus on this under-researched, poorly funded, heavily represented population in homelessness. Whether your program exclusively serves

unaccompanied women or serves them with other populations, this conference will offer new and best ideas and Next Practices. For decades while other populations of our homeless neighbors have had the attention of research, policy, and focused resources, unaccompanied homeless women have not. Yet one in four sheltered homeless adults is an unaccompanied woman. One in Four. Recently in our quest to find research, uncover targeted policy, or simply discover when the last conference focused on this population occurred, we learned about the deficiency of research and data, the absence of policy focus, and the lack of convening/conferencing targeted to this often vulnerable population. Our aim is to begin a process to remedy these oversights. In partnership with organizations who serve women exclusively or in larger programs, we have announced a One in Four Convening on October 23 - 24, 2014 at Harvard University. Our intent is to begin a national dialogue to rectify the deficiencies in research, policy, and convening, as well as to offer an opportunity to those who serve women to listen and learn from one another.

Two full days focused on research, policy, practice, and resources. One in Four Convening Thursday, October 23: 9 am to 5 pm, followed by an informal reception, Dinner on your own, Friday, October 24: 9 am to 7 pm including annual Robert Coles Call of Service Lecture. Registration Fee is $250 Please Note: You will receive an automatic acknowledgement when you complete the registration form and pay (SEE ATTACHMENT). Your registration will be confirmed and final

when you receive a confirmation email. Registration payment requires use of a credit card. No split registrations or 1-day registrations. No refunds once registration is confirmed. Don't miss any details of the October 23-24 Convening at Harvard!

SOURCE: The American Round Table to Abolish Homelessness, 5 Park Street, Boston, MA 02108; philip.f.mangano@abolitionistroundtable.com; Lisa Watson, Downtown Women's Center