By Rep. Julie Parrish

Recently, The Oregonian/OregonLive's Ted Sickinger reported about the pending PERS budget crisis. Two solutions seem to be on the table: Raise taxes or reform PERS. But another budget hole is also coming in the 2017-19 biennium. Driven by the Affordable Care Act (ACA), a "Cadillac tax" will be assessed on health plans that Congress has deemed as being overly generous. Left as is, this will include a tax on public employee plans, paid for by taxpayers. The estimated cost coming out of local school districts and county governments? In the millions of dollars.

To solve both problems without raising taxes, I proposed House Bill 3564, which I will reintroduce in 2016. It offers a solution to get us out from under the Cadillac tax penalty and create a large-enough savings to pay down the PERS unfunded liability.

Let's start with the Cadillac tax issue first. As an excise tax, it will be assessed on the difference between plan costs and congressionally set caps. As an example, a $14,000 annual health care premium for a single employee, against a $10,200 ACA cap, creates a $1,520 tax burden. The penalty, assessed at a 40 percent tax rate, will differ for each school, transit and special district, city, county and state government. No employee will see any added health care benefits. Insurance carriers will likely act as tax collectors, sending payments straight to the federal government.

Under House Bill 3564, all Oregon public employers would align to the single benefit cap set forth by the ACA. The $10,200 would be treated as a defined employee benefit. Public employees would be offered a wide range of flexible spending choices in their benefits, no longer a one-size-fits-all model. Instead, employees would decide how their benefit dollars best meet their needs and could change the makeup of benefits at different stages of life.

A single employee could stay on his parent's health care plan until age 26. He could spend his $10,200 paying down student loans or putting money away for retirement in a pretax account. A single mother working in a school district making under 300 percent of the poverty rate could move her kids onto the Healthy Kids plan, buy a plan for herself and put the rest of her money into a pre-tax, flex-spending account to pay for daycare. An older, married employee with dual coverage from her spouse could use her money to increase long-term care coverage or increase payments to an IRA. All employees would buy from a health care exchange. Dental, vision and long-term care are excluded from the caps, so employees would keep that coverage.

Even at $10,200, there are family plans that public employees could buy. Are they the platinum-care plans of today? Maybe not. Does every employee need a platinum plan? Definitely not. Would each employee gain from having flexibility in how they spend their benefit dollars? Absolutely.

By avoiding the Cadillac tax penalty, the bill creates significant savings. Half the savings would be banked in a health savings trust account for future health care cost increases. When the federal government adjusts the caps, so would we, paid for by the trust account. The other half could be used to pay down the PERS liability and used for other locally bargained benefits. In an economic downturn, the savings would act as a buffer to avoid laying off teachers, first responders and other public employees.

Whether state legislators agree with the ACA or not, we can't be caught off guard in dealing with each component as the federal government implements it. The Cadillac tax issue has to be fixed in 2016 or we won't be able to avoid the tax in 2018. By aligning public employee health care plans to the ACA, we could also stop the PERS budget crisis and help stabilize budgets for years to come.

Our Oregon, the campaign arm of the public unions, hopes private corporations will pony up new taxes to pay for these bills. But all Oregonians lose in that battle. We must be innovative in using the money we have to meet our obligations. It's time to govern through our challenges together, with solution-oriented policies that honor public employees and respect taxpayers.

•

Republican Julie Parrish of West Linn represents Oregon House District 37.