Topics: 2014 Sochi Olympics, Dream City, Editor's Picks, panopticon, Security, Surveillance, surveillance state, Vladimir Putin, News, Politics News

The records are supposed to be set on the slopes at Sochi, not on the spreadsheets. But Vladimir Putin’s 2014 Winter Olympics, which begin on Feb. 7, are already an extraordinary event by several measures.

First, the Sochi Games are the most expensive in history. At $51 billion, the expenditure has exceeded even Beijing’s 2008 festivities ($40 billion), though more than four times as many athletes compete at the Summer Games.

Second, Sochi is the warmest city to hold the Winter Olympics. (Hence the goofy motto, “Hot, Cold, Yours.”) Weather forecasts for Sochi, one of Russia’s few subtropical cities, predict highs in the 50s. Hence also the cost: $10 billion has gone into the construction of a 30-mile highway-cum-railroad that will connect Adler, the temperate coastal site of the skating competitions, with Krasnaya Polyana, the sleepy mountain town transformed, over the past seven years, into a ski resort. With 45 bridges, 12 tunnels and corruption around every turn, this thoroughfare is the most expensive construction contract in Russian history, and by itself costs more than the entire 2010 Winter Olympics in Vancouver ($7 billion).

Lastly, there is the extensive security force surrounding the event, which will include upwards of 60,000 personnel — one for every six residents of Sochi, and more than the 53,000 foreign spectators expected to attend. When all is said and done, it could mark history’s most concerted effort to install a comprehensive security system in a free city.

According to the latest figures from Russia’s Interior Ministry, the 1,500-square-mile “Ring of Steel” surrounding Sochi is composed of the following human elements:

25,000 police (compared to 13,000 in London)

30,000 soldiers (compared to 17,000 in London)

8,000 Interior Ministry troops

The 58th Army, to assist in establishing an Olympic security zone in the contested Georgian territory of Abkhazia, just a couple of miles from Adler.

It’s the largest security force ever provided for the Olympics. Enabled by a perfect storm of terrorist threats, autocratic government and limitless resources, the system is certainly more extensive that what might be possible at a similar event in the U.S. or Europe.

In addition to metal detectors and X-rays at various checkpoints, Sochi has been equipped with tens of thousands of cameras. Russia has banned all vehicles not registered in the region. Russian visitors, like their foreign counterparts, must register with police within three days of arrival. The Pentagon has sent two warships to the Black Sea (to join four Russian Grachonok boats), has promised air support and is considering sharing technology used to disrupt remote detonators. Anti-ballistic missiles and underwater machine guns stand at the ready.

“It’s almost like Sochi has been turned into an independent state,” said Mark Galeotti, a specialist in security affairs and modern Russia, who teaches at NYU. “It is an extremely extensive control zone.”

On Wednesday, I spoke to Andrei Soldatov, a Russian investigative journalist who broke the biggest security story of the Sochi Olympics: SORM, the Russians’ virtual surveillance system. The Russian FSB (successor to the KGB) will monitor all communications between spectators, journalists, athletes and anyone else who visits (or lives in) Sochi. The U.S. State Department has warned business travelers to be careful with sensitive information, which “may be taken and shared with competitors, counterparts, and/or Russian regulatory and legal entities.” One security expert said SORM was like “PRISM on steroids.”

“There’s not public outcry about these measures,” Soldatov said. “After every big terrorist attack, like Volgograd,” — where suicide bombings killed 34 people last month — “Russian society approves half-measures. And metadata seems quite innocent in comparison to what was proposed.” In October, for example, the lower house of the Russian Parliament approved a law to hold the relatives of terrorists financially responsible for crimes. Muslim women in nearby Dagestan say they have been asked to provide saliva samples to the FSB so that their body parts may be identified in the event of a suicide bombing.