Andrew Morton (Photo: Marty Allison/The Herald)

The funeral for 16-year-old Andrew Morton, of Dickson, who died in the Highway 46 South wreck has been set for Tuesday at 4 p.m. from Dickson First Assembly with Bro. Jerry Jenkins officiating. Place of rest will be in the Dickson County Memorial Gardens.

Visitation will be Monday 2-8 pm at Taylor Funeral Home and Tuesday at the Dickson First Assembly at 2 pm until time of services.

Morton, a Dickson County High School student, was driving southbound on Highway 46 to mow a yard as part of his summer lawn care business when his GMC pickup truck crashed into a tractor-trailer, which was turning left onto Livestock Road beside the Pilot Travel Center in Dickson, said Dickson Police Cmdr. Eddie Breeden. The wreck occurred 11 a.m. Thursday.

The truck driven by Morton ran underneath the trailer, according to Dickson Police Officer Scott Hull. Morton was deceased at the scene.

The tractor-trailer driver, Daniel Maupin, 31, of Pikeville, Tenn., was cited for failure to yield. Maupin was not injured.

"We drew blood from both drivers and it's going to be weeks before we get that information back but there is no reason at this point in time to suspect that anything is going to come back abnormal," Breeden said.

Morton, who played for the DCHS Cougars baseball team, was the son of Marvin Morton and Becky Bear. He was a member of the Church of God of Prophecy.

According to his obituary, Morton was "an avid hunter and fisherman" and "he had a great love for baseball." He started playing baseball with DCYAA "where he developed his love of the game," according to the obituary.

A fundraising website has been set up for the family by American Pipe and Supply where Marvin Morton works.

The link is:

http://www.youcaring.com/memorial-fundraiser/marvin-andrew-morton-family-fund/190848

Read or Share this story: http://www.tennessean.com/story/news/local/dickson/2014/06/14/funeral-is-tuesday-for-teen-in-fatal-wreck-andrew-morton/10517523/