New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, are shown in a file photo. Jason DeCrow/ASSOCIATED PRESS

New York City Mayor Bill de Blasio’s office said Thursday the mayor and his wife plan to travel to Puerto Rico for a personal trip, a public disclosure that provides a sharp contrast to former Mayor Michael Bloomberg’s policy of keeping his out-of-town jaunts private.

Mr. de Blasio and his wife, Chirlane McCray, are scheduled to leave New York on Friday evening and return to the city on Tuesday.

“The mayor will remain in close contact with senior leadership and staff at City Hall, including receiving daily briefings,” said Wiley Norvell, a spokesman for Mr. de Blasio.

The mayor and Ms. McCray are paying for their travel costs, his office said. No aides from City Hall are accompanying them on the trip, but the mayor’s security team from the New York Police Department will be with the couple, his office said.

First Deputy Mayor Anthony Shorris will be responsible for attending to any issues that arise at City Hall while the mayor is out of town.

Mr. de Blasio has promised to provide the public with general information about his whereabouts, saying he believes New Yorkers have a right to be informed about his location.

Mr. Bloomberg, who served as mayor between 2002 and 2013, refused to provide information about his personal out-of-town travel. A billionaire, Mr. Bloomberg owned homes around the world, including Bermuda, London and Vail, Colo.

In 2010, Mr. Bloomberg came under fire for being in Bermuda at the start of a snowstorm that snarled the city for days. In 2013, Mr. Bloomberg was again in Bermuda when a train derailed in the Bronx.

“The problem is the mayor would have no private life, couldn’t be with his kids when you have the press following you around all the time,” said Mr. Bloomberg in 2011, explaining why he kept his whereabouts secret. Mr. Bloomberg has said he was in charge of the city “all the time,” no matter where in the world he was.

Mr. de Blasio’s position on this issue is different.

“I think it’s important to alert the public and the media broadly to my whereabouts,” Mr. de Blasio said in 2013. “For security reasons and, you know, other important reasons, it may not be right down to the street address and where the front and back door are.”