Verizon is mad for millennials.

“We’re always skating to wherever the puck is going,” CEO Lowell McAdam told attendees at Goldman Sachs’ Communacopia media conference on Thursday. And the puck Verizon’s chasing right now is 18-to-34 year-olds.

Exhibit A from the telecom is Go90, a free app introduced this month that Verizon calls its “mobile-first video service.”

McAdam, who’s clearly taken with Go90 despite being outside the target demo, said the skinny OTT bundle has content specifically curated for millennials.

This means “snackable content” from Verizon-owned Huffington Post, some half-hour and hour shows produced by Vice and others that’s delivered a la Netflix, and some sports, including live NFL games.

Add to this mix some exclusive content from DreamWorks Animation and a feature called “cuts,” which allows app users to snip a clip from a video on Go90 and transmit it to friends. Verizon knows millennials like to share that way.

“It’s not only the type of content but how you interact with the content,” McAdam said.

The app won’t go live until the end of the month, although 25,000 Verizon customers have already downloaded Go90 for some requisite road-testing.

The shift toward millennial media isn’t entirely at the expense of Verizon Fios, as McAdam said the company will show growth in both areas. But he also left no doubt that, at Verizon, the fiber-optic network that offers cable-like bundles has taken a backseat to mobile video.

The transition is in some ways upsetting Verizon’s workforce, members of which picketed outside the hotel where McAdam gave his presentation.

When asked about the protesters, the CEO told The Post that Verizon has always “focused on employees keeping good jobs and expanding their jobs.” But with so many regulatory changes afoot, including the Affordable Care Act, he called it necessary to rethink benefits.

But once that’s done, McAdam said, “I’m confident our employees will be in the upper echelon in wages and in benefits.”