UnitedHealthcare's experiment in Chicago mixes several elements, including cushioned chairs, a fireplace, yoga classes and free doctor visits. It's only been four months but so far the nation's largest health insurer seems pleased with the reaction.

Its Harken Health subsidiary opened four medical practices Jan. 1 and plans to open six more clinics by the end of the year, said Harken CEO Tom Vanderheyden.

With Harken, UnitedHealthcare is testing whether it can both sell insurance and provide medical care. The strategy is an integrated approach modeled after Kaiser Permanente in California, with the goal to make medicine more personal and comfortable while controlling costs.

Harken's goal is the intent of the entire health care industry but it remains elusive. The U.S. spends far more on health care than other high-income countries and yet Americans die sooner and experience unhealthier lives than residents in those other nations.

Harken's focus on the patient starts by making the medical office warm and inviting, Vanderheyden said. The office is designed with big windows to let sunlight in. There are cushioned chairs and a fireplace in the reception area, along with free coffee and free Wi-Fi.

Harken members receive unlimited free doctor visits at the company's medical offices. The exam rooms feature tables and chairs to encourage face-to-face conversations. Patients spend time not just with physicians but with health coaches who can help manage chronic conditions like diabetes or support wellness aims such as weight loss. The medical centers also offer free classes in yoga, meditation and stress management.

Harken received $65 million from Minnesota-based UnitedHealthcare to fund startup expenses but Vanderheyden said the company is being run as an independent entity with a distinct approach to selling coverage.

Harken started selling health plans to individuals and small groups last fall in only two cities, Chicago and Atlanta. The company attracted about 35,000 members, more than it anticipated, Vanderheyden said.

In Chicago, Harken attracted subscribers like Lee and Karen Berenbaum, who had to find new insurance after Blue Cross and Blue Shield of Illinois eliminated their health plan. The couple, who live in Wrigleyville and are in their late 50s, were attracted by Harken's PPO plans, which offer broad access to doctors and hospitals in the Chicago area, including well-known academic medical centers such as Northwestern Memorial Hospital.

Among "silver" PPO plans, Harken's premiums are among the lowest on the exchange. The Berenbaums bought a gold-tiered plan with a premium of about $1,300 a month. Their deductible is $1,750 per person if they get medical care at one of Harken's "preferred" providers.

The closest Harken medical practice to them is in the Edgewater neighborhood. They've been there once, to get flu shots.

"They have a nicer waiting room than any private doctor's office I've been to," said Lee Berenbaum, who is self-employed. The only thing missing, he joked, was an aquarium.

Because they already have primary care doctors, the couple has little reason to make appointments at the Edgewater medical center, he said.

The Berenbaums represent the challenge to Harken's model. The company's emphasis on primary care is all about preventing more serious — and expensive — illnesses or conditions down the road. The approach, though, requires a long-term relationship with patients.

Vanderheyden said Harken has attracted members of all ages and backgrounds, such as Megan Pluister, a 29-year-old executive recruiter. She hadn't established a relationship with a primary care doctor before joining Harken so she likes the free visits at Harken's South Loop clinic.

She has a doctor who she can email any time. Her health coach helped her come up with a plan to lose weight after she had a baby in January.

"He'll call me to touch base and ask me how I'm doing," Pluister said. "I really enjoy working with the care team."

The care team is actually Iora Health, a private, for-profit company in Boston that shares Harken's commitment to changing health care. The doctors at Harken's clinics are on salary, not paid for every patient they see, which gives Harken greater control of costs.

As a new company, Harken experienced some startup-related customer service issues when coverage began Jan. 1. For example, customers complained on social media of long wait times on the phone and doctors who had never heard of Harken.

Vanderheyden sent a letter to members in March, apologizing for the problems and promising to fix them. Harken has hired people to handle the greater call volumes.

The new medical offices will be in Oak Park, Oak Lawn, Skokie and the Portage Park and Lakeview neighborhoods of Chicago. Harken declined to disclose the sixth location because it is still working on the lease.

Harken also plans to grow its presence in Atlanta from six to eight practices. The company is eyeing new markets beyond Chicago and Atlanta this year, Vanderheyden said, but he wasn't ready to provide more details.

In the meantime, UnitedHealthcare, its parent company, will pull out of nearly all Affordable Care Act state insurance exchanges next year because of heavy losses on individual health plans. Harken's growth and UnitedHealthcare's exit may not be a coincidence.

"I can't speak for our investors (at UnitedHealthcare) but they are affirming our growth plans," Vanderheyden said. "We know we have a highly differentiated model."

asachdev@tribpub.com

Twitter @ameetsachdev