Click photo to enlarge «

1

»

Rise Broadband is the largest fixed wireless Internet provider in the country, serving nearly 200,000 rural and suburban residential and commercial accounts in the Midwest, Rocky Mountain and Southwest regions. Its operations center is in Loveland while its corporate headquarters is in Englewood.

Fixed wireless broadband is a type of high-speed Internet access where connections to service providers use radio signals rather than cables. The service is growing in Colorado and the country for those living in rural areas where services like cable are not available.

We caught up with company co-founder Jeff Kohler at Rise Broadband's Loveland facility last week.

1. Are the majority of your customers homes or businesses?

We're 85 percent residential, 15 percent commercial and those go from small businesses to larger enterprises including the work we do for school districts in rural areas.

In rural areas it's very expensive to build and run fiber out there, to run cable out there, so wireless really is the best and most cost-effective alternative.

We can provide up to a gigabit speed service to a business or a school.

We can relay tower-to-tower up to 20 miles, but for the best service we like to keep it to about four miles. The closer the tower to the customer, the better the speed.

The most unique aspect of our service is that we can build these networks for a tenth of the cost of the wire-line guys. This is why we're the answer for rural America.

Advertisement

2. Why isn't everybody doing it this way?

That's a very good question. You have the two incumbents, the phone companies and the cable companies. They are what they are. They are there, they're big, they've been doing it for a hundred years and they will continue doing it for a hundred years.

When you get out of the city centers, well, we call it a donut strategy. We stay out of the donut hole, so you're not going to see us in Longmont, not in Ft. Collins, but you're going to see us on the outside areas. Beyond that the best service out there is this, and then after this it's satellite.

Our main operation center is here in Loveland. We have 170 employees in this location. This is where our call center is for all of our 16 states. So this is the biggest hub we have in the entire company. We go from Illinois to Nevada, and down to Texas, 16 states.

3. So lets say I live 10 or 15 miles east of Berthoud, with no other option for the web, how much am I paying for this service?

You are probably paying between $40 to $60 a month, depending on if you want a 10, 15 or 20 megabit plan. If you wanted the home phone service to go with it you pay an extra $20 a month.

Business is great. Everyone's Internet usage is going up 40 or 50 percent a year, they can't seem to get enough of it, its right up there in the hierarchy of needs with food and water! Everybody needs it, everybody wants it. ,

In rural areas where there is not a lot of choice, we're the number one choice. Even in some suburban areas like in Loveland, some people choose us because a lot of people don't want to do business with the phone company and the cable company.

4. How do you get your new customers?

I would say word of mouth is about 40 percent of it. When we get out to the really rural areas that word of mouth can be 60 percent. It's also some direct mail. We know where our towers are, and what neighborhoods we can hit. We also do a bit of radio advertising in the rural areas as well.

Nationwide we pick up a few thousand new customers a month. We have almost 200,000 customer accounts right now. We hear from 10,000 people a month who want the service, but we just don't have towers everywhere yet. When people hear about fixed-wireless service and they don't have other choices they call us. They're desperate, but a lot of them we just can't help.

Last year we were in the Rural Broadband Experiment Program. The FCC sent out maps of unserved areas and said 'send us your best offer, what will you build a network here for?' So the most anyone could win was $20 million and we got $16.9 million out of it because we can build networks for a lower cost than the big companies. So we'll be building 10 new networks in five states with unserved areas. It's a real FCC mandate right now to see that everyone has access to this.

5. So for someone like me in Longmont, or in Boulder, we have systems in place already. So you would not be an option for me, is that right?

Right, you are in the donut hole. So you would find our towers on the outskirts of town and then moving out from there. That's our niche.

In general because we focus on providing service to the under served, we do very well at keeping customers with us because we treat them well.

The towers can be up to 300 or 400 feet. We primarily lease space on existing towers, we aren't in the construction business. In rural areas its grain elevators, water towers, mountain tops, those high points.

Vince Winkel: 303-684-5291, winkelv@times-call.com or twitter.com/vincewinkel