For the first time since 1992, the poverty rate and household income of Americans did not change from one year to the next while the number of young people without health insurance dropped, according to the U.S. Census Bureau. The status quo is a thin silver lining for a nation struggling to recover from the worst recession since the Great Depression. "It’s a metaphor for the whole economy,” said Ron Haskins, senior fellow and co-director of the Center on Children and Families at the Brookings Institution, a liberal Washington, D.C., think tank. “We're running in place. Poverty is high. Income is low. We're not making up for lost time.” The annual Census report released Tuesday tracks income, poverty and health insurance coverage, and comes as Congress continues to battle over full implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Median household income in 2012 was $51,017, not statistically different in real terms from 2011’s $51,100. Household income had dropped the two previous years but is still 8.3 percent below pre-recession levels and 9 percent lower than the all-time peak in 1999. More than 46 million people – or 15 percent – live in poverty, according to the report. Poverty increased for all age groups but is highest among children. The average poverty threshold for a family of four in 2012 was $23,492, as defined by the Office of Management and Budget and updated for inflation. The 2012 poverty rate was 2.5 percentage points higher than in 2007, the year before the most recent recession. “No way this is good news,” Haskins said. “Even if it came down a little bit, it’s still way above where we were. We’ve lost progress.”

The only region to experience a decline in poverty was the West, where it dropped from 15.8 percent to 15.1 percent in one year. California is on the verge of enacting the highest minimum-wage rate in the nation at $10 an hour. "We're not making the kind of progress we should be making on poverty now that those government programs that we instituted during the recession are fading out," said Austin Nichols, economist at the left-leaniing Urban Institute. Employment insurance benefits were helping lift 3 million people out of poverty, he said. Now that they're running out, they're helping only 1.7 million people stay above the poverty line. Financial conditions are improving for only the top 1 percent earners, Nichols said, and child poverty has remained at 22 percent the last three years. "Nobody else is doing better, just holding constant and poverty is the same even though we're supposed to be recovering from the recession," he said. "Something needs to be done." The only region where the number of poor people went up was in the South – from 18.4 million in 2011 to 19.1 million in 2012. "What's striking is how little things have changed," said Mark Mather, associate vice president of U.S. Programs at the nonpartisan Population Reference Bureau, a Washington-based research group. "Income was up slightly in cities. … Poverty increased in areas outside of metro areas." If statistically significant, "it could suggest that the recovery is uneven" and that urban residents are recovering faster than those in rural areas, he said.