Jindal also talking tough

Front-running Donald Trump is soaring in the polls, in part because he's been so outspoken, or, as he puts it, unwilling to be "politically correct."

But one can make the case that Louisiana Gov. Bobby Jindal is being almost as outspoken, though, clearly, without reaping the benefits of better presidential campaign polls numbers.

On Tuesday, Jindal didn't just criticize fellow candidate and fellow Republican Gov. Scott Walker's health care plan, but condemned it for endorsing "the fundamental underpinning of Obamacare – the notion that America needs another entitlement."

"When did conservatism die? When did we accept the idea of dependence on government? Governor Walker is confused here. In his stump speech he has some clever lines about how the Fourth of July is about independence, not dependence. I like those lines. But with this Obamacare lite health care proposal, he's going to have to drop those lines from his speech."

This tough talk isn't new for Jindal. In February, he stood outside the White House, following a meeting between governors and President Barack Obama, to proclaim that Obama was "unfit to be commander in chief." Later, he used the same words to described GOP presidential candidate, Sen. Rand Paul, R-Ky.

And he just didn't condemn Hillary Rodham Clinton's use of a private email server as secretary of state, as fellow Republican candidates did, but said Clinton "is one email away from prison."

Unfortunately, for the Louisiana governor, all that tough talk has left him with a RealClearPolitics polling average of 0.7 percent, 13th in the GOP field, with Trump, the billionaire businessman, still No. 1 at 22 percent.

When people don't live up to what they say

We all know people who don't live up to what they say – and they aren't all politicians. As a young reporter, many, many years ago, I learned that lesson when a school board president "leaked" me the name of the school district's new superintendent of schools. After the story appeared, that same school board president, apparently not wanting to be suspected of the leak, condemned the "premature revelation'' at an open school board meeting. He called for an investigation to learn who the "irresponsible" leaker was.

That brings me to Josh Duggar, the member of the famous reality TV family, who had to resign a few months back as a lobbyist for the Family Research Council after reports he had inappropriately touched his sisters when he was a teen-ager. The Family Research Council promotes itself as the leading organization for Christian and family values, and is headed by Tony Perkins, the former Republican state legislator from Baker.

On Thursday, Duggar admitted he had signed up for Ashley Madison, the website for people seeking extramarital affairs. While he was apparently involved with that website, Duggar was leading the charge in the Family Research Council's drive to stop court ordered issuance of marriage licenses for same-sex couples, calling the court orders an "attack" on family, children and "Christian values."

After the Ashley Madison website was hacked, revealing the 32 million enrollees, Duggar apologized. "I have been the biggest hypocrite ever. While espousing faith and family values, I have secretly over the last several years been viewing pornography on the internet and this became a secret addiction and I became unfaithful to my wife," Duggar said in a statement Thursday.

Perkins, the Family Research Council head, commented Friday: "Last night we learned from online reports about allegations concerning Josh Duggar and then read his confession today. We are grieved by Josh's conduct and the devastating impact of his pornography addiction and marital unfaithfulness. Our hearts hurt for his family, and all those affected by Josh's actions. His deceitful behavior harms his family, his friends, his former coworkers, and the cause he has publicly espoused. Those of us who advocate for family values in the public square are held to a higher standard, and Josh's failures serve as a painful reminder of the destructive effects of not living with integrity. We are praying for the family."

After the first revelations of inappropriate touching by Josh Duggar, The Learning Channel (TLC) cancelled the Duggar's reality show, "19 Kids and Counting."

Vitter takes heat from Dems for defending oil companies

The executive director of the Louisiana Democratic Party is hitting Sen. David Vitter, R-La., for coming out against proposed EPA regulations to reduce methane emissions from oil drilling.

Stephen Handwerk, executive director, said that's it's another example of Vitter coming to the defense of corporate special interests who are backing his campaign for governor.

"On common-sense issues as basic as making rules to stop gas leaks, David Vitter has proven yet again that he can't be trusted to faithfully protect Louisiana families," Handwerk said.

Of course, there's a long tradition among Louisiana members of Congress of coming to the defense of the oil and gas industry, and not just by Republicans. Former Democratic Sens. Mary Landrieu, J. Bennett Johnston and John Breaux were strong supporters of the industry when they served.

Vitter explained his concerns about the new methane rules, which require oil companies to stop most methane leaks and reduce overall emissions by roughly half over the next decade, this way:

"EPA's not-so subtle methane rule announcement has the potential to undo the significant economic and employment gains that are a direct result of the expansion of Louisiana's oil and gas industry, which is arguably one of the brightest spots in our economy," Vitter said. "Even more outrageous is that this rule is only one of many attempts by the Obama Administration to disrupt growth and increase costs for Americans."

Clinton raises objections to new Alaskan drilling

Hillary Rodham Clinton is breaking with President Barack Obama on drilling in the Alaskan Arctic.

"The Arctic is a unique treasure. Given what we know, it's not worth the risk of drilling," the frontrunner Democratic Presidential candidate and former Obama administration Secretary of State said in a tweet Tuesday.

Her tweet came after the Obama administration awarded the final permit approval to Royal Dutch Shell to drill for oil on the Chukchi Sea of the Arctic Ocean.