Americans were shortchanged by the CNN debates, GOP candidate Scott Walker said Friday, as there was more talk and arguments over personalities, not policies."I think there's a real sense of urgency in America," Walker told MSNBC's "Morning Joe" program. "Not anger, but urgency, [as] Americans are concerned about the economy, they're concerned about the threats from ISIS and radical Islam, they're afraid the government's come too far into their lives."Republicans are also concerned about senators and representatives who were elected on promises such as repealing Obamacare, he continued, but haven't."Those are things we should have been talking about and we didn't," said Walker. "I'm going to be talking about it on the campaign trail, Michigan, South Carolina, Iowa, that's what people want to talk about."The debate was more about pitting one candidate against the other, said Walker, who like many candidates did not get much speaking time."One of my sons, my 21-year-old son Matthew, made a great insight," said Walker. "He said, after that they didn't ask you a lot of questions because you didn't attack other candidates. I haven't been out on the trail attacking other Republicans, I've been attacking Hillary Clinton, Barack Obama."Walker has said he plans to focus his attention now on the state of Iowa, where his campaign will "get right down to the grassroots, right down at the precinct level."He said he believes Iowans are interested in him, as well as fellow candidates Ben Carson, Ted Cruz, and Marco Rubio.Meanwhile, Walker said he believes the fight in Washington and the shutdown that's being threatened over Planned Parenthood funding is "what's wrong with Washington right now.""I defunded Planned parenthood more than four years ago, in a Democrat state that hasn't gone Republican for president since 1984," he said. "We put the money into women's health issues ... we should be able to do the same thing [in Washington]. Pass a bill in the House, in the Senate. Forget the 60-vote rule. Democrats used 51 votes to pass Obamacare."