The White House said on Tuesday that President Barack Obama would not sign legislation under consideration in Congress that would give owners of the Keystone pipeline the go ahead to build the XL portion of the transnational oil transportation system.

It also said Obama would not sign GOP-backed legislation amending the health care reform bill to redefine full-time employees as those that work 40 hours a week from the current 30 as the White House believes it would create a loophole for businesses to avoid Obamacare regulations.

Republicans were set to vote on both bills before the end of the week as they fired the starting gun on the 114th session of Congress, as well as another that would give businesses that hire veterans a break on another mandate included in the Affordable Care Act.

A White House official told DailyMail.com that the president would sign that bill as he supports 'common-sense improvements' to the health care law.

Scroll down for video

White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest told reporters today that President Barack Obama would veto the Keystone pipeline legislation and another GOP-backed bill that would create a 'loophole' in Obamacare

Mine all mine: House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi, left, hands Speaker of the House John Boehner, right, the speaker's gavel during the first session of the 114th Congress. Boehner survived an intra-party challenge today and was reelected speaker

Senate Majority Leader Senator Mitch McConnell arrives on Capitol Hill today. The 114th Congress convened today with Republicans taking majority control of both the Senate and House of Representatives

The House spent the first part of its first day back at work engaging in the traditional pomp and circumstance that comes along with a new Congress.

As the president's spokesman was browbeating Republicans, GOP leader John Boehner was giving a bipartisan address to the lower chamber.

'We’ll begin this endeavor on common ground – both in letter and spirit,' he said, using a phrase oft-mentioned by the White House.

Today members took the oath of office and formally voted to give Ohio Republican John Boehner the speaker's gavel.

Boehner survived an intra-party challenge and was reelected as the House's top dog with 216 votes to House Minority Leader Nancy Pelosi's 164. Florida Republican Daniel Webster claimed a surprising third place with 12 votes from his conservative colleagues.

But now that today's formalities are over, it's back to work for lawmakers, and House leadership has issued a jam-packed schedule for representatives over the next four days, during which they will consider a slew of bills the GOP-led chamber has been angling to send to the president for months.

'No, this work won’t be tidy. The battle of ideas never ends, and never should,' Boehner told the House. 'As Speaker, all I ask – and, frankly, expect – is that we disagree without being disagreeable.'

Republicans will top off the first week of the 114th Congress with a reading of the U.S. Constitution on the lower chamber's floor before heading home for weekend on Friday afternoon.

Later today they'll begin debate on the Hire More Heroes Act, which would exempt businesses from having to include veterans who have health care through the Department of Defense or Veterans Affairs Department in their employee rosters for the purposes of Obamacare enrollment.

The health care reform law requires businesses with 50 or more employees to provide health insurance to their workers. Republicans hope to spur job growth and encourage companies to hire more veterans by giving them a break on health care insurance costs.

'So not only are we providing small businesses – and our economy – with much-needed relief, but we’re also helping more of our veterans find work,' the bill's sponsor, Illinois Rep. Rodney Davis, said over the weekend in congressional Republicans weekly address to the nation.

'Because despite receiving the best training in the world, post-9/11 veterans are consistently faced with higher unemployment rates than that of other veterans. As more and more of these men and women return home, the Hire More Heroes Act will give them a better chance in a still-tough job market,' Davis stated.

Even though the House has already approved the legislation, it must again vote on it as all bills introduced in the 113th Congress that was not signed into law by the president is now null and void.

The White House indicated to DailyMail.com on Tuesday that the president would sign that legislation if it reaches the Oval Office.

'We support commonsense improvements to the Affordable Care Act, including the Hire More Heroes Act, which ensures that the hiring of veterans who have access to health coverage through the Veterans’ Administration or TRICARE does not change an employer’s status with regard to their responsibility to offer coverage to their employees,' a White House official said.

'We want to work with Congress on policies that strengthen and simplify the Affordable Care Act, protecting coverage and taxpayers alike.'

In the remainder of the week the House plans to re-pass a series of jobs bills left over from the previous Congress, including reauthorization of the Terrorism Risk Insurance Program that pays out businesses for 85 percent of terrorism inflicted costs after the first $100 million.

Over time the revised bill would decrease the amount of money the government is liable for to 80 percent and increase to $200 million the amount businesses must pay out before the government pitches in.

The House sent that legislation to the Senate at the end of last year, but since-retired Republican Sen. Tom Coburn stopped it from being passed in the upper chamber.

Also on the agenda is the Save American Workers Act, which would bump up the work week requirements in Obamacare from 30 hours to 40 hours in order for employees to be considered full time and therefore eligible for heath care insurance under the law.

The White House said on Monday that the president would veto the legislation if both the House and Senate pass it and send it to the president's desk, however.

What's to say that the same business owners won't cut back on employees' hours to try to avoid the new requirement, the president's spokesman, Josh Earnest, told reporters today.

The 'majority' of 'responsible' business owners already provide health insurance for their employees, he said, 'but there are some who are looking for loopholes where they can try to avoid taking that responsibility.

'And we certainly don't think that we should make that easier. That's not good for the Affordable Care Act. It's not good for these workers.

'What's clear is that the temptation that some employers might have would only be sweetened significantly if this Republican change...were to be put into place,' he said moments later.

Snow blanketed Washington, D.C. on Tuesday as lawmakers began their first day of work in the 114th Congress at the U.S. Capitol

United States military veterans who are homeless or in transitional housing collect donated and new clothing at a Phoenix, Arizona, even last year. More than 1,500 homeless veterans in the area were expected to receive help from 70 providers with health care, clothing and legal services. House Republicans intend to pass legislation today they believe will incentivize businesses to hire more retired military personnel

The mostly uncontroversial bills are expected to pass both chambers of Congress but its unclear if Republicans have enough juice in either chamber to overcome a presidential veto as they hold relatively slim majorities in both the House and the Senate.

Republicans are likely to have their first major showdown of the legislative session with the president at the end of this week over a bill to approve the Keystone XL pipeline.

The House has said it will vote on its Keystone bill, which is a replica of the legislation in the Senate, on Friday.

The Senate Energy Committee was to hold a hearing on the bill on Wednesday ahead of a vote before the full Senate.

But after an anonymous Democratic Senator put a hold on the proceedings, Senate Republicans said hearing or no hearing, the legislation would come for a vote before the upper chamber. It could take a final vote on the legislation later this week.

After a heated debate in the Senate, a bill giving the pipeline's makers the green light to build the fourth and final installment of the oil transportation system came just one vote short of overcoming a Democrat-incited filibuster in November.

At the time Republicans made up just 45 votes in the Senate. Beginning today they'll have 54.

To overcome a filibuster, Republicans need six Democrats to split with their party and vote yea on the bill.

Democratic Sens. Joe Manchin, Heidi Heitkamp, Claire McClaskill, Mark Warner, Jon Tester and Joe Donnelly have all signed on as sponsors, giving the majority party the votes it needs to pass the legislation.

But to overturn a veto, they would an additional six Democrats to flip.

North Dakota Sen. John Hoeven, the bill's lead Republican sponsor, and West Virginia Sen. John Hoeven, the lead Democratic sponsor, told the Hill today that they have commitments from a total of 63 Senators to vote for the bill and three more are on the fence.

The White House would not say on Monday if Obama would veto Keystone legislation, saying it hadn't seen a copy of it yet, but the president's spokesman indicated that Obama doesn't appreciate the legislative branch interfering in the construction of the pipeline.

Approval of the pipeline is a matter best left to the State Department to decide, White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said.

'That’s how previous pipelines like this have been considered, and we believe this one should be considered in that same way too.'

But this afternoon Earnest issued a firm veto threat and suggested that Republicans don't actually want to work with the Democratic president.

'If this bill passes this Congress, the president wouldn't sign' it, he said

Earnest said the President does not think Congress should be 'circumventing a well-established process' already in place at the State Department and other government agencies for granting permits.

The president does not think it is 'the right thing for Congress to do,' he explained.

Opponents of the proposed Keystone XL pipeline braved the snow on Monday afternoon in Sioux Falls, South Dakota, to protest its construction. The XL portion of the pipeline would cut through South Dakota to get to Steele City, Nebraska. Congress is expected to pass legislation this week giving builders the green light- but President Barack Obama could still veto it

The blue dotted line represents the portion of the oil transportation system yet to be built. A Nebraska judge must approve the route, regardless of what Congress and the president say, before construction can move forward

Earnest said Monday that the president is also concerned about the amount of carbon pollution the oil transportation system will add to the atmosphere and 'the negative impact that that has on the public health of people all across the country,' Earnest explained.

'As we see weather disasters worsen, as we see in the form of wildfires or more severe hurricanes, that only adds to costs. So the President does harbor those concerns,' he said.

Furthermore, the White House is still waiting to see if a judge in Nebraska approves the route of the pipeline, Earnest said, repeating a previously stated qualm of the White House with legislative efforts to fast track construction of Keystone XL.

'So we don’t want to put the cart before the horse here, and that is why in the past we’ve taken a rather dim view' of this strategy, he said.

Earnest did not commit the president to a blanket veto of all Keystone legislation on Tuesday yet said his 'principle objection' was Congress stepping on the toes of the regular permit process.

'We're not gonna render judgement on the pipeline project,' he said, 'until a final project has been forward.'

The Natural Resources Defense Council, a main opponent of the pipeline, said Tuesday that 'the president made the right call' in saying he'd veto the bill currently before Congress.

'What’s needed now is for him to kill the dirty tar sands pipeline outright,' it said.

The bill's top Republican sponsor, Sen. Hoeven, said Obama's 'veto threat comes as no surprise' and that it's been his plan all along to derail construction of the pipeline with 'endless' delays.

'That’s unfortunate, because the Keystone XL pipeline should be approved on its merits,' Hoeven said in a statement. 'It’s about energy, jobs, economic growth and national security.

'Furthermore, the State Department in its environmental review has stated that the Keystone XL pipeline will have no significant environmental impact.

Members of the House of Representatives on the GOP side raise their hands for the oath of office at the opening session of the 114th Congress. After they took formally took the oath as a group, they each had a ceremonial swearing in photo op with their families

By the end of the afternoon, Boehner's eagerness to work with the president's party had lost some of its thrill.

'After years of manufacturing every possible excuse, today President Obama was finally straight with the [American people] about where he truly stands,' Boehner said.

'His answer is no to more American infrastructure, no to more American energy, and no to more American jobs. Fringe extremists in the president’s party are the only ones who oppose Keystone, but the president has chosen to side with them instead of the American people and the government’s own scientific evidence that this project is safe for the environment.

Continuing, Boehner said, 'This is simply another sign that President Obama is hopelessly out of touch and has no plans to listen to the American people or champion their priorities.'

McConnell accused the president of playing politics.

'It’s interesting to note that the President declined to issue a veto threat last month when a Democrat senator was trying to save her job over the exact same Keystone bill,' McConnell said, referring to former Senate Energy Committee chair and Louisiana Sen. Mary Landrieu, who was defeated last month by then-Rep. Bill Cassidy in a run-off election.

Manchin, he lead Democratic sponsor of the bill, told the Associated Press that his office talked to the White House earlier that day and was not made aware of Obama's plans.

That he 'slapped down' a bipartisan bill before it had even been debate, Manchin said, 'It's just wrong. It's just not the way you do business.

'If this is the start of things, it is a sad beginning,' the West Virginia lawmaker said.

Earnest said on Tuesday that the spirit of goodwill between the White House and Congress 'goes both ways.'

'Congressional Republicans are well-aware of this administration's position' on Keystone, he said..

'Maybe it raises questions about the willingness of Republicans to actually cooperate with this administration when you consider that the very first bill that is introduced in the the United States Senate is one that Republicans know the president opposes,' he said.

If Obama does veto Keystone legislation, it would likely lead to a confrontation when congressional leaders come to the White House next Tuesday to meet with Obama.

It could also increase tension between the Democratic president and conservative on Capitol Hill during his final two years in office and encourage them to press forward with legislation to strip Obamacare and roll back his executive orders on immigration.

Boehner and McConnell said in November that repealing Obamacare was a top priority for the party, and they would hold votes to eliminate the law completely before dismantling it provision by provision.

They revealed little else about their legislative plans, but Boehner said in a November weekly address that after the House clears its logjam of jobs bills, 'more good ideas will follow.'

'And with them, a chance to address some of the most pressing challenges that we face, whether it’s a broken tax code that’s driving jobs overseas, health care costs that continue to rise, or an education system that leaves too many of our young people unprepared for the future,' he said.