FAIRHOPE, Alabama – A pair of doctors and advocate for the poor will discuss the impact of the state's decision to reject federal funds to expand the Medicaid program under Obamacare.

Gov. Robert Bentley has held fast to that decision, arguing that the state cannot afford even marginally higher costs and that it makes no sense to pour resources into what he calls a broken system.

On Tuesday at 6 p.m. in the Giden Room of the Fairhope Public Library, the Baldwin County chapter of the League of Women Voters will sponsor a forum on the issue. Jessie Rose, who is on the group's Medicaid committee, said the state chapter has endorsed the expansion. Although the Baldwin chapter has not taken a formal stance on the issue, the forum's speakers have a decidedly pro-Medicaid bent. They include:

Dr. R. Allen Perkins, chairman of the University of South Alabama Division of Family Medicine, and president of Alabama's Rural Health Association.

Dr. Suzanne Tormoen, an internist in Fairhope with an additional specialty in nutrition and diet. She has 15 years of experience and privileges at three hospitals.

Jim Carnes, policy director of the Arise Citizens Policy Project, which advocates on behalf of low-income Alabamians.

Under the Affordable Care Act, the federal government pays 100 percent of the expansion costs to Medicaid for the first three years and then gradually ratchets back to 90 percent. It was a key component of the health reform legislation.

But after the U.S. Supreme Court ruled that the federal government could not compel states to expand their Medicaid programs, Alabama and many other states rejected it. It has left millions of people across the country ineligible for subsidies to buy private insurance on the government-run exchanges and also uncovered by Medicaid.

In Alabama, that number is between 181,000 and 324,000. A study over the summer by Families USA estimated that more than half of Alabamians who would qualify have jobs.

The University of Alabama and the University of Alabama at Birmingham both produced studies suggesting that the state stood to gain more than 30,000 jobs and hundreds of millions of dollars from the expansion. Troy University's Johnson Center for the Political Economy countered with its own study challenging those findings.

Updated at 10:40 a.m. to correct the name of Dr. R. Allen Perkins.