Topics: Art, Indiewire, New Orleans, Selma, The Wire, Wendell Pierce, Entertainment News, News

This article originally appeared on Indiewire

Wendell Pierce — Juilliard trained actor, business entrepreneur, film actor, television icon. His baritone voice and infectious charisma made his pivotal role on David Simon’s “The Wire” one of the more cherished in small screen history. His turn as Antoine Batiste was the first cast for Simon’s “Treme,” a show that this writer somewhat controversially thinks the best show in the history of American television, a poetic look at music, film and culture that surpassed even the unabashed magnificence of the much lauded, Baltimore-set drama “The Wire.”

As part of a larger conversation that included talk of his latest film project, the remarkable “Selma” (which documents the events surrounding the March to Birmingham in 1965), we pivoted to talk about his two most prominent roles on the small screen. What began as a simple, general question resulted in an answer of rare depth and complexity, an intensely introspective and philosophical response about what these two projects mean to him both as an artist and as a man.

What “The Wire” means to Pierce…

“The Wire,” to this point, defines me as an artist, defines my career. That speaks not just of occupation, but there’s a vocation of why you become an actor, the thing that you’re called to do. One day it might not be my occupation, I may not earn my living at it, but it will always be my vocation, the thing that I’m called to do, to try to illuminate some aspect of this human journey and human existence.

What he feels is the role of art…

What thoughts are to the individual when they lie awake at night and say “Who am I? What are my values, what have I done, what do I hope to do, where have I failed, where have I succeeded?” As you reflect on your own personal life, and those thoughts fill your head, that is the same role of art in society as a whole.

Entertainment is just a residual of art, but the role of art is where we collectively think about who we are, what our values are, where we’ve succeeded, where we’ve failed, where we hope to go as a society as a people. It’s a declaration of our value.

We’ve lost that, assuming that the only role of culture and art is to entertain and it should have no other impact. And that’s why people so readily say hey, you’re just a Hollywood actor, shut up, don’t have an opinion. But [with] “The Wire,” you could not get a clearer demonstration of that role of art in action, where it is to declare to society in a forum, to discuss who we are, what our dysfunctions are and where our problems are and where we hope to succeed. More importantly, [it’s] giving humanity to folks whom society has marginalized, said we’re going to put on the side, we’re not going to face our dysfunctions, we don’t want to deal with that.

Well, we’re going to put it front and center on the table.

On Pierce’s faith in David Simon, and watching “The Wire” for the first time…



I can now look back and appreciate that impact that “The Wire” had. Reading it, I saw the possibility there. Shooting it, I felt the possibility there. When I first saw it, I thought, “Oh my God, save your money, this is not going anywhere!”

I sat there with Andre Royo and Sonja Sohn. I’ll never forget the day we screened the first two episodes, I thought oh my goodness, man, this is gonna be cancelled!

David Simon has [taught] me to have a respect for the intelligence of the folks in the audience, to speak not to the least common denominator in the audience, but speak to a higher level. Folks will come up to you if you’re authentic and truthful and honest.

[Simon] said all the pieces matter, all the pieces fit. He had faith and he was able to change American storytelling on television. He had faith in the audience — that if you were authentic and truthful, and to the point, people would hang in there.

On “The Wire” as a visual novel…



If [an audience is] engaged with the characters, they are going to put in the time and see where the development of the characters takes them and the development of the stories. [Simon] said that happens all the time in novels and we give it short shrift when it comes to television, but I think it can happen in television. He proved that it can be done and that you will be rewarded handsomely by honoring your audience.

It was the first time that I ever heard someone say it, but they said to think of “The Wire” as a novel. Some chapters you won’t be in, and you’re not going to be a part of other chapters, but creating an entire world will have an impact. That’s why “The Wire” lives on to this day [as a] multi-faceted, complex rich depiction of humanity, not only in the acting but in the written word. [There’s] the meld between actors and folks who were coming from the world, bringing even more, a higher level of authenticity. Putting them in the piece just helped the actors become more authentic and do their research and allow themselves to create the world so strong that it induces behavior.

I was able to trust that all of the pieces fit and mattered, [as] I knew it would be cumulative.

On the universality of this story from Baltimore, and the nature of culture…

David is successful in his storytelling because he taps into that humanity. The more specific you are, the more universal it becomes. We are all human, and our humanness is manifested in different ways because of our cultures and where we are, [with] a culture being that intersection between life and how people deal with it.

People deal with life in different ways, but the common thread through us all is the humanity, the humanity that will inform our behavior and who we are and how we react to things. How we react finds our moral core.

On reaching different audiences…



[It’s] humanity that connects “The Wire,” from the kids slinging on the corner to that blue haired lady on Park Avenue. If you look in the hip hop culture world, “The Wire” is revered, and then you can go online and see “The Wire” high up on the list when it comes to a parody site like Stuff White People Like. It is the thing that pulls them all together.

It is that humanity that David tapped into and the fact that he didn’t give it short shrift. He was very specific. I don’t know anyone strung out as much as Bubbles, but I knew who Bubbles was, I empathized with him, I understood his struggle, I got angry with him, I loved him, I cried at his triumph when he overcame. That is the humanity that we all share.

On “Treme” and its connection with his life and birthplace…

“Treme” is not a television show at all to me. “Treme” is a defining era of my life.

[“Treme”] was the last 4 years I got to spend with my mother before she passed. It was coming back to the city that I loved so much, but I didn’t understand how much it was a part of who I was until we lost it all, and I knew that it could easily never come back.

[That] fear of knowing that your entire city, your entire reference of childhood and present and future is gone in one week, in one day, with the possibility of it never coming back. [It] was a nuclear holocaust and a nuclear winter of spirit, of place, of memory, of future.

Being from a city is like being from a family, with all of the dysfunction. It is the closest connection you have to your past and the people who are most likely going to be there for you in the future.

What New Orleans means to Pierce…

Family. That’s what New Orleans is. To lose New Orleans in one night with Katrina, goes far beyond Mr. Wolfe’s declaration of you can’t go home again. It’s like you can’t go home again because your home never existed.

It was an unacceptable fear to everybody in New Orleans and that was the thing that unified us to say we have got to bring New Orleans back. It wasn’t just lip service, it wasn’t a declared love, it was out of an absolutely acute necessity because if we didn’t bring New Orleans back, didn’t attempt to bring New Orleans back, didn’t declare the importance of New Orleans, didn’t declare the absolute American genius of our culture, it would be saying it never existed at all and you have no reason to have any importance of existence and no declaration that you were ever here as a person, as a family, as a neighborhood, as a city, as a culture.