WASHINGTON, D.C. -- John Katko, the Republican seeking to unseat Rep. Dan Maffei this November in the 24th Congressional District, says he's a fiscal conservative who wants to "go to Washington to get things done."

But that's where he draws the line on describing what kind of Republican he would be in Congress.



Should Central New Yorkers expect a moderate Republican in the tradition of former Rep. James Walsh, who represented the Syracuse area in the House for 20 years?



Or is he more like former Rep. Ann Marie Buerkle, a conservative who held the region's House seat for one term through 2012?



"I'm not interested in doing the labels," says Katko, 51, of Camillus, who resigned as an assistant U.S. attorney to make his first bid for public office. "I'm very interested in everyone understanding that I'm a fiscal conservative. I want to go to Washington and engage the other side and see what we can do to improve the country."



So what should voters expect? In an interview with Syracuse.com, Katko shared his positions on a dozen key issues that will face the Syracuse area's next member of the House of Representatives.



Jobs and the economy

Katko says New York has the worst business climate of the 50 states due to high taxes, excessive power costs and too many regulations. He's concerned "the federal government is going the same way as New York state."

He said he supports closing tax loopholes for businesses, while at the same time lowering corporate income tax rates, currently ranging from 15 percent to 35 percent. Katko declined to say what specific rate he would support.

He also wants to provide incentives for corporations to bring back profits kept in overseas accounts.

Minimum wage

He opposes President Barack Obama's proposal to raise the federal minimum wage from $7.25 to $10.10 per hour.

Katko said his opposition is based, in part, on a Congressional Budget Office report that found the higher wage could result in the loss of 500,000 jobs nationwide.

"Those are the people who are trying to get off public assistance and get into the workforce," Katko said of those likely to lose their jobs. "I would rather give individuals in that tax bracket a tax incentive to work (such as a tax rebate)."

The Affordable Care Act



Katko opposes President Barack Obama's landmark healthcare reform law, and wants to replace the law with a bipartisan solution.



"I think it's a textbook example of rushed legislation that is fraught with major problems," he said. "The bottom line is the ACA has tremendous unintended consequences for the public. Insurance rates are going up at a precipitous rate. Deductibles are on the rise. We were told we would be able to keep our doctors and keep our policies, and that's not true."

Katko said the law has caused some companies to cut jobs and employee hours as they attempt to deal with Affordable Care Act mandates.

He proposes keeping some popular aspects of the law, such as guaranteed insurance coverage for those with pre-existing conditions, and a rule that allows parents to keep children on their health insurance policies until age 26.

"The bottom line is I think Obamacare needs, at best, a radical surgery," he said. "I think the most prudent course is to start over in a bipartisan manner. I think both sides need to sit down and agree to keep good parts that can be fixed, and change others so that we can find a reasonable solution."

The national debt and budget deficit

Katko is critical of both Republicans and Democrats for failing to reduce the $17.5 trillion national debt and eliminate annual budget deficits in the federal budget.

He supports an immediate end to deficit spending, but declined to say whether he will support the Republican budget blueprint of Rep. Paul Ryan, the House Budget Committee chairman.

Ryan's budget for fiscal 2015 passed the House in April. It required the federal government to cut more than $5 trillion in spending, overhauled Medicare and reduced the top individual tax rate to 25 percent. The Ryan budget is largely symbolic because the House and Senate already agreed on a bipartisan two-year budget framework for fiscal 2014 and 2015.

"I'm not in Congress and wouldn't have an opportunity to vote on that," Katko said of the Ryan budget proposal.

He said only that he supports the principles of a lower tax rate, and requiring the federal government not to spend more money than it receives in revenue.

Katko said he would have voted against the December 2013 bipartisan budget deal that Maffei supported.

But he said he would not support the fiscal brinksmanship that brought the United States close to defaulting on its debt. Former Rep. Ann Marie Buerkle, a Republican from Onondaga Hill, is among those who voted against raising the federal debt limit to prevent default.

"I would not let my vote be the one that causes us to default on our debt," Katko said.

Medicare and Social Security

Katko said he supports fundamental reform to make sure Medicare and Social Security are solvent for generations to come, but he declined to provide a specific plan.

He opposes any proposal to lift the annual earnings cap for Social Security taxes. In 2014, the maximum amount of taxable earnings for Social Security purposes is $117,000. Some, including Maffei, have suggested lifting the cap to make Social Security stable for decades.

"I don't favor anything that raises taxes," Katko said.

He said "anyone at or near retirement age should not face cuts" in their benefits. He would not specify what age groups would be acceptable for diminished or changed benefits.

Paycheck Fairness Act

Katko opposes the Paycheck Fairness Act, a bill in Congress that would require employers to demonstrate that wage differences among employees are based on factors other than gender.

Democratic supporters, including Maffei, say the legislation is necessary because women are paid 77 cents on average for every dollar paid to a man.

Katko said one reason for his opposition is that employee pay would be made public. The Congressional Research Service, a nonpartisan arm of Congress, says the law would not automatically make hourly rates and salaries public.

Same-sex marriage

Katko says Congress and the federal government should have no say on the issue.



"I think it's a state's rights issue," he said. "And I think whatever the states decide is what we must honor. I don't think the federal government has any role in this, other than ensuring that people are not discriminated against."

Abortion

He declined to offer an opinion when asked specifically whether Roe v. Wade, the landmark Supreme Court decision that made abortion a legal right, should be overturned.

"My position on abortion is consistent with my faith in the Catholic Church, with the exception of rape, incest or the health of the mother," he said.

Second Amendment rights

He opposes any new federal restrictions on the purchase of firearms, including a proposal that failed in the U.S. Senate in April 2013 that would have expanded federal background checks.

"We have a very robust federal system as it is, and I have been enforcing gun laws for 20 years," Katko said. "A lot of the gun laws work, and some do not. But I don't think additional bans on guns are going to solve the problem. I am for stepping up enforcement for those people who illegally obtain guns -- criminals -- and I will do everything in my power to make sure the New York SAFE Act never becomes a federal law."

Katko said he would support and encourage measures for safe gun ownership, including a tax rebate for individuals who buy gun safes.

Energy and the environment

Katko opposes any federal effort to oversee or regulate drilling for natural gas through the process of hydrofracking. He said it's an issue that should be left to the states.

"We all know we are sitting on a tremendous amount of natural gas in New York. It could be a game-changer. I grew up here and I don't want to see another Onondaga Lake. But if it can be done safely, away from the watershed, we should do it."

He also opposes any unilateral effort by the United States to reduce its carbon pollution as a way to combat global climate change.

"I don't know if it's a man-made problem or not," Katko said. "It certainly seems like there have been a lot of changes in the climate lately. But it we take unilateral action...you're not doing much. I think efforts would be much better to try to get a global agreement on how to reduce carbon emissions."

Education

He opposes national education standards such as Common Core.

"To the extent that Washington is dictating how we teach our children in Syracuse, New York, I object to that," he said. "I don't think people in Washington or Mississippi should have the same standards...It's an example of bureaucrats trying to shove programs down people's throats."

Campaign finance reform

Katko said he would support efforts to limit the influence of Super PACs and special-interest groups on elections. But he is undecided on the best way to achieve that goal.

"I think it's very troubling to see the amount of money it takes to run for Congress," he said. "It puts a challenger at a distinct disadvantage. Our Founding Fathers probably never envisioned anything like this. It's clear everyone is sick of it. But that being said, I think it will be difficult to limit this (campaign spending) going forward."

Contact Washington Correspondent Mark Weiner at mweiner@syracuse.com or 571-970-3751. Follow him on Twitter @MarkWeinerDC