Working on the front lines of those struggling to afford health care, Lance Goller recognizes first-hand the pitfalls faced by those who fall in the Medicaid gap.

About 500,000 low-income people in North Carolina do not qualify for Medicaid or the subsidies available through the Affordable Care Act, and that impact is being felt here in Henderson County.

“In the around 20 states that didn’t expand Medicaid, the lower-income people are out of luck,” said Goller, community outreach coordinator for Blue Ridge Community Health Services.

Goller cited the case of one BRCHS patient — a single parent working part-time in a fast food restaurant for $7.25 per hour — whose income is too high to qualify for Medicaid, though not high enough to enable her to get subsidized coverage.

“She’s one of many that are falling through the gap,” said Goller.

Medicaid expansion is the missing piece of providing health care to all — as intended by the ACA, or Obamacare, local nonprofit leaders say. Some opponents of the ACA argue that it is too costly to cover all people too poor to buy insurance. But proponents say that leaving some people out not only leaves working people without health care, but also has hidden costs.

These may show up in higher insurance premiums or even the government having to step in to cover unpaid health care expenses.

“These people are still accessing health care at community health centers, (which) are seeing these patients at a loss,” said Goller. “Someone is bearing that cost of that care.”

BRCHS and The Free Clinics regularly see patients who fall in the Medicaid gap.

“There’s a misconception that since we have ACA we don’t need a safety net,” said Judy Long, executive director of TFC. “In fact, we’ve seen zero change in the amount of people qualified to receive service here, and an increase of 25 percent in demand over the last two years.”

Of the 20,000 residents who qualify for TFC’s services, about 7,800 fall into the Medicaid gap.

Long said TFC has completed an analysis to create local statistics from a national study on the effects of the Medicaid gap. They found that in the course of one year, five to 13 Henderson County residents will die of a preventable disease as a result of non-expansion of Medicaid in the state.

“The upside of this, if there is an upside, is that because the safety net recognizes the gap, we have a system that can get people care,” said Long.

At BRCHS, caregivers see only about 40-50 percent of the county’s residents living at the poverty level — others often resort to visiting emergency rooms for care, an expensive option that does not produce long-term health outcomes.

A single person making less than $11,770 annually can fall in the Medicaid gap, like one grandmother in her 60s who came to BRCHS for help. People like her have the choice of surviving and paying their entire month’s income for health insurance and having no money for anything else, or not paying and not getting care; it’s really an impossible choice, said Goller.

He added that legislators perhaps don’t realize that in states where the law is being implemented as it was designed, prices are going down, like in California, where Goller recently worked as director of outreach and enrollment for a regional consortium for community health centers.

“Preventing people from accessing health care is not a zero sum goal; you’re going to see that cost somewhere,” he said. “If we’re all in, it helps to create a good pool of people that are being taken care of ... it would be a much better use of our health care dollars, and you have much better outcomes.”

Goller also finds it puzzling that working parents are often the ones left out of the coverage picture. “It’s popular to give kids access to health insurance, but they need someone to take care of them,” he said.

Not expanding Medicaid has a role in driving up costs, he added, because people with health issues who really need insurance will figure out ways to qualify for health care, creating an “adverse selection” of insured individuals, which in turn causes premiums to rise.

“That drives a ‘death spiral’ in health insurance because as prices go up, healthier people increasingly choose to not to get health insurance, and feel that paying the penalty will be cheaper, whereas if you’re sick, you’re going to bend over backwards to pay for insurance,” Goller said of the “sicker pool” that is adverse selection.

The open enrollment period for the Affordable Care Act was designed to negate adverse selection, mitigating a rush of those wanting insurance only as their health situation changes, yet the gap in coverage actually creates a scenario with a similar outcome.

“The reality is that people in that income bracket have little political power because frequently those people don’t vote,” Goller said. “My message to people would be: vote. If you’re in the Medicaid gap, your voice matters.”

Some states are reversing their decisions to expand Medicaid. In Louisiana, after taking office in January, Gov. John Bel Edwards signed an executive order to expand Medicaid coverage; Edwards ran on the platform of Medicaid expansion.

Beyond the politics of the issue, Goller cited the possibility of those not receiving adequate care infecting others, as in the recent outbreak of tuberculosis in a poor area of Alabama, a state that did not expand Medicaid.

“This really shouldn’t happen in our advanced society,” Goller said. “TB doesn’t discriminate against rich or poor — it can affect everybody.”

For more information about Blue Ridge Community Health Services, visit brchs.com. For more information about the Free Clinics, visit thefreeclinics.org.

Reach De Bona at beth.debona@blueridgenow.com or 828-694-7890. Follow @BRNBeth