SEATTLE, Sept. 16, 2014 /PRNewswire/ -- Most financial advisors are repelling the clients they most want to attract – doctors, according to Vicki Rackner, M.D., President of TargetingDoctors.com, a consultancy that helps wealth managers to attract highly paid physicians as clients.

Photo - http://photos.prnewswire.com/prnh/20140915/146228

"How to Optimize Your Medical Magnetism and Engage More Physician Prospects and Clients," a new handbook shows financial services professionals how to:

Understand what attracts and repels physicians

More effectively engage physician prospects and clients

Lower the barrier to entry in the medical market.

"Most business professionals simply do not understand doctors' relationship with money. For physicians, money is the ultimate taboo topic. They actively avoid conversations about financial plans," she said. "Add the aggressive gatekeepers, physicians' busy schedules and their distrust of strangers, and you begin to understand why the barrier to entry to the medical market is so high."

Rackner says, "This is the right place and the right time for financial advisors to work with physician clients. The Affordable Care Act presents financial challenges, and advisors have financial solutions."

Her courses and coaching program offer tools and skills to help advisors engage physician prospects, build rapid rapport and create a culture of introductions.

"Here are tips to optimize your 'medical magnetism' so you enhance your chances of attracting physician prospects. Think of these tips as your magnetism makeover," she said.

Address prospects' wants instead of their needs. Put the prospect in the spotlight. Talk about personal outcomes rather than financial outcomes. Show rather than tell. Listen more. Pose more questions Plant your flag in the medical market. Offer more stories and fewer numbers. Offer more pictures and fewer words. Simplify.

"This process works because neuroscience tells us that emotion drives motion. Most of our actions are designed to help us achieve a desired feeling state. Each person is temperamentally attracted to one of four feeling states: to feel in control, to feel smart, to feel admired or to feel included. Physicians as a group want to be in control," she said. "My live training, web-based courses and coaching services show financial professionals how to help physicians be in control of their financial destiny."

Her clients rave about her methods and coaching program.

"Dr. Vicki Rackner is a person of integrity who walks her talk and offers solutions," Howard Putman, Former CEO Southwest Airlines

"Dr. Vicki Rackner is the person most responsible for helping me find current success. She helped me find the best way to get the idea I'm promoting into the minds of those who can best benefit from it," said Tony Kendzior, CLU, Medical Malpractice Insurance Consultant.

"Vicki shows us the way to not only get past that gatekeeper but to get the interest of the physician directly," said Lynn S. Evans, CFP, President and CEO Northeastern Financial Consultants, Inc.

"I am always looking for resources that inspire and deliver actionable ideas. Cracking the Doctor Code by Vicki Rackner is a success on both accounts," said Ed Maass, CFP, ChFC, CLU Recognized by Medical Economics Magazine as one of The 150 Best Financial Advisors for Doctors.

"Dr. Vicki Rackner has showed me time and again that she is fully committed to the success of the advisors she coaches. She brings such comprehensive and relevant programs that will guarantee you success if followed thoroughly," said Stephani Lucas, Financial Services Educator.

She also offers a course called, "Cracking the Doctor Code." This course will assist financial professionals to understand physicians, their practice, how they make decisions, and how to adopt an effective marketing plan to start meeting local physicians.

"If you are interested in developing a client niche with medical professionals, I highly recommend you participate in this course," said Rick O. Helbing, CFP®, ChFC who was recognized by Medical Economics Magazine as one of The 150 Best Financial Advisors for Doctors in 2009, 2010, 2011 and 2012.

For information, go to TargetingDoctors.com.

About Dr. Vicki Rackner

Dr. Vicki Rackner, President of Targeting Doctors, helps financial services professionals acquire physician clients and keep them for life.

This former surgeon, author, speaker and nationally noted authority on physician engagement demystifies the process of building business relationships with doctors. She helps clients get business results.

Dr. Rackner is quoted regularly in the national media including CNN, The Wall Street Journal, USA Today, The Washington Post, Reader's Digest, Bottom Line Health, Woman's Day, Real Simple and many others. She has been interviewed on over 100 radio shows, including NPR, Martha Stewart Living and Health Talk.

Contact

Dr. Vicki Rackner

(425) 451-3777

SOURCE Dr. Vicki Rackner

Related Links

http://TargetingDoctors.com