Rep. Dave Brat (R-VA). (AP photo)

(CNSNews.com) – Rep. Dave Brat (R-VA) gave his own Republican congressional leadership a failing grade for not going “all in” to solve the nation’s fiscal problems and for not fighting President Obama’s executive overreach.

“I’d give them all F’s. Fail. We did not fight. We didn’t win. My district sent me up here to score some points,” Brat said Friday after C-SPAN Washington Journal host Peter Slen asked the Tea Party-backed freshman congressman what he thought about House Speaker John Boehner’s leadership over the past year.

Brat noted the Republican-controlled Congress’ failure to defund Planned Parenthood in the wake of graphic undercover videos released by the Centers for Medical Progress showing the harvesting of fetal organs by the nation’s largest abortion provider as just one example of the GOP leadership’s failure to make an impact.

“Our leadership has said we’re going to fight, we’re going to fight, we’re going to fight. And then Planned Parenthood, we’ve got these horrendous videos now that everybody is…nobody can even watch them and think through what that is. The human mind just recoils from having to picture that.

“And so, am I happy with leadership? No, we’re not winning. If those were my students’ papers, on those range of papers I’d give them all F’s. Fail. We did not fight. We didn’t win.

“My district sent me up here to score some points,” he added.

Brat also pointed out that the GOP leadership did not stop the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) from imposing increasingly harsh regulations on ranchers, farmers and small business owners, and allowed the Obama administration to push through its nuclear deal with Iran without getting the approval of two-thirds of the Senate.

He said he hoped Congress would not repeat the same mistake it made last year when it passed a “cromnibus” bill to keep the federal government funded that also contained funding for President Obama's executive amnesty.

“And so we ended up funding something that in my mind and most peoples’ minds was unconstitutional. Our leadership said we’re going to fight tooth and nail, right? This was the first round – maybe not the first – but it was a round of extreme executive overreach, right, presidential powers. And the entire year, that has continued.”

Related: Conservatives Lambaste 20 GOP Senators Who Voted for Amnesty

Related: Congressman-Elect Dave Brat on Obamacare: 'It's Moved to the Kitchen Table'