A little shark bite won’t keep Myxie out of the waves

IT wasn’t the giant chunk of flesh hanging off her thumb that upset Myxie Ryan the most – it was the fact that her 100-day surfing challenge had been foiled.

Every day after school, the 10-year-old and her brother Dembe make the short walk down to the Main Beach at Lennox Head.

On day 95 of their challenge, the pair paddled out to the breakers about 20m from shore when Myxie felt a sting.

The Lennox Head Public School student didn’t see what got her but she could feel it, and her little brother could see the blood.

Mum Natasha had just arrived at the beach when her daughter – a member of the All Girls Surfriders – was bitten by what she still believes was a small shark.

“It’s hard to know what it was and we’ll probably never know. Myxie thought it was a shark but she couldn’t really see anything and when we brought her into shore the paramedic thought it could have been a small shark,” Ms Ryan said.

Myxie was rushed to the Lismore Base Hospital, about 45 minutes from Lennox Head.

On Wednesday – the day after the fish or shark attack – Myxie underwent 3.5 hours of surgery to try and repair the severed nerves and tendon in her thumb.

“She was in a bit of pain but the adrenaline and shock meant she didn’t really know what was going on,” she said.

“They’ve tried their best to put it back together. There was a fair bit of skin missing on the wound. Myxie was actually upset about her cut wetsuit.”

Ms Ryan said Dembe, 9, had already got back in the surf and her daughter was keen to get her cast off and paddle out.

“He was a good little brother and helped bring her back in to shore. When it all happened he was pretty upset for his sister.”

Myxie and her mum spent the weekend at Sydney Olympic Park where she was set to compete in the 800m, 1500m and 1100m walk at the state athletics titles.

“The funny thing is I had been telling her for weeks to be careful and to not hurt herself on the skateboard and then this happened.”

“She has been told she needs to keep her thumb out of the water for 6 to 8 weeks but she’s keen to make that four weeks if she can.”

Myxie’s father Craig has surfed Lennox Head for more than 20 years and has seen sharks and the family know they are in their territory.

It's hard to know what it was and we'll probably never know

In the frantic moments after the attack, NSW Ambulance tweeted that they were “treating a girl at #LennoxHead for a significant hand injury after allegedly being bitten in the water by a shark” and the story went viral.

Far North Coast surf life saving co-ordinator Jimmy Keogh said there had been no sightings of sharks or bait fish in the area around the time of the attack.

All Girls Surfriders Lennox Head president Berenice Roberts told The Sunday Telegraph it could have been a mackerel, tailor or small shark that had nipped Myxie.

Myxie will return to school this week.

Every day after school, the 10-year-old and her brother Dembe make the short walk down to the Main Beach at Lennox Head. On day 95 of their challenge, the pair paddled out to the breakers about 20m from shore when Myxie felt a sting.

The Lennox Head Public School student didn’t see what got her but her little brother could see the blood.

Mum Natasha had just ­arrived at the beach when her daughter, a member of the All Girls Surfriders, was bitten by what she still believes was a small shark.

“It’s hard to know what it was and we’ll probably never know,” she said. “Myxie thought it was a shark but she couldn’t really see anything and when we brought her in to shore the paramedic thought it could have been a small shark.”

Myxie was rushed to the Lismore Base Hospital, about 45 minutes from Lennox Head. Next day she underwent 3.5 hours of surgery to try to repair the severed nerves and tendon in her thumb.

“They’ve tried their best to put it back together,” she said. “There was a fair bit of skin missing on the wound. Myxie was actually upset about her cut wetsuit.”

Ms Ryan said Dembe, 9, had already got back in the surf and her daughter was keen to.

Myxie and her mum spent the weekend at Sydney Olympic Park where she competed in the 800m, 1500m and 1100m walk at the state athletics titles.