Sen. Rand Paul is looking like a prescient and savvy politician these days, the embodiment of public wariness about government spying and intervention in messy faraway conflicts. It is a lucky convergence for a libertarian whose overriding philosophy — a sharply limited government role in almost all areas of life — happens to jibe with popular sentiment on those particular issues.

So far it is all gain and no pain for the Kentucky Republican as he heads into a near-certain 2016 presidential campaign. Some analysts are even calling Paul the early front-runner for the Republican nomination. Yet as attention shifts to his views on domestic policy, he will have to make some tough decisions: move away from positions that would alienate moderates, independents and traditional Republicans, or stay true to his principles and end up like his father, Ron Paul — a niche candidate who energized many but never won the White House, the GOP nomination or even a single 2012 primary.

Rand Paul portrays himself as a man of iron conviction when it comes to executive power. Barack Obama used to be a civil libertarian, he told me in August, but he scrapped that identity when he became president. “I think there’s a disease,” Paul said. Or, I asked, perhaps a fear that Americans might be attacked? “I think all of us have that,” he said. “Don’t you want to do everything that you can to protect the country? Why should you have to change if you become president? I think people should still be rational. This disease process is one of accumulating power.”

In Paul’s view, the nation can be kept safe without mass surveillance. He says a President Paul would not feel straitjacketed by such limits and would not evolve the way Obama has, because, according to him, the limits reflect “everything that I stand for.” Still, we cannot know if he would keep that commitment unless he actually manages to become commander in chief, with the nation’s safety in his hands.

Will Paul’s certainty and resolve extend to domestic policy? Here his philosophy is perhaps epitomized by his determination to repeal the Affordable Care Act and the budget he released last year. An ophthalmologist by trade, he does not believe health care is a right and has said a universal right to care would enslave doctors. His 2013 budget would have axed Obamacare and the departments of Commerce, Education, Energy, and Housing and Urban Development. It turned several entitlement programs into capped grants and added private options to Medicare and Social Security. Paul also proposed replacing the tax code with a 17 percent flat tax and ending taxes on savings, dividends and capital gains.

Asked what the role of government should be, his answer to me last summer was short: prevent violence, enforce contracts, prevent fraud. He did not mention the military then, but now he is touting his belief in a strong defense and claiming Ronald Reagan’s mantle for himself.

Paul’s blueprint for a minimalist government is the highest hurdle he faces in widening his appeal beyond libertarians and noninterventionist conservatives. Though he has tea party support, the largest voting bloc in GOP primaries is “somewhat conservative” voters who favor even-keeled candidates “who do not espouse radical change,” Henry Olsen writes in The National Interest. Democrats are even less likely to be able to stomach Paul’s worldview, which Neera Tanden, the president of the liberal Center for American Progress, characterized to me as “end government as we know it.”