WASHINGTON (MarketWatch) — Consumers in the waning months of 2014 spent the most on services including health care in 14 years and exports were also stronger, but companies built inventories at a slower pace than originally reported to keep fourth-quarter U.S. growth at 2.2%.

Despite the biggest jump in consumer spending since 2006, the economy slowed in the final three months of last year from a blistering 5% pace in the third quarter because businesses trimmed investment, government outlays fell and the nation’s trade balance deteriorated, revised figures show.

Potentially more troublesome, corporate profits fell in the fourth quarter and posted the first annual decline since the middle of the last recession, a potential headwind for the U.S. economy in 2015. Already economists have chopped estimates for first-quarter growth to less than 2%, though harsh winter weather is also viewed as a big drag in sectors such as manufacturing and housing.

Pretax corporate profits, adjusted for depreciation and the value of inventories, fell at a 1.4% annual rate in the fourth quarter, the Commerce Department said Friday. For the full year, adjusted profits slipped 0.8% to $2.09 trillion.

Banks and other finance companies showed lower earnings, while nonfinancial firms modestly increased profits.

Gross domestic product, meanwhile, was left unchanged in the fourth quarter.

Consumer spending was raised to 4.4% in the fourth quarter from 4.2%, marking the largest increase since 2006.

Outlays on services jumped 4.3%, the biggest gain since early 2000. A spike in health-care spending, likely related to the law known as Obamacare, accounted for almost one-third of the rise in consumer spending in the fourth quarter.

Exports also rose 4.5% instead of 3.2%. Import growth were revised up to 10.4% from 10.1%. Trade deficits subtract from the nation’s official growth tally, however.

The value of inventories, meanwhile, was lowered to $80 billion from $88.4 billion, mainly reflecting smaller stocks of oil and gas among U.S. energy producers hampered by a global plunge in petroleum prices.

The rest of the figures in the second revision of the fourth-quarter report were little changed.

For all of 2014, U.S. gross domestic product grew at a revised 2.4% rate, compared to 2.2% GDP growth in 2013 and a 2.3% gain in 2012. GDP reflects the value of all goods and services produced by the U.S. The report is revised twice after its initial release.

More from MarketWatch