Public gets final input on spending measures at Thursday hearing

If you go What: Boulder County commissioners to hold public hearing on proposed 2016 county budget When: 4 p.m Thursday Where: Third-floor hearing room, Boulder County Courthouse, 1325 Pearl St., Boulder Information about the proposed spending package is available online, at bouldercounty.org/budget. Public comments can also be submitted by email to: commissioners@bouldercounty.org or by mail to: Boulder County Commissioners' Office, P.O. Box 471, Boulder, CO 80306. Final adoption: Commissioners are scheduled to take final action on next year's budget at 11 a.m Dec. 10

Boulder County Sheriff Joe Pelle will get the two additional nurses he'd sought for his jail staff, under a tentative budget decision the Board of County Commissioners have made for 2016.

That will cost the county a projected $76,809 each per nurse, with the money to come from an offender management fund within Bolder County's overall budget for next year.

Commissioners Deb Gardner, Elise Jones and Cindy Domenico said at recent budget work session that they supported tapping that same fund to pay for other additional jail-related spending the Sheriff's Office sought: $25,000 for the increased amounts of food that has to be provided a growing population of jail inmates; $50,000 to cover the medical and mental health care required by those inmates; and $512,413 to upgrade part of the jail's heating, ventilation and air conditioning system.

Advertisement

However, when the commissioners announced during that Nov. 5 work session which of the sheriff's proposals they're likely to incorporate into next year's county spending package, they did not include $295,964 that Pelle had sought from the budget's general fund to pay for four more deputies for the jail staff.

Those new deputies were among several commissioner-rejected requests that various county departments and agencies had made for covering the costs of putting additional permanent full-time employees on Boulder County government's work force.

Meanwhile, members of the general public will have at least one more opportunity — during a hearing on Thursday afternoon — to offer their own suggestions about what should be added to, or subtracted from, a 2016 budget package the commissioners are scheduled to formally adopt on Dec. 10.

Pelle wasn't the only elected official or appointed department head who came away from the commissioners' Nov 5 work session with only part of what they'd asked for.

County Coroner Emma Hall is in line to get $14,000 to implement a family liaison program to work with distraught survivors during her office's death investigations. But the commissioners haven't included the $50,269 she'd sought for a second full-time medical pathology technician or the $73,991 she'd requested for a seventh full-time medical investigator.

Boulder County District Attorney Stan Garnett appears likely to get $45,732 to pay for the electronic storage of materials that state law will be requiring DAs to provide, electronically, to defense attorneys during the pre-trial discovery process, along with $7.500 to cover the increased operating cost of computer forensic lab equipment.

The commissioners have thus far not, however, approved Garnett's $46,462 request for adding an administrative restitution technician for the Juvenile Restorative Justice Program, $83,179 for a second full-time deputy DA for the Community Protection Division that investigates consumer fraud and crimes against the elderly and other vulnerable populations, or $83,179 for a deputy DA's post in county court.

Boulder County budget director Bruce Knight said on Friday that, including the decisions the commissioners made during their work session, it now appears that the proposed 2016 budget, going into next Thursday's hearing, would total about $424.76 million.

That's less than the $438.84 million budget the commissioners originally adopted last December for the current 2015 calendar year. But officials have said next year's spending package is likely to grow above $424 million, particularly as expensive but not-yet-budgeted flood-recovery projects are added after 2016 spending gets under way.

John Fryar: 303-684-5211, jfryar@times-call.com or twitter.com/jfryartc