Loudoun Free Clinic bridges gaps for the uninsured

Five years after the Affordable Care Act was signed into law, there are still low-income groups unable to afford the premiums and monthly payments associated with basic care.

The Loudoun Free Clinic in Leesburg provides a safety net to those groups. Patients making 200 percent less than federal poverty guidelines, without insurance, are able to visit the clinic like a primary care facility. The clinic works with 13 specialists all over the county, connecting patients with services in dental health, behavioral health and more.



“They would go without these services if they weren’t provided,” Rahman Parker, LFC executive director, told the Times-Mirror. “There are some people that just aren’t set up in a way to receive care like most of the community is.”



The clinic was initially a project of the Catoctin Foundation, which no longer exists. It started seeing patients in 2002. Now, even in 2016, after the entirety of the Affordable Care Act has been implemented, the clinic is seeing a growing number of patients. Some days there are more patients than the facility can take in, said Parker.



“They have to decide if they’re going to eat versus meeting their deductible,” said Parker. “We’re seeing that nationwide, not just here. We’ve got to customize something so that people can get the care they need and access it when they need to.”



The clinic has 12 staff members and over 100 volunteers dedicated to helping serve the uninsured.



“Volunteers make the clinic run,” said Parker. “Without them, we wouldn’t be in existence.”



The clinic’s full-time physicians show passion in their work each day, said the executive director.



“I think it’s not only a passion but an art form,” he said. “I’ve had the opportunity to watch our providers in their craft. It’s amazing how skilled they are. You could akin it to a conductor or an artist. They figure out the patients' needs and how they can treat the whole patient, not just a cough.”



Having connections to specialist all over the county allows the clinic to refer patients to the services they need to be truly healthy.



Providing specialty care like mental health services can help combat larger community issues like addiction, said Parker.



“People want the help. People are hurting and addiction is very powerful,” said Parker. “The heroin issue is not just about drugs. It really speaks to a bigger issue of what’s going on in our community. It’s a symptom.”



As long as there are people falling through the cracks in the health care system, Parker says the clinic will continue to help them with the aid of volunteers, donors, private foundations and county and state funding.



For more information, visit loudounfreeclinic.org.



Comments

Post a comment

Commenting is not available in this channel entry.

Comments express only the views of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of this website or any associated person or entity. Any user who believes a message is objectionable can contact us at [email protected].



More News