Topics: China, Climate Change, Environmental Defense Fund, Global Sustainability, GlobalPost, Sustainability News, Politics News

This article originally appeared on GlobalPost

It’s the deal that has everybody talking: The United States and China have agreed on a climate change strategy that aims to significantly lower each country’s carbon emissions.

The agreement was announced in Beijing Wednesday at a press conference that closed this year’s Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) summit. The deal involves China pledging to cap its carbon dioxide emissions by 2030 and increasing its use of renewable energy to 20 percent. At the same time, the US would cut its emissions by at least 26 percent from 2005 levels by 2025.

We spoke with Nathaniel Keohane, vice president for international climate at the Environmental Defense Fund (EDF), a Washington, DC-based nonprofit collaboration of scientists, attorneys, economists and other professionals, to find out what this deal means to the fight for global sustainability and to economic progress.

The GroundTruth Project: What does it mean to the international community that the US and China – who together emit 45 percent of the world’s greenhouse gases – have made this agreement?

Nat Keohane: I think it’s a huge deal. It’s a kind of game changer on two fronts. The first is the obvious diplomatic one: Having the two largest economies in the world – the two largest emitters in the world, who in other issues are sometimes economic rivals – coming together and cooperating on climate change, and encouraging each other to take steps to reduce their emissions in the long run. I think it’s incredibly powerful.

Just the fact that the US and China are talking about this at the presidential level, making this a key priority, is very important and can help really reshape the dynamic of climate change.

The second way that hasn’t been focused on as much is the signal this gives to clean energy investors. The world’s two largest economies – and of course the EU, the third – are headed towards a clean energy future. They put themselves in that path. And that’s why this matters so much.

GTP: Where does this agreement put the US in the global struggle for sustainability?

NK: I think overall it’s a positive sign that President Obama and his team are making climate change a priority. It’s great to see the president himself set a new target going forward.

The reality is we will need more. My tweet on this was, “Is this a game changer or is more needed?” The answer is both. It’s a game changer for all the reasons I talked about before; it’s a tremendous and powerful signal from the US; it confirms that the US is helping to lead on climate. And yet more is needed. More is needed on both sides because of the urgency of the climate challenge. So even as we applaud the progress that’s been made, we are going to need to find ways to make even deeper reductions.