Rick Perry suspended his presidential campaign on Sept. 11. This page will no longer be updated.

RICK PERRY'S POSITIONS ON ISSUES:

Rick Perry opposes abortion rights, and as Texas governor signed bills requiring notification and consent of parents for minors seeking abortions.

He supports gun rights, rejecting "the false premise that gun control can prevent violence."

Perry opposes the Common Core education standards and says states can set their own standards rather than follow "unelected bureaucrats and special interest groups thousands of miles away in Washington."

He opposes the Affordable Care Act. As Texas governor, he rejected two key state components of the act: expansion of Medicaid and establishment of a Texas-based insurance exchange.

On gay marriage, Perry told CNBC "Squawk Box" anchor Joe Kernen in 2014 that Texas voters decided "by a vote of over 75 percent" that "marriage is between one man and one woman, and I respect that. And I respect whatever they want to do in California or New York for that matter."

Speaking at the Commonwealth Club of California in 2014, Perry was asked if he thought homosexuality is a disorder. He answered by comparing it to choices someone makes when he has a predisposition toward alcoholism. "Whether or not you feel compelled to follow a particular lifestyle or not, you have the ability to decide not to do that," he said, according to video of the event shown by a San Francisco TV station. "I may have the genetic coding that I'm inclined to be an alcoholic, but I have the desire not to do that, and I look at the homosexual issue the same way."

Perry supports expanding foreign trade, which he says has been good for Texas. But he is in no hurry for President Obama to get fast-track authority so trade deals through Congress without obstruction, saying that "if we have to wait until there's a new president, that's OK."

RICK PERRY'S POLL STANDING:

National average, 1.3 percent; Iowa, 1.3 percent; New Hampshire, 1.0 percent; South Carolina, 1.5 percent.

Figures are current averages of polls, tracked by RealClearPolitics.com, that compare the potential candidates in Republican primaries and caucuses.