Good morning. Here are some of the stories we're following today:

1. President Obama to Give Eulogy for Slain Pastor

The president will once again try to comfort a country in mourning as he delivers the eulogy for Rev. Clementa Pinckney, who was gunned down last week alongside eight others in a shooting spree at a historic black church in Charleston, South Carolina. The funeral begins at 11 a.m. ET and follows services held Thursday for two other victims. Read more in NEWS.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Massacres in America: A Look Back at Obama's Remarks 3:46 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

2. Obamacare Survives Supreme Court Battle

The high court on Thursday rejected a challenge to the reach of the Obama health care law, rescuing the program from a potentially fatal legal blow for the second time since the program's inception in 2013. The victory for Obama comes as the justices are expected to rule Friday or Monday on another hot-button issue: gay marriage. Read more in NEWS.

Play Facebook

Twitter

Google Plus

Embed Supreme Court upholds Obamacare subsidies in 6-3 decision 1:09 autoplay autoplay Copy this code to your website or blog

3. Man Decapitated in French Terror Attack

French authorities began a terror investigation Friday after one person was reportedly beheaded in an apparent Islamist attack at a gas factory in southeastern France. The country's BFM TV reported that an explosion was heard in the morning at the Air Products plant and a decapitated body was found near the scene. Read more in NEWS.

4. Arrested Prison Guard Paints Negative Atmosphere

Gene Palmer, the second New York prison employee arrested in the escape this month of two convicted killers, described the prison as a "negative environment" that could lead corrections workers to suicide in a radio interview from 2000. His arraignment Thursday was postponed until Monday because Palmer is hiring new lawyers. Read more in NEWS.

5. Putin Talks ISIS, Ukraine With Obama

Russian President Vladimir Putin called Obama and discussed continued tensions in eastern Ukraine and the fight against ISIS in the Middle East. In a statement, the White House said the two leaders addressed continued bloodshed in Syria and agreed on the importance of unity among the six world powers that are negotiating to restrict Iran's nuclear capabilities. Read more in POLITICS.

6. Sightseeing Plane Crashes, Kills Nine On Board

A sightseeing plane company boss told of his "pain and anguish" Friday after a pilot and all eight passengers were killed in a crash in southeastern Alaska. The plane was carrying cruise-ship passengers on a shore excursion when it crashed in the Misty Fjords area near Ketchikan. The NTSB has begun its investigation. Read more in NEWS.

7. Univision Dumps Trump Over Mexico Remarks

Univision announced Wednesday it is ending its relationship with the Miss Universe organization, which is partially owned by billionaire Donald Trump, following his remarks about Mexico sending its criminals and rapists to the U.S. Univision had acquired the rights to air the Miss Universe pageant in Spanish. Trump is running for the GOP presidential nomination, and made the controversial comment during his announcement. Read more in LATINO.

UCI Statement re Miss Universe Org and Donald Trump's remarks re Mexican Immigrants http://t.co/pMHmed12Zg pic.twitter.com/MiHdBaylY7 — UCI Public Relations (@UCIPRTeam) June 25, 2015

Nightly Spotlight

America's "favorite pastime" is establishing a new level of trust between the youth of Chicago and the police, who want a positive image.