Campus hosts last-ever winter ceremony because of scheduling conflicts

University of Colorado winter commencement Bachelor's degrees: 1,280 Master's degrees: 280 Law degrees: 8 Doctoral degrees: 168 Total degrees awarded: 1,736 Source: University of Colorado

After four stressful years of college, Sung Ouk Myong feels older, wiser and more mature than when he started at the University of Colorado as an 18-year-old.

Myong, who graduated Saturday with a degree in linguistics, will serve a mandatory two-year military term back in his home country of South Korea before applying to graduate school.

"The kid who started college and me, right now, they're different people," Myong, 23, said. "I got to mature and I see the difference. Now I see that it was all worth it, the amount of work I had to do."

Myong was one of 1,736 students to earn a degree at the Coors Events Center this weekend. That total includes 1,280 bachelor's degrees, 280 master's degrees, eight law degrees and 168 doctoral degrees awarded during the Boulder campus's last-ever winter commencement ceremony.

The school is doing away with the winter tradition one year early due to scheduling conflicts with CU's Denver campus. Though students who finish their degree at the end of fall term will still officially finish then, they'll have to wait until May if they want to participate in the traditional graduation ceremony.

Advertisement

Long-time commencement marshal Araceli Warren, who has volunteered at ceremonies for the last 10 years, said she enjoys saying goodbye and sending students off each winter.

She said she hoped students who finish after fall semester don't lose out on some of the pomp and tradition that comes with a commencement ceremony.

"I wonder about that because will the December graduates come to the spring graduation? There will be no motivation," said Warren, an office administrator in the civil engineering department.

Commencement speaker Fred Anderson, a history professor who this year received the university's most prestigious award, drew inspiration for his speech from a bronze statue of poet Robert Frost that sits on Norlin Quad.

Anderson told the crowd that though Frost said his poems began with an emotional "lump in the throat," he worked and reworked many drafts before completing each piece.

"If we your teachers have done our jobs and you our students have done yours, you have indeed become people who can begin with a lump in the throat and make it into something of enduring worth," Anderson said.

For Zach Williams, Saturday's event marked the beginning of a period of uncertainty in his life. Williams, who finished a degree in mechanical engineering, joked that his full-time job moving forward will be tweaking his resume and filling out job applications.

"I'll miss the day-to-day security, I knew what I was going to do the next day," he said. "You have a test to worry about but it was a pretty good safety net especially if your parents are helping out. That uncertainty of the next level, that's intimidating."

Many students said they planned to see the world after graduation, including Miranda Fuller, who planned to trek through New Zealand, Europe and South America after earning her degree in ecology and evolutionary biology.

Also heading overseas was Samantha Lantz, who lined up a job as an au pair with a family in China. She will live with the family and help their child learn English, with plenty of time for traveling, too.

Lantz said potential employers were impressed with her degree in the humanities because it conveyed her ability to think critically and communicate.

"A lot of people, when I applied abroad, really liked that because they feel like I'm more creative or culturally knowledgeable," she said.

Sarah Kuta: 303-473-1106, kutas@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/sarahkuta