SAN DIEGO — Navigating an NFL schedule requires talent. No team makes it to the postseason without eye-opening players. But surviving the NFL schedule requires sudden, if not desperate, bursts of improvisation.

All because of injuries.

The previous Sunday night, the New England Patriots walked onto snow-covered Sports Authority Field at Mile High boasting an undefeated record. They woke up Monday as the AFC’s third seed, reeling from the absence of tight end Rob Gronkow ski, losers of two straight games.

PHOTOS: Pictures from the Broncos-Chargers game

The Broncos moved into position to secure the AFC’s top seed, held by the Cincinnati Bengals in a three-way tie because of their conference record. Denver sits at 10-2, but vulnerability exists.

Already without strong safety T.J. Ward, nose tackle Sylvester Williams and edge rusher DeMarcus Ware, the Broncos lost linebacker Danny Trevathan (concussion) and defensive backs David Bruton (knee) and Omar Bolden (hamstring) during Sunday’s 17-3 victory over the San Diego Chargers. Offensively, running back C.J. Anderson (ankle) and Vernon Davis (concussion) exited over the final three plays of the first half.

BESTS/WORSTS: Broncos’ Von Miller and Demaryius Thomas

None was considered serious. But optimism can’t replace tests. The players must heal, show they can practice.

What December football shows is how much August matters. Coach Gary Kubiak made a point to integrate young players during training camp. He provides backups a share of first-team reps. He lets them get meaningful, though brief, looks during the week in the regular season. It has paid dividends.

Sunday, young linebackers Todd Davis and Corey Nelson filled in for Trevathan — who scored on a 25-yard first-quarter interception return — in the second half. Davis excelled in coverage. Nelson collected two tackles. Safety Josh Bush, signed as a free agent last week with Ward out, forced a fumble.

“We are beat up. I am sure everybody in the league is,” Kubiak said after the Broncos extended their NFL record divisional road winning streak to 15 games. “We are going to have to call on people down the stretch. The good news is that they are getting to play.”

Anderson injured his ankle on a 12-yard pass reception. He showed a slight limp as he jogged it off on the sideline. With a 14-point lead, the Broncos took a cautious approach, ruling him out.

“If I would have cut back, I probably would have had none of that. That’s all right I deserve it. They were being smart. I don’t think it’s anything big,” Anderson said. “I am not worried at all.”

Troy E. Renck: trenck@denverpost.com or @troyrenck