Buy Photo Broadlawns Medical Center, 1801 Hickman Road, has acquired five houses and one vacant lot south of Hickman Road, directly across the street from the medical center. (Photo: Register file photo)Buy Photo

A public discourse over the role of our community's safety net hospital, Broadlawns Medical Center, is appropriate and healthy. However, I believe that it needs to focus on the level of taxpayer support rather than the need for the existence of taxpayer support.

In recent years, Broadlawns has been transformed to a community hospital model. A community hospital serves everyone in the community. It has a legal mandate to provide care to uninsured individuals but also provides services to the insured population.

This model benefits our community in several ways. First, Broadlawns uses the local property tax levy ($65 million in FY 2016) to cover the costs of medical services to uninsured individuals that, throughout their history, have been economically unviable for other hospitals to provide, such as mental health, medical education, dental and social services related to facilitating the delivery of medical care to low-income patients. The community hospital model allows Broadlawns to be a safety net provider of medical services through the balancing of different revenue sources. The balancing of payment streams to the hospital from Medicare, Medicaid, commercial insurers, self payers, and local property taxes helps Broadlawns from becoming too reliant upon any one source of income. This can increase the financial strength and stability of their business operations over the long term.

Second, the community benefits by having high-quality primary and secondary health care services provided to insured citizens at a below average cost. Since 2006, Broadlawns has reduced their operational costs per patient day from $2,900 to roughly $1,400. Having lowered their unit costs to a level some 30 percent below the average cost per hospital patient day in Iowa, they have subsequently attracted more paying patients. This, in turn, supports their ability to withstand periods of high needs placed upon them from uninsured and underinsured patients (e.g., in the event of an epidemic health crisis).

Taxpayers Association of Central Iowa has questioned whether the current property tax levy of $3.36 per thousand of assessed value is appropriate. This represents about six cents of every dollar that local property owners pay in property taxes. They are raising the issue over the fact that the Affordable Care Act passed by Congress has reduced the total number of Americans without health insurance from 42 million Americans to roughly 29 million. Their thought process appears to be that the existence of a new source of revenue from the ACA paid for from federal taxes should reduce or potentially eliminate the need to maintain Broadlawns' property tax levy.

Eliminating the property tax support for Broadlawns could place too heavy a financial burden upon the hospital's safety net function. Polk County still has its share of the 29 million Americans that do not have health insurance. Broadlawns is focusing on providing for unmet community health care needs in the area of mental health. Plans are to expand inpatient and outpatient mental health facilities and to alleviate a doctor shortage by beginning an educational residency program to train more doctors to practice psychiatry within Iowa. Also, they need to modernize the hospital physical plant and facilities, some of which date back to the 1920s and 1940s.

A reduction in the property tax levy is more viable, assuming that the ACA continues and is not substantially repealed by a post-election Congress and president. Given Broadlawns recent successes, planning done by their management has determined that they can sustain a 15 percent reduction in local property taxes or roughly $9 million. This would reduce a Polk County resident's property tax on $170,000 of taxable property value by $39.

One of the treasures of living in this community is the compassion that its citizens and leaders have shown to those without financial resources to provide them with access to critically needed health care services through Broadlawns. I believe Broadlawns enhances the quality of life and well-being of all of our citizens.

William E. Taber is president of Taber Asset Management LLC, a registered investment advisory firm, and is a community representative on the Broadlawns Finance Committee.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1Tz2imU