Contribution

Wayne Allyn Root is a bestselling author. His latest book is: “ The Power of RELENTLESS! ” Dubbed by the media as “the Capitalist Evangelist,” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com .

The biased, clueless liberal mainstream media are in shock and awe. They have no idea why so many Americans love Donald Trump. But the answer is so simple and clear. Just ask any conservative.

Donald Trump is a breath of fresh air. Donald Trump is the answer to what ails America – simply because he kills two birds with one stone.

America has two big problems. America is under attack by a vicious one-two combination. America has been ruined by two parties. And Donald Trump’s mouth solves both problems. Donald Trump’s mouth is a nuclear weapon.

America is being lost because the GOP is bringing knives to a gunfight. Share:

Democrats clearly hate American exceptionalism, capitalism, entrepreneurship, and Judeo-Christian values. They hate business owners (see “You didn’t build that”) and appear to blame American patriotism, white people, business owners and Christians for every problem in the world today.

The Democrat Party is riddled with socialists, Marxists and communists hell bent on “fundamentally changing America.”

The Democrat Party is filled with frauds (see President Barack Obama, Jonathan Gruber and the lies used to sell Obamacare); traitors (see Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry and the new Iran nuclear treaty); thieves and conmen (see the scandal involving $2 billion donated to the Clinton Foundation while Hillary Clinton was secretary of state); reckless wasters of taxpayer money (see Obama’s Kenya trip that cost us over $50 million dollars for one day in a country that offers America NOTHING ); and outright criminals (see Hillary’s upcoming criminal investigation and Obama’s use of the IRS to target, persecute and even attempt to imprison political opponents and critics).

But the GOP may be worse.

If there’s anything worse than evil, it’s cowardice in the face of evil. The GOP leadership is riddled with cowards, wimps and naïve, feckless, country club powder puffs who have no clue how to fight back against the Democrats ruining America and destroying our children’s future with debt. Yes, Democrats are the bad guys. But Republicans are standing by helplessly, scared and petrified, allowing it to happen.

I suspect many of the Republican leaders in Washington, D.C. are either being bribed or blackmailed. Exhibit A is Supreme Court Justice Roberts, House Speaker John Boehner and Senate Majority Leader Mitch McConnell. These guys are all either bought and paid for; or someone is holding a gun to their heads (along with a photo of them in bed doing something shocking). Don’t believe me? See the criminal case against former Republican House Speaker Dennis Hastert. They are all doing something morally wrong, or breaking some law. And Obama’s partners in the National Security Administration and IRS are always watching. America is being lost because the GOP is bringing knives to a gunfight.

The only way to save America is to bring a nuclear weapon to a gun fight. And Donald Trump’s mouth is a nuclear weapon.

It’s time to stop being “nice.” “Nice” is okay for playing golf with Muffy at the country club. But “nice” doesn’t work in politics. “Nice” guys finish last in politics. “Nice” is getting our country ruined. “Nice” is killing middle class jobs. “Nice” is wiping out middle class incomes. “Nice” has led to negative GDP growth. “Nice” has led to more businesses closing than opening each day for the first time in America’s history. “Nice” has left the border wide open to an illegal alien invasion, the bankruptcy of America and a terrorist attack like Sept. 11, 2001.

“Nice” has led to disaster and disgrace all over the globe. The world no longer has any respect for, or fear of America. We are in decline and disarray. We are headed for collapse and disaster.

Into this crisis steps “the nuclear mouth” Donald Trump. He isn’t afraid to put America first. He isn’t afraid to tell the truth. He isn’t afraid of what the media thinks. He isn’t afraid of being called a “racist” for pointing out how Obama has damaged and destroyed America. He isn’t afraid to question Obama’s very mysterious, questionable and troubling past – much of it sealed away in darkness.

Trump isn’t afraid to fight like our future is on the line because he understands it is. He isn’t afraid to offend. He isn’t afraid to expose the cowards and frauds in his own GOP leadership for what they are. He refuses to be “politically correct” when he sees corruption and idiocy. He won’t back down or apologize for telling the truth.

Of course the evil Democrats, corrupt and cowardly GOP leadership, and biased mainstream media hate him. They are all rooting for another Mitt Romney. Let’s compare Mitt to Donald Trump:

They are both rich white guys. Both famous successful businessmen. Both Republican presidential candidates past and present. That’s where the similarity ends.

Mitt Romney is a very nice guy. Mitt has manners. Mitt would never offend anyone. Mitt let the media run roughshod over him. Mitt would never say something rude or offensive about Obama or Hillary. Mitt would never accuse them of crimes against the American people. Mitt would never prosecute Obama or Hillary if he was elected.

And one other difference: Mitt lost.

It’s no coincidence that Mitt lost. The last thing we need now is “nice.” It’s also no coincidence that the people in power (evil Democrats, the corrupt GOP leadership, and the mainstream media) all want another Mitt Romney. They want the status quo. They want to keep the bribes and blackmail coming. They don’t want anyone to upset the apple cart.

They are scared to death of Donald Trump, who doesn’t play by traditional rules or etiquette. They are scared to death of a guy who can’t be bribed. They are scared to death of a guy who speaks about the hopes, dreams and fears of middle class Americans. They are scared to death of a street fighter. They are scared to death of a candidate who is as relentless for saving America…as Obama is for destroying America. Donald Trump understands what I call, “The Power of Relentless.”

Mostly, they are scared to death of Trump’s mouth. The kind of mouth that could stir up a citizen revolution and topple “business as usual” in Washington, D.C.

Yes Donald Trump’s mouth is a nuclear weapon. And that’s precisely why we love him.

Bombs away!

Wayne Allyn Root is known as “the Capitalist Evangelist.” Wayne’s latest book is: “The Power of RELENTLESS!” Wayne is a former Libertarian Vice Presidential nominee, bestselling author, international business speaker, serial entrepreneur and conservative media personality – appearing on over 5,000 interviews in the past five years. Wayne’s web site: ROOTforAmerica.com.

Feature Image: Shutterstock

–

TheBlaze contributor channel supports an open discourse on a range of views. The opinions expressed in this channel are solely those of each individual author.