Loveland High School's Act One will present the mystery-comedy Friday and Saturday

Seniors Patrick O'Brien (as Richard Hammond), Alex Forbes as Crane Hammond) and Maddie Waldrep (as Kate Bixley), along with sophomore Jaden Saddler (as Jenny) perform during Act 3 of the play "Exit the Body" when Richard arrives unexpectedly to find strange happenings in the house. (Special to the Reporter-Herald)

Nearly every student actor playing a role in Loveland High School's winter play, "Exit the Body," will go through or into a closet.

"The closet is central to the play," said Danny Hollweg, English teacher and director of Act One, the school's drama department.

Ten students will be performing the three-act mystery-comedy written by Fred Carmichael, which debuted in 1961. The students will be on stage Friday and Saturday for three shows.

If You Go What: Loveland High School drama students perform "Exit the Body." When: 7 p.m. Friday; 2 p.m. and 7 p.m. Saturday. Where: School auditorium. Tickets: $8, adults, $5, students with an ID; free, students with an activity card; can be purchased at the door.

Carmichael's farcical play tells the story of murder mystery writer Crane Hammond, who goes to New England for a month to get away from New York City. She rents a home from a man who just died and is connected to stolen diamonds that are of interest to several people.

Advertisement

"There's a murder mystery writer who has a mystery going on around her that she doesn't know about," Hollweg said. "There's a 'dead body' found in the closet that (she) doesn't discover until midway through the first act."

Alex Forbes, a 12th grader, will be playing Hammond; Maddie Waldrep, also a senior, plays Hammond's secretary, Kate Bixley; and Zach Bermejo plays the town sheriff, Vernon Cookley.

"I always enjoy ensembles," Hollweg said. "I really enjoy directing when all the kids come together and help each other out."

Each role in the play is essential to the telling of the story, and the actors have fine-tuned their characters, Hollweg said.

"They're having fun tinkering with their characters, even offering me suggestions," he said. "They have done an amazing job of bringing together the idiosyncrasies of their particular characters."

The stage set has four doors, including the closet and the front, kitchen and French doors.

"It's a play of timing. It's a play of entrances and exits," Hollweg said about the play's setting of a single day. "At 2 a.m., everybody is sneaking around the house unbeknownst to each other, so every door is utilized."

The costumes will be from the 1950s and 1960s, and there will be a few cameos from the spring play, "Noises Off!" -- such as a blue vase and axe that make their way onto the set for "Exit the Body."

The actors will hold their dress rehearsal at 7 p.m. Thursday, an industry night open to the public for a donation to the theater department. Visitors will be able to see Hollweg give final stage directions and come on stage.

"They'll see me as a director talk through things," Hollweg said. "They'll see what it's like to be part of a play."

Shelley Widhalm can be reached at 669-5050, ext. 531, or swidhalm@reporter-herald.com. Follow her on Twitter: @ShelleyWidhalm. Read her blog: shelleywidhalm.wordpress.com.