POLITICO Pro Vermont legislature to pick next governor Thursday

Two months ago, voters in bright-blue Vermont came within an eyelash of ousting their Democratic governor in favor of a rookie Republican businessman — and the race still isn’t over.

The contest between two-term incumbent Gov. Peter Shumlin and Republican Scott Milne was so close it triggered an unusual provision of the Vermont Constitution that gives the state’s 180 lawmakers the final say. A secret-ballot vote to decide who will govern the Green Mountain State for the next two years is scheduled for Thursday.

Story Continued Below

Most observers expect the state’s deeply Democratic legislature to grant Shumlin a third term. The vote in Montpelier this week is a result of a colonial-era provision of the Vermont Constitution that requires successful statewide candidates to win more than 50 percent of the vote. Although nothing binds lawmakers to choose the top vote-getter — this is the 25th time in history the vote has been kicked to the legislature — that’s been the practice in every modern gubernatorial election.

That the race was close at all was just another blot on a miserable 2014 for Shumlin, who helmed Democratic efforts to win governorships before he nearly lost his own. As chairman of the Democratic Governors Association, Shumlin traveled the country as his party’s top cheerleader for gubernatorial prospects — only to watch the best ones wilt and Republicans capture blue states like Maryland, Massachusetts and Illinois.

In his own race, Shumlin edged Milne by only 2,100 votes on Election Day, capturing 46 percent of the vote to Milne’s 45 percent. Though the Vermont legislature hasn’t supported a second-place finisher for governor since 1789, a creeping uncertainty has set in, as Republican anger and Democratic disenchantment with Shumlin seeps to the fore.

“Precedent is only as good as until you establish the next precedent,” said independent state Rep. Paul Poirier, a liberal who says he intends to vote for Milne.

Shumlin’s frequent out-of-state travel helped opponents paint him as an absentee governor. His detractors also say the governor also exhausted his goodwill by pursuing a divisive agenda, botching the rollout of Vermont’s Obamacare exchange and presiding over a period of stagnant middle-class wages and high property taxes.

“That was reflected in the vote,” said Vermont state House Speaker Shap Smith, a Shumlin ally who plans to support him Thursday. Smith said Shumlin deserves credit for helping Vermont recover from Tropical Storm Irene and for beginning to tackle increasing incidence of drug addiction. Unemployment has been declining, which should eventually correlate with rising wages, he added.

But Milne — underfunded and little-known — harnessed discontent around the state and helped frame the contest as a referendum on Shumlin.

“We had a strategy which proved to be pretty effective,” he said in a phone interview. “The more Peter Shumlin had to talk about Peter Shumlin, the more people didn’t like it.”

Milne thinks he has a good case to make to state lawmakers, too. Shumlin squeezed by on Election Day, but that margin was inflated by his huge edge in the Burlington area. Milne appears to have won more state legislative districts, so if lawmakers simply vote based on their constituents’ preferences, he argues, he’ll prevail on Thursday.

Poirier, the liberal state lawmaker, has pledged to do just that. The former House majority leader — who left the Democratic Party because he said it wasn’t left-leaning enough — told POLITICO he plans to vote for Milne because of a personal friendship but also because Milne carried his district. Although he expects his colleagues to reelect Shumlin, Poirier says he’s been fielding calls from incumbent Democrats who say they also intend to rebuke the governor.

“In my dialogue — it’s mostly with the left-of-center Democrats — they are furious at the governor,” he said. “There are some people that have said to me they’re going to turn around, vote for Milne, ‘Hold my nose.’”

The Shumlin and Milne camps, as well as the state Democratic and Republican parties, insist they’re not making any serious efforts to lobby state lawmakers. Both candidates have publicly stated their positions, but there’s no arm-twisting, they say. In part, that’s because the vote is typically conducted by secret ballot.

On its face, the math is stacked against Milne. Republicans made gains in Vermont’s newly-elected legislature but still hold only about a third of the 180 seats. Even if every Republican votes for Milne, about 20 Democrats and a slew of independents would have to join them to give Milne a majority.

Shumlin allies shrug off the notion that state lawmakers will vote their district rather than for the top vote-getter statewide.

“The Governor believes that the legislature will honor the long democratic tradition in Vermont of selecting the candidate who received the most votes,” said Scott Coriell, Shumlin’s deputy chief of staff, in an email. “As he has said many times, he would not want to serve as Governor if he did not win the most votes from Vermonters.”

“I guess it depends on whether you think of yourself as a trustee or a delegate of your voters,” added Smith, the state House speaker. “My vote should be a reflection of what happened statewide.”

But Shumlin may have given liberals added impetus to rebel when he announced late last month that difficult fiscal conditions forced him to shelve a long-touted plan to enact a single-payer health care system.

“Shumlin’s post-election retreat on single-payer has been a body-blow to single-payer advocates, who have always seen Shumlin as a steadfast ally,” said Bertram Johnson, a political scientist at Middlebury College. “Their feelings of betrayal could lead to some interesting dynamics in the legislative vote this week.”

Eric Davis, a Middlebury College political science professor, said Shumlin appeared to be caught off guard by the anger he was facing at home while he was out traveling the country.

“If the GOP had been able to recruit a more politically experienced candidate, and if the [Republican Governors Association] had got involved in the … race, Shumlin might have gone down to defeat,” he said in an email.

The RGA declined to comment on the extent of its efforts in Vermont, simply issuing a statement of support for Milne in Thursday’s vote.

The larger question in Vermont is whether Milne’s strong showing has helped revive a once-dominant Republican Party that was on the verge of extinction in recent years. Republicans won every presidential election in Vermont from 1856 to 1988, excepting Lyndon Johnson’s landslide win in 1964. But since Bill Clinton’s first victory, the state has been reliably Democratic.

Democrats scoff at the notion that Shumlin’s close call is a sign of a GOP resurgence.

“It is bluster coming from the other side,” said Ben Sarle, a spokesman for the Vermont Democratic Party. “I don’t think this is a reflection on Democrats as a whole. … Gov. Shumlin, he got the message. The voters spoke and he won by thousands of votes still.”

Milne himself wouldn’t rule out a run in two years.

“My sense is that we’ll look back on 2014 as a year where the Republican Party has brought Vermont back to a more balanced two-party state,” he said.

State GOP chairman David Sunderland agreed, arguing that the party hit its “low point” in late 2013 and has been on the upswing since.

But Milne’s still likely to lose on Thursday, he added.

“The reality is that the headwind against Scott Milne in the legislative vote is strong,” he said.

Authors: