For Tracy Gallaway, getting information can be a struggle.

The single mother, who has two small boys, said receiving the same answer — or a straight answer — when it comes to her child support would make life easier. Gallaway is on good terms with the father of her children, but since Kansas privatized its child support services, there has been no single source of information where she can go.

“The major thing that changed is I’m calling a bunch of different places for information I used to get from one place,” Gallaway said.

Last year a wave of privatization swept across the state’s child support system. Kansas’ child support services, previously a function of the Kansas Department for Children and Families, were handed over to a handful of companies in contracts worth millions. More than a hundred state employee positions were eliminated as officials promised more aggressive collection and greater efficiency.

But data obtained by The Topeka Capital-Journal through an open records request shows Kansas now does a worse job collecting current child support than before privatization — and the percentage of current support collected stands at a 14-year low.

Data also indicate child support services have become more cost effective during privatization, but the state is slipping in collecting late support.

The state defends its approach. The official leading child support services said the focus of the first year of privatization was cost effectiveness and other indicators will improve in the coming years.

In interviews, parents receiving child support say the system is frustrating to navigate. Nearly all complained of poor customer service and the difficulty in getting answers to their questions.

For its part, the department acknowledged customer service — particularly its call center, which has been privatized for some time — has been an issue it is attempting to improve.

Illustrating the lack of satisfaction, even a child support recipient the DCF held up as an example of someone who benefited from privatization slammed the state’s new approach.

When The Capital-Journal initially approached department spokeswoman Theresa Freed about this story, she asked the reporter if he would be willing to speak with individuals who had been helped through privatization and put the reporter in contact with Sherry Adams.

Adams, who has two children with two fathers, said she has nothing but admiration for child support enforcement workers.

“These enforcement officers, they need rabies shots on a daily basis because they’re getting chewed on by people,” Adams said.

Yet Adams’ praise turned to frustration on the topic of privatization. In the past, she could physically go talk to someone. Now, she has to use a call center and she never gets to speak to the same person twice.

“I think somebody just needs to close their doors and they need to put it back into the hands of the local people,” Adams said.

Falling

performance

Prior to privatization, child support workers throughout the state’s judicial districts had handled support services. That includes helping individuals apply for public assistance to establish paternity, locate parents and obtain court orders to collect support.

The privatization effort began early in 2013, with the DCF requesting bids. At the time, DCF Secretary Phyllis Gilmore hailed the benefits of moving the work to private companies.

“Collection is a function that can be carried out more efficiently and more cost-effectively by private companies that specialize in this kind of work,” Gilmore said. “Those who do not provide court-ordered support to their children can expect a more aggressive approach to collections.”

Privatization didn’t come without controversy. One of the companies contracted by the state to collect child support, YoungWilliams, has a CEO who donated $2,000 to Republican Gov. Sam Brownback during the 2010 primary election cycle.

The Brownback administration also picked Trisha Thomas to be head of child support services. Before that, Thomas had worked at YoungWilliams.

By March 2013, Thomas told child support services employees that privatization was needed. The state began collecting bids later in the year and contractors began taking over operations from the state that fall.

Now, a year later, data provided to The Capital-Journal under an open records request gives the first insight into how privatization is performing: several indicators of performance have fallen to their lowest levels in more than 10 years.

The indicators are measured in federal fiscal years, which span October to September.

The data show the state is collecting the smallest percentage of current support due since 2000. In FFY 2014, 54.04 percent of current support due was collected. In 2000, the state had a 48.17 percent collection rate.

The state also collected less current support dollars in FFY 2014 than FFY 2013, despite the amount of current support due growing. About $130.6 million in current support was collected in 2014, compared with $134.5 million in 2013. But the amount of current support rose from $241.09 million in 2013 to $241.7 million in 2014.

Kansas also is doing a worse job post-privatization in another key area: collection on late support. The collection percentage on arrears (support past due) fell to a 13-year low. For FFY 2014, the percentage stood at 60.14 percent.

Kansas’ success at arrears collection peaked in 2008 at 65.8 percent and has largely fallen since then. However, the drop between 2013 and 2014 was sharp — 62.62 percent to 60.14 percent.

Adding to the tough numbers, the percent of cases with support orders fell in FFY 2014. It is the only drop recorded in the more than a decade of data provided.

Support orders are court orders setting the terms of the support to be provided from one parent to another. Without a support order, the state can’t take action to force the payment of support.

Since 2000, the percentage of cases with support orders has risen from 49 percent to more than 80 percent. In FFY 2013, 83.76 percent of cases had support orders. That fell in 2014 to 82.47 percent.

Thomas, who still leads child support services, said the Affordable Care Act resulted in more than 7,000 new cases last year that have proved a drag on the agency’s performance metrics.

“The ACA brought in, as you can tell, an extra 7,500 cases. So that really kind of messes with some of our numbers and so I think had that not happened at the same time we’d be looking at a definitely different set of numbers,” Thomas said.

With more individuals joining Medicaid under the ACA, the number of cases referred to the DCF has increased. However, unlike the food stamp program — where participants are required to cooperate with child support services — no such cooperation requirement exists for Medicaid participants, Thomas said. She added the agency only is able to collect or get cooperation on 20 percent to 30 percent of the cases referred by Medicaid.

“So after we open a case we have to keep it open until it fits the case closure criteria for the federal government. It’s really difficult to close these cases, and we have a lot of people who don’t really want to work with us on those particular cases,” Thomas said.

Despite lagging in several indicators, Kansas has dramatically increased in one performance area under privatization: cost effectiveness. The cost-effectiveness for child support services experienced a large spike in the past year, the largest in the more than a decade of data provided to The Capital-Journal.

In child support, cost-effectiveness is measured by comparing how much money was collected to how much money was spent collecting it.

For FFY 2014, Kansas collected $5.89 for every $1 spent. In 2013, it collected $4.12 for every dollar. In 2002, the state’s child support cost-effectiveness ratio stood at 3.39 to 1.

“We saved $16 million this past year and are still working on performance. And a lot of that is fixing the broken system we had before,” Thomas said. “We had state staff and contract staff kind of doing overlapping duties. We had issues with policies and procedures that really weren’t streamlined. We had inconsistent training and those kind of things.”

Thomas indicated improving cost-effectiveness was the first priority of privatization and that improvements in other areas will come.

“The first year of privatization was all about getting this cost-effectiveness number up. The next year, and how we kind of budgeted and really thought about things is the obligation rate and the percentage of current support are the ones that go up the next year and stay up there,” Thomas said.

Prior to privatization, officials promised the state would be collecting an additional $52 million by the end of privatization’s third year. So far, collections have dipped. But Thomas stood by the prediction. A extra $52 million represents a 10 percent overall collection increase, she said.

“Pretty much starting July 1 and going on for the next three years is where I see that $50 million,” Thomas said.

The drive toward cost-effectiveness has sparked criticism that contractors are less likely to tackle difficult child support cases — those that may prove important for the parent receiving the support but require a lot of resources to be expended in the process.

Ron Nelson, a Lenexa divorce and family law attorney, has been an outspoken critic of privatization, arguing that it encourages companies to go after “low-hanging fruit” while ignoring difficult cases. The added benefits that came with a state-run child support services system included employees who were familiar with public assistance programs and were knowledgable enough to guide parents to additional assistance, he said.

“All of it has detrimentally affected the consumers of the product,” Nelson said.

Easy cases — meaning those where the income of one parent is withheld to pay support — account for about 70 percent of cases, and workers don’t need to spend a large amount of time on those cases, Thomas said. Rather, most time is spent on the other 30 percent.

“We wrote the contract to make sure every case is important. The same folks who work for human services for a state agency are the same kind of folks who are going to work for human services with a private agency. The whole idea of ‘we’re here to help people, whether we work for the state or a private company’ is the mission of folks,” Thomas said.

More than a hundred state employees faced layoffs as a result of privatization. Thomas said in the end, only two employees allowed themselves to be layed off in order to collect unemployment. The rest either took other jobs, retired or transferred to different state jobs. It is unclear how many took jobs with the contractors.

Frustrating

service

Despite the debate over performance metrics, the real flashpoint with parents over privatization is customer service. Parents who spoke with The Capital-Journal expressed frustration with the inability to talk with people in person under the newly privatized system and the difficulty in navigating the state’s call center system.

Prior to privatization, child support services were handled by state workers assigned to judicial districts throughout the state. It was possible to physically track down a support services worker in your area.

Now, the lack of in-person contacts leaves parents to interact more frequently with the state’s child support call center. Unlike other parts of child support services which were recently privatized, the center has been run by a private company for some time, but the anger among parents and others is fresh.

“When we’ve tried to get certification of arrearages, we get the run around and then go to a call center and they don’t know anything at all and then we don’t get calls back,” Nelson said.

The process used to be straightforward, Nelson said.

“If we don’t get the answers, it probably indicates that consumers are getting much more frustrated,” Nelson said.

For Lori Firestone, a single mother with three teenagers, getting results under the privatized system has proved difficult. She said the father owes about $30,000 in back support. But making any progress on the case has proven difficult.

Firestone said she has caught clerical errors on paperwork and has trouble getting information on her case.

“I would call them and say, ‘Do I have to do your job for you?’ ” Firestone said.

With the father of Sherry Adams’ now-adult daughter, getting child support came easy. He may not have always been around, Adams said, but he never missed a payment.

It has been a different story with the father of her 21-year-old son. Adams says she had him removed from their home when her son was young. For the next 17 years, he hid in plain sight — as Adams puts it — and she didn’t get a dime of child support from him.

That changed this spring. She said she made sure child support enforcement workers were flagging his income tax returns and she fed them as much information as she could. Finally, years of back payments had caught up with him, and Adams started receiving the money she was owed.

Adams still has trouble getting information on her case, however.

“You never get to talk to the same person twice,” Adams said.

Tracy Gallaway said she used to train people to take Medicaid-related calls. She believes the private contracts end up costing more in training and startup.

Ultimately, she wants information in one place. Gallaway said she isn’t able to interact with one caseworker, instead using a call center. Gallaway did express thanks, however, for a website that allows her to see when her support is coming.

Thomas acknowledged the state has fallen short when it comes to customer service and promised to do better. She said the call center experiences high turnover, but that the Department of Children and Families is on-site at the center several times a month and closely involved in improving the experience through increased training and other accountability measures.

“We definitely understand that’s an area we need to improve and are working on a solution to improve that,” Thomas said.

The future

Detractors of privatization are unlikely to experience a victory any time soon. The contracts for the companies who now run child support services are just beginning and will last several more years.

Whether privatization will ultimately improve other areas of performance beside cost-effectiveness remains to be seen. Thomas is confident it will; others like Nelson, not so much.

Undisputed, however, is the importance child support has for the parent who receives it and ultimately, the children who benefit from it.

“I’d like to see us a lot higher in performance numbers than we are,” Thomas said. “Because really, it’s all about helping people and the lower your numbers are, the less people you’re helping.”