By Rob Nikolewski │ New Mexico Watchdog

SANTA FE — The Obama administration insists the troubled healthcare.gov website is working better, but a 60-year-old lawyer from Los Lunas says his application for individual coverage has been stuck in limbo for more than two months.

“This thing (healthcare.gov ) does not do what it’s supposed to do at all,” Guy Dicharry told New Mexico Watchdog. “I’m frustrated because this thing was not ready. The whole system is not working; it’s not working for me.”

A self-employed attorney who also works as a part-time registered nurse, Dicharry and his wife were happy with their old health coverage, which cost $317 a month with $5,000 deductibles for each person and vision and dental coverage.

But under the requirements of the Affordable Care Act, colloquially known as Obamacare, the couple’s coverage through Presbyterian Healthcare Services was canceled because it did not meet the more robust standards of the ACA.

Dicharry says his new plan through Presbyterian will cost three times more. He believes he’s eligible for federal subsidies to help lower those premiums, but his application has not gone through, even though he has logged onto healthcare.gov repeatedly since Oct. 5.

The problem appears to be that the website is unable to verify Dicharry’s identification.

Repeatedly, Dicharry says he receives messages like this one:

“I keep waiting for them to send me an email saying, we’ve confirmed your identity,” said Dicharry, who said he originally supported the aims of Obamacare. “It shouldn’t be that hard to do. I’m 60 years old and I’ve been filing income tax returns since I was 15.”

The clock is ticking.

Old policies like Dicharry’s expire at the end of the year, and applications must be approved by the federal government by Dec. 23 to go into effect Jan. 1.

“If I go from having health insurance for 20, 30 years, getting my coverage canceled and to now go to being on the verge of being uninsured (it’s frustrating),” Dicharry said. “I’m going through everything they wanted me to go through.”

Contact Rob Nikolewski at rnikolewski@watchdog.organd follow him on Twitter @robnikolewski