Holiday giants are offering savings of more than £800 on sunshine breaks in a fierce new price war.

The post-Christmas period is crucial for sales and firms including Thomson and Thomas Cook are battling to win early bookings.

They have already been badly hit as British families turned away from countries such as Tunisia, Egypt and Turkey in the wake of terror attacks.

The post-Christmas period is crucial for sales and firms including Thomson and Thomas Cook are battling to win early bookings by offering hundreds of pounds off long haul holidays

Now the tour operators are pushing alternative long-haul destinations such as Mexico, the Dominican Republic and Sri Lanka, which are also more attractive this year because the strong pound helps holiday cash to go further.

As well as money-off deals, Thomson and sister brand First Choice say they are offering thousands of free child places and low-deposit bookings.

Their ‘Sunshine Super Saver’ deals include savings of £860 per couple for a Thomson Sensatori holiday to Mexico, cutting the cost of 14 nights at a five-star resort next May to £2,934.

There is a saving of £672 per couple for a Thomson Sensimar holiday to the Dominican Republic, which brings down the price of the two-week all-inclusive holiday at a four-star hotel next August to £2,854.

Thomas Cook is promising savings of up to £400 per booking, child places for £1 and thousands of breaks for less than £400 per person.

Big package holiday companies like Thomas Cook They have already been badly hit as British families turned away from countries such as Tunisia, Egypt and Turkey in the wake of terror attacks

Deals include seven nights for a couple at an all-inclusive resort in Menorca in May at £798, saving £400, and seven nights for two adults and a child in Mallorca in May for £979, which works out at £489 per adult and £1 for the youngster. Meanwhile, according to research by Post Office Travel Money, the pound will buy up to 18 per cent more travel cash than this time last year in destinations such as Malaysia and Mexico.

Spokesman Andrew Brown said: ‘With Egypt off-sale to UK visitors for the moment, bargain hunters who would normally head to Sharm el Sheikh in Egypt after Christmas could find Mexico the strongest contender to take its place.

The strength of sterling against currencies for long haul destinations like Mexico, Malaysia and Mauritius will make them appealing to holidaymakers looking for higher temperatures Andrew Brown, Post Office Travel Money spokesman

‘At £756 per person for a week in January, Cancun was the cheapest long-haul beach resort surveyed. An 11 per cent year-on-year drop in the Mexican peso’s value gives visitors £50 extra on a £500 currency exchange.’

However, the best-value holidays over the New Year can be found closer to home in Cyprus and Lanzarote.

The lowest-priced destination outside Europe is the Florida theme-park capital of Orlando, where a week’s holiday including meals is just £692 per person – despite the relative weakness of sterling against the US dollar.

Mr Brown added: ‘The great value we found in Orlando just goes to show that holidaymakers planning trips really need to look at both the package price and the cost of eating out.

‘Even though the US dollar remains stubbornly stronger against the pound, prices are low in Orlando and package costs are looking very reasonable.