Buy Photo Paul Karrer (Photo: The Salinas Californian)Buy Photo

The old, tired grandmother and her 11-year–old grandchild Toby edged closer and closer to the counter at Kmart. Grandma scratched her head and thought about her pills. Have I taken all of my pills? The ones for the high blood pressure, dizziness, and all my other problems?”

She stopped and faced Toby. “Do you remember if I took all my pills today?”

The child smiled as he looked into her brown eyes. “I don’t know Gram, I think you did. But I don’t remember.”

Sometimes Toby worried about Grandma. She was getting older and he was more than happy to go along with her just to help. But if Toby knew the truth, she also worried about him because that is what Grandmothers do, too.

Grandma shook her head and muttered to Toby and herself at the same time, “Thank goodness I retired from teaching years ago. I just wouldn’t have the energy for it these days. No way.”

They kept on walking and just before the line to the counter formed, Toby’s eyes got real big and he stared. Boy, oh boy, he thought, I hope this isn’t going to be a problem. He had spotted a man and woman struggling with four children. The kids fidgeted and whined. But it was the man that put a little fear in Toby. Toby put his finger on it immediately. Well, I guess he looks rough and mean. Toby moved closer to grandma. It was a move meant to make Toby feel safer. He gently nudged his grandma.

“What?” she enquired peering down at him with a concerned look.

“Look at the man’s neck,” Toby whispered nervously.

“What?” asked Grandma.

Toby didn’t dare point directly, he slowly faced the man as he clung near the safety of his grandmother. Bit by bit he raised his finger to indicate the direction she needed to look in.

“Hmmm, Yes, I do see,” she said with a soft voice. Grandma also noticed what Toby had seen – the tattoo. A big black spider tattoo on the man’s neck. Grandma took in a long breath and continued watching the man and his family. She tried not to stare or at least not to be noticed by him. His white T-shirt, shaved head and baggy blacks pants confirmed her suspicions.

He’s probably a gang member, I’ll bet he’s been to jail. Lord only knows what he’s been up to. She also regretted the thought once it popped in her head. But now a conflict arose. Both groups of people – Grandma and Toby, and the man and his family – arrived at the counter at about the same time. The smallest child cried. The man gave the child a stern look and the child immediately stopped crying.

Wow, thought the grandmother, he has power, too. A chill went up her back and she clung a little more tightly to Toby. She decided she’d avoid any problem by letting the man and his group go ahead.

“You go first,” she meekly offered and she stood her ground, waiting for him to pass ahead of her.

“No, you go first,” he insisted and he halted his children and wife with an outstretched arm.

“You have more people with you.” Grandmother answered, “and we don’t mind waiting. We’re used to waiting.”

“We should respect our elders,” he replied and with a gentle sweeping motion indicated the way for grandma and Toby.

Well, I guess we better go first. No sense in having a problem over this. A nervous smile crossed her lips as she hobbled in front of the man. She scooted Toby along with her.

“Thank you,” she said as she almost pushed Toby in front of her.

“You are most welcome,” the man replied and a small smile flickered on his face.

Toby placed their small plastic bag of items on the counter and waited. He was still a little tense and wanted to look back and see what would happen next, if anything, but he didn’t dare.

However, his grandmother had turned to face the man and Toby twisted his head just enough to peer up and behind her. Toby knew what was going to happen next – the teacher in her just had to ask a question, just one simple question. And Toby was right because he knew his grandma well. He wasn’t shocked when she turned and faced the man. But Toby did have to admit he was still a little frightened.

Grandma saw the tattoo, his muscles, the bald head, and the white sleeveless T-shirt. But she looked past them into his dark black eyes and said.

“I have to ask you. Who taught you your good manners?”

“That is very simple, Mrs. Simpson, you did. You did, way back in the third grade.”

Read or Share this story: http://bit.ly/1NRTiX4