Paperless records still don’t flow smoothly among doctors, hospitals and patients. 'Clunky' switch to e-health records

The government-led transformation of health information is driving doctors to distraction, igniting nurse protests and crushing hospitals under debt.

Most health care professionals accept the inevitability of going electronic and see its value. But they have a message for the administration’s multibillion-dollar push: not so fast.

Story Continued Below

The government has already delayed parts of the program, but the American Medical Association and others want more relaxation of the rules, and warn of disaster if they aren’t heeded.

( Also on POLITICO: Full health care policy coverage)

Doctors largely supported the Obama administration’s $30 billion incentive program to switch the nation’s medical records from paper to electronic starting in 2009. They understood the potential of using health IT to reduce medical errors, increase efficiency and give patients and caregivers access to complete, portable and up-to-date records.

If that vision isn’t motivating enough, there’s also cash on the line. Doctors can get up to $44,000 per year for digitizing and meeting criteria for “meaningful use” of health technology. Those who cling to their paper records could face penalties next year.

But the transition has proved painful. Paperless records still don’t flow smoothly among doctors, hospitals and patients and they won’t for some time. Nor have measurable savings or widespread improvements been seen yet.

And there’s a difference between liking the idea of electronic health records, or EHRs, and liking the particular systems in use. Even Karen DeSalvo, who as national coordinator of health IT is responsible for implementing national use of EHRs, notes that her own husband, an emergency room physician, considers his EHR “clunky.”

( Also on POLITICO: Obamacare Hill subsidy case to go to court)

In short, the current generation of EHRs has about as many fans in medicine as Barack Obama at a tea party convention.

When the Department of Health and Human Services opened the taps to pay for the records systems, after incorporating a health IT law in the 2009 stimulus law, the technology on the market wasn’t ready to respond. Many records systems were built atop software designed in the 1970s for billing, not for comprehensive tracking of 21st-century patient care.

Top HHS tech officials recognize the shortfalls.

“Government payment incentives forced people into early adoption of technology that in most of our views is not optimal for what people want to do with it,” said Greg Downing, director of innovation at HHS.

Many EHR products designed to meet federal guidelines are not user-friendly. They take months to learn, require lengthy data entries and often don’t communicate with other computer systems. Doctors complain that because of EHR design flaws, they spend so much time “clicking” that their hands hurt.

( Also on POLITICO: SHOP flop: Obamacare for small businesses)

“Infuriating and cumbersome,” is how Steven Stack, president-elect of the American Medical Association, describes commercial electronic health record systems. “They slow us down and distract us from taking care of patients. And I’m a supporter of EHRs.”

Despite all those gripes and barriers, adoption of at least partially electronic systems keeps growing. The share of office-based physicians using any type of EHR increased from 48 percent in 2009 to 78 percent in 2013, according to HHS. More than 60 percent of hospitals now rely at least partially on electronic systems.

In surveys, nearly all doctors say they are willing and eager to go digital — but most aren’t happy with their current systems. Some 22 percent of doctors have opted out of the meaningful use program, forgoing payments. Only a tiny percentage is currently on track to meet government deadlines set for next year.

The frustration is tangible.

“We’re basically key-punch operators, transcriptionists having to input the data ourselves,” said James Gilbaugh, a physician in Wichita, Kansas. “It has essentially tripled the time to complete a medical record. How do you accomplish that when we are already working 12 to 14 hours a day?”

There are no data available on the number of physicians taking early retirement because of the pain of implementing EHRs, but anecdotes abound.

Stack, an emergency room physician, tells the story of a 64-year-old urologist he called in for a consult at his Lexington, Kentucky, hospital. The older doctor, who said he was retiring when he turned 65, had difficulty using the hospital’s records system during the visit. “This is why I’m retiring,” he said.

The AMA is asking the Obama administration to waive meaningful use requirements for older and rural doctors, and doctors in small practices. Society needs older doctors to keep caring for the boomer generation, Stack said. EHR implementation costs are one factor driving them out. Government incentive payments help but not enough.