Tempers flare after Democratic Senator claims Republicans don't like Obamacare because the president is black



West Virginia Democratic Sen. Jay Rockefeller said Republicans push back against the president because he's black

Wisconsin Republican Sen. Ron Johnson went ballistic, at one point barking, 'God help you for implying I'm a racist!'



'I didn't object to this because of the race of the president,' he said. 'I objected to this because it is an assault on our freedom

Rockefeller will retire next January at age 77



Tempers flared Wednesday during a Senate Commerce Committee hearing as a soon-to-retire Democratic senator said opposition to the Affordable Care Act stems from members of the GOP thinking President Barack Obama is 'the wrong color.'

West Virginia Sen. Jay Rockefeller let that slip near the end of a hearing he was chairing about whether insurance companies should be forced to spend most of Americans' premiums on health care, instead of on overhead and management.

Sen. Ron Johnson of Wisconsin was the only member of the opposition who remained to the bitter end, and took it as a personal insult, at one point yelling, 'God help you for implying I'm a racist!'

SCROLL DOWN FOR VIDEO

Dark words: Sen. Jay Rockefeller accused Republicans of being racists for opposing the Affordable Care Act 'God help you': Sen. Ron Johnson went toe-to-toe with Rockefeller for 'playing the race card' Barack Obama, the first black U.S. president, has provided some Democrats with a window to play the race card whenever the GOP pushes back against White House policy

Objecting to what he saw as GOP obstructionism, Rockefeller said he thought it was 'very important to take a long view at what's going on.'

'I'll be able to dig up some emails that make part of the Affordable Care Act that doesn't look good – especially from people who made up their mind that they don't want it to work because they don't like the president.'

'Maybe he's of the wrong color, something of that sort,' Rockefeller jabbed. 'I've seen a lot of that and I know a lot of that to be true. It's not something you're meant to talk about in public but it's something I'm talking about in public because that is very true.'



Johnson's turn at the mic couldn't come soon enough for the Republican.

He stared down Rockefeller, who will not stand for re-election in November, while saying 'it regrettable, and I would say it was offensive, seeing as how I'm the only one in the room here really talking about opposition, that you would play the race card, that you would say opposition to Obamacare necessarily must stream from ... inherent racism. Very offensive.'



'So no, I didn't object to this because of the race of the president,' Johnson said, in constant crescendo. 'I objected to this because it is an assault on our freedom.'

'I found it very offensive that you’d basically imply that I’m a racist because I opposed this health care law. That is outrageous!' he barked.



'Mr. Chairman, I have to admit I have a great deal of respect for you and I'm the only one in the room and I found it very offensive that you would basically imply that I'm a racist because I opposed this law,' Johnson continued.



'Please don't assume. Don't make implications of what I'm thinking and what I would support,' he concluded. 'You have no idea.'

Rockefeller doubled down.



Letting it all hang out: Rockefeller isn't running for re-election in November

'I actually do, you know. God help you,' he said, leaning forward.

'No, senator,' Johnson replied. 'God help you for implying I'm a racist!'

The Affordable Care Act, known as the Obamacare law, passed in Congress without a single Republican vote in either chamber.