Topics: 2016: Obama's America, Ann Althouse, Dinesh Dsouza, Editor's Picks, FEC, Matt Drudge, National Review, The Dailly Caller, The Enemy at Home, Wendy Long, Politics News

Late in the day on Thursday, Dinesh D’Souza, the right-wing author, pundit and filmmaker, was indicted in New York on charges of campaign fraud. According to the feds, D’Souza had knowingly wiggled his way around the $5,000 individual donation limit in order to provide Wendy Long, a college friend who was running for the U.S. Senate in New York as the Republican nominee, some $20,000. His alleged method was extremely simple: He asked other friends to give Long a maximum donation of $5,000 and then reimbursed them later.

D’Souza is innocent until proven guilty, of course, but comments released on Thursday from his lawyer seemed to indicate that he won’t be putting up too strenuous of a fight. “Simply put, there was no … knowledge by the candidate that campaign finance rules may have been violated,” said D’Souza’s attorney, Benjamin Brafman. “He and the candidate have been friends since their college days,” Brafman added, “and at worst, this was an act of misguided friendship …” As even the influential right-wing blogger and law professor Ann Althouse acknowledged, Brafman’s statement “looks pretty much like a confession that D’Souza committed the criminal acts.”

D’Souza was charged with two counts — one for making illegal campaign contributions and one for lying to the FEC — and if he’s convicted for the maximum sentence for both, he could be looking at seven years in prison. I’m not a lawyer, so I can’t speak to the likelihood of such an outcome. I only bring up the potential incarceration time to emphasize the seriousness of D’Souza’s alleged transgression. This isn’t jaywalking, or talking on a mobile phone while driving on the freeway.

As bad as this latest news is for D’Souza, the unfortunate reality for the former Reagan administration policy analyst is that this entanglement with law enforcement is merely the latest in a long line of recent public failures. After spending much of the 1990s enjoying the financial and social benefits of being embraced by America’s right-wing ecosystem — writing in conservative magazines, speaking at conservative events, taking positions within conservative think tanks, and selling lots of books about conservatism (and the evils of liberalism) to conservative audiences — D’Souza’s had a rougher go of it in the aughts.

He was never a mainstream figure, even during his ’90s heyday, but sometime around the the latter-half of the 21st century’s first decade, D’Souza receded further and further toward the far-right fringe. If there was a single tipping point, it was probably the release of his execrable 2007 book, “The Enemy at Home: The Cultural Left and Its Responsibility for 9/11,” whose title tells you pretty much all you need to know. (It did give us this D’Souza interview with Colbert, though, for which we can be grateful.) That was an argument so hostile and unreasonable, so suffused with a neurotic and tribalist hatred, that it more or less negated itself with its own silliness.

D’Souza’s trip to rock bottom wasn’t a straight line, however. It’s true that he went from being a right-wing pundit with a whiff of intellectual seriousness about him to becoming just another run-of-the-mill far-right demagogue, albeit with a larger vocabulary than most. But as Sarah Palin or Glenn Beck or Rush Limbaugh could tell you, if you hit your marks and balance seething resentment with a carnival barker’s flair, you can make good money on the far-right fringes. A lot of it, in fact.

Thus did D’Souza add another talent to his repertoire, becoming a filmmaker with 2012’s extremely successful — and utterly mendacious — “2016: Obama’s America,” a pseudo-documentary that argued Kenyan anti-colonialism was the key to understanding the 44th president. For a political documentary — for any documentary not made by Michael Moore, really — the film was absolute gangbusters at the box office, raking in somewhere around $33 million. Liberals laughed at it, sure, but conservatives on the whole adored it, and even persuaded themselves that it would make an impact on the 2012 election, as was its clear intent.