The economy and the availability of good jobs tops the list of voters’ priorities among both parties heading into the November midterm elections, a new poll showed on Thursday.

While Democrats and Republicans mostly agree on those issues, they diverge on other concerns such as the threat of Islamic militants and equal pay for women, the Gallup poll showed.

ADVERTISEMENT

Republicans rate the situation with Islamic militants as their second concern — 85 percent listed it as the top problem — while the issue ran sixth for Democrats, with 72 percent giving it top priority.

Both sides also place a high priority on how the federal government is working, with Democrats listing it fourth and Republicans fifth.

The No. 1 problem for Democrats (89%) is the availability of good jobs while 91 percent of Republicans made the economy their top issue.

Jobs were third for Republicans at 83 percent while the economy came in second for Democrats at 86 percent.

Overall, the least important issues to voters are climate change and abortion and access to contraception, which appear near the bottom of the list for both political groups.

Two of Democrats' top five issues — equal pay for women and income distribution — are much less important for Republicans, with gaps of 29 points (87 vs 58) on equal pay and 21 points (75 vs. 54) on income distribution.

By party, climate change, abortion and access to contraception are more important to Democrats while the deficit, taxes, immigration and the ongoing situation with Islamic militants are more important to Republicans.

Economic growth is improving and the labor market is chugging along at a solid pace, even though improvements haven’t given a boost to President Obama and congressional Democrats.

The poll suggests that Democratic candidates sould focus on inequality-related issues, including equal pay for women to spur voter turnout.

Republicans would do better to focus on the Islamic militant situation in Iraq and Syria, the deficit and taxes and immigration.

Gallup's previous assessments of issue priority also have put the economy near the top of concerns.

The survey was conducted Sept. 25-30.