Affordable health care is within your reach - but you'll have to get moving if you want it.

It's time to block out all the Obamacare noise and focus on March 31, the deadline for signing up for health insurance.

If you're lucky enough to have coverage from your employer or already have comprehensive health insurance, such as Medicare or Medicaid, you don't have to do a thing.

But if you are uninsured, you have just three weeks to take action.

Under the Affordable Care Act, most people must be covered this year or face a penalty of $95 per person or 1% of your income, whichever is higher.

Once March 31 passes, you will have missed the boat: Most people, with some exceptions, won't be able to buy a health insurance plan again until the next open enrollment period begins on Nov. 15 for coverage that begins in 2015.

"It's so important," Jenna Stento, senior manager at Avalere Health, told the Daily News. "You can essentially be locked out of the insurance market."

Choosing among the dozens of plans from 16 insurance companies offered at NY State of Health (NYStateofHealth.ny.gov), New York's official health insurance exchange, is no easy task.

The Daily News is here to help.

Our Guide to the Affordable Care Act, Part III, will help you understand your new coverage options.

We'll tell you what to consider when making a choice, introduce you to New Yorkers who have already bought on the exchange, and answer some frequently asked questions.

First, you should know the basics:

— Under the health law, all plans must cover 10 essential health benefits, including maternity care and mental health services. An insurance company can't turn you down based on a preexisting condition.

— Many people who purchase on the exchange will be eligible for help.

If you are an individual earning up to $45,900 a year, or a family of four earning up to $94,200 a year, you might qualify for premium subsidies that could substantially lower your cost.

— There are five types of plans - bronze, silver, gold, platinum and catastrophic, which are high deductible plans available for young adults and people with financial hardships.

Bronze plans tend to have the lowest premiums among the metal tiers. The lower your premium, the higher your cost sharing.

— Regardless of the plan you choose, you will have a maximum out-of-pocket cost limit: no more than $6,350 for an individual plan and $12,700 for a family plan, so long as you stay in the plan's network.

That means no matter how high your health care costs are, your out-of-pocket expenses for covered benefits will be capped. Premiums do not count toward the cap.

"The fact that there is maximum out-of-pocket protection in the marketplace cannot be overstated," noted Elisabeth Benjamin, vice president of health initiatives at the Community Service Society.

"This is the economic security part of the law that people don't understand."

Now that you have the basics, it's time to get to work.

You don't want to leave this big decision to the last minute, especially if this is your first time buying insurance.

Keep in mind, exchange plans have some unique features that require your attention.

If you don't meet the deadline, you may not be able to buy a health insurance plan until the next enrollment period begins on Nov. 15. (iofoto/Getty Images/iStockphoto)

"Applying for financial assistance may take extra time," said Cheryl Fish-Parcham, program director of private insurance at Families USA.

In order to keep their costs down, some insurance companies are offering narrow networks in their exchange plans.

That means you'll need to dig in to see if the doctors and providers you want are in the network.

"You need to research the provider network," said Karen Pollitz, a senior fellow at the Kaiser Family Foundation. "If you take medication, you need to research the formularies."

At the end of the day, you may find the experience was worth the time and effort.

"Health insurance gives you the peace of mind that you can get to the doctor when you need to, and your health care expenses will be capped if you have a major illness," Fish-Parcham said.

pfurman@nydailynews.com

------------------------------------

Help is just a click or a call away.

There are plenty of places to go to learn more about the exchanges and to get help in enrolling in a plan.

Here are some key resources you need to know about:

NEW YORK STATE OF HEALTH'S CUSTOMER SERVICE CENTER

Trained reps are ready to take questions by phone from individuals and business owners.

Call toll-free: 1-855-355-5777.

NAVIGATORS

Face-to-face guidance is available at offices set up throughout New York City, with trained experts on hand to walk you through the enrollment process.

To find an office near you, go to nystateofhealth.ny.gov.

INFORMATION

Do your homework. Check out the following websites to brush up on the insurance marketplace:

Nystateofhealth.ny.gov — The official website for New York State of Health.

Healthcare.gov — The federal government's official health insurance website.

HealthLawHelper.org — A web-based tool from Consumer Reports that offers personalized guidance to help consumers better understand how they may be affected by the Affordable Care Act.

Kff.org — The Kaiser Family Foundation, a nonprofit focusing on major health care issues, offers a treasure trove of information and helpful online tools, including an animated video on the Affordable Care Act and a health insurance subsidy calculator.