Doing nothing in politics is almost always the sensible option. Inertia minimises the likelihood of blame. It avoids bad headlines and gains you the reputation of a safe pair of hands.

With that in mind, let’s examine the fate of two magnificent and visionary schemes: Obamacare in the United States and Iain Duncan Smith’s system of Universal Credit in Britain. No decent person could object to the principle that lies behind either project. President Obama’s Affordable Care Act was designed to ensure that all Americans, however poor, could obtain health insurance. Mr Duncan Smith wants to end welfare dependency by making it easier – and financially rational – for the unemployed to return to work.

Both schemes are now in trouble. In the US, the government website through which people were supposed to apply for their insurance crashed almost at once, and has not yet been repaired. Meanwhile, in Britain, the introduction of Universal Credit has been repeatedly delayed and even now is operational in only a handful of benefit offices.

These failures have been exploited by the Republican Party in the US and Labour in Britain. Indeed, the American Right are trying to use the troubles of Obamacare to destroy the US president, and judging by opinion polls they are succeeding.

In Britain, every setback for Universal Credit brings down derision on the Cameron government, while Iain Duncan Smith has been subject to an escalating campaign of venomous personal attack. This is the price brave politicians always pay when they attempt to improve the world. I believe, however, that Obamacare will ultimately fail, while Mr Duncan Smith’s Universal Credit still stands a fair chance of success.

I will start with Obamacare, which faces two intractable problems. The first of these concerns implementation. Kathleen Sebelius, the US health secretary, believed she could introduce an online health insurance marketplace for 25 million Americans all at once. Not surprisingly, this “big bang” approach failed in spectacular fashion. President Obama’s popularity is crashing through the floor as a result.

In Britain, it would be perverse to play down the scale of the problem faced by the Universal Credit system. When the plan was originally announced, it was assumed it would be completed by 2017. “This would involve an IT development of moderate scale,” announced a spokesman, with extraordinary complacency, “which the Department for Work and Pensions and its suppliers are confident of handling within budget and timescale.”

Rather surreptitiously, Mr Duncan Smith last week used the Autumn Statement as cover for an announcement that his scheme has now been put back beyond 2017. Behind this revelation lay a host of disasters. The well-liked and senior IT expert responsible for handling the changes, Philip Langsdale, died. This set back progress.

The project has already overrun its costs by £30 million and looks certain to exceed that by some distance. There appears to have been an unedifying period of high-level panic inside the DWP, during which ministers fell out publicly with their civil servants. This reflected well on no one, and badly on ministers, including Mr Duncan Smith. The initiative might have collapsed altogether but for one crucial fact. Nobody had ever planned to implement Universal Credit all at once. A series of pathfinder schemes, followed by a staged introduction across the country, was always the intention. As a result it has been relatively simple to slow down progress without compromising the entire project (the disaster that has befallen Obamacare).

Yesterday I went to view one of the “pathfinder” offices in Hammersmith, west London. The systems expert was a bearded Scotsman who told me there had been a few glitches on the new system, but he was confident it would work: “It’s more intuitive, it makes more sense to me.” The office was clean and organised. It felt like a well-run business, while the staff were a revelation. It was clear that they found the new system of Universal Credits vastly preferable to work with than the old model. They told me it was much easier to persuade people to find a job, too: “We don’t have that financial cliff edge when people go back to work.”

I spoke at length to Alex, a 20-year-old claimant. He was being well looked after by Vandna, his “work coach”. I’d put money on him finding a job quite soon. My visit was organised, at my request, by the DWP. I must also declare that I find it troublesome enough getting my own computer to work, and am incapable of making an authoritative judgment about the prospects of a massive system supposed to deal with six million families. Moreover, just a tiny number of people are on Universal Credit so far.

The big test lies round the corner, when it is trialled across regions rather than individual offices. So my tentative optimism may be premature and ill-informed. Universal Credit nevertheless has one massive advantage that Obamacare lacks. Although it secured a majority in Congress, the American people have still not given it their wholehearted support. The US remains essentially a Darwinian, some might say barbaric, country where individuals and families are expected to fend for themselves. Universal Credit, by contrast, is popular. It is also well-received, according to preliminary findings, among the claimants themselves.

According to research published last week, people claiming Universal Credit say they spend on average 27 hours a week looking for work, compared with 13.5 hours under the Jobseekers’ Allowance. They tend to apply for significantly more jobs, and feel more confident about getting them. The importance of this change can hardly be overstated. Gordon Brown’s tax credits were not just a hideously expensive disaster. They required something not far off a degree in mathematics to understand, while creating perverse incentives to turn down a job.

Universal Credit is simpler, and does not present the same financial obstacle to a return to work. The crucial point is this, though one would not guess it from the constant blasts of attack: Mr Duncan Smith’s plan is in essence supported by the Labour Party. Rachel Reeves, the shadow welfare secretary, is caustic – and not without reason – about the waste of money and delays. But she has no plans to return to the old system.

This is an honourable position to take, since Iain Duncan Smith is not seeking to wreck the welfare state, as critics claim. He is trying to take it back to something like the arrangement recommended 70 years ago by Beveridge, i.e. a secure safety net rather than dependency.

Mr Duncan Smith’s reforms may yet be brought down, for all I know, by technological failure. But all great revolutions in administration are bound to encounter teething problems or worse, as Michael Gove is discovering with his free schools programme. Such early setbacks should not be cause for despair, especially since the Labour Party is behaving with more responsibility than it pretends. Unlike the Republicans, with their rabid and disreputable opposition to Obamacare, Ed Miliband’s Labour is capable of recognising a good idea when it sees one.