Pacific Grove >> Discussion of budgetary and revenue matters dominated the Pacific Grove City Council meeting Wednesday night.

Council members spent a majority of the meeting hearing about the 2016-17 recommended operating and capital improvement budget and discussed at length options for changing the city’s business license tax. Prior to the meeting, the council met in closed session about possible litigation brought against the city by the Monterey Bay Aquarium if the city decides to institute an admissions tax. The possibility of such a tax will be discussed publicly at the June 15 council meeting. Consideration of the tax and other measures for the November ballot have come about recently as the city looks for ways to increase revenue.

But on Wednesday, the first matter at hand was whether or not to adopt the city’s 2016-17 operating and capital improvement budget, which the council did unanimously.

Mayor Bill Kampe noted that he was pleased with the approved budget in the area of capital equipment specifically, with special attention for road maintenance in the coming year.

There was also discussion of $700,000 being potentially spent on the Affordable Care Act in an effort to offer health care benefits for city employees. More than 10 years ago city employees chose to take higher salaries rather than receive health care benefits.

In general, Councilman Rudy Fischer, along with the other council members, noted appreciation for how the budget was prepared this year by new City Manager Ben Harvey and Finance Director Patricia Maitland.

The council ultimately decided to contract with Hinderliter, de Llamas & Associates to conduct an analysis of the current business license ordinance that was passed in 1979. The council also wants the company, which is currently used by the city to collect business tax, to study the city’s tax registration database, get a clearer idea of current tax revenues and perform a comparative study of neighboring cities.

The current cap for a business license if $3,000 while the minimum cost is $15. Harvey has noted in the past that both figures should be higher.

“What we felt what we needed was someone who could both look at current practices and help us understand what best practices are for both business licenses and what that means for the city when collecting revenue from the business tax,” said Kampe. “You can set rates but you also have to know who they apply to and so on.”

For his part, Councilman Robert Huitt cautioned his fellow council members about adopting additional ballot measures in general when it comes to raising revenue for the city.

Advertisement

“We should be very careful in framing our decisions about additional ballot measures so we don’t shoot ourselves in the foot,” Huitt said.

Carly Mayberry can be reached at 831-726-4363.