Heslip, Lewis Jackson

Lewis (Louie) Jackson Heslip, 58, of Blacksburg, passed unexpectedly Tuesday, May 24, 2016. He was born in Montgomery County on August 29, 1957. He was preceded in death by his father, Norman Lewis Heslip.Louie was a veteran of the United States Marine Corp. He retired from Christiansburg Kroger after 25 years. Then Louie fulfilled his lifelong dream and became a Deputy of the Montgomery County Sheriffs Office and rose to the rank of Lieutenant. At the Sheriffs Office, Louie became a mentor for many of his deputies and spearheaded a county leadership program that involved the entire community. He also loved volunteering and teaching spin classes at The Weight Club. Louie loved to cycle all over the New River Valley, and he was passionate about helping with the Montgomery County Animal Shelter.He is survived by his wife and best friend of 26 years, Christie G. Heslip; mother, Eloise (Sue) Heslip, Blacksburg; sister and brother-in-law, Debbie and Wayne Scott, Williamsburg; brother, J.B. Heslip, Buckingham; father-in-law, Charles Gregg and wife, Judy, Merry Hill, N.C.; mother-in-law, Carole Gregg, Sterling; sisters-in-law and brothers-in-law, Andrea L. Gregg and Amit, Rachel G. Davis and husband, Jason, Sterling; nieces and nephews, Shannon Freedres, Angela Johnson, Brittany Scott, Gray Heslip, Mattie Heslip, Addison Heslip, Mary Heslip, Elianna Davis, Olivia Davis.Funeral services will be conducted at 11 a.m. Saturday, May 28, 2016 in the St. Mary's Catholic Church 1205 Old Mill Road, Blacksburg, with the Dr. Tommy McDearis officiating. Interment will follow in the Memorial Gardens of the New River Valley. In lieu of flowers memorial contributions may be made to the Montgomery County friends of Animal Care and Control 125 N. Main St. Suite 500 #129, Blacksburg and The Law Enforcement Torch Run for Special Olympics at http://www.torchrunva.com. The family will receive friends from 4 to 8 p.m. Friday evening at the McCoy Funeral Home 150 Country Club Dr. SW, Blacksburg.