By

As veterans, we empathize with those who suffer from mesothelioma, the asbestos-related disease. We were trained as veterans to never leave our fellow soldiers behind, and that is why we took the same position as the AMVETS Department of Wisconsin in supporting the asbestos legislation (2013 Wisconsin Act 154) passed by the Wisconsin Legislature and signed by Gov. Scott Walker. This new law will ensure that our brothers in arms are not left behind.

Recently, Democratic gubernatorial candidate Mary Burke pledged to repeal the new law. Contrary to what has been claimed, Act 154 will not harm veterans. Instead, the law will help veterans by ensuring that valuable resources are not depleted.

Specifically, the new law prevents plaintiffs' attorneys from attempting to "double-dip" by making inconsistent representations to trust funds set up to compensate victims.

It's important to begin with an explanation of how compensation for asbestos-related illnesses works. A number of trust funds were created under the bankruptcy laws by companies that made and sold products that contained asbestos. Those trusts were established under the supervision of bankruptcy courts to provide appropriate compensation to individuals harmed by products produced by the bankrupt companies. A plaintiff has the right to file with one or more of the trusts.

In addition, plaintiffs can sue solvent businesses in Wisconsin courts. This gives plaintiffs two ways to pursue recovery for asbestos injuries — the courtroom and the bankruptcy trust claims process.

Prior to Wisconsin's new law, there was no requirement that lawyers disclose with the courts how much they received from the trust funds. Or, lawyers could wait until after the lawsuit to file with the multiple trusts. This allowed lawyers to double-dip by withholding evidence from courts and then filing with the trust funds. These tactics deplete the trust funds, leave some businesses paying more than they are required and ultimately harm future victims, including veterans.

Such concerns were confirmed in a court order by a North Carolina federal district court that uncovered a "startling pattern of misrepresentation" and extensive abuse by plaintiffs' lawyers. The court found that the lawyers withheld exposure evidence, which resulted in "unfairly inflating" recoveries.

According to a National Public Radio story, the case was called a "watershed moment." A law professor interviewed by NPR said the case "laid bare the massive fraud that is routinely practiced in mesothelioma litigation."

According to a Huffington Post column, the court's decision confirmed that "attorneys have been leading clients to tell one story for one trust and another for another trust and maybe a third story for an actual injury — and on and on." This means less money is available for future veterans and other plaintiffs.

Act 154 is common sense legislation that protects veterans and other individuals who have been afflicted with mesothelioma. Wisconsin joined Ohio and Oklahoma in passing this type of law, and the U.S. House of Representatives last year passed similar legislation.

Wisconsin's new law provides transparency and fairness, and ensures that enough assets will be available for current and future veterans. That is why we, as veterans, fully support the new law and oppose any attempts to repeal it.

Larry Kutschma is a veteran and past commander of the Veterans Foreign Wars Department of Wisconsin. Steven S. Stefonik is a veteran and member of the American Legion.