Reducing Readmissions by Improving Email Open Rates

Kentucky's Kindred Healthcare revamps its email marketing strategy and sees readmissions rates shrink.

When hospital leaders brainstorm strategies to reduce readmission rates, email marketing probably isn't the first (or second, or third) thing that comes to mind—but maybe it should be.

Kindred Healthcare, a Kentucky-based post-acute care provider, revamped its email marketing strategy to prepare for penalties linked to hospital readmissions as mandated by the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. The organization operates in 2,787 locations, including 97 transitional care hospitals, 16 inpatient rehab hospitals, 90 nursing centers, and 21 subacute units, so it had a lot of ground to cover when it came to educating physicians, case managers, and C-suite members about best practices to avoid readmissions.

"Reducing rehospitalizations is the right thing to do for patient care—we all know this. But with task forces on performance improvement initiatives ranging from infections to patient satisfaction, it can be difficult to know where to focus efforts for the greatest impact,' says Lori Beaton Riggs, senior director of enterprise marketing at Kindred Healthcare.

"We have provided information about what programs are working, based on industry research, so that providers know where to focus their efforts. Summary information and direction in best practices is very helpful in initiatives such as this, where information is prolific and ever-expanding."

Content Should Solve Problems, Not Sell

Working with marketing automation platform Marketo, Riggs and her team crafted emails that were informative and inviting with the aim of improving open rates.

"No one wants to feel marketed to or sold to," she says. "When you provide your audiences and customers with relevant and helpful information, they take note. You are able to establish yourself as a thought leader and partner, showing you are dedicated to helping make their lives easier, not simply promoting your companies' services and value propositions."

The new email marketing strategy adheres to a strict 80/20 rule that is designed to keep readers engaged.