Three candidates from the Chicago area want the chance to become the Democratic Party’s nominee to represent Illinois in the U.S. Senate. One stands out and has actually given some time and attention to this part of central Illinois.

Andrea Zopp, 59, of Chicago is an attorney with a wide-ranging public service background, her most recent contribution as president of the Chicago Urban League. Tammy Duckworth, 47, of Hoffman Estates, is an Iraq War veteran who has filled high-ranking posts at Veterans Affairs departments at state and federal levels and has represented Chicago’s northwest suburbs in the U.S. House for the last three years. Napoleon Harris, 37, of Flossmoor is a state senator serving Chicago’s south suburbs who’s run pizza franchises and previously played in the National Football League.

This race is really between Duckworth and Zopp. Harris did not respond to an invitation to interview or answer questions, and he has come off as ill-prepared at some public functions.

Duckworth first garnered national media attention after an Iraqi insurgent attack on her Army Black Hawk helicopter in 2004 cost her both legs. It’s no surprise that military and veterans’ issues dominate her agenda. She is pro-choice and pro-gun control. She’s a fiscal liberal, generally opposed to entitlement reforms beyond plays at the margins. She tilts toward labor and is not much of a free trader, of interest locally given that Peoria-based global manufacturer Caterpillar is one of the state’s largest employers. She does not get high marks from the American Farm Bureau — indeed, she was tied for lowest in the Illinois delegation in 2014.

All of that is pretty general, and we would have liked to probe her thoughts further, but Duckworth, too, has been a no-show in the Peoria area during this campaign with the exception of a Labor Day parade appearance last year. We’d just say that the job title is senator of Illinois, all of Illinois, and her absence in the Peoria area has been duly noted. She just hasn't allowed us to get to know her.

Zopp did come to Peoria with her sterling résumé in hand. She has prosecuted prominent cases in both the Cook County State’s Attorney’s Office — including former Congressman Mel Reynolds on sexual assault charges — and the U.S. Attorney’s Office, where she was a finalist for the top job in 1997. The Harvard graduate has held high-placed corporate counsel jobs at Exelon, Sears and Sara Lee. Along the way she’s found time to serve on the Chicago Board of Education, the Governor’s Commission to Review the Death Penalty, etc.

Her priorities in office would be comprehensive criminal justice reform that focuses less on locking the non-violent up and more on redirecting them toward productive lives, bolstering the middle class with federal infrastructure investments and tax incentives for small businesses, and immigration reform that protects America’s borders without militarizing them.

She supports ObamaCare with some tweaking to contain costs, especially for small businesses, but unlike many Democrats she’d allow insurance companies to compete across state lines to bring down premiums and deductibles. Regarding corporate taxation, she’d provide incentives for investment and jobs in the U.S. and disincentives for the same abroad. She’d raise the minimum wage. Like Duckworth, she’d discipline military spending and parts with the president in her misgivings regarding the Trans-Pacific Partnership. Beyond that, she’s with the White House on climate change issues, on the current strategy of limited engagement with ISIS and only with a multi-national coalition, on the nuclear deal with Iran.

Ultimately, Duckworth’s military service to the nation was laudable, she is her party’s choice and polling suggests she’s the clear frontrunner. But if so, Democrats may be missing the boat on Zopp, who is accomplished and informed, with serious policy chops and a genuineness about her that is appealing. We urge local Democrats to not just fall in line and to give her a chance. Andrea Zopp is endorsed.