WASHINGTON — The Affordable Care Act prohibited lifetime and annual limits on health insurance payouts beginning in 2014. It was a rule that affected 105 million Americans with health insurance.

Before that, the lifetime benefit in Texas had to be at least $3 million. That seems like plenty of cushion. But a new report from Sun Life Financial, the nation’s largest “stop-loss” health insurer, makes plain that million-dollar hospital bills are not as rare as they used to be.

Sun Life specializes in covering self-insured companies against catastrophic losses. When someone has a severe injury or illness requiring a long hospitalization, the bills add up quickly. Anything beyond $175,000 is generally considered a catastrophic claim, though for some companies it’s a lot less than that. Employers turn in such cases to a second line of insurance defense for help (to “stop the losses”). That’s what Sun Life offers.

The Affordable Care Act phased out lifetime and annual health insurance limits between 2010 and 2014. During that period, the number of million-dollar plus claims reaching Sun Life went up 68 percent. Claims exceeding $2 million more than doubled.

“That certainly shows a pretty telling trend for very large catastrophic claims,” said Brad Nieland, Sun Life’s vice president for stop-loss claims. “Certainly, it is our belief that the provision under the Affordable Care Act that requires employers to provide unlimited benefits has had an impact.”

These big claims are hospital bills. When there were lifetime caps on benefits, a patient caught in one of these hospital stays could be in considerable financial peril when the benefit ran out. Sometimes, bankruptcy followed.

From the hospital’s perspective, there was considerable uncertainty about whether those bills would get paid.

Cancer care

Not anymore. Now that there’s no ceiling on benefits for treatment of critical conditions, insurers (or, typically, self-insured employers) have to pay.

The leading cause of these catastrophic care episodes is cancer care. Between 2011 and 2014, Sun Life paid out $536 million for cancer patients.

Next was end-stage kidney failure or renal disease, a condition that typically leads to intensive dialysis treatment. The average patient goes through $368,000 a year in care.

Birth defects and premature births took the next two spots.

Organ transplants remain hugely expensive. The average cost of care for a heart transplant is about $550,000. A bone marrow-stem cell transplant runs about $475,000.

The billed charges are much higher. Hospitals’ charges are often almost double what insurers will reimburse. Sun Life handled claims for $8.3 billion between 2011 and 2014, but payments were just $4.8 billion. The stop-loss portion of those claim payments was $2.1 billion, while employers typically picked up the difference.

Drug costs

Why do these cases cost so much? Nieland didn’t offer much insight.

“We don’t negotiate directly with the hospitals. We don’t see all of that day to day,” he said.

But the report does highlight large payments for cancer drugs. The average cost for newer medications treating advanced cancers exceeds $10,000 a month.

Even insured patients can be in for a shock with these prices. Deductibles and co-payments of thousands of dollars are getting commonplace.

On Monday, the American Society of Clinical Oncologists issued a draft rating system to help doctors and patients determine the best value in cancer treatments. Drugs are rated on effectiveness, toxicity and the length of time between treatments. A numerical score is assessed, ranging from 0 to 130. Set against that is the cost of the medication, both to the insurer and the patient.

“People with cancer are about 2.5 times more likely to face bankruptcy than people without,” said Dr. Richard Schilsky, the society’s chief medical officer. “In 2013, a study of cancer patients found cost concerns led to lower compliance with medication. Twenty percent said they took less medicine than they were prescribed. … Twenty-four percent avoided filling prescriptions altogether.”

Follow Jim Landers on Twitter at @landersjim.