Three Mississippi, two Mississippi, one Mississippi … Ready or not, Demaryius Thomas, here come the Broncos.

Regardless of how overpowering Thomas may be on the field, the Broncos will catch him in the game of franchise tag Monday, and he will be “it” in a bargaining move that all but ensures the team of retaining their star wide receiver for the 2015 season.

Specifically, the Broncos are expected to use the “nonexclusive” tag on Thomas. The team could have used the “exclusive” tag that would have prohibited the player from negotiating with other NFL teams.

The “nonexclusive” tag makes it possible for other teams to negotiate with Thomas, although the Broncos would have the right to match any offer. Moreover, should the Broncos decide against matching an offer, the team signing away Thomas would have to compensate Denver with two first-round draft picks.

In other words, the cost of another team signing away Thomas is so costly, he is certain to be with the Broncos in 2015. The “nonexclusive” designation is the most common tag. The Dallas Cowboys will also use the “nonexclusive” designation Monday on their star wide receiver, Dez Bryant, who was selected two slots behind Thomas in the first round of the 2010 draft.

Neither Thomas, 27, nor his agent, Todd France, could be reached for comment Sunday, but it wouldn’t be a surprise if the three-time Pro Bowler protested by not signing his franchise tag designation until the July 15 deadline. That would keep Thomas away from the team’s offseason program that will run from mid-April until mid-June. It would also allow him to skip the mandatory minicamp in June without penalty.

The franchise tag has been around since the advent of NFL free agency in 1993. Its primary intent is to prevent the richer, bigger-market teams from having a competitive advantage against the smaller-market, cash-strapped teams.

There is a compliment in the tag. The Broncos have 12 free-agent players this year, and only Thomas is the chosen one. The franchise tag will present Thomas with a guaranteed one-year salary of $12.797 million (based on the projected $143 million salary cap) for the 2015 season.

Meanwhile, other big-name Denver free agents, such as Julius Thomas, Terrance Knighton, Orlando Franklin, Rahim Moore and Wes Welker, will be allowed to hit the market and shop their services elsewhere.

The Broncos are tagging Demaryius Thomas because he, more than any other, is the free-agent player they want back. So why is he not expected to be happy about getting tagged?

Because in the open market, he probably would be able to command a five-year contract worth $60 million to $80 million.

“Our goal is to get something down with Demaryius,” Broncos general manager John Elway said Feb. 19 at the NFL scouting combine.

The Broncos have tried to sign Thomas to a long-term deal. Their offer last August would have made him the league’s third highest-paid wide receiver, at about $13 million per year. Thomas was seeking something north of $15 million per.

Typically, there are also differences in the amount of guaranteed money placed within the first three years of a contract.

In Thomas’ defense, he is coming off three consecutive monstrous seasons when he had 94, 92 and 111 catches. His yards in those three seasons were 1,434, 1,430 and 1,619. He scored 10, 14 and 11 touchdowns.

During that three-year span, no other wide receiver in the NFL had more receiving yards, and Thomas was second only to Antonio Brown in catches and second to Bryant in touchdowns.

Yes, Thomas has benefited from having Peyton Manning as his quarterback. Or has Manning profited from having a talented stable of elite receiving targets led by Thomas?

Manning could become a complicating factor in the Broncos’ ability to sign Thomas long term. The quarterback is expected to formally announce this week his return for the 2015 season. But Manning turns 39 on March 24.

Does Thomas want to make a five-year commitment to the Broncos if Manning has only one or two years left in his playing career? If not, the Broncos could place a franchise tag on Thomas again next year. His 2016 salary would bump 20 percent to $15.36 million.

Still, two years of tags at a combined $28.16 million would not be team-prohibitive for a player of Thomas’ caliber.

Thomas will be the third Broncos player to have received the nonexclusive franchise tag in four years. In the two previous cases, the Broncos were able to reach multiyear contract agreements with place-kicker Matt Prater (2012) and offensive tackle Ryan Clady (2013) before training camp.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis