Image 1 of 3

Media Alert: ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology Showcases Power of Specialty

Complimentary Media Registration Offered for American College of Radiology Annual Meeting May 15–19 in Washington, DC

Add to Favorites

Contact Information Available for logged-in reporters only

Newswise — Media Alert

At ACR 2016—The Crossroads of Radiology®, health, science and medical reporters can gain access to leading radiology and health care experts and hear first-hand how economic, legislative and regulatory trends affecting radiology and radiation oncology impact the future of medicine. The all-member ACR Annual Meeting will take place May 15–19 in Washington, DC.

WHO

Several thousand radiology professionals (diagnostic radiologists, interventional radiologists, nuclear medicine doctors, radiation oncologists, medical physicists, technologists, nurses and radiology practice managers) attend the American College of Radiology annual meeting.

WHAT

—Abstracts: More than 120 abstracts cover topics such as delivering quality patient-centered care; exploring changing utilization patterns and patient consumerism; examining diagnostic and management advances for breast and lung cancer, pediatric appendicitis, Crohn’s, flesh-eating disease, stroke and other medical conditions; using 3-D printing for patient education; and affecting meaningful diversity and inclusion in radiology.

—Speakers: Ezekiel J. (Zeke) Emanuel, MD, PhD, an architect of the Affordable Care Act and a leading practitioner shaping the future of health care, delivers the May 15 keynote address. Andy DeLaO (aka @CancerGeek), who has an extensive background in cancer services, designing health care experiences and connecting patient communities, presents the May 17 Moreton Lecture.

—Payment models Twitter takeover: Geraldine B. McGinty, MD, MBA, FACR, moderates From PQRS to MIPS: What You Need to Know About New Payment Models for Radiology from 10 a.m.–12 p.m. (Eastern) on Thursday, May 19. Use #ACR2016.

—Patient engagement is the focus of a Journal of the American College of Radiology (JACR) Tweet Up from 12–1:30 p.m. (Eastern) on Tuesday, May 17. Use #JACR.

—Special events include Capitol Hill Day, with exclusive meetings scheduled May 18 for members to bring the Voice of Radiology to elected officials, and the May 14–15 Journal of the American College of Radiology (JACR) Hackathon to reinvent medical journal access. The exhibit hall is open May 16 and 17.

—More than 100 concurrent and general sessions focus on clinical research; clinical education; advocacy, economics and health policy; quality and safety; informatics and innovations; and more.

WHEN, WHERE

ACR 2016 will be held May 15–19 at the Washington Marriott Wardman Park Hotel in Washington, DC.

FREE MEDIA REGISTRATION, ABSTRACTS AVAILABLE

To receive complimentary media registration, receive related news releases and gain access to select embargoed abstracts, please contact Shawn Farley at 703-648-8936, Maryann Verrillo at 703-390-9822 or email PR@acr.org. Dedicated working news room is available on site. Program and embargoed abstract info is available through the ACR 2016 Annual Meeting App, available in Apple’s App Store or on Google Play.

FOLLOW

Follow ACR on Twitter (#ACR2016) with @RadiologyACR and Facebook for news and updates.

About the American College of Radiology

The American College of Radiology (ACR), founded in 1924, is a professional medical society dedicated to serving patients and society by empowering radiology professionals to advance the practice, science and professions of radiological care.



Reporters: follow Looking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an

Expert Query. follow @Expert_Pitch to receive instant updates via TwitterLooking for a different expert? Reporters can submit an Promote your organization’s experts with Expert Pitch

Comment/Share