Union Beach Police announce that an officer and an EMS chief were able to resuscitate a man suspected of overdosing on heroin in a home on Sunday. They used the drug Narcan to bring him back to life.

Buy Photo A police officer examines a sample of naloxone in this file photo. Union Beach Police reported the first life was saved in the borough by the overdose-reversal drug on Sunday. (Photo: Kathy Johnson/Courier News )Buy Photo

Add Union Beach to the list of boroughs on the Jersey Shore where a life has been saved by a first-responder and the overdose-reversal drug naloxone.

A news release from the Union Beach Police said police were called on Sunday to a Park Avenue home on a report of an unconscious person. Police found a man who was not breathing and gathered information that pointed to heroin use.

IN-DEPTH: Heroin at the Jersey Shore

Patrolman Matthew Gajewski and Union Beach EMS Chief Carlos Rodriguez administered Narcan, the brand name for the drug naloxone, a nasal spray that acts to resuscitate a patient who is actively overdosing on an opiate, like heroin. The victim regained consciousness while en route to the hospital, according to Union Beach police Officer Christopher Tuberion, the department’s naloxone program coordinator.

Overdose deaths from heroin and prescription opioids, like the brand name painkillers Oxycontin and Vicodin, have been skyrocketing nationally and locally in the last decade.

Drug-related deaths increased from 843 in 2010 to 1,294 in 2012, according to the New Jersey Office of the Medical Examiner. In Monmouth County, for instance, between 2011 and 2013, heroin and prescription opiate abuse was responsible for three times as many deaths as homicides and highway fatalities combined.

Heroin purity high in New Jersey, cops say

With Jon Bon Jovi at his side, Gov. Chris Christie signed the Overdose Protection Act in May 2013, which included provisions to encourage the expansion of the opiate antidote, especially among families and doctors.

Paramedics were empowered to begin carrying and using Narcan through an order from the Christie administration in late March.The first lifesaving dose of Narcan in Ocean County was given by a Seaside Heights Police officer in early April, just days after Christie announced in Brick that police in Monmouth and Ocean counties would part of a pilot program to train and equip officers with Narcan.

Narcan use was credited with saving 45 lives in Monmouth County from June 5 through mid-September, according to the Monmouth County Prosecutor’s Office.

Russ Zimmer: 732-557-5748, razimmer@app.com

Read or Share this story: http://on.app.com/1vrgP6T