Damaged wells and septic systems make city services more attractive

September's floods did a number on the wells and septic systems of many Boulder County residents, with testing still revealing contamination in some wells nearly three months later.

That damage has led to a surge of inquiries about annexation into the city of Boulder from people who have typically been wary of city government but now see the appeal of getting city water and sewer service.

But the cost can be prohibitively expensive for many homeowners, and it's not clear how many properties will ultimately be added to the city as a result of the floods.

City planners are currently assessing the costs and financing options for roughly 40 properties. That compares with two to five annexations processed by the city in a typical year.

Back in 2010, the city annexed 35 homes on Gapter Road while allowing residents to keep their more rural streets without sidewalks and street lights. The city and county helped residents with the financing.

Though that annexation preceded the flood by years, several residents there had failing septic systems, and county regulations strongly discourage putting new septic systems in the floodplain.

Planners said that annexation could provide the model for an annexation of 28 homes on nearby Old Tale Road, where residents already have city sewer but are on private wells, some of which are still contaminated after the South Boulder Creek flooded the area.

However, with both governments facing millions of dollars in damage to infrastructure, they have less money to pay for upfront costs, even if residents pay them back over time.

The city has also heard from another eight to 10 homeowners in other unincorporated areas, including several in Githens Acres, a county enclave in north Boulder.

At a recent City Council meeting, council members said they are sensitive to the public health issues involved and are open to annexing the properties of interested homeowners. But those homeowners need to pay the full cost, they said.

"From my perspective, with some of these really close-in enclaves, it's a public health issue," Councilwoman Lisa Morzel said. "You have shallow water tables. You have leaking septic systems. That's not good public health. But we can't afford to finance all these annexations."

Because of flood, 'their perspective has changed'

Boulder Mayor Matt Appelbaum said the city needs to take examine the costs and benefits.

"We need to take a close look at this, but without trying to sound too unsympathetic, I don't want this to cost the city money," he said.

But Councilman George Karakehian said this represents a window of opportunity to close holes in the city's infrastructure network, as residents who had previously rejected annexation are now interested.

Boulder city planner Chris Meschuk said annexing and connecting to city utilities can cost anywhere from $20,000 to $120,000 per house, depending on what infrastructure already exists in the area and how far sewer and water lines have to be extended.

The typical cost is between $45,000 and $50,000 per house.

The city takes over road maintenance in those areas, as well, but it also asks for easements from residents.

Meschuk said planners are researching the feasibility of forming an improvement district of some sort in the Gapter Road area if residents are interested. That would allow residents to pay back the costs over a period of years through an additional property tax assessment. However, improvement districts typically only cover actual infrastructure costs, not the fees associated with connecting to utilities.

The city may also be able to serve as a bank of sorts and extend low-interest loans, or homeowners could look for private financing.

Meschuk said the attitude toward annexation is notably different now.

"The interest is a lot higher," he said. "When we met with the Old Tale Road residents, some of the people who invited us had not previously been interested in annexation, but because of the flood, their perspective had changed."

"This is the time to do it," said Thomas Perry, who has lived on Old Tale Road for 27 years and still doesn't have potable water from his well after the flood.

The road is "a mess," and the failure of a county measure to create road maintenance improvement districts means repairs are not likely any time soon, he said.

If the city brought in water lines, it would also put in a new road surface after the installation. Though annexation is expensive, it brings two big benefits that will pay off in the future, Perry said.

"Our wells are all shallow," he said. "If we have a four-or five-year drought, we're up a creek. And that could easily happen, though folks aren't thinking about it now because we just had a flood. The idea of getting the road and the water in one fell swoop seems ideal."

Some of his neighbors are unconvinced.

Some homeowners wary of cost

Jacqueline Olmsted, who has lived on Old Tale for more than 40 years, is adamant about staying in the county. She has problems with her well after the flood and would pay to get city water, but she doesn't want to annex.

Cost is one reason. The 60-foot easement the city could want along South Boulder Creek, taking up more than half her backyard, is another.

"I don't see why we should have to annex to get city water," she said, noting that other unincorporated areas already have city water.

Ray Hedberg said an informal email survey of the 28 people on the road found 12 -- less than half -- interested in annexation, and even for them, cost is an issue.

Hedberg said he believes this is yet another effort by the county to get out of paying for road maintenance, the same perspective that led a majority of county voters to reject the road improvement districts.

Hedberg does not have contamination issues with his well and said there are ways to treat water that are much less expensive than annexation.

"I'm shocked by the cost," he said. "Under no circumstance would I sign up to annex."

Perry said he is resigned to the annexation not going through if the city can't make an offer that is more attractive to area residents, but the long-term water situation could eventually pull the area into the city.

"I think people would rather be unincorporated," he said. "It's just who we are. But the water will end up being the deciding factor."

Contact Camera Staff Writer Erica Meltzer at 303-473-1355, meltzere@dailycamera.