Common Man owner receives lifetime achievement award at hospitality expo

CONCORD — New Hampshire’s hospitality industry leaders gathered at the Sheraton Portsmouth Harborside on Nov. 9 to celebrate individual achievements at the New Hampshire Lodging and Restaurant Association’s (NHLRA) annual Hospitality Expo and Stars of the Industry Awards Dinner. Among those honored was Common Man Family owner and founder Alex Ray, who was given a Lifetime Achievement Award for the success of his business and numerous philanthropic works in the region.

Ray opened the first Common Man in Ashland in November 1971, and since then has built a thriving hospitality business throughout New Hampshire, employing more than 1,000 people statewide.

The event also featured a Hospitality Industry Forum, which covered four critical issues facing the industry in the coming year: worker’s compensation and labor laws, 401k and succession planning, changes in the Affordable Care Act, and the EMV (Europay, MasterCard and Visa) chip-enabled credit card liability shift.

Following the forum, the Hospitality Expo offered the opportunity for NHLRA members to learn about new products, ideas and innovations from industry suppliers. A highlight of the expo was appetizers prepared and served by members of the Portsmouth High School ProStart culinary team. ProStart is a nationwide, two-year high school program that unites the classroom and industry in teaching the skills they need to succeed in the restaurant and food service industry. Under the direction of chef and culinary instructor Perrin Long, Portsmouth High School won the 2015 New Hampshire ProStart competition and went on to represent the state at the national competition.

This year’s Stars of the Industry Awards went to:



Restaurant Employee of the Year: Michelle Doucette, 900 Degrees Neapolitan Pizzeria, Epping and Manchester



Lodging Employee of the Year: Laurie Foster, Three Chimneys Inn, Durham



Allied Member of the Year: Paul E. Ramsey, Eversource



Educator of the Year: Kendra Veno, Mt. Washington Valley Career & Technical Center



Chef of the Year: Shawn Deegan, Lakehouse Grille, Meredith



Innkeeper of the Year: Kate Bartlet, Henniker House B&B



Restaurateur of the Year: Brian Shea, The Barley House, Concord



Lifetime Achievement Award: Alex Ray, The Common Man Family



Lifetime Achievement Award: Edward “Rusty” McLear, Mill Falls at the Lake, Meredith



Appreciation awards were presented to outgoing NHLRA board members Karen Meyer, Three Chimneys Inn; Jim Hill, Clark-Mortenson Agency; Chuck Randall, Fox Ridge Resort; Eric Roberts, Lui Lui; Angela Scanlon, Southern Wine & Spirits; and Brian Shea, The Barley House. The board also elected a new chairman for the coming year: Sim Willey, chief executive officer of Hart’s Turkey Farm Restaurant in Meredith.

Founded in 1919, the New Hampshire Lodging & Restaurant Association is a statewide, non-partisan coalition of hospitality businesses and allied businesses that serve the industry. With approximately 600 members, NHLRA’s mission is to promote, protect, educate and inform the foodservice and lodging industries of the state and to ensure positive business growth for its members. For more information visit www.nhlra.com.