Beacon Hill Institute projects vetoed by Suffolk University included an Obamacare study involving a prominent University of Chicago economist, BHI director David Tuerck told Boston Herald Radio today -- adding that he had been chided for his comments to the Herald in the past.

Tuerck said his institute has long been the target of “attempts at censorship” by Suffolk. However, University President Margaret McKenna -- a liberal now under fire for marginalizing a conservative voice -- insisted in an earlier interview that the campus features a “variety” of political viewpoints.

Tuerck and McKenna made their remarks to Boston Herald Radio's Newsfeed hosts Zuri Berry and Joe Dwinell in separate, back-to-back phone interviews this afternoon.

Tuerck said the Obamacare project nixed by the university was aimed at studying the effects of the controversial health care law on employment across the United States. It was to be co-authored by University of Chicago economics professor Casey Mulligan.

“That got turned down,” said Tuerck. “I don’t know why, but that is the environment in which we’ve been operating.”

Tuerck said Suffolk officials have tried to “shut me up” over the past 10 years for his organization’s conservative viewpoints and for his comments over the years to the Herald.

“There were past attempts at censorship of us, which I fought off but became at a minimum an irritant,” said Tuerck. “I don’t blame anyone in charge now for those episodes. Those took place over a period of time, and I don’t want to go into details, but there were attempts to shut me up, especially when I was talking to the Herald. A lot of people there didn’t like what I was saying.”

Tuerck said the censorship attempts began a decade ago. He characterized them as efforts “to control what I say based on public relations or political considerations.”

McKenna, who took over 6 months ago, said she’s never met Tuerck, but insisted the campus is a place for a wide range of political perspectives.

“If I found out there was anything done here that would in any way interfere with our students hearing about a variety of views, ideologies and philosophies, I would make sure that that would never happen,” said McKenna. “A good education depends on our students being exposed to the widest varieties and philosophies, otherwise it’s not a good education, and we would be negligent.”

Tuerck said he sent an email citing his concerns to McKenna requesting a meeting with her, but was not offered one. Instead, McKenna referred his complaints to the university's provost.

Tuerck is now planning to make the Beacon Hill Institute completely independent of the university, though he said he is saddened that that likely means no longer working with school faculty and students.

“I’m not interested in going back,” said Tuerck. “We’re going to leave and I can’t imagine how anybody at Suffolk could convince me to stick around after this episode. I’ve just had enough.”