TERRE HAUTE, Ind. (WTHI) – You’ve made your end of the year donations to charity. Now, it’s time to find out what credits you may claim on your tax return. The 2015 tax season is right around the corner, and the Affordable Care Act could change how you file this year’s return. Those who have insurance could be in line for a significant tax credit.

The US has a massive tax code, about 5 million pages long. There are major tax credits that you may be eligible for, but you may not know about it. A common credit you may be eligible for is the Earned Income Tax Credit. You can get it if you are single or if you have children or college students in your home.

“If you have children in your home with you and your income is below $53,000, you’ll be eligible for some EIC, and EICt can exceed $6000,” said Andy Stadler, who is an enrolled agent and owns Stadler’s Tax Service.

He also talked about the child dependent credit, which you may also claim if you have an adult dependent, up to $3000 per dependent. If your kids are 16 or younger, see if you qualify for an additional $1000 per child.

Then there’s something called the Additional Child Tax Credit.

“If you’re eligible for the Chlid Tax Credit, also look to see if you’re eligible for the Additional Child Tax Credit,” Stadler suggested.

There’s also a saver’s credit for those of you who are putting away money for retirement via an IRA or a retirement plan at work. How about the American Opportunity Tax Credit? It’s a College Tax Credit, up to $2500 credit that you may claim for yourself, your spouse or children.

Then there’s the Affordable Care Act.

“This is brand new and could be really substantial,” said Stadler. “It could be over $10,000, but you’ve got to meet certain income limits, and you gotta have healthcare type insurance.”

“For a family of four, if they have an income of less than $94,000, they’ll be eligible for some kind of healthcare tax credits. Either they can get a refund on their tax return, or they get them throughout the year to help pay for healthcare.”

So, there’s a lot to consider. Consult your certified tax professional or get to work on your return early so that you may take advantage of the credits that might come your way.

Congress cut the IRS budget by $341 million heading into this tax season. Stadler says this resulted in cuts in taxpayer services, which means longer wait times if you call the IRS with tax-related questions.