Steffen Schmidt (Photo: Special to the Register)

A day before the Iowa Agriculture Summit for presidential contenders, I had coffee in Ames with David Rennie, a.k.a. "Lexington," who is the U.S. bureau chief for The Economist. His knowledge of and interest in American politics was astonishing.

While the whole world was focused on the "horse race" of the Republican presidential wannabes, he and I talked about the "big picture."

In this case, it was the question of where agriculture and ethanol fit into the national political equation. Of special interest was whether the "farm vote" and the "farm states" have a reduced and still declining role in the national political scene.

Ethanol has been very important for the Iowa presidential caucuses since the advent of the fuel. Iowa is the largest ethanol producer. In 2015 there is also a rift between the corn ethanol and the "advanced biofuels" industries over ethanol mandates. The Des Moines Register's Christopher Doering had an excellent story on this little-known conflict.

MORE: Agriculture: More than food for thought in 2016 presidential race

As Rennie and I discussed, for the past several cycles of Iowa presidential caucuses candidates were asked to "take the ethanol pledge" as they campaigned in Iowa. This meant that they were specifically asked if they supported federal programs, such as tax breaks and import tariffs against Brazilian ethanol, as well as the mandate that required a 10 percent ethanol blend in gasoline.

In 2008 John McCain did not mince words at the Iowa State Fair when he said he did not support the ethanol subsidies. Larry Rohter of the New York Times wrote in October 2008, "John McCain lost the Iowa Republican caucuses in part because he has always opposed government subsidies for growing corn ethanol." His opponent Barack Obama from Illinois (also a big corn-producing state) not only supported ethanol subsidies but appointed ethanol advocates as advisers to his campaign.

My argument the day before the Ag Summit was that agriculture is still a formidable piece of the American economy. That turned out to be untrue.

The agriculture share of GDP for the United States is 1.31 percent, comparable with Canada at 1.52 percent, but for Germany it's 0.86 percent and the U.K., 0.65 percent. As a keen analyst of Europe, Rennie was skeptical about the clout of agriculture since it has declined as a major factor in that part of the world.

In his Economist column, "Paying Fealty to Farmers," Rennie argued, "…the RFS is a glaring example of Big Government meddling. It is awkward, to put it mildly, for a small-government conservative to favour rules that force Americans to buy more of something than they want." Ouch! He also concluded after the Agriculture Summit that, "Mr. [Ted] Cruz sensed a political advantage in flying to Iowa to sit beside a tractor telling farmers that they are wrong to want federal help."

In 2015 the dynamics of ethanol have taken an interesting turn. Sen. Kelly Ayotte, R-N.H., who has been mentioned as a vice presidential candidate in 2016, has cosponsored a bill to repeal the Renewable Fuel Standard.

In the end David Rennie and I agreed that for the 2016 Iowa caucuses, ethanol and RFS will not be the "third rail" of Iowa presidential politics. Other issues including ObamaCare, the collapse of the Middle East (ISIS), government spending, gay marriage, and terrorism will dominate the campaign. But Rennie also sees a larger rejection of big agriculture subsidies in general as the GOP becomes more anti-big-government spending.

STEFFEN SCHMIDT is a professor of political science at Iowa State University. Contact: steffen schmidt2005@gmail.com.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1CbJVv8