Squire Patton Boggs is rehabbing its healthcare practice, hiring an official responsible for implementing ObamaCare, the firm announced on Monday.

Kristine Blackwood most recently served as the deputy director for oversight and investigations at the Department of Health and Human Services’ (HHS), Office of the Assistant Secretary for Legislation.

ADVERTISEMENT

She managed the department’s response to congressional inquiries and investigations related to the Affordable Care Act and other programs overseen by HHS.

“At a time where healthcare reform implementation, healthcare fraud and abuse, and Medicare and Medicaid policies remain at the forefront, Kristine’s strong relationships with policy and staff on both sides of the aisle on will be a great asset,” said former Sens. John Breaux (D-La.) and Trent Lott (R-Miss.), who now head Squire Patton’s lobby shop, in a statement.

Last year, Squire Patton Boggs lost a huge chunk of its healthcare policy practice — including its founder, John Jonas — to competitor Akin Gump Strauss Hauer & Feld. The 11 defecting lobbyists took about $5 million worth of annual advocacy business with them.

Blackwood’s hire gives prospective clients of Squire Patton Boggs a former high-ranking official that can navigate regulatory and investigative challenges from both agencies and lawmakers. It could also attract other new talent to the firm, which is still in the process of rebounding from the loss of the health policy team.

In addition to her administration experience — she also spent more than a decade at the Justice Department’s Office of Legislative Affairs — Blackwood also worked on Capitol Hill as chief counsel for the Senate Special Committee on Aging and as investigative counsel for the House Energy and Commerce Committee.

“I have come full-circle in my career and I’m excited to be back in the private law sector,” said Blackwood, referring to beginning her career at law and lobby firm McDermott, Will & Emery.

“Having worked in the healthcare arena for over two decades, I have witnessed the industry undergo tremendous reform,” she said in a statement. “Squire Patton Boggs’ provides an ideal platform that will allow me to bring my experiences to bear to help clients.”

Squire Patton Boggs remains the No. 2 firm on K Street by revenue, earning $31.6 million lobbying fees last year.