Video

Image Daley Mail: Gold Coast Titans v West Tigers 2:14 Play video Lara Pitt and Laurie Daley preview the round two clash between the Titans and the Tigers.

TITANS skipper Greg Bird wants the Gold Coast to turn their home ground into a house of pain this season by putting fear into NRL rivals with ferocious defence.

Bird said the aggression, intensity and intent of their defence had been a major focus this preseason and believes Gold Coast flexed their muscle in that area last week in their 18-12 win over Cronulla.

With Wests Tigers making the trip to Cbus Super Stadium for what looms as a scorching mid-afternoon game today, Bird has challenged his forward mates to turn up the heat on a team many believe will struggle to make an impact in 2014.

Paul Gallen mic'd up in round one vs Titans 0:52 Play video Cronulla captain Paul Gallen was mic'd up during his side's round one loss to the Titans at Remondis Stadium. Here is a sneak peak at what the skipper had to say before he left the field injured in the first half.

“We have got a strong defensive pack. Nate (Myles), Harro (Ash Harrison), Luke Douglas, they’re blokes who are going to be flying out of the line and hurting teams,” Bird said.

“I know the Sharks were struggling to get off their line last week purely because our blokes were putting a lot of effort into our defence.

“If we can start that at our home ground it can be something we can really make our own and make a bit of a trademark.’’

Titans forward Mark Minichiello has been given until today to overcome a virus that troubled a few players this week, with Ben Ridge to make his first appearance of 2014 if the second rower is ruled out.

Gold Coast coach John Cartwright is keen to see more direct play from his playmakers against the Tigers and Bird revealed that controlling Wests skipper Robbie Farah had dominated pre-match discussion.

Titans down injury-hit Sharks 2:10 Play video The Gold Coast recorded an 18-12 win over an injury-ravaged Cronulla at Remondis Stadium.

Bird believes the new rule changes have played directly into the hands of hookers like Farah and is wary of the free-flowing dangers presented by a Tigers team many have already written off.

“The Tigers will be as good as we let them be I think,” Bird said.

“They’re always flamboyant, they will throw a lot of attack at you and they can come from all directions.

“(Farah) can play really direct in behind the markers and that’s something we looked at today, was Robbie finding space in behind the markers and catching blokes napping if they’re not concentrating.

“He has been the leader there for a long time now and you’ve got to give him the respect he deserves otherwise he will cut you to pieces, especially the new rule changes have really opened up the door for good hookers to take advantage.”