MedeAnalytics, a pioneer in healthcare analytics, today announced record company growth in 2014 with its second consecutive year of more than 30 percent organic growth in bookings and a 62 percent jump in employee acquisition. In 2014, the company launched a unique new revenue cycle product and was selected as one of Modern Healthcare’s 100 Best Places to Work in 2014 – a prestigious recognition highlighting outstanding employers in the healthcare industry on a national level.

MedeAnalytics expanded their national customer base again last year, partnering with esteemed healthcare organizations across the country including, Covenant Health Systems, Boston Medical Center HealthNet Plan, Mississippi Medicaid and Wellmark Blue Cross Blue Shield, among others. The company also expanded its big data operations into Richardson, Texas to support MedeAnalytics’ growing hub of nearly 1,000 customers.

“As the need for big data and analytics continues to grow in the healthcare industry, we are extremely well positioned and will continue to see strong growth in 2015 and beyond. As provider and health plan requirements and incentives change and converge, we are uniquely positioned with a single healthcare analytics platform to successfully serve both of those markets,” said Andrew Hurd, Chairman and CEO of MedeAnalytics. “Our population health solutions leverage our platform at the center of that convergence, offering both provider and health plan capabilities with relevant end user sensibilities.”

In 2014 MedeAnalytics also acquired OnFocus Healthcare, Inc. expanding their portfolio into the enterprise performance management space, offering the first “closed loop” analytics and execution-driven performance improvement solution for healthcare. Additionally, MedeAnalytics launched Revenue Integrity, a unique data analytics solution that brings complete visibility to a provider’s “mid-cycle” to optimize revenue and minimize risks in an ever-evolving reimbursement landscape. MedeAnalytics also received the 2014 NCQA Certification for HEDIS Certified Measures.

“Healthcare organizations need to become data driven in order to meet the goals of improved clinical and financial outcomes. Historically healthcare organizations have had access to reports, but it is critical that they move towards data discovery in order to make data actionable,” said Cynthia Burghard, Research Director, Accountable Care IT Solutions at IDC Health Insights. “In virtually all of IDC Health Insights surveys of healthcare organizations the top investment priorities include analytics. The last 18 to 24 months have brought innovation to the analytics market.”

MedeAnalytics took their insights on the road in 2014, presenting at key industry trade shows including HIMSS14, Health 2.0, AHIMA, MESC and other regional events across the country. Looking ahead, MedeAnalytics will showcase their new solutions and share other updates at the HIMSS15 Annual Conference & Exhibition at McCormick Place in Chicago, April 12-16, 2015. More information will be unveiled in the coming weeks around the company’s speaking sessions and events at the Clinical & Business Intelligence Knowledge Center. Visit MedeAnalytics.com for updates.

About MedeAnalytics®

MedeAnalytics provides evidence-based insights to solve a real problem that plagues healthcare – how to use the immense amount of patient data collected along the care continuum to deliver cost-effective care and promote a healthier population. Its analytics platform delivers intelligence that helps healthcare organizations detect their greatest areas of risk and identify opportunities to improve their financial health. It empowers providers and health plans to collaborate and use data to strengthen their operations and improve the quality of care. MedeAnalytics’ cloud-based tools have been used to uncover business insights for nearly 1,000 healthcare organizations across the United States and United Kingdom. The company has also been named one of Modern Healthcare’s top 100 Best Places to Work in Healthcare for 2014. For more information, visit www.medeanalytics.com.