<p>Cardiogram and stethoscope</p>

By Liz Freeman of the Naples Daily News

Two Southwest Florida universities are expanding degree programs in medical fields to help address the need for hands-on health care workers, information technology specialists and health care administrators.

Ave Maria University will offer six new majors this fall, including biology, health science and health science administration.

Hodges University is adding both an associates and bachelor’s degree in biomedical science, and is debuting a master’s of services administration degree that will be offered online to attract a broader audience outside of Southwest Florida.

Officials with both universities say current students have expressed interest in medical and health-science fields. Beyond the local market, the need for health-care workers in a variety of fields shows no signs of easing, according to studies.

Health care is expected to remain among the fastest-growing industries from 2012 to 2022, according to the U.S. Department of Labor. As of 2013, there were 16 million jobs in industry.

This past June alone, health care employment grew by 21,000 jobs, with the biggest gains in ambulatory health care, nursing and residential care, according to the federal agency.

In 2009, the American Hospital Association’s long-range policy committee examined workforce issues and pointed to key factors creating new demands for health-care professionals, which include scientific advances, reimbursement changes, fewer uninsured patients, broader use of electronic medical records and greater use of ambulatory care.

“The expansion of the biology and health-related fields corresponds to increasing student interest in those areas,” Michael A. Dauphinais, Ave Maria’s vice president for academic affairs and dean of faculty, said in an email. “Together with our current majors in biology and biochemistry, students will now have a number of areas in which they may concentrate their studies in biological and health areas.”

Ave Maria draws students nationally, yet 40 percent come from within the state, he said.

“The health-related majors at Ave Maria builds upon the strength of the residential campus community, the strong liberal arts core curriculum, and the Catholic mission of the campus,” he said.

Hodges’ new master’s degree program will be online and is intended for people already employed in the health care industry who want to enrich their opportunities, said Carlene Harrison, dean of the School of Allied Health.

“The way we designed the program, there are two tracts all online and all accelerated,” she said. “You can complete four courses in a semester.”

One tract is health administration, which will qualify someone in management, organizational behavior and communications, she said.

In 2012, Forbes magazine ranked the master of science degree in health services administration as one of the top 10 best degrees, where mid-career median pay is $88,580, according to Hodges.

The second tract is health infomatics, a discipline that enables hospitals, universities and others to determine what to do with data about clinical care and related issues.

Someone can get a master’s degree in health informatics or they can get a certificate for completing the program if they don’t want a master’s degree, she said.

Besides an ongoing shortage of primary-care doctors due to aging baby boomers and a surge in more people having insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act, there’s a widespread shortage for health information professionals.

One study found the U.S. will be short of 51,000 health information workers by the end of 2014, particularly in rural areas, according to iHealthBeat, part of the California HealthCare Foundation.

The master’s degree program is a total of 10 courses for 7 and 1/2 weeks, she said.

Harrison said the hope is to enroll 20 students but it is a national recruitment rather than a local focus.

The bachelor’s degree program in biomedical sciences provides a solid background for future graduate level studies in allied health or biological sciences, according to Hodges.