Topics: Antonin Scalia, John Roberts, Religion, Religious Discrimination, The Supreme Court, News, Politics News

In a noteworthy ruling, Justice Antonin Scalia, who once called a key provision of the Voting Rights Act “a perpetuation of entitlement,” penned the majority opinion earlier this week that determined a young Muslim woman was unjustly discriminated against when she didn’t get a job because she was wearing a headscarf. Why would Justice Scalia, who often opposes civil rights claims, find this case to be “easy?” The answer points to an emerging trend in the Roberts Court, one that might have larger implications.

In 2008, Samantha Elauf, 17 years old and living in Tulsa, Oklahoma, applied for a sales job at an Abercrombie and Fitch store that specialized in selling children’s clothes. She aced her interview but didn’t get the job. Abercrombie has what’s called a “look policy” which bans hats for all sales employees of the company. With the help of the U.S. Equal Employment Opportunity Commission, Samantha Elauf sued the company and on Monday won, with an 8-1 ruling of the U.S. Supreme Court. In the case of EEOC v. Abercrombie & Fitch Stores, Justice Scalia wrote the opinion for the majority, with Justice Clarence Thomas concurring in part and dissenting in part.

This case hinged on whether Abercrombie was required to provide Elauf accommodation for her headscarf, a religious practice, even though she didn’t request such accommodation.

The 1964 Civil Rights Act “prohibits a prospective employer from refusing to hire an applicant because of the applicant’s religious practice when the practice could be accommodated without undue hardship.” Title VII of the Act prohibits employers from refusing to hire an applicant “because of such individual’s race, color, religion, sex, or national origin.” Another provision specifies the word “religion” to include “all aspects of religious observance and practice, as well as belief, unless an employer demonstrates that he is unable to reasonably accommodate to” a “religious observance or practice without undue hardship on the conduct of the employer’s business.” Given that, the Civil Rights Act requires that employers accommodate workers’ religious beliefs in the workplace, by prohibiting them from firing, or not hiring, a person due to their religious beliefs. Abercrombie and Fitch argued that it couldn’t have known to accommodate her religious beliefs, because Samantha Elauf never requested any such accommodation.

Eight of the nine justices did not find Abercrombie’s argument compelling, and reversed an earlier appeals ruling in the retailer’s favor. They found that what matters is not whether she requested any religious accommodation, but whether the manager at Abercrombie assumed that Elauf was Muslim and would regularly wear her headscarf while working at their store.

In this case, the headscarf was a “motivating factor” in their decision not to hire. Justice Antonin Scalia wrote for the majority that”[A]n employer who acts with the motive of avoiding accommodation may violate [the law] even if he has no more than an unsubstantiated suspicion that accommodation would be needed.” Scalia asserted in the opinion that “motive and knowledge are separate concepts.”