Buy Photo Your 2 cents' worth (Photo: The Register)Buy Photo

The federal government, which has Tomahawk cruise missiles and Apache, Blackhawk, Kiowa and Lakota helicopters, and used the code name "Geronimo" in the attack that killed Osama bin Laden, officially objects to the name Washington Redskins. The hypocrisy in this administration is unbelievable.

— Iowa Senior

I am 28. Caucused for Obama. Voted for Obama. Support Obama. I would describe myself as a liberal. But seriously? This free 2 year college? Among the aforementioned, I am also a teacher, a parent of two and a taxpayer who is sick of GIVING and watching people TAKE while my husband and I WORK HARD.

— Not a liberal after all? in 50311

Evidently, Sen. Lindsay Graham did not work swine on a South Carolina farm. Now Iowa Senator Joni Ernst needs to figure out where to hang Graham's gift.

— The 50126 Varmint and two good dogs

Didn't Branstad get rid of several Project Managers out of Administrative Services because the private sector could do such a great job? Sounds like that failed as well. The new men's prison has major problems and the women's prison in Mitchellville also had some major construction issues.

— Ankeny Person

In 1993 Des Moines Waterworks CEO, L.D. McMullen gained the nick name "Flood Stud". 2015 CEO Bill Stowe nick name? "Water Thug"

— Ankeny

Dear Mike Huckabee and Rick Santorum, could you please go home and get real jobs? Being also-rans for President and speaking at Iowa Republican county events is not supposed to be a career. Let someone else have a turn!

— You had your chance, from Pella

To the "Iowa leaders" who claim Iowa's voluntary farm pollution policy is going to result in clean rivers and lakes — don't spray polluted water on our legs and tell us it's raining.

— We're not that dumb

Not a penny more of state funding should go to new floodplain development in Iowa. We all end up paying when the inevitable flood happens and the city that stupidly allowed the development begs for and gets federal disaster aid. Enough is enough.

— But it will happen anyway

We recently relocated from Iowa to North Carolina. BCBS North Carolina is the primary player in ACA here. They embraced ACA and actively promote it in all the media. Their service and assistance coordinating with the Marketplace is excellent. I don't understand why Wellmark has the complete opposite philosophy.

— Iowa transplant

So yet another Iowa State Trooper gets a slap on the hand (or was it a hand shake?) for going way over the speed limit and is only issued a ticket after the incident becomes public, months later! The governor's driver and other troopers are treated differently. And poor Mr. Hedlund loses his job?

— Status does have its privilege.

Within a couple days of her swearing in, Senator Joni Ernst announced plans for her annual fundraising event. Looks like the Senator's priority is on re-election, not representation.

— Urbandale observer

When Lewis and Clark explored the mighty Missouri they called it the BIG MUDDY because of the good agricultural soil along its banks. Some farmers could be better stewards of their land, but most do what they can to preserve their soil.

— Concerned in Racoon River Valley.

Read or Share this story: http://dmreg.co/1BSdcu4