Topics: 20-somethings, Books, Editor's Picks, essays, millennials, Personal essays, Ryan O'Connell, thought catalog, Life News, Entertainment News, News

When Ryan O’Connell started writing for Thought Catalog in 2011, I was a 20-year-old girl with a lot of feelings and even more uncertainty. O’Connell was a few years older than me and living in New York, a complete stranger who updated his roadmap to Millennial angst – published in the form of listicles and second-person confessional essays – daily on the nascent site. I was so, so good at following it, even when I wasn’t reading it.

Given the earnestness of this interview intro, it’s probably clear that I can still be very good at the Millennial angst thing; for this, I suppose I owe a debt to O’Connell, who quickly became known for his insight on “How to Be a 20-Something.” Personally, I was bad at some of what he listed as crucial — the binge-drinking and drug use, for example, for which I’m now grateful — but very successful at having hip wannabe-filmmaker friends who read Tao Lin and hosted punk shows in their dank Austin living rooms.

My friends would occasionally contribute to Thought Catalog, then a burgeoning, somewhat highbrow platform where they could submit things like snarky reviews of Mormon.org or lists of experimental musicians’ Facebook pages. The site had not yet become the trolling behemoth it’s now known to be, but was, as Newsweek recently noted, criticized for a different reason: essentially, O’Connell’s sincerity.

He was the star. He would reckon with the meaning of his 20-something existence before a growing Internet audience and get all the clicks, because people like me were eating that shit up.

O’Connell made his name by churning out hundreds upon hundreds of how-to guides and justifications for bad behavior – “How to Fall In Love With a Boy for the First Time,” “How to Appear Cooler On Facebook than You Really Are,” “Why It’s Okay to Flake on People Sometimes” – which simultaneously made him untouchable to other, more mainstream media organizations. And yet you might have noticed that the sort of somber indulgence in nostalgia, anxiety and desire for which O’Connell became known – which became the O’Connell brand – is everywhere now. Just take a look around at your Internet.

That’s not what O’Connell does anymore, but it sort of is. After using Thought Catalog as a launch pad — and paving the way for other 20-somethings to pour their hearts out online in some effort at human connection — O’Connell branched out, writing essays for Vice and eventually getting a book deal. His first manuscript was also about “how to be a 20-something,” and was, he told me recently, terrible.

“It wasn’t easy,” O’Connell said of the essay collection when I spoke to him by phone earlier this month. “The first draft I wrote of the book was such garbage. It was so bad.”

So he left the full-time Internet writing game, moved to Los Angeles, and came up with a different idea: an essay collection that’s still about being a 20-something, but is infused with a general indictment of the entire online culture O’Connell has, in a way, been instrumental in creating.

The book, “I’m Special: And Other Lies We Tell Ourselves,” is a grown-up version of the type of writing for which O’Connell is best known. It is deeply revealing in the most casual manner, and deals with topics O’Connell chose not to touch at Thought Catalog — specifically, what it’s been like for him to live with cerebral palsy. The book still preaches to the aimless-ish Millennial, leans heavily on Internet slang and is meant, clearly, to be relatable. For the most part, it is – at least to me, a white 23-year-old who grew up affluent, lives in New York, writes for the Internet and read Thought Catalog back in the day. I also still have a lot of feelings and plenty of uncertainty, so I’m pretty much the target demographic.

And that’s sort of the problem: The book is part of a genre that is meant to appeal to the universality of 20-something angst, but relies overwhelmingly on experiences that aren’t universal. Rather, they’re unique to a very narrow, privileged demographic. It’s an issue O’Connell actively tries to address in “I’m Special,” with a discussion of the role socioeconomic status contributes to “the Millennial experience” – if such a term can even be applied to the myriad realities of being a 20-something. He’s aware of the problem, and of the ubiquity of the problem and of the way places like Thought Catalog contribute to it. But that doesn’t mean he’s going to stop writing.

O’Connell spoke with Salon by phone about his new book, which comes out June 2, as well as how he feels about Thought Catalog’s turn toward transphobic trolling, what he has to say to critics of his writing, and what he’s looking forward to as he wraps up his 20s. Our conversation has been condensed and lightly edited for clarity.

How do you go from already having put so much of your life on the Internet in blog posts to writing a book? I feel like you sort of pioneered this certain kind of blogging that is now ubiquitous and then you went old-school and wrote a book…



Yeah, it was a vintage moment, it was a throwback Thursday!

How did you navigate that?

At first, it was really difficult. I got this book deal when I was 25, and I was working full-time at Thought Catalog still. The book that I sold to Simon & Schuster was kind of bad. I think it was literally called “How to Be a 20-Something” — it was terrible, but God bless them, they bought it. So when I got the book deal I realized I didn’t want to write about that, and I knew that if I really did want to write a book, I had to make it different. I wanted to write about my disability, which was something I had never talked about before. Well, actually, my editor was like, “I think I have a title for your book. I think we should call it, ‘I’m Special,’” and I was like, “Funny you should say that. Not only am I a special snowflake, but I’m riding-the-short-bus special as well.”

You said this is the first time you wanted to write about your disability. Do you feel like now you’ve used up all of your personal material?

No… It’s interesting, because this book to me really represents the end of that chapter of confessional writing. I’ll always be writing personal essays, but not that much. To me, the next step in my writing is just writing for other shows, creating my own show, and just immersing myself in that world. My life just isn’t that interesting anymore! It’s a good life, I’m happy, everything is relatively stable. When I was writing for Thought Catalog, I was a hot fucking mess. I was on drugs, I had shitty friends and I was pretty miserable, which obviously inspires good writing, but for mental health isn’t so good. Once you find your life taking a more stable shape, what are you going to write about?

I’m curious how you know which mundane aspects of your life are actually not that mundane, and are worth exploring. Or did you just kind of think everything was important when you were writing for Thought Catalog?



If I feel drawn to something enough to actually sit down and write about it, I usually know I’m onto something. Writing is such a painful, horrible process that actually wanting to sit down and make a point of writing down your thoughts — that means you’re onto something for sure.

Right? Why do people always think writers actually enjoy writing?

That’s the thing: When you do it, it should count. When I look back at my old stuff on Thought Catalog, there was no filter; it was definitely quantity over quality. Now I feel like I’m much, much more choosy about what I want to put out. When I write things for Thought Catalog now, I feel like it needs to add something to what I’ve already discussed. I always see universal things in specific things I talk about.

You talk a little bit about socioeconomic class and background, but what do you make of critiques that your writing is speaking to a very distinct class or racial group — that a lot of what might be your personal experience isn’t really that universal, and that it overlooks the experiences of other Millennials?

Everything does, though. That’s culture, that’s movies, that’s TV shows. You always write what you know; at least I do. I would never try to speak for things I’ve never experienced. I would never even try to put myself in a position where I’d comment on something that’s way out of my league. Here’s the thing: Things always look different on the surface. I think that on the surface, everything looks different — class, race, whatever — and that definitely informs your existence, but when you strip everything down, wanting human connection and wanting to be loved is universal. Wanting to feel not alone is universal. What I hope my writing tries to get at are those basic feelings that I think everyone experiences in their 20s or forever. I may not always succeed, and it may be more specific than I think, but I do try to get to a larger picture than just this privileged 20-something angst.