A 13-year-old conservative who became an internet sensation after he released a video criticizing President Obama said he is stepping away from the label that made him famous.

CJ Pearson, who once worked for Ted Cruz's presidential campaign, said the only label he now represents is 'American' - and that he no longer wanted to be known as the 'anti-Obama' kid.

'I want to be an objective voice for my generation,' he tweeted to more than 37,000 followers.

'I can't do that without looking to the other side. So, guys, I'm finally listening.'

CJ became a viral sensation in February when he released a YouTube video claiming Obama had a 'downright hate for American values' and said he was unwilling to defend the country against terrorism.

Scroll down for video

Conservative sensation CJ Pearson, 13, is renouncing all political labels and says he wants to become an 'objective' voice for his generation

CJ became a national sensation last February after he made a video criticizing President Obama, even getting invited to become the chairman of Ted Cruz's Teens for Ted campaign

The video made the teen from Georgia a viral star. He became the chairman of Cruz's 'Teens for Ted' campaign and was invited to speak on Fox & Friends.

But on Friday CJ announced that he could no longer be a champion of the Republican party, saying he was tired of the GOP turning 'a blind eye to racial discrimination'.

'I was...tired of being a champion of any cause that denies equal rights to every American,' he told CNN.

'Tired of being a champion of a party that doesn't care about the issues important to young people.'

CJ's decision was partially influenced by the Laquan McDonald video, which shows the black teen getting shot 16 times by a white police officer in Chicago.

Just days before he announced he no longer identified with any political label, CJ made a response to the video, titled #JusticeforLaquan, and said it was neither a conservative nor a liberal issues.

But on Friday CJ announced that he could no longer be a champion of the Republican party, saying he was tired of the GOP turning 'a blind eye to racial discrimination'

'This is an issue about a gross miscarriage of justice, this is a tragedy,' he said on the YouTube video posted to his channel of nearly 19,000 subscribers.

'This has happened far too many times...This is a problem, and that is why Laquan deserves justice. This is an issue where conservatives and liberals should come together.'

'I want to see your hearts,' he told his supporters. 'Because that boy, he was somebody's son, and that mother misses her little boy.'

CJ said on Friday he wanted to be an objective voice for his generation, not someone that people follow because 'I'm that anti-Obama kid'.

'I don't want to be the conservative wonder kid that people follow because I make them feel good or like young people are part of their movement,' he told CNN.

CJ was just 12-years-old (pictured here) when he made a video claiming Obama had a 'downright hate for American values' and said he was unwilling to defend the country against terrorism

'I want to be followed because I'm the voice of a generation that doesn't have a voice at the table...My views on the issues aren't going to be dictated by one political platform or another.'

CJ is still fiscally conservative but socially liberal, with the exception on the issue of abortion, he told The Blaze.

The 13-year-old separated from the Cruz campaign earlier this month because he didn't believe the Republican candidate was doing enough for young people, and now may throw his support behind Marco Rubio because of how he is 'tackling race relations'.

As for the critics who say CJ's change of opinion is a ploy for attention or makes him a RINO (Republican In Name Only), the teen has a message:

'I risked political suicide,' he tweeted, 'Just so I could be my own voice. Free of a party.'

'Take a seat.'