Advances reshape stem cell research

Pittsburgh projects As much as 20 percent of the biomedical research at the University of Pittsburgh involves stem cells. Studies range from arthritis to poor eyesight. “If you understand how diseases come about, you can figure out how to deal with them,” said Rocky Tuan, director of the university's Center for Cellular and Molecular Engineering in Oakland. He said researchers use stem cells to develop targeted medical treatments and explore biological triggers for disease. Though a team at Oregon Health and Science University cloned human embryos to make stem cells, Tuan said, much of the stem cell data researchers use come from embryos discarded from in vitro fertilization. Other studies rely on what scientists call induced pluripotent stem cells, a newer approach that researchers can use to cultivate a variety of cell lines from non-embryonic adult tissue. Multipotent cells, a more limited type of stem cells, have continued to drive medical discoveries since scholars identified them in the late 1960s. At Pitt, Tuan said researchers use stem cells to try to restore the vision of macular degeneration patients. And they are exploring ways to treat degenerative skeletal diseases, especially those that can hobble joint functions. Some are working toward tissue regeneration in muscles. “Those structures do fall apart, particularly due to injury and aging and bad lifestyle,” Tuan said. “We try to use stem cells to give rise to the tissues that are now non-functioning. Perhaps you can restore the function of that tissue.” Related .pdfs

Can't view the attachment? Then download the latest version of the free, Adobe Acrobat reader here: Email Newsletters Sign up for one of our email newsletters.

A decade ago, a dream team of researchers from Pittsburgh to South Korea claimed a medical invention that promised to reshape a culture war.

The scientists said they custom-designed stem cells from cloned human embryos. The scientific breakthrough was celebrated around the globe.

Then the bottom fell out.

A scandal erupted over fabricated data, and University of Pittsburgh biologist Gerald Schatten was forced to pull back the findings. Critics cast the 2004 discovery as a farce, a high-profile fraud that forced the journal Science into a rare retraction in January 2006.

Eight years later, the push to use stem cells as a medical treatment continues, but scholars balk at the suggestion that anyone is trying to make genetically identical individuals.

“We're not here to clone human beings, for gosh sakes,” said John Gearhart, a stem cell researcher and University of Pennsylvania professor in regenerative medicine. Instead, he said, scholars are working to manipulate stem cells to produce heart cells for cardiac patients, brain cells for neurological patients and other custom transplants that could match a person's genetic makeup.

Schatten's work continues at the Magee-Womens Research Institute at Pitt, where university officials cleared him of scientific misconduct, and he remains a vice chairman for research development. He focuses on educating and training “physician-scientists and other scientists,” a school spokeswoman wrote in a statement. She said Schatten was traveling and was unable to speak with the Tribune-Review.

Researchers have turned the onetime myth of developing stem cells into reality.

At the Oregon Health and Science University, researchers succeeded by blending unfertilized human eggs with body tissue to mold stem cells. Scholars say the cells could let doctors grow customized organs for transplants and other therapies.

The approach engineered by biologist Shoukhrat Mitalipov's research team last year in Portland is among two that scientists are using to forge laboratory-made stem cells — the so-called master cells that can transform into other body parts — without relying on donated human embryos. Federal law tightly controls the use of taxpayer money for embryonic research.

In Mitalipov's approach, the nucleus of a donated egg is replaced with a patient's DNA. The other method, developed in Kyoto, Japan, allows almost any mature body cell to be reprogrammed to operate as a stem cell.

Kyoto University professor Shinya Yamanaka won a 2012 Nobel Prize for the discovery of the induced pluripotent stem cells, which researchers can explore without so much as a human egg, Pitt faculty member Lei Yang said.

“This technology is fast, it's easy, and it's been repeated many, many times,” said Yang, a stem cell researcher and assistant professor in developmental biology. He called it “very possible” to regenerate a liver or kidney by using pluripotent cells, a development that Yang said researchers might achieve within a decade.

He said certain organs, such as the heart, present more of a challenge. Pitt and 11 other institutions are involved in an ongoing program to attempt to replicate brain, kidney and other critical organ functions for research, largely through pluripotent cells.

The Pitt portion has won $5.8 million to let researchers refine a device that mimics the human liver, which would make it easier for companies to test pharmaceuticals without animal trials. The three-year grant came from the National Institutes of Health, although the NIH would not answer inquiries from the Trib about cloning-related projects.

Any practical patient treatments arising from stem cells probably are years away, said Dr. David A. Shaywitz, chief medical officer at the genomic data management company DNAnexus near San Francisco. The cells offer strong promise in linking particular genes with specific diseases and should remain “powerful research and development tools,” he said.

Scientists still are looking into how different types of man-made stem cells vary from one another, said Mitalipov, the Oregon biologist. Clinical trials that could lead to gene therapy and other applications hinge on approval from the Food and Drug Administration and regulatory bodies overseas, he said.

“It's going to be difficult to demonstrate to the FDA people that these cells are going to be safe,” said Gearhart, the Penn professor. He called the technology “extremely powerful” as doctors approach experiments with lab-grown cells in human subjects.

“We hope ... that it's going to function in the same way,” Gearhart said. “You try to do the best you can.”

Adam Smeltz is a Trib Total Media staff writer.