Obama, who believes in the voodoo science of climate change , personally visited " 57 states ... not including Hawaii and Alaska," and still hasn't conquered the Obamacare website, took the science fair opportunity to tout science, technology, and math.

Barack Obama couldn’t make it to Bibi Netanyahu’s address to a joint session of Congress, but he did squeeze in an appearance at the fifth annual White House science fair, which he said is the "most fun event of the year."

Sounding more like he was advancing the concept of "sharing the wealth" than congratulating a group of aspiring scientists, Obama told science fair participants, "It's not enough for our country just to be proud of you. We've also got to support you."

The exhibitions included things like ball-throwing robots, technology to tackle cyber-bullying, an Alzheimer's monitor for Gramps, an Ethiopian water filtration system, a "pollution-into-power battery," hiccup-curing lollipops, and a quadrilingual kid team’s sustainable city of the future.

But the posse that took the science fair by storm was a team of six-year-old girls sporting shiny red Superman capes.

photo credit: NBC News

The "Supergirls" Junior FIRST Lego League Team from Daisy Girl Scouts' troop 411 came to the White House toting a battery-powered page-turning device constructed out of Legos, fabricated to assist readers who are paralyzed or arthritic.

While perusing the exhibits, the president stopped and chatted with the five munchkins. After all, if these kids could come up with a novel version of a handicapped page-turner, just think of what they could do for a Teleprompter-addicted president with an annoying tendency to mimic a bobble-head.

As he strolled past the Supergirl exhibit, the president leaned over to speak to the pint-sized kindergarteners about their invention. Obama asked Emily, Alicia, Karissa, Addy, and Emery how they came up with their idea, to which the chirpy girls responded that they had settled on their exhibit after they "brainstormed."

First of all, Obama chatting and then giving a group hug to a bunch of kids – the abortions of whom he wouldn’t have had a problem with six years earlier – is sort like Paul Bunyan being a guest of honor at an Arbor Day event. Still, the giggly group had a few questions for the guy who would have applauded their pre-born demise.

Right after the child-loving/pro-abortion president told them he was "thrilled to have them," the girls asked him, "Have you ever had a brainstorming session yourself?"

Reminiscing about his failed border security brainstorming sessions with Desperate Latina Housewife Eva Longoria, in a rare moment of frank honesty, Obama said, "I have had a couple of brainstorming sessions, but I didn't come up with anything this good. You guys are already better brainstormers than I am."

Honestly, five little Supergirls getting the haughty Barack Obama to admit that he "didn't come up with anything this good" is a much more impressive accomplishment than cooking up a Lego science project, don't you think?

Next, the little scientists asked him, "What did you come up with?" To which the man who told every business owner in America "You didn’t get there on your own … you didn’t build that" actually said, with a straight face, "You know, I came up with things like, you know...health care."

Then, awkwardly shrugging his shoulders, Obama unconvincingly mumbled, "It turned out okay, but it...started out with some prototypes."

Sorry, Mr. President, but the Obamacare mockup is a disaster crying out to be returned to the drawing board.

Either way, there it is! As if Obama's failed policy could hold a candle to a Lego page-turner for the handicapped, White House science fair wannabe Barack Obama attempted to one-up five little girls by bragging that he invented Obamacare.

Jeannie hosts a blog at www.jeannie-ology.com.