Three of New Hampshire's most hard-line, staunch conservatives are ready to endorse Republican presidential candidate Ted Cruz.

Ted Cruz Ted Cruz (R) is a candidate for president in 2016. More

WMUR.com has confirmed former New Hampshire House Speaker and current state Rep. Bill O’Brien, former U.S. Sen. Bob Smith and Executive Councilor David Wheeler will be announced on Wednesday as co-chairs of the Texas senator’s presidential campaign in the first-primary state.

The announcement is expected at a news conference in the Legislative Office Building in Concord. WMUR Political Director Josh McElveen first reported the endorsements on Twitter earlier Tuesday.

While the value of big-name endorsements are debatable in presidential primaries, they may make a difference in a tight, crowded field. The three Granite Staters are expected to be important assets to Cruz as the race unfolds over the next nine months.

O'Brien and Smith endorsed former U.S. House Speaker Newt Gingrich in the 2012 primary race. Wheeler made no endorsement in 2012; he backed former Arkansas Gov. Mike Huckabee in the 2008 primary.

Sources say O’Brien, Smith and Wheeler have been told that the co-chairmanships will be hands-on posts in which they will be asked to give advice on policy, rather than purely ceremonial in nature.

Cruz announced his presidential candidacy on March 23 and has been to New Hampshire twice since then. He is expected to return to the state on May 29-31.

O’Brien, of Mont Vernon, was the elected nominee of the House Republican Caucus for House speaker, but lost his bid to return to the post in December, when House Democrats joined with a minority of the GOP caucus to elected Rep. Shawn Jasper. O’Brien has retained significant influence in the House while being critical of the more moderate Republican establishment, including Sen. Kelly Ayotte, who opposed his bid to become the nominee of the caucus.

Smith, of Tuftonboro, served three terms in the U.S. House in the 1980 followed by two terms in the U.S. Senate. His attempt at a political comeback fell short last year when he lost a GOP U.S. Senate primary to Scott Brown.

Wheeler, of Milford, is now in his fourth term representing District 5 on the Executive Council, is also known as a fiscal and social conservative and particularly as a 2nd Amendment rights advocate.

The three conservatives are expected to express their shared belief that Cruz has shown by his actions on Capitol Hill that he is steadfast and will act on his conservative principles and not simply make promises that he cannot or does not intend to keep.

They are expected to say they see in Cruz a leader who is a younger version of themselves and someone who has been unafraid to face criticism for taking principled stands. They are expected to cite his willingness to filibuster the Affordable Care Act and gun control legislation backed by President Barack Obama.