Let’s suppose Demaryius Thomas gets some stick to his buttery fingers.

Suppose, too, Broncos offensive coordinator Adam Gase de-emphasizes the rushing game and his unit regains rhythm through Peyton Manning’s precision passing.

Even if all were clicking offensively, the Broncos still would not be likely to repeat their record-setting performance from 2013.

“Give the opponent some credit,” Broncos coach John Fox said last week, and just about every week before that.

The biggest challenge in the Broncos’ 2014 regular season has been a schedule shift in location. Instead of playing all those patsy defenses from last year’s NFC East, the Broncos are taking on all those defensive powerhouses in the NFC West.

The Broncos didn’t go into their bye week this season putting up 45 points against hapless Washington, as they did last year. They put up 20 points against Seattle — which wasn’t bad, considering the Seahawks allowed a league-low 14.4 points last season.

For their fourth game of the 2014 season, the Broncos won’t be putting up 52 points against a rebuilding Philadelphia team, as they did in Game 4 a year ago. They’ll be playing Sunday at Sports Authority Field at Mile High against the Arizona Cardinals, who four weeks into this season have the league’s second-stingiest defense with a mere 15.0 points allowed per game.

Not that it’s all about the opponent. The Broncos’ offensive line hasn’t graded out well in run blocking. And Thomas has started sluggishly after he ranked among the league’s top three in combined receiving yards the previous two seasons.

Broncos receivers coach Tyke Tolbert mentions two reasons he believes Thomas’ slump will end soon. One is the return of slot receiver Wes Welker, who missed the first two games because of a suspension.

“One thing that might have put him a little off his game is when Wes missed those games, we moved Demaryius around a little bit and that might have messed with him psychologically,” Tolbert said. “He wasn’t able to concentrate solely on the position he’s used to playing. But he’s working at it. On the players’ off day Monday, he came in and caught 200 balls off the Jugs machine. Everybody knows he’s our best player. I have all the confidence in the world he’s going to start playing like our best player.”

Another reason for Thomas’ slump is his speciality — yards after catch — may have worked against him. Thomas’ 1,242 yards after catch the previous two years were tops among NFL receivers.

In his rush this year for the large gain after the catch, though, Thomas forgot about Part 1 — the catch. He’s averaging just 4.3 receptions and 47.0 yards through three games.

“We always talk about how you catch balls with your eyes, as well as your hands,” Tolbert said. “He has a tendency to trust his hands so much, he likes to look and see where he’s going to run with the ball before he looks it in. That’s a point of emphasis with us — look it in and catch it first, tuck second, run third. It’s been a major emphasis, really, from the beginning, but even more so now in this bye week.”

It won’t be easy for Thomas to regain form this week, though, as he figures to take on one of the league’s best cornerbacks in Arizona’s Patrick Peterson. It’s another aspect to the Broncos’ step up in defensive competition this year.

As the Broncos were scoring a record 606 points last season, they piled up 189 points, or 31.2 percent of their total, in their four games against NFC East opponents.

The breakdown: 41 points at the New York Giants, 52 against Philadelphia, 51 at Dallas and 45 vs. Washington.

The 20 points the Broncos scored last week at Seattle put them three touchdowns off their 2013 pace. And the Cardinals’ defense is so good, it has gone 2-0 with backup quarterback Drew Stanton, defeating the Giants in New York and San Francisco 49ers.

In the simplest of terms, it’s not always about the points an offense can put up but how many the opposing defense will allow.

Mike Klis: mklis@denverpost.com or twitter.com/mikeklis