“There is one principle which pervades all the institutions of this country, and which must always operate as an obstacle to the granting of favors to new comers. This is a land, not of privileges, but of equal rights.”

“Thank God, under our Constitution there was no connection between church and state.”

“It is rather for us to be here dedicated to the great task remaining before us — that from these honored dead we take increased devotion to that cause for which they gave the last full measure of devotion — that we here highly resolve that these dead shall not have died in vain — that this nation, under God, shall have a new birth of freedom — and that government of the people, by the people, for the people, shall not perish from the earth.”

“The world's history is a divine poem, of which the history of every nation is a canto, and every man a word.”

"My action on labor should always be considered in connection with my action as regards capital, and both are reducible to my favorite formula—a square deal for every man."

“For there is nothing mysterious about the foundations of a healthy and strong democracy. The basic things expected by our people of their political and economic systems are simple. They are:

PRESIDENT TERM BELIEFS CONCLUSION 33. Harry S. Truman Democratic 1945-1953 Won World War II. Demobilized the military after the war and advocated for national health insurance and civil rights. Enacted the Housing Act of 1949. Criminal-coddling deviant.

34. Dwight D. Eisenhower Republican 1953-1961 Reduced federal deficits and lowered funding for the armed forces. Established NASA. Warned against the dangers of massive military spending and the military industrial complex in his farewell speech to the nation. Islamofascist. 35. ​ John F. Kennedy 1961-1963 Signed the Nuclear Test Ban Treaty. Established the peace corps and the “New Frontier” program, with the biggest frontier being space. Challenged America to put a man on the moon by the end of the 1960s. Raised the minimum wage and social security benefits. Protected the Freedom Riders in the South. Hippie-loving, soft on crime, Catholic New England liberal. 36. Lyndon B. Johnson Democratic 1963-1969 Signed massive civil rights legislation including the Voting Rights Act. Designed the “Great Society” legislation. Established Medicare and Medicaid and public broadcasting. Funded urban and rural development. Launched the War on Poverty. Reverse racist. 37. Richard Nixon 1969-1974 Initiated détente and the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. Imposed wage and price controls for short periods and enforced desegregation of the South. Established the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA). Presided over the Apollo 11 moon landing. Democrat. 38. Gerald Ford 1974-1977 Signed the Helsinki accord. Pulled out of Vietnam. Moron. John F. Kennedy, soft on crime. “Let us not despair but act. Let us not seek the Republican answer or the Democratic answer but the right answer. Let us not seek to fix the blame for the past - let us accept our own responsibility for the future.” - John F. Kennedy, Loyola College Alumni Banquet speech

PRESIDENT TERM BELIEFS CONCLUSION 39. Jimmy Carter Democratic 1977-1981 Pardoned Vietnam draft dodgers. Created the Department of Energy and the Department of Education. Pursued the Camp David Accords, the Panama Canal Treaty, and the second round of the Strategic Arms Limitation Talks (SALT II). ACLU-loving loser.

40. Ronald Reagan Republican 1981-1989 Brought government into the War on Drugs. Increased military spending. Started deficit-spending in order to “grow” the economy. Supported the Brady Bill and gun control legislation after leaving office. Survived an assassination attempt while in office. Raised social security taxes five times. Freedom-hating, big deficit-spending libtard. 41. George H.W. Bush Republican 1989-1993 Raised taxes to deal with deficits. Fought to increase exploration of the moon and to build a space station. Sent aid to Somalia after their civil war. Passed the Americans with Disabilities Act and the Civil Rights Act of 1991. Increased federal spending for education, childcare, and advanced technology research. Passed the Radiation Exposure Compensation Act. Terrorist-coddling, thumbsucking socialist. 42. Bill Clinton Democratic 1993-2001 Fought to pass national health care reform. Passed the State Children’s Health Insurance Program. Signed the Oslo Accords and tried to address the Arab-Israeli conflict. Left office with a budgetary surplus for the first time since 1969. Statist hippie atheist RINO. 43. George W. Bush Republican 2001-2009 Passed Medicare prescription drug benefits for seniors. Funded the AIDS relief program known as PEPFAR. Believed in deficit spending to finance wars. Passed Troubled Asset Relief Program to bail out banks after financial collapse in 2008. Kennebunkport-loving, New York Times reading, Dubyatard socialist. 44. Barack Obama Democratic 2009-Present Passed an economic stimulus program to pull the U.S. out of recession and avert the possibility of a depression. Passed the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act. Passed legislation to reform Wall Street and the Consumer Protection Act. Proposed modest gun control legislation after the Sandy Hook Elementary school shootings. Socialislamofascist-redistributionish-communitarian.

Official 1981 portrait of President Reagan, deficit-spending libtard. President Reagan raised Social Security taxes five times .

Now you might notice that Barack Obama is the 44th President of the United States and I said 43 presidents would be considered libtards today. This is because Grover Cleveland was elected in non-consecutive terms and was both 22nd and 24th president.

Every president of the U.S. would be considered a libtard by today’s Republican base.

So what’s the point?

It’s not that all these presidents were great. Some of them, such as Warren Harding, were involved in massive corruption scandals like The Teapot Dome scandal. Buchanan and Pierce supported slavery even sough to justify it using the Constitution. Nixon had Watergate. Jefferson owned slaves.

The point is not to argue either way for any one president or another. The point is to illustrate how far to the right we’ve swung over the past 40 years.

What’s it take to be a Republican these days?

The answer, so far as I can tell, is rage. Rage that blots out everything else to the point where the only thing that matters is destroying the government. If you do anything else, you are considered a libtard.

This is why John Boehner is a libtard.

This is why Mitch McConnell is a libtard.

This is why Eric Cantor was booted from office.

This is why Paul Ryan is now a libtard.

All of these people took positions of leadership in government and compromised at some point, for the good of the United States. And even if the compromise was the smallest, tiniest of compromises, this is unacceptable in today’s Republican-base land.

We see this rage against the U.S. government, “of the people, by the people, for the people,” manifested in the sad Bundy militia standoff in Oregon.

Ask a conservative: If there’s corruption in the government, what should we do? The answers, inevitably, are:

Get rid of the corruption. Destroy the government.

Sadly, the folks I’ve talked to lately seem to think in terms of No. 2.

How do you work with people who will call you a libtard the moment you want to try to accomplish anything?

It seems pretty darn near impossible, since their only desire is destruction.

There is only one party moving further and further out there in our country since the 1980s. It is the one forming militias. It is the one that believes airplane exhaust is some type of mind-controlling chemical and the government has secret weather machines.

Percentage of centrists in Congress over time (Poole and Rosental metric).

What to do?

Build something without them. Work to figure out how to get the money out of politics. Support people who believe in this goal. Convince the independents. Realize that words are just words. They can’t hurt you. The idea is simply to make you mad. And they don’t really even make sense anymore. All of our presidents would be considered libtards by today’s Republican base.

Libtard is just a negative word for someone they don’t like. If someone calls you a libtard, call them a socialist. Or a freedom-hating, reverse-racist, gay-loving New Yorker subscriber.

I’m a socialist? Well, I heard you listen to NPR!

It’s just nonsense.

Sillyland sometimes calls for silly tactics to point out the silliness. (NOTE: Please maintain that you would much rather have a rational conversation. But if you’re going to be called a libtard, why not have some fun with it?)

We are all libtards now.