ATLANTIC CITY — The last time thousands of local officials met in Atlantic City for the annual New Jersey League of Municipalities convention, mayors talked about how Tropical Storm Irene and a fluke October snowstorm were exacerbating budget woes.

Two years, one cancelled conference and a historic storm later, those municipal leaders will return to Atlantic City this week to tackle a new set of problems fueled by severe weather. The League of Municipalities kicks off its 98th annual conference, titled “Navigating Recovery & Renewal,” at the Atlantic City Convention Center on Tuesday.

“It’s very important to share with the other towns what you’re doing,” after Hurricane Sandy, said Monmouth Beach Mayor Susan Howard. “Going down to the League [conference] and getting the opportunity to talk to other mayors who are going through the same thing that you are going through and finding out what successes they are having, what they're learning, it’s invaluable.”

Sandy forced the League of Municipalities to cancel last year’s convention. League Executive Director Bill Dressel said this year his organization geared programming during the three-day event toward understanding what worked best in response to the storm as scores of towns throughout the state cope with long-term rebuilding efforts.

He said it was also important to learn “how we can prepare our officials for another disaster that could occur whether it’s an event of nature or whether or not it’s a train wreck.”

“There’s also a lot of communities out there that weren’t impacted by Sandy and thank God that they weren’t, but clearly sometime in the future every community is going to be dealt an emergency situation,” he said.

New Jersey Department of Community Affairs Commissioner Richard Constable will join a panel called “Sandy: 1 Year Later” with other top Christie administration officials on Wednesday morning. Later that afternoon, Senate President Stephen Sweeney (D-Gloucester), Senate Minority Leader Tom Kean, Jr. (R-Union), outgoing Assembly Speaker Sheila Oliver (D-Essex) and Assembly Minority Leader Jon Bramnick (R-Union) will discuss recovery efforts.

There will also be seminars on challenges faced during utility disruptions, flood hazard rules and emergency management.

Janice Mironov, mayor of East Windsor Township and president of the New Jersey League of Municipalities, said though not every community suffered severe damage from Sandy, "How to best prepare for major weather events and other emergencies is an area that we all share."

The three-day conference, which the league expects more than 18,000 elected officials, exhibitors and other guests to attend, will also include seminars on a wide-range of other topics, such as: affordable housing, health benefits reform, shared services and transportation. More than 100 seminars and workshops will be held.

Gov. Chris Christie, who spoke at the conference for the first time as governor in 2011, will not address local officials this year. But Lt. Gov. Kim Guadagno will.

However, the events aren’t limited to the Atlantic City Convention Center.

After business wraps up for the day, special interests and politicians host a number of extracurricular soirees. Former Gov. Jim McGreevey compared the evening sessions — where politicians have garnered headlines for getting themselves into trouble — to a "huge frat party" in his memoir.

Dressel said his organization focuses each day on providing local officials the most accurate, relevant information to help them govern. “I can’t control what people do after their normal 9 to 5 workday,” he said.

RELATED COVERAGE

• N.J. politicians gather in Atlantic City for networking event that dates back to 'Boardwalk Empire' era

• In address to League of Municipalities, Christie calls for cuts to worker benefits, increased shared services