Ruth-Ellen Blodgett (Photo: Picasa)

New research published in the New England Journal of Medicine from the Texas Policy Evaluation Project (TxPEP) reveals the devastating consequences for women when politicians block access to care at Planned Parenthood.

After the state of Texas blocked Planned Parenthood patients from accessing care through the Women’s Health Program in 2013, it led to a 35 percent decline in women using the most effective methods of birth control and a dramatic 27 percent spike in births among women who had previously used injectable contraception, which researchers attribute to the ban.

A companion study in contraception found that women reported difficulty making an appointment and the ability to pay for care. These consequences are even more devastating for low-income women and women living in rural areas. Researchers wrote: “These results should be cautionary to states considering similar measures; they contradict the claim that Planned Parenthood could be removed from a statewide program with little or no consequence.”

This research comes as politicians across the country continue to endanger the lives of their citizens with blatant lies, even as accusations against Planned Parenthood continue to crumble. Recently, a Houston grand jury indicted David Daleiden, the founder and self-proclaimed leader of the anti-abortion group called the Center for Medical Progress, on criminal charges, including one felony charge. In addition to the grand jury in Harris County, officials in 12 states have concluded investigations into claims that Planned Parenthood profited from fetal tissue donations and each one has cleared Planned Parenthood of wrongdoing. Officials in another eight states have declined to even investigate altogether, citing a lack of any evidence to suggest wrongdoing.

Cecile Richards, president of Planned Parenthood Federation of America, speaks for all of us who work day in and day out to ensure full access to reproductive health care to those in our communities. “This new research shows the devastating consequences for women when politicians block access to care at Planned Parenthood. Politicians have claimed time and again that our patients can simply go to other health care providers — and tragically that’s not the case. Instead, women were left out in the cold. Texas is fast becoming a cautionary tale for politicians in Ohio, Utah, and other states targeting care at Planned Parenthood.”

Luckily for New Yorkers, Gov. Andrew Cuomo and many legislators on both sides of the aisle know all too well the value of ensuring access to reproductive healthcare services. On behalf of Planned Parenthood Mid-Hudson Valley and our community partners, I applaud Assemblyman Kevin Cahill, D-Kingston, and all Assembly members who voted to pass the Comprehensive Contraceptive Coverage Act (CCCA) just last month. I am grateful to Sen. John Bonacic, R- Mount Hope, Orange County, for taking the lead in the Senate to support this legislation and encourage all members to follow this lead to ensure family planning benefits entitled under the Affordable Care Act are realized by all women (and men) seeking services in New York state.

For more information, please go to www.ppmhv.org or email publicaffairs@ppmhv.org



Ruth-Ellen Blodgett is president & CEO of Planned Parenthood Mid-Hudson Valley.

Read or Share this story: http://pojonews.co/1Tio91O