The family of Bill Thao stood next to his tiny casket at his visitation. Bill's father Samboon Thao (right) holds Bill's little brother, Magic Thao, 3. His wife, Suabna Xiong, is at left. Bill's grandmother is in front of them stroking the boys head in the casket. Credit: Michael Sears

By of the

The 21-year-old Milwaukee man charged Friday in the shooting death of toddler Bill Thao made an initial appearance in Milwaukee County intake court Saturday.

Bail for Darmequaye D. Cohill was set at $500,000, court records show.

Cohill was charged Friday with first-degree reckless homicide and first-degree recklessly endangering safety, both offenses with a dangerous weapon, in connection with the death of the 13-month-old boy.

Bill was shot on Dec. 27 while playing with his toys in the living room of a house in the 6400 block of N. 73rd St., according to the criminal complaint.

He was taken to Children's Hospital of Wisconsin, where he later died from his injury.

Prosecutors had charged Cohill on Jan. 5 with conspiracy to commit armed robbery for a separate incident.

According to that complaint, Cohill and three other men, all with guns, tried to rob Cohill's uncle outside Cohill's grandmother's house in September, but fled after the victim pointed out that there was a surveillance camera aimed at them.

Recent child deaths

Bill was the third Milwaukee child under the age of 13 killed by gunfire in 2014.

Another 12 children, ages 13 or younger, were wounded by gunfire and survived. They made up about 2% of the 582 victims of nonfatal shootings in 2014.

At Bill's funeral service on Jan. 2, the toddler was remembered as a "sweet, smart and strong child," who loved to sing "Twinkle Twinkle Little Star" and whose first word was bird.

The shooting deaths of Bill, 5-year-old Laylah Petersen and 10-year-old Sierra Guyton caused widespread outrage throughout Milwaukee and received national media attention.

All three young victims were hit by gunfire in places thought to be safe: a relative's home, a grandfather's lap and a neighborhood playground, respectively.

In 2013, five children ages 13 and younger were homicide victims.

However, the suspects in the deaths of those five children were their parents or caretakers, and only one was killed by gunfire.

On average, children ages 13 or younger make up between 1% to 2% of all nonfatal shooting victims in Milwaukee annually, according to data from the Milwaukee Homicide Review Commission.