KALAMAZOO, MI -- The first year of Obamacare in Kalamazoo County was largely a success, with 16,000 residents obtaining health-insurance coverage through the Affordable Care Act this past year, according to Enroll Kalamazoo County, a local coalition working to implement the new law.

That includes 5,983 people covered by private plans purchased through the federal insurance exchange and 10,134 who enrolled in Healthy Michigan, the state's version of the Medicaid expansion, based on federal and state numbers.

To put that number in context, the U.S. Census Bureau estimates about 28,000 Kalamazoo County residents lacked insurance in 2013, and most were between the ages of 18 and 64.

"That's a huge number of people who are insured now," said Amy Terry, system manager for community health for Bronson Healthcare and spokeswoman for Enroll Kalamazoo County. "That's very exciting."

RELATED STORY: Signing up for Obamacare in 2015.

While there remain challenges and concerns, Terry said, "none of the doomsday scenarios came true" -- including predictions that people wouldn't sign up, insurance companies would be loath to participate and premiums would skyrocket after the first year.

Consider:

• The federal government projected that 161,000 Michigan residents would enroll in private plans on healthcare.gov for 2014. The actual number who enrolled: More than 272,000

• 87 percent of Michigan residents who obtained insurance through healthcare.gov were eligible for a subsidy. The average subsidy was about $2,610.

• The number of insurance companies participating in Michigan insurance exchange increased from 10 to 14 in 2015. In Kalamazoo County, residents have a choice of 73 plans for 2015 compared to 40-some in 2014.

• Premiums "haven't moved much" from last year, Terry said. "Some plans have gone up, but some have come down." A study by Kaiser Family Foundation found the cost of the second-lowest Silver plan in Detroit went up an average of 2.5 percent.

• As of this week, about 450,000 people have enrolled in Healthy Michigan. That's 94 percent of the estimated number projected to be eligible for the program.

• While some new enrollees had insurance before, a national study by Enroll America estimates the percentage of uninsured Kalamazoo County residents ages 18 to 64 has dropped from 18 percent in 2013 to 11 percent in 2014. That equates to about 10,000 adults who are newly insured.

Josh Fangmeier, a policy analyst for the Center for Healthcare Research and Transformation at University of Michigan, said that despite the very rocky start, the rollback of the ACA went surprisingly well.

"At the end of the day, a good number of people got new coverage," he said. "The basic components have been working fairly well. There are still challenges that need to be worked out. But it's fair to say that it's been a success."

'I hate it'

Mary Swanson of Portage and Tim and Julie Brown of Kalamazoo have a much different perspective.

They are self-employed residents who have had inexpensive, high-deductible plans that are no longer available.

Neither family qualifies for a subsidy. Both households are seeing their premiums go up dramatically.

In 2013, Swanson and her husband paid $833 a month and had $4,000 in annual deductibles. The least expensive plan now is $993 with a $12,700 deductible.

"Before we had the freedom to choose (a level of coverage) and now we don't," Swanson said. "Our health-care system was broken, but I don't think this was the answer."

The Browns are in a similar situation. They previously paid less than $500 a month for catastrophic insurance for themselves and their teenage children. The least expensive plan on the federal exchange for 2015 is $864, and has a high deductible and a limited list of providers.

"There are so many good things about health reform, such as allowing people with pre-existing conditions to get insurance," Julie Cook Brown said.

But like Swanson, Brown and her husband -- who own Easy On Hold, which produces recordings for business telephone systems -- are furious that Obama's promise that people could keep their plans proved not to be true.

"The biggest thing for me is having to pay for services that I don't need and don't believe in, such abortion," Brown said. "I worked extremely hard to build my business, and I don't appreciate having the government redirect my money to something I don't believe in."

The Browns and Swansons were among an estimated 225,000 Michigan households with individual insurance plans had their policies canceled at the end of 2013 because the plans did not comply with the ACA.

There is no data available on outcomes for those 225,000 policyholders, but Terry and others say some purchased new subsidized plans through the federal marketplace that gave them better coverage at a lower price. Others, like the Browns and Swansons, continued to purchase unsubsidized plans directly from an insurance agent.

The Brown and Swanson households "are classic examples" of Americans hurt more than helped by the ACA, Fangmeier said — they don't qualify for subsidies, are fairly healthy and had insurance plans they liked and that are no longer available.

Catastrophic policies are still available for people under 30 and households with a hardship exemption, which includes situations where the least expensive plan on the federal exchange is more than 8 percent of family income.

For those purchasing individual insurance in Kalamazoo County, that would allow a couple in their early 60s to opt for catastrophic coverage if they earn between $62,920, which is the subsidy cap, and $149,000. For a family such as the Browns, with parents age 54 and 49 and two teenagers, the catastrophic policy is available for those with an income between the subsidy cap of $95,400 and $129,600.

Fangmeier said the reason access to catastrophic coverage is restricted is the fear that healthy people would flock to such policies, leaving those with costly health problems to be overrepresented in the regular ACA plans, driving up premiums.

In fact, he said, that's the kind of imbalance that allowed the Swansons and Browns to have lower-cost insurance in the past, when insurance companies were allowed to screen out people with pre-existing conditions.

"It was an artificial pool" of the people who were relatively inexpensive to insure, Fangmeier said.

Terry also said that catastrophic plans have proven problematic because the coverage is less than consumers anticipate.

She gave the example of a Bronson patient with catastrophic policy whose son was seriously injured in a go-cart accident. The insurance company refused to pay the bills because of a clause in the policy that exempted coverage for accidents that occurred on racetracks.

"So here's a situation where someone thought they had insurance and they couldn't use it," Terry said. "It was a nightmare."

In fact, Julie Brown had her own experience with a catastrophic policy not covering the bills when one of her children ended up in intensive care years ago. The family's share of the cost was so high they couldn't pay it, she said, and the hospital foundation covered some of the cost.

Brown sees that as a good example of how the old system worked well, and the problems of under- or uninsured patients have been exaggerated.

But Fangmeier says it's an example of how the individual health insurance market was facing a "death spiral." As premiums rose, more and more people opted out of full coverage, which made traditional plans cost even more and increased the need for charity care for the under- and uninsured.

"It was just unsustainable," he said.

One advantage now for households such as the Swanson and Browns: If a family member does have a very expensive medical condition, they don't have to worry about their policy getting canceled or their premiums going up as a result.

That's not much comfort for Brown.

"I run a business, but I don't understand insurance," she said. "I hate it and I'm mad about it."

Others happy

Terry said in her experience signing up people for Obamacare, most people have walked away happy.

"We worked with many people who have never had insurance their whole life," Terry said. "They were excited."

That mirrors his experience, said Seun Adewale, chief operating office of Kalamazoo's Family Health Center, which serves Kalamazoo's low-income neighborhoods.

The ACA "has been such a success," Adewale said. "We've had a 40-year-old who has never been to a physician before. Forty years old!"

A national poll released Friday by Gallup found 71 percent of Obamacare policyholders surveyed said their coverage through the exchanges was good or excellent, and 75 percent were satisfied with the cost.

For many self-employed people, especially those who qualified for subsidies, the ACA has been a godsend.

Michelle Serlin owns Choices for Change, a Kalamazoo social work agency. A single mother with a teenage daughter, Serlin said purchasing insurance through the federal health-care exchange dropped her health-care premiums from $590 to $250 a month and the coverage also is better -- her old deductible was $2,500 and now it's $600.

"When I found I qualified for a subsidy, I about fell off my chair," Serlin said.

Plus, she added, "this is the first time we've ever had decent dental coverage," she added.

Perhaps the biggest difference is piece of mind, she said. Before this year, Serlin said she worried every time she and her daughter used their health insurance that it would results in an increase in her premiums.

"Now we actually use our insurance without it counting against us," she said.

"This is monumental for people who are self-employed," Serlin said. "It's been off-the-charts helpful."

Challenges and concerns

In addition to the cost of premiums for some households, Fangmeier and Terry said there are other challenges and concerns with the new law.

That includes trying to determine the correct subsidy for those with fluctuating incomes, and the inability of those who qualify for Healthy Michigan to obtain subsidized private insurance if they wish, Terry said.

"We have people who want to pay for private insurance, but they don't have a choice" if they qualify for Healthy Michigan unless they are willing to pay the full unsubsidized cost, she said.

Another issue involves people with fluctuating incomes who float in and out of eligibility for Healthy Michigan. "We need to stabilize that," Terry said.

Still another issue associated with Healthy Michigan is the dearth of doctors willing to participate in the plan, which has lower reimbursement rates than private insurance.

"It's been really hard in this area," Terry said. "We hope that will change."

Family Health Clinic is one office that will accept Healthy Michigan patients, and Adewale said they've seen an increase in clientele. "We had a record number of phone calls in July, which indicates more people are using our services," he said.

"We knew this was coming, and we've been preparing for it, so we were able to absorb more patients," he said. "The fact we can now provide preventative care (for people who were previously uninsured) is outstanding."

Another concern for ACA supporters is what will happen to the law on the political front, with Republicans threatening to repeal or cripple the ACA now that they control Congress.

The U.S. Supreme Court also recently agreed to hear a challenge to the law that could eliminate ACA subsidies in states such as Michigan that rely on the federal government to run their health-care exchange.

"We're working under the current legislation, and we'll just have to adjust if it changes," Terry said.

U.S. Rep. Fred Upton, R-St. Joseph, is among the Republicans who have voted for repealing the ACA. In request for comment for this story, he offered a written statement in which he said the law needs a bipartisan overhaul.

"A year ago, more than a hundred thousand Michiganders received the dreaded notice that they would be losing their affordable health coverage because of the President's law," he said. "In spite of repeated assurances from the administration, fears of lost coverage, rate increases, and loss of access to longtime family doctors became the reality for millions nationwide.

"We will learn shortly if the website updates are capable of handling round two. Looming over the whole situation is yet another Supreme Court decision that could collapse the current program. I said from the start that health care needed to be reformed and in a bipartisan way. To fix the many flaws, it will require a bipartisan approach and a President willing to work with the Congress."

Impact on providers

Terry, who works for Bronson Healthcare, said it's too early to tell the financial impact of the Affordable Care Act on health-care providers.

"You have many more people who are insured, which helps. But there's also lower reimbursement rates," she said.

The ACA "is really getting us to our mission of doing more health care for less," Terry said.

While that aspect of health-care reform is infuriating for some physicians and other health-care providers, others say it's long overdue.

Currently, the United States has the dubious distinction of spending, by far, more per capita on health care than any other country in the world -- 50 percent more than Norway, which is No. 2 on the list.

But based on health outcomes, such as life expectancy, and patient satisfaction, the U.S. ranks well below many other countries. There are multiple factors at work here, but a big issue is that health care in other countries is largely run on a nonprofit model, while medicine in the United States is a largely a for-profit business -- and a very profitable one at that.

American hospitals charge much more for services and procedures than hospitals in other countries. Prescription drugs cost more here than elsewhere. U.S doctors have higher incomes. Medicine in the United States also tilts toward a more expensive mix of services -- Americans are more likely to get expensive tests, see specialists and have more invasive procedures, numerous studies show.

"We spend a lot of money and our outcomes are not as good as they should be, so we need to fix that," Terry said. "The challenge is providing the right care at the right time at the right price."

Despite the challenges presented by the ACA to health-care providers, Terry said, "we also know that the community will be healthier if more people are insured, and that's a real win.

"This really is a transformational time for the health-care industry," Terry said. "It's very exciting."

Julie Mack is a reporter for Kalamazoo Gazette. Email her at jmack1@mlive.com, call her at 269-350-0277 or follow her on Twitter @kzjuliemack.