Judicial Watch announced today that U.S. District Court Judge Emmet Sullivan ordered the U.S. State Department to request that Hillary Clinton and her top aides confirm, under penalty of perjury, that they have produced all government records in their possession, return any other government records immediately, and describe their use of Hillary Clinton’s email server to conduct government business.

Judge Emmett Sullivan, who is hearing the FOIA lawsuit brought by Judicial Watch, has put Hillary Clinton’s top aides Human Abedin and Cheryl Mills (and their boss Hillary) on the spot, in a ruling JW president Tom Fitton describes as a “blockbuster.” Judicial Watch summarizes (the text of the order appears below):

This puts Hillary’s two key factotums (factota?) under serious jeopardy if Hillary Clinton emailed them anything to do with State Department business that has not already been turned over in the 30,000 emails that escaped deletion from her server. Any material, for instance, relating to donations to the Clinton Foundation or speaking fees for Bill that might have been deleted by Hillary as “personal” would be covered, since both Abedin and Mills drew State Department paychecks. Correspondence between them and Hillary would be considered government records, even if yoga positions or Chelsea’s wedding were the subject.

The perjury issue is serious. Judge Sullivan shows signs of increasing irritation, and the possibility that he will order the seizure of Hillary’s server is growing. At that point, Huma and Cheryl have to wonder how good the FBI’s data recovery team is. Should they be able to recover deleted emails (as many people believe possible) and the two assistants have not disclosed emails, they could face time in the federal pen.

So, assuming Hillary deleted those emails for a good reason, they now face the choice between ratting out the boss or facing orange is the new black for a period of time. Huma is the mother of a small child, and that prospect cannot be welcome.

Here is the text of Judge Sullivan’s order: