The president of the Fraternal Order of Police (FOP) in Baltimore wrote an open letter to the state’s attorney, Marilyn Mosby, asking her to appoint a special prosecutor to determine whether the six cops involved in Freddie Gray’s homicide should face charges. The FOP insists all the officers involved in Gray’s death in custody discharged their duties to protect the public that day. “Not one of the officers involved in this tragic situation left home in the morning with the anticipation that someone with whom they interacted would not go home that night,” wrote Gene Ryan, the FOP president. “Not one of the officers involved are responsible for the death of Mr. Gray.”

Ryan brought up Mosby’s husband, who represents the neighborhood where Gray was apprehended by police, saying his political future, “for better or worse,” would be tied to her investigation of the officers involved in Gray’s death. Probably not the conflict of interest Councilman Mosby expected when his wife won the election last year. Unmentioned by the union were Mosby’s other family relations—a mother, father, and grandfather who were cops. Maybe it’s useful in cases where the state’s attorney would settle for taxpayer money to the victims and the brutalizers return to the streets, as has seemed to be the standard process. The union also cited Mosby’s relationship with Gray family William Murphy, a prominent trial lawyer who narrated the video “10 Rules for Dealing With Police,” as well as the lead prosecutor’s “connections with members of the local media.”

But in principle, Ryan’s correct. An independent prosecutor should investigate all questionable police incidents, not just this one. Ryan refers to “litigation” related to this incident in which some reporters might have to testify. So appointing an independent prosecutor, should she, for example, produce even heftier charges, could lead to litigation too. But the important question is: where do police get the privileges masquerading as rights that offer all these avenues for litigation and appeal? Everyone deserves due process, even the cops in the middle of this. But what part of the Constitution ties a cop’s privilege to carry a gun and enforce the law to the due process afforded him and the rest of us? The union has every right to write an open letter to the state’s attorney. But cops shouldn’t have an inherent right to their job.

Plenty of reasons why, maybe, cops shouldn’t have unions.

Flashback: Before some Baltimore protests turned violent, the police union compared them to a “lynch mob.”

Full letter, below the jump.