Atlanta's Thabo Sefolosha has been diagnosed with a broken ankle from NYPD incident early Wednesday, out for season, sources tell RealGM. — Shams Charania (@ShamsCharania) April 9, 2015

Former Colorado standout and current Pacers forward Chris Copeland was stabbed outside a New York City nightclub early Wednesday, along with his ex-fiancée and another woman, and was in intensive care after undergoing surgery.

According to multiple reports, Copeland suffered knife wounds to his elbow, abdomen and his hand, and his diaphragm was punctured.

Copeland’s ex-fiancée, Katrine Saltara, was slashed in multiple areas, but was released from the hospital Wednesday evening. And the other woman was slashed in the abdomen, but was said to be in stable condition.

Two Atlanta Hawks players, Pero Antic and Thabo Sefolosha, were also on the scene of the incident and were detained for trying to prevent police from setting up a crime scene investigation. They were released without bail after being charged with obstructing governmental authority and disorderly conduct.

A suspect, 22-year-old Shevoy Bleary, was arrested and is facing charges.

According to the Indianapolis Star, Copeland and Saltara were assaulted while waiting for their car outside the club, while a source told the paper that “Chris did not initiate anything.”

But for some reason, Copeland felt the need to apologize, releasing this statement Thursday:

Update on Chris Copeland and statement: http://t.co/W7ngudTnfe pic.twitter.com/JCRJgpcadq — Indiana Pacers (@Pacers) April 9, 2015

Pacers players wore headbands to honor Copeland during their win over the Knicks in New York on Wednesday, while many others across the league wished him a speedy recovery.

After Wednesday’s game, Pacers star Paul George opened up to beat writer Candace Buckner on the incident:

Paul George, still wearing the blue headband after the game, said he thought about Chris Copeland "the whole night." — Candace Buckner (@CandaceDBuckner) April 9, 2015

PG (1 of 3): "I sit next to Cope every game. He’s right next to me. I feel like all of our conversations are on the bench…" — Candace Buckner (@CandaceDBuckner) April 9, 2015

PG (2 of 3): "…so it was tough not seeing him and not having him right next to me…" — Candace Buckner (@CandaceDBuckner) April 9, 2015