A lot of folks voted for Rick Snyder in 2010 because they thought he'd be a moderate governor.

And here's a friendly reminder: If Snyder had governed like one, he wouldn't be fighting for his political life right now.

Of course, the Republican was never going to coast to another near-20-point rout in 2014. He's facing a credible Democratic opponent in former U.S. Rep. Mark Schauer instead of Lansing Mayor Virg Bernero, whose animated tirades are kryptonite for independent voters.

But Snyder has dragged Michigan further right than anyone in modern history -- yes, superseding the record of Republican maestro John Engler.

That's repelled a lot of independents and Democrats who supported Snyder last election.

Thanks to national media coverage, the governor is best known for signing Right to Work, harsh abortion restrictions and a ban on same-sex partner benefits for public employees.

There's a reason why Snyder isn't campaigning on these issues: they're not terribly popular with independents.

Although it's not the official campaign line, you'll hear a lot of folks gloss over his record, mumbling that Snyder was just indulging the whims of the more conservative GOP legislative leadership.

That doesn't exactly scream leadership, but the hope is that it will mollify moderates.

But given the odds that Republicans will keep control of the Legislature next term, why would voters believe Snyder will stop appeasing the right if he's re-elected?

Snyder's top priority has always been economic policy. And that agenda has also been extremely conservative.

He's slashed unemployment, welfare and workers' compensation benefits. He's cut regulations, despite concerns over hurting public safety and the environment.

The former Gateway CEO's crowning achievement was pushing through a $2 billion corporate tax cut, followed by eliminating the Personal Property Tax for businesses.

Although Snyder claims these tax cuts were about "fairness," not ideology, he's also signed legislation making it harder to go after corporate tax cheats.

And a lot of people, especially seniors, don't think it's particularly fair that their taxes have skyrocketed so corporations can pay less. Snyder oversaw a $1.4 billion tax hike on individuals by eliminating popular tax exemptions for children, pensions and charitable donations.

Education cuts also haven't been very popular. Less money is getting into the classroom than before Snyder took office and the minimum per-pupil allowance is down, which is what we all care about.

The governor claims he's increased spending, largely because he's counting appropriations for retirement costs. That's great. But what voters see is too many districts having to increase class sizes, lay off teachers and cut programs to stay afloat.

To blunt the edges of his hard-right record, Snyder has stressed his few moderate achievements, like backing the Medicaid expansion under Obamacare.

But his message has been undercut by the Republican Governors Association, which is currently running an ad savaging Schauer as the real Obamacare lover.

Maybe Snyder will be saved by a $2.3 million ad buy from former New York Mayor Michael Bloomberg's SuperPAC, billing him as "the governor that put partisanship aside."

It's good marketing, even if it's detached from reality.

But even if Snyder loses because he's veered too far right, it will still be worth it for conservative special interests.

Why? It will probably take decades for Democrats to undo the last four years. They'd need to control all branches of government, as Republicans currently do -- and have the backbone to push their agenda.

That wouldn't be the case if Snyder truly was the post-partisan, technocrat governor he sold himself as in 2010.

And Snyder still has a pleasant, moderate demeanor going for him, not to mention a flush campaign account. So he may very well win another term anyway.

Susan J. Demas is Publisher and Editor of Inside Michigan Politics, a nationally acclaimed, biweekly political newsletter. She can be reached at susan@sjdemas.com. Follow her on Twitter here.