Any suicide is a tragedy, but the suicide of a college student—just on the brink of entering independent adulthood—is particularly heartbreaking. We know the statistics: in the past year, 8% of students seriously considered suicide and 1.3% attempted to end their lives1[PDF]; suicide is the 2nd leading cause of death among college students.2[PDF] Although counseling centers are ubiquitous on college campuses, students often don’t seek out help for their problems, and when they do, they may be referred to off-campus providers for ongoing care.3[PDF] Since counseling centers have a responsibility to serve the entire college community, they often need to triage and refer students who require intensive or ongoing services. It is therefore not uncommon for psychiatrists in the community to encounter college students in serious distress in their practices.

Although college students are in many ways similar to any patient in their age group, their environment and stressors differ in significant ways. Psychiatrists who treat students outside the campus mental health system may not be aware of the particular resources offered by campuses and also some of the impediments to ideal care. What follows is a brief primer on some of the issues to consider in assessing and managing suicidality in college students, as well as an introduction to some of the resources available on campuses to supplement outside treatment.

CASE VIGNETTE Jane is a 20-year-old junior college student who presents with symptoms of severe depression and suicidality in the context of failing 2 of her classes and being placed on academic probation. She is the first in her family to attend college—she transferred to a 4-year state university after completing her first 2 years of higher education in a community college. She worries that her academic performance will put her financial aid in jeopardy, and she does not want to tell her parents about her situation. She has a history of major depression and was hospitalized at age 16 after an overdose. She is part of a sorority and acknowledges that she drinks too much on weekends. She has a family history of depression and a cousin who completed suicide. She lives on campus with 2 roommates.

Assessing suicide risk

Suicide risk factors are the same in college students as for anyone else, and Jane has several: a history of major depression, a past suicide attempt, excessive alcohol intake, and a family history of completed suicide. In addition, psychosocial stressors, including the pressure to succeed in college, financial stress, and academic failure, raise the level of concern. These psychosocial stressors add up and have severe consequences beyond the moment: inability to complete college, whether for academic or financial reasons, can have downstream effects on job prospects, future earnings, and even identity as part of the middle class.

Jane’s substance use puts her at increased risk for suicide. There is widespread recognition of the negative effects of underage drinking, and a public-health push on campuses to prevent substance abuse. In fact, all campuses that receive federal funds are subject to the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act, a 1990 federal act that requires institutions of higher education to “design, develop and implement alcohol and other drug prevention programs for students and employees and to critically evaluate their programs on a biennial basis.”4 Unfortunately, treatment programs lag behind prevention, and students must often rely on community programs (eg, Alcoholic Anonymous) or insurance-based interventions.

Given the severity of her history, Jane would benefit from an ongoing relationship with a psychiatrist who could follow her through the remainder of her college career. While the college counseling center may be most convenient, on-campus services are often short-term. It is therefore not at all unusual for a student like Jane to be treated by a community psychiatrist who accepts the student’s health insurance.

Access to care

Students seeking psychiatric services may be confused about their options for treatment, including on- and off-campus services, and free versus insurance-based services. Campus health services are generally funded—entirely or in part—by student fees and may also bill third-party payers. When campuses provide services for free, there is generally a time limit, and longer-term treatment is referred out to community providers.

Before the Affordable Care Act (ACA), many young adults had significant gaps in health insurance coverage, and institutions began offering institution-specific plans for enrolled students. With the implementation of the ACA, however, the landscape of student health is shifting. Now that students can be covered on their parents’ health plans until age 26 years, many undergraduates arrive on campus with health insurance for which the preferred providers are outside the campus health system. In practice what this means is that community psychiatrists who accept the parents’ insurance may become first-choice providers for students in distress. It also means that community providers need to become familiar with campus structures and supports.

Financial stress from paying for higher education

For Jane, academic success is essential not only to please herself and her family, but also to maintain her financial aid and therefore her housing and health insurance. It sets the stage for her future employment options too. Understanding the interdependence of these factors is key to helping Jane manage her situation.