Bloomberg News

Federal Reserve officials in January actively debated the future of a program they hope will set a floor underneath short-term interest rates.

They discussed raising the daily size limit of what the central bank calls its reverse repurchase agreement program, according to minutes of their Jan. 27-28 Federal Open Market Committee meeting, released Wednesday. A number of officials believe a higher cap, at least for a time, could help the central bank begin the process of rate increases, when the time comes.

Through the reverse repo, the Fed takes in cash from eligible investment banks and money managers in exchange for loans of Treasury securities. The program has been in testing since it was launched in September 2013.

The Fed plans to use the interest rate it pays on the cash to set a lower boundary of a target range for its benchmark federal funds rate. The Fed plans to set the top of the range with the interest rate it pays on reserves parked at the central bank by private, deposit-taking banks.

The Fed plans to use the tools together to lift the fed funds target, which has been a range of zero to 0.25% since 2008. When they raise that target, it should cause other borrowing costs to rise, such as the rates on mortgages, credits cards and business loans.

Most Fed officials have indicated they expect to start raising rates this year, with many pointing to midyear as a possible time for liftoff.

The Fed has been tinkering with the terms of the reverse repos as it seeks to understand how they work under different financial conditions. The Fed has capped the total borrowing amount for overnight reverse repos at $300 billion daily because of worries the tool could destabilize financial markets in times of panic if it gets too big. But that limit compromised the Fed’s ability to set a floor under short-term rates when demand for the repos exceeded the cap.

The Fed addressed that by adding a series of multiday “term” reverse operations that expanded the amount of Treasurys the central bank could lend on any given day. The meeting minutes showed that officials see scope to boost the borrowing cap.

“Most meeting participants indicated that a sizable [overnight reverse repo] cap would be appropriate to support policy implementation at the time of liftoff, and a couple of participants suggested that the aggregate cap might be suspended for a time,” the minutes said.

Some policy makers said it might be good for the Fed to start with a high borrowing limit for the reverse repos and quickly reduce it once rate increases start, in a bid to drive home to markets the temporary nature of the program. The Fed has signaled the tool would be phased out at some point.

Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond President Jeffrey Lacker voted against the Fed’s decision to put in place multiday “term” reverse-repo operations to span the quarter-end, believing the central bank already had enough information about how the program works.

Related reading

Fed’s Rate Debate Heating Up

Key Passages in the Fed’s January Meeting Minutes

Fed Flags Midyear Rate Hike—Or Later

Deciphering the Fed: ‘Solid’ Beats ‘Moderate,’ and ‘Strong’ is Even Better

Read the Full Text of the Fed’s Statement

Parsing the Fed: How the Statement Changed