Topics: Abortion, Center of Bio-Ethical Reform, Florida, Genocide Awareness Project, Reproductive Rights, UCF, Life News

Can the opponents of reproductive choice please stop resorting to underhanded, manipulative tactics to try to frighten women out of having abortions already? Can they stop acting like if they can just upset women enough, they’ve won a moral victory? Case in point: The showdown this week at the University of Central Florida over graphic abortion imagery.

The provocatively named “Genocide Awareness Project” from the Center of Bio-Ethical Reform is currently making its seventh visit to the campus this week, positioning itself near the campus reflecting pond, in front of the library, with a display that includes photographs from abortions. The group is also passing out literature and engaging in “discussions and debates” with students. Fletcher Armstrong, the group’s national field director, promised the Orlando Sentinel Sunday that “You see arms pulled off, decapitation, dismemberment, that’s what you see…. Frankly, it’s hard to show. But if we don’t show it, people don’t get it.” And just to make a point, in addition to vivid images of aborted fetuses, the displays also feature images of dead bodies from the 1994 Rwandan genocide. Armstrong estimates that “an average of five to 15 percent” of visitors who participate in the group’s opinion poll wind up changing their minds on the issue, though he says that figure is “not scientific.”

The bloody fetus strategy has a subtler, but also emotionally manipulative cousin in the “informed consent” rules like the one being mulled in Missouri this month – which would require women seeking abortions to watch an “informational” video about the procedure. And the tactic of showing, as graphically as possible, the results of abortion remains the same. It’s designed to incite a strong reaction – and sometimes, unfortunately, it works. Last year, a group called Survivors of the Abortion Holocaust – another Christian group known for its deployment of “overwhelmingly bloody and gory pictures,” brought its campaign to the University of California at Santa Barbara. It was a visit that culminated in a heated exchange between the visitors and feminist professor Dr. Mireille Miller-Young, one in which Dr. Miller-Young came away looking like the aggressor, and the protestors were embraced by the right wing media as victims of an “attack.”