The White House has tapped ex-Microsoft Office President Kurt DelBene (left, pictured in 2011) to lead efforts to fix the ailing Obamacare website Jon Snyder

With his approval ratings tanking in no small part because his administration so bungled Healthcare.gov, Barack Obama needs a saviour. And apparently, he believes he has found one: ex-Microsoft man Kurt Delbene.

On the same day the president was to meet with executives from several Microsoft rivals, the White House announced that the former head of Microsoft Office will lead the effort to salvage the struggling Obamacare website. DelBene took charge of Office in 2010 and left this past July. He replaces Jeffrey D. Zients as the guy in charge of overhauling the government's health insurance website, and he will begin work on Wednesday.

"Kurt has proven expertise in heading large, complex technology teams and in product development," Kathleen Sebelius, the secretary of health and human services, said in a statement, according to the New York Times. "He will be a tremendous asset in our work."

As one of five division heads who reported directly to Microsoft CEO Steve Ballmer, DelBene oversaw the launch and expansion of Office 365, a web-based version of its iconic productivity suite and a cornerstone of the company's effort to compete in the cloud. "We're as serious about the cloud as we are about evolving our businesses," DelBene told Wired in late 2011. "We always look a little askance when we get the question, because it always seems odd to us. Particularly as engineers, we say: '[The cloud is] the way the world is moving.'"

Others may look a little askance at the fact that the guy Obama tapped to save Healthcare.gov comes from a company that has struggled to get the internet right, rather than a company that grew up on the web. Google made that argument back in 2011 when bashing Office 365, claiming -- rightly -- that Microsoft built its business on the old-school client-server model, which doesn't play on the web.

But Delbene may be just what the government needs. Google may be awesome at the web, but its experience lies in building things for the web from scratch. Microsoft, on the other hand, carries the heavy legacy costs of building its empire on an approach to software and distribution that's becoming obsolete. If DelBene was able to drag a hidebound organisation into a new way of doing things by bringing Office into the 21st century, maybe he can do the same for the federal government and Healthcare.gov.

This story originally appeared on Wired.com