STAR FILE PHOTO Medi-Cal enrollment in the Gold Coast Health Plan has rocketed to 202,360 people.

By Tom Kisken of the Ventura County Star

More than one of four people in Ventura County receives health insurance through a Medi-Cal system pointed primarily at low-income people.

About half the children younger than 5 in the county are also covered through the Medi-Cal program funded by federal and state governments, according to the Gold Coast Health Plan.

Gold Coast is the managed care organization launched four years ago to administer Medi-Cal in Ventura County. Back then, it served about 100,000 residents.

That number has mushroomed to 202,360, officials announced this month.

State data shows thousands of other people are covered by programs outside of Gold Coast, bringing total Medi-Cal membership to 227,500 people in a county of 846,178.

The other surprising number — the 50 percent of young children covered — could grow next year because of a California law extending coverage to undocumented minors.

To some, high coverage numbers are surprising in a county considered among the state's wealthier, with a family median income of $86,000. Others say the numbers reflect dramatic changes in the Medi-Cal health system and poverty that pockmarks areas of the county.

"We see a growing number of families who are in poverty or the working poor and don't have the means to lift themselves out," said Claudia Harrison, executive director of First 5 Ventura County.

Perhaps the most powerful trigger for change has been the reshaping of a Medi-Cal program once aimed at very low-income families with children.

The Affordable Care Act, known as Obamacare, expanded eligibility in 2014 to people in the tiers above the federal poverty line. That means families of four with incomes of $33,465 — likely ineligible under the old rules but still financially stretched — qualify for coverage.

A complicated eligibility formula was simplified and based solely on income, meaning people could qualify even if they were single and had no children.

In other changes, the Healthy Families program aimed at families who previously didn't qualify for Medi-Cal were folded into the insurance program. That means children from households with incomes as high as $64,505 for a family of four qualify for coverage, although they have to cover some costs.

The changes ignited enrollment. Ventura County Health Services Agency officials said they originally expected enrollment to plateau at 175,000 members, but it rocketed past that mark.

Across California, 12.8 million people are now enrolled in Medi-Cal — about one-third of all state residents. About 1.4 million children younger than 5 are covered statewide, comprising 56 percent of all youth in the age range.

The rise shows how Medi-Cal's role has changed, said Anthony Wright, director of Health Access California.

"It's gone from being a health care program for some categories of children and senior with disabilities to a safety net for all of us when we might need it," he said. "If you and I are between jobs, we might be eligible for Medi-Cal — that's a good thing."

But the program's primary focus remains low-income populations. That's why the inclusion of 50 percent of children younger than 5 in Medi-Cal makes Harrison anxious. She heads a nonprofit group that focuses on early childhood health and development, with half of the families served earning less than $20,000 a year.

"There are a lot of kids in poverty in Ventura County," she said, citing a United Way study contending 25 percent of families in Ventura County don't make enough to meet basic needs.

The study also highlighted the struggles of families relying on low-paying jobs. It said two parents with an infant and a school-aged child would have to hold more than three full-time, minimum-wage jobs to survive.

Harrison said rising Medi-Cal numbers show people in need are receiving health insurance. She praised local enrollment efforts.

Wendy Aiens views things differently. She isn't surprised more than one of four Ventura County residents is covered by Medi-Cal. She just wishes she was one of them.

The Santa Paula resident works as a medical assistant and makes less than $1,400 a month.

She has been told she misses the limit for Medi-Cal. She said costs of private health coverage, even through the Covered California marketplace created by the Affordable Care Act, are too high.

So she goes without, biding her time until she can apply for Medi-Cal again.

"I'd rather have that," she said. "I can't afford Obamacare."