A new cable TV show "The Knick," premiering this week, dramatizes cutting-edge medicine circa 1900, with a recurring theme that treatments standard at the time were actually ineffective or even harmful. (Other reviews by the New Yorker and The New York Times.)

We reached out to a diverse group of physicians via email and asked:

Do you think there are standard-of-care treatments today that future generations will look back on in horror, and which ones will they be?

The participants this week:

Cherie C. Binns, RN, an independent multiple sclerosis-certified nurse based in Wakefield, R.I.

John P. Higgins MD, MBA , MPHIL, associate professor of cardiology, the University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston (UTHealth)

Murali Doraiswamy, MD, professor of psychiatry and medicine, Translational Neuroscience Division, Duke University School of Medicine

Michael Rinaldi, MD, interventional cardiologist and director of clinical research at Carolinas HealthCare System's Sanger Heart and Vascular Institute

Jack Shapiro, MD, member, Michigan State Medical Society-Physicians Review Organization of Michigan, and a board-certified internist recently retired after practicing for over 50 years

Tanzid Shams, MD, sports concussion specialist and pediatric neurologist in Boston

Shotguns and Carpet Bombs

Murali Doraiswamy, MD: "Ninety-nine percent of treatments today will be viewed as harmful or unethical in the future; for example, most psychiatric treatments given to children or most back surgeries."

John P. Higgins MD, MBA , MPHIL: "Many of our medications that we use today will be considered primitive 'shotgun style' approaches in the future. We currently use medications in a 'one size fits all' manner, and they are absorbed into our bodies and affect many systems in addition to the one they are intended for and may cause damage to healthy systems. An analogy would be spraying a whole rose bush with chemicals to treat one leaf that has a black spot fungus. Examples include most commonly used medications such as beta-blockers, statins, antibiotics, and NSAIDs."

Cherie C. Binns, RN: "Talk of limiting care for geriatric patients or the multiply handicapped child (especially at birth) and limiting access to resources for those with chronic health conditions that utilize a majority of services and healthcare dollars available are certainly, if they become standards of care, something that will be mocked, misunderstood, maligned in another generation."

Michael Rinaldi, MD: "Medicine is trying to move from a less focused 'carpet bomb' approach to medicine and toward a more focused targeted approach to therapy that limits collateral damage. We have made progress but certainly have a long way to go."

Only Constant: Change

Jack Shapiro, MD: "I think the question is not very intelligent or meaningful. Medicine today is as much an art as a science -- what we lack in knowledge, we try to make up from what we do know. As our knowledge base increases our methods will change."

Tanzid Shams, MD: "'Standard-of-care' is absolutely a time/generation-specific concept that will continue to change in every medical subspecialty."

Binns: "With the changing face of healthcare coming out of the Affordable Care Act (ACA) legislation, standards of care are swiftly changing. Patients are now, in some cases, prevented from seeing members of their healthcare team that have tended them for years in lieu of lesser skilled providers who will accept a lower reimbursement for care and with that, may overlook or fail to treat conditions that a familiar provider would care for."

What Progress Looks Like

Shapiro: "Too much of our knowledge base is inference and meta-analysis rather than hard evidence, which is difficult to come by. As our scientific technology increases, our ideas will change as they always have."

Higgins: "In the future, targeted and individualized therapy for a patient's unique physiology will be used, with precision efficacy and near zero side effects."

Rinaldi: "Conventional surgery will become less invasive and less necessary as minimally invasive techniques advance. Examples already playing out include the transition to stent grafting and TAVR over big conventional surgeries. This will continue to advance.

"Medications will become more tailored. We will become better at determining who will benefit from a medication and who will not. The number needed to treat will fall and patients who will not ultimately benefit from a medication can avoid the cost and risk of adverse reactions and side effects. Chemotherapy will become more tolerable and more focused. One of the biggest fears patients have with cancer is not just the disease itself but also the side effects from the treatments. The same can be said of many other therapies."

Shams: "It is best not to view every advancement in medicine and science as a magic bullet. Throughout history, our understanding of disease processes have evolved and so have the solutions that we have come up with to deal with disease conditions. "

Binns: "There was a sense, up until about 4 or 5 years ago, that we were a forward moving and thinking society when it came to caring for our weakest and most vulnerable members. With ACA and cost-saving measures being instituted by insurers, the compassion is rapidly seeping out of care and into the leach-fields of commonality and disinterest. Passion is no longer nurtured. Vocation to the healing arts is discouraged.

"Are we willing to allow ourselves to be remembered for these changes in our standards of care?"

You may also be interested in these recent Friday Feedbacks:

GME Beyond Repair?

Zero-Tolerance Employment Smoking Bans?

MD Celebrities in the Land of Oz

Free Care for Veterans?

Fetal Risk From WiFi and Mobiles?

E-Cigs for Cessation

RIP Annual Checkups?

Friday Feedback is a feature that presents a sampling of opinions solicited by MedPage Today in response to a healthcare issue, clinical controversy, or new finding reported that week. We always welcome new, thoughtful voices. If you'd like to participate in a Friday Feedback, or suggest a topic: e.chu@medpagetoday.com or @elbertchu.