Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share Courier-Journal Business Enterprise Reporter Grace Schneider talks about her beat and her background.

Buy Photo Courier-Journal Business Enterprise Reporter Grace Schneider interviews Larry Hatzell for a story. December 5, 2014 (Photo: Michael Clevenger/The Courier-Journal)Buy Photo

I know. I know. I know.

I know what you're thinking. You've seen my face. Maybe you read the article that I wrote in June telling about the person behind this byline. My new role merits another swipe at relating a bit more about me and the new assignment I've taken writing about business.

For years, I'd worked in the CJ's Southern Indiana bureau, but late last summer, my editors — they're called "content coaches" now — offered me a chance to return to Louisville to take on a catch-all beat covering the local automotive industry, manufacturing, health-care business, entrepreneurship and start-ups.

Boiled down, that means Ford Motor Co.'s two plants, where more than 9,500 people work. There's General Electric's Appliance Park, Humana and a vibrant hub of hospital systems, including Kentucky One, Norton Healthcare and Baptist Health.

There's also a lot bubbling up from local entrepreneurs and the companies they're creating. On the first day I arrived back at Sixth and Broadway, the coaches descended while I stood unpacking boxes at my desk asking I hop on a front-page story abut Swedish appliance maker Electrolux's interest in buying General Electric's Appliance division.

That's big news in a community where thousands have worked at GE and 6,000 hourly and salaried employees still draw a paycheck. Three days after getting a private tour of the Appliance Park from ace GE spokeswoman Kim Freeman, the overseas news wires reported that Electrolux had struck a tentative $3.3 billion purchase deal.

Neither company is saying much about what's ahead at Appliance Park deal. But analysts have speculated that if the Swedes are serious about expanding their North America market, Appliance Park and its lines of dishwasher, refrigerators and hybrid hot water heaters should survive.

To say the least, I've got a ton to learn — about how a young entrepreneur fashions a business plan, about the Affordable Care Act, about labor unions that represent local workers, about the amazing evolution of American manufacturing.

GRACE'S WORK: Motorcycle safety effort launches in Highlands

AND: New technology might turn TV into shopping list

It's comforting to know that many publications designed to educate me about the stock market, finance, monetary policy and Lean manufacturing rely on lists to simplify things. Five ways to get your grown children off the household payroll. Eight must-have leadership skills. Ten things never to include in employee evaluations.

My takeaways? One of my favorites came years ago from Frank Bick, the late publisher and owner of the Suburban Newspapers in St. Louis where I landed my first journalist job. In negotiations, never give the first number, Bick told me. Never.

It's not as though I've negotiated big deals. But Frank's words have been useful when sale people ask: "How much were you thinking about spending?"

I realized a few weeks after the first On Assignment that I'd forgotten to mention that many readers mistook me for a far more influential Grace Schneider when I joined CJ in the 1980s. Grace taught school in the South End to hundreds of students, including U.S. Senator Mitch McConnell and Ken, a librarian and church organist whom I worked with for a time at the former Highland Branch library.

MORE: Health plans lead to more hospital pre-pays

She was a stellar teacher. And through the years, people called the office to catch up with their former teacher. One man described the sleek sports car she drove to work and the crush he'd had on her.

Then she called one day to say that old friends and former students were calling to ask about her new career. I told her I appreciated the great chat my cousin reported having with her when she found a number in the phone book and dial her during an airport layover.

She was sweet and gracious and I wished I'd gotten to know her better. "Keep up the good work," she told me. "You're making us both proud."

Reporter Grace Schneider can be reached at 502-582-4082. Follow her on Twitter @gesinfk.

Meet Grace Schneider

Born: St. Louis, Mo., one of nine children.

College years: University of Missouri-Columbia and its school of journalism

First jobs: Lifeguarding. First professional job followed a summer internship at the Suburban Newspapers of St. Louis, covering court-ordered desegregation in the St. Louis Public Schools.

At the C-J: Stints in Neighborhoods, editing and writing its now former sports section; the Metro Desk; plus special-projects team assignments on education inequities in Southern Indiana schools, problem gambling and illegal gambling.

Family: Husband is Bruce Allar. Two sons: Neal Alfred, married to his Amherst College sweetheart, Kimberly Partee; and Daniel Thor, named to honor his Scandinavian great-grandfather Thor Sorensen.

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1A3TisN