The Nuggets have come to agreement on a 4-year, $50 million contract extension with Kenneth Faried, according to a league source, that could grow to $52 million with incentives.

The sides had earlier agreed to a five-year, $60 million contract beyond this season but it did not comply with rules of the collective bargaining agreement (CBA). In order to do that, they had to make Faried a “designated player.” And according to the CBA, a designated player’s first-year salary is the maximum, which means Faried would have been paid a max contract under those rules.

This contract is an average of $12.5 million per season. The deal will likely be signed Wednesday.

Faried did not talk with reporters on Tuesday. The Nuggets arrived back in town at 2:30 a.m. after their first preseason game, against the Lakers on Monday night. The team watched film and shot free throws after going 29-of-44 in the 98-95 loss to the Lakers.

Faried wasn’t part of that problem, making six of his eight free-throw attempts. But the Manimal was bottled up everywhere else, going 0-for-4 from the field and finishing with one rebound.

“The ball didn’t come his way,” coach Brian Shaw said. “They were more prepared for him in terms of runouts and things of that nature.”

Teams are going to be paying acute attention to Faried, Shaw said. The fame he gained in the summer playing for Team USA — and his impending contract extension has placed him at or near the top of opponent scouting reports.

“When his contract and all that stuff is taken care of, and it’s done and all of the numbers come out, and all of the accolades that he got from this summer and how he ended up last season, he’s going to have to learn how to play a different way as well,” Shaw said. “Because he will be a point of emphasis for other teams to game plan against, whereas before maybe he wasn’t.”

Which, Shaw said, isn’t unlike others who have experienced a rise in star power.

“It’s what every player goes through that reaches that level,” Shaw said. “Star players, once they have an effective season, the next season team’s start … game-planning specifically for the strengths that you bring to the floor. He has to learn to negotiate through that and play around that.”

The Nuggets return to the court Wednesday at Pepsi Center against Oklahoma City for the Thunder’s preseason opener.

None of the Nuggets players coming off surgery — Nate Robinson, Danilo Gallinari, J.J. Hickson or JaVale McGee — will play against Oklahoma City, Shaw said.

Christopher Dempsey: cdempsey@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dempseypost