News 9 is learning more details about an attack on two women in The Village that left one of them dead.

Albert Ray Johnson Jr. is accused of rape, murder, kidnapping, and assault and battery. He is being held without bond in the Oklahoma County jail. Johnson admitted to detectives he did it.

6/17/2014 Related Story: Medical Examiner Releases Cause Of Death For The Village Murder Victim

A friend of the woman and child, who survived the attack tells News 9, she is doing whatever she can to help the mother and daughter.

"They are shook up a lot," she said. "They are trying to stay busy."

The friend, who didn't want to be identify on camera, said she met Johnson when he first started dating her friend.

"He came over and shook my hand," she said. "He cut my yard a couple of times."

She said she was always worried about Johnson and his criminal past. Apparently, her friend knew about Johnson's history.

6/15/2014 Related Story: Village Police Arrest Suspect Wanted For Murder, Rape



"But she said she forgave him," she said. "She don't look at people's pasts. When you have that good heart, you kind of forget about a person's past and give them a chance."

According to court documents released on Tuesday, Johnson, a convicted felon, had just been release from jail in October of last year. He was upset that his live-in girlfriend had not covered for him well enough, with his probation officer during a visit.

The documents goes on to state, Johnson ordered her to call two friends to come over, so he could have sex with one of them. He said if they didn't show up, he was going to kill her and her 8-year-old daughter. Johnson's girlfriend called Rachel Rogers, 24. She showed up to the home where Johnson forced her inside the house then raped her, beat her, and killed her.



6/13/2014 Related Story: One Woman Dead, Another Injured After Early Morning Attack In The Village



It also revealed Johnson used a trailer hitch, frying pan, dumb bells, and clothes iron to beat the women. Johnson then put his girlfriend in the closet after she told him that if he killed her, her daughter would not have anyone to care for her. The little girl was sleeping during this whole time.

"Some of the stuff she do not remember," she said. "Because she got hit in the head - and no telling what's she's going through in her mind. So I think she's trying to forget it - but it's kind of hard to forget."

This friend said both the girlfriend and her daughter are going through counseling to deal with the stress and trauma from the deadly attack. She said, her friend does plan to testify.

The District Attorney is trying to determine if there is enough evidence and grounds to seek the death penalty in this case.