Politicians often support legislation based on dubious information. In Florida, they are supporting legislation based on a lie.

The lie is that Planned Parenthood illegally profits from the sale of fetal tissue. Based on that lie, the Legislature wants to prohibit Medicaid insurers from contracting with any health clinic that provides elective abortions. Planned Parenthood clinics in Florida offer such abortions. Senate Bill 1722 and House Bill 1411 thus effectively would defund Planned Parenthood in Florida — based on a lie.

We know about the lie because Gov. Rick Scott last year ordered the Florida Agency for the Health Care Administration to investigate Planned Parenthood. Scott did so after an anti-abortion group released its doctored videos purporting to show a Planned Parenthood official attempting to sell fetal body parts. Tissue donors can receive compensation only for their costs.

The state's investigation found that no Planned Parenthood clinic had broken the law. Similar investigations by other states and Congress reached the same conclusion. As Politico reported, however, Scott's office rewrote AHCA press releases to leave out the findings that cleared Planned Parenthood on the fetal tissue charge and emphasize allegations that three clinics performed unauthorized, second-trimester abortions.

According to other reports, the governor's office rewrote a news release to say that Planned Parenthood "self-reported" these supposed violations. In fact, Planned Parenthood denies performing unauthorized abortions. The portion of SB 1722 that updates definitions of pregnancy trimesters supports Planned Parenthood's denials.

Further exposing the lie was a Texas grand jury's indictment last month of two people who work for the Center for Medical Progress, the group that secretly recorded and distributed the videos.

Yet at a subcommittee hearing this week, state Sen. Kelli Stargel, R-Lakeland, sponsor of SB 1722, said the Medicaid restriction is necessary, even though Scott's investigation found no criminal violations. The portion of the wide-ranging bill to restrict abortion states that no "public funds" should go to any organization that performs abortions in cases other than rape, incest or to save the mother's life. Florida uses "public funds" to reimburse Medicaid insurers and providers.

Sen. Joseph Abruzzo, D-Wellington, asked Stargel if SB 1722 would prevent a clinic from receiving money for HIV screening if it performed elective abortions. "That would be correct," Stargel replied. Then she added, "Or they could choose not to provide the abortions."

So the legislation is an attempt to force Planned Parenthood to stop providing non-elective abortions. To make that threat, SB 1722 and HB 1411 would cut access to women's health care services.

As Florida demonstrates, the right-wing campaign against Planned Parenthood continues regardless of facts. The videos that started the latest round of attacks have been discredited. The prosecutor leading the Houston grand jury is a pro-life Republican whom the lieutenant governor named to lead the investigation.

At this week's Senate hearing, however, an official of the Florida Family Policy Council spoke in favor of SB 1722. That group's president, John Stemberger, last fall called Planned Parenthood an organization "with a record of illegal activity and abuse, now found to also illegally sell baby parts." That statement is false.

After the videos came out, the GOP-led House wasted $300,000 on a committee to investigate Planned Parenthood. The Texas indictments did not deter fact-challenged Rep. Marsha Blackburn, R-Tenn., the committee's chairwoman. "We will continue to gather information and get the facts," Blackburn said, "about medical practices of abortion service providers and the business practices of the procurement organizations who sell baby body parts."

Last October, after release of the doctored videos, a poll by the Gallup Organizations found that nearly 60 percent of Americans still viewed Planned Parenthood favorably and opposed defunding it. That rating was about 40 points higher than Congress.

Republicans in Washington and Tallahassee pushing to defund Planned Parenthood have no plan to expand health care access — and not just for the poorer women who use Planned Parenthood. They would repeal the Affordable Care Act but offer no replacement. Behind the lie about Planned Parenthood is that fact.

Randy Schultz is the former editorial page editor of The Palm Beach Post. He also blogs for Boca Raton Magazine.