APSU Sports Information Office

Normal, IL – Illinois State remained undefeated as it defeated Austin Peay State University, 55-6, Saturday night at Hancock Stadium.

The victory pushed Illinois State to 3-0 on the season while the Govs remain winless at 0-4 and will return to Ohio Valley Conference play next week against Eastern Kentucky.

In the second half, quarterback Tre Roberson threw four third-quarter touchdown passes to show why the Redbirds are the No. 22-ranked Football Championship Subdivision team.

The Govs’ defense was the anchor in the early going, holding Illinois State to just six points early when poor field position left the defense in its own end most of the quarter.

But Marshaun Coprich finally provided Illinois State momentum when he broke free when it appeared the Redbird standout running back could be tackled behind the line of scrimmage. Once he cleared the corner he sped 69 yards for the TD. He added another TD run early in the second quarter on a seven-yard run.

APSU challenged late in the half, moving the ball down to the one-yard line after some impressive runs by both walk-on freshman running back Otis Gerron and freshman quarterback Darrien Boone. The combination of Boone and Gerron helped lead APSU to its only score, a one-yard plunge by Boone with 8:23 left in the third period.

Robertson, who completed two-of-three first-half passes for three yards in the first half, more than made up for it in the second half. He threw for 219 yards in the second half, completing 10-of-13 passes.

Austin Peay finished the game with 10 first down compared to 27 for the Redbirds. APSU allowed 496 yards total offense—256 on the ground and 240 via the air. Coprich ended with 156 yards rushing on 14 attempts.

APSU had 115 yard passing—89 from Mickey Macius (6 of 11) with Darrien Boone throwing for 26. Gerron led the Govs with 38 yards rushing while Boone had 25 and APSU’s only TD.

Defensively, Buddy Mitchell led the Govs’ effort with seven stops while defensive tackle Malcolm Goines had APSU’s only sack.

Video – Kirby Cannon

Sections

Topics