This week, world leaders including President Obama will convene in Paris to hammer out a global agreement on climate change. After two decades of climate negotiations and little progress, many view the Paris summit as our last chance to avert the most catastrophic impacts of global warming.

The talks will fall short of expectations.

In 2009, nations responsible for 87 percent of global carbon emissions signed the Copenhagen Accord, which identified a rise in earth’s temperature of two degrees Celsius as the upper limit for allowable global warming. But, scientists like James Hansen at Columbia University have identified one degree as the truly safe limit and warn that a two-degree trajectory could lead to repercussions including a rise in sea level of ten feet or more by mid-century. Blow past one degree, and all hell breaks loose.

ADVERTISEMENT

And yet the Paris agreement, if reached, would allow a three-degree temperature increase—catastrophically exceeding the negotiators’ self-imposed goal of two degrees. Republican candidates in the U.S. have vowed to dismantle any agreement reached in Paris, so we may in fact be headed for warming of four degrees or more.

Politicians have failed to stem the tide of global warming, so now our last hope lies with the courts. This August, in conjunction with an Oregon-based nonprofit called Our Children’s Trust, I and twenty other young people from across the nation filed suit against the federal government to demand robust national action on climate change. We are demanding that the federal government write and implement a national science-based plan to reduce carbon emissions.

Our argument is simple: By allowing a dangerous increase in our planet’s temperature, the government is violating the basic constitutional rights of young people to life, liberty, and property. In its most salient words, our federal complaint asserts that, “without a stable climate system, neither liberty nor justice exists.”

We also draw on the well-established principle that our government must protect natural resources that are needed for society to function. This concept, known as the Public Trust Doctrine, originated with Emperor Justinian in Rome. The Public Trust Doctrine is reflected in the Magna Carta and the writings of Thomas Jefferson, and it has been cited in U.S. court decisions since the 1800s.Teddy Roosevelt crystalized the idea when he stated, “the nation behaves well if it treats the natural resources as assets which it must turn over to the next generation increased and not impaired in value.”

The Public Trust Doctrine makes intuitive sense to me. My family lives on the farm in Oregon that my great-great-great-great-grandmother founded in 1868. The farm rests in the verdant countryside between the mountains and the sea. Each generation has preserved the farm for the next, just as our government must now preserve the planet’s climate system.

This legal argument is gaining traction. Earlier this month in Seattle, after hearing arguments in a lawsuit brought by youth activists against the state of Washington, Judge Hollis Hill ruled that the Public Trust Doctrine and the Washington State Constitution require the state to slash carbon emissions. The decision in Seattle follows similar rulings in Pakistan and The Netherlands, where courts have ordered governments to cut carbon in order to protect basic human rights.

Big Oil knows which way the wind is blowing, and trade groups representing every major oil company on earth—including BP, ExxonMobil, and Koch Industries—recently filed a request to “intervene” in our case against the Federal Government. Sidley Austin, the best-rated law firm on K Street, is representing the deep-pocketed industry.

So far, President Obama is siding with the Kochs and their ilk. Unless the president changes course, lawyers from the Justice Department will stand shoulder-to-shoulder with lawyers from Sidley and argue that young people like me have no right to a stable climate. They will be strange bedfellows, given that Big Oil lobbied for the Keystone Pipeline and is currently backing a coalition of states that are suing the EPA to undo Obama’s own meager climate regulations.

But regardless of whose side the president is on, the judges who hear Our Children’s Trust’s case will ultimately determine the fate of our climate. As negotiators in Paris begin their unavailing talks, let us hope that courts stand on the right side of history.

Loznak is one of the youth plaintiffs involved in a federal case against the government and big oil companies to protect the environment for future generations. He is now an 18-year old freshman at Columbia University.