A day after the 2008 election, when Americans voted to put the first African-American in the White House, Jamar Holmes and his mother were having a discussion about that very topic while on a visit to the neighborhood 7-Eleven. As a young kid, Jamar wasn’t sure yet just how much it meant for him. But speaking about it now, the 15-year-old is overwhelmed with joy at the idea of how much having a black president inspired him — and will continue to — even as President Barack Obama’s presidency comes to a close in the next year.

“It was just the beginning,” Jamar said. “It gave me more of a sense of hope and self-confidence. People forget how even small ripples can change how a wave can move.”

Reflecting on Obama’s time in office during this Black History Month, young people say they are generally more hopeful and positive about Obama’s presidency. Adults are hopeful as well but caution that there is so much work to be done.

Are the lives of African-Americans better now than before the president took office in 2009?

More blacks have access to health care because of Obama’s Affordable Care Act. More black adults are working as well. According to the U.S. Department of Labor, the black community saw an 8.3 percent unemployment rate at the end of last year, compared with 16.1 percent in December 2009. And school dropout rates for blacks also have gone down.

Yet a Pew Research Center poll in August 2013 found that only about one in four blacks said their situation in this country was better than it was in 2009, when 39 percent held that belief.

Racial tension

Another Pew poll found that 70 percent of blacks believe they are treated less fairly by police, compared with 37 percent of whites who hold that view. And the child poverty rate has held steady over the years for blacks but has declined for other races.

“The African-American community was expecting him to be the Messiah, and he’s not the Messiah,” said the Rev. Al Combs of Christ’s Church Apostolic, a small church off East Colfax Avenue in Aurora. “He’s just a man.”

Racial tension is another concern. By reaching the highest level in the United States, Obama has brought the spotlight on the racial divide in this country, which some believe has gotten wider.

High-profile fatal police shootings of black men, including in Ferguson, Mo., have caused civil unrest and suggest there is still much work to do in the fight against racism.

The Rev. Timothy Tyler of Shorter Community AME Church in northeast Denver said it is a misnomer to believe that having the country’s first black president would be like “closing the book” on all the problems African-Americans have endured over the years.

“That was not the case,” he said. “President Obama’s election did not make life better for black people, and in some instances it made it worse because of the reaction to it.”

Jordan Grant, 18, a senior at Martin Luther King Jr. Early College, says oppressed communities found a voice through efforts such as Black Lives Matter.

“People are afraid of change,” Grant said. “But Obama kind of instilled the mind-set around us that we’ve seen progress and we can see more and the idea that we want to push forward to keep it going.”

For Grant, the tensions also boil down to a lack of understanding for people who are different.

“I pray that, as time goes on, we continue to develop and that we continue to grow to be more understanding and more respectful of each other,” Grant said. “That way we won’t be so quick to judge.”

According to the U.S. Census Bureau, Colorado’s population of 5.4 million people in 2014 was nearly 88 percent white and 4.5 percent black, compared with 13 percent who are black nationwide. Aurora has the highest number of blacks in the state, 15.7 percent of its nearly 350,000 residents. The city saw an increase of almost 9 percent from 2010 to 2014.

Denver Mayor Michael Hancock, who is black, points to numbers that show more people of color are enrolling in college. Obama’s turnaround of the economy cannot go without praise, either, he said.

“He pulled the nation back from the brink of economic depression,” Hancock said. “Generally, you can say life in America has become much better since President Obama took office.”

Education has been one area in which Obama has inspired younger black Americans.

At the Hill Campus of Arts & Sciences middle school in Denver, students are learning about African-American history and what it means for them.

This year, teacher Monique Roberts started a club — Black Power! — in which students are encouraged to learn about their history and feel comfortable exploring their identities. Roberts also started a group for Latinos.

“I wanted to make sure my students had a group where they could go where they could be undeniably themselves,” Roberts said. “We work toward self-esteem building and talk about how do we combat racism in our schools.”

For Roberts, her own experiences and her research about racism help shape her work with her students.

“When you’re frequently one of the only black kids in a room, you tend to take on that burden of representing a group or wanting to make sure you don’t let someone down, and in that you lose an authentic sense of self,” Roberts said.

But having a person of color in the White House relieved her of that burden and may have for others as well, she said.

“It was as if I didn’t have to fight that battle on my own,” Roberts said. “My students, they’ve grown up in an era where they’ve seen they can reach the highest levels. It’s been an awesome eight years, but it’s up to us as a whole community to maintain that appreciation of diversity and empowering our students.”

Obama: Many things to many

Jarmell Johnson, 13, a seventh-grader in Roberts’ Black Power! group, said seeing President Obama gives him hope, too.

“I would say don’t be afraid to express yourself and just be positive about things you see,” Jarmell said. “Don’t give up just because you don’t think you have the power to do something.”

Former Denver Mayor Wellington Webb said Obama’s impact on the African-American community cannot be measured just by numbers. Webb, the first black mayor in Denver’s history, said the president has had a positive effect on the “national psyche.”

He points to the importance of black activists who worked for decades for racial equality being able to finally see an African-American as president and for the nation as a whole witnessing the Obamas in the White House.

“What a sight seeing his two girls growing up in front of your eyes playing on the south lawn — little girls to being teenagers,” Webb said. “It sends a different signal to the world that you don’t have to be white to be president in America.”

Denver school board member Allegra “Happy” Haynes, who is also Denver’s executive director of parks and recreation, said Obama has meant many things to many people.

However, just having a black president isn’t enough to effect change. The country’s youths must take the baton and continue to work hard to overturn racial inequities and disparities, she said.

“What it didn’t do was say that we’ve arrived, that now we’re in a post-racial society, where race doesn’t matter anymore,” Haynes said. “I think it’s exactly the opposite. We found out it matters as much today as it did 50 years ago.”

Landri Taylor, a former board member for Denver Public Schools, said Obama’s presidency has been monumental also for the things he has accomplished for minority communities.

“Particularly for communities of color, it refocused our whole mind-set about how important education is,” Taylor said.

Among Obama’s education initiatives is “My Brother’s Keeper,” aimed at local communities to create more opportunities for young men of color.

“Kids that didn’t think about being a president or U.S. senator or even a mayor now know that it’s within their sight to achieve that,” Taylor said. “That has been just one of the greatest things that I see when I talk to young kids of color. We think that kids are blind to what’s going on around them, but they are all very, very aware.”

Carlos Illescas: 303-954-1175, cillescas@denverpost.com or @cillescasdp

Unemployment rate for blacks

December 2009: 16.1 percent

December 2010: 15.5 percent

December 2011: 15.4 percent

December 2012: 13.9 percent

December 2013: 11.8 percent

December 2014: 10.4 percent

December 2015: 8.3 percent

Source: U.S Department of Labor

Percentage of those who feel they are treated less fairly by police

Blacks: 70 percent

Whites: 37 percent

Source: 2013 Pew Research Center poll