Many barriers exist to implementing approaches to medical liability that could serve as alternatives to federal tort reform, a series of studies funded by the Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality (AHRQ) found.

Physicians can be hesitant to admit medical errors and misdiagnosis; insurers are leery of supporting early notification of errors; and barriers are created by existing state malpractice laws, according to research published as a series in Monday's Health Affairs.

In 2010, the AHRQ provided $23.2 million in projects that support the development of evidence-based patient safety and medical liability demonstration projects. The money came following passage of the Affordable Care Act -- a law that noticeably omitted any tort reform.

Communication-and-resolution programs (CRPs) -- one such project studied -- encourage the disclosure of unanticipated outcomes and proactively seek resolutions, including apologies and reimbursements to patients, before expensive lawsuits are filed.

Although such projects don't require changing existing laws, federal and state policymakers could help facilitate their use by encouraging patient participation and easing provider fears, William Sage, MD, JD, law professor at the University of Texas at Austin, and colleagues said.

For example, practitioners are concerned that admissions they make about errors could end up in the National Practitioner Data Bank, since federal law requires liability insurers to report malpractice payments to the data bank.

"Some commentators have suggested creating a protected domain for CRP payments in which reports cannot be accessed unless a practitioner accrues multiple reportable incidents," Sage and co-authors wrote. "This approach is consistent with current credentialing and disciplinary practice, which tends toward forbearance unless negligence is gross or likely to be repeated."

Michelle Mello, JD, PhD, law and public health professor at the Harvard School of Public Health, and colleagues found challenges in educating physicians about CRPs -- particularly in sites spread across practices, states, and insurance agents -- after studying six early adopters.

"Program founders initially struggled to overcome physicians' skepticism," the authors wrote. "Many physicians were uncomfortable with making disclosures to patients, probably because of a lack of training in disclosing errors and a cultural disinclination to admit error."

Their work was also published in Monday's Health Affairs, but wasn't funded by AHRQ.

In order to be successful in facilitating CRPs, Mello and colleagues suggested:

Extensive outreach to clinical staff

Creating a culture of transparency

Ensuring timely incident reporting

Conducting rapid and thorough investigations

Ann Hendrich, PhD, senior vice president of clinical excellence at Ascension Health in St. Louis, appointed a local "champion" obstetrician to provide leadership, support, and encouragement in a project to implant a full-disclosure protocol at five labor-and-delivery sites within Ascension's health system. Ascension is the largest Catholic and nonprofit health system in the U.S.

"This person could increase the motivation among other physicians to use the protocol and gently erode practitioners' resistance and fear," Hendrich and colleagues wrote.

As a result of Ascension's taking such a step, support of the protocol increased from 24% at 3 months after implementation to 77% after 27 months, the authors found. The rate of documented disclosure increased by an average of 221% across the demonstration sites.

"Practitioners viewed consistent communication from leaders as necessary for decreasing and eventually eliminating the practice of not communicating fully and honestly with patients and families," Hendrich and colleagues wrote.

In other AHRQ-funded work published Monday, Jason Etchegaray, PhD, an assistant professor at the University of Texas Medical School at Houston, and colleagues presented findings on when and how best to incorporate information from patients during the medical error disclosure process -- another key hurdle.

CORRECTION: This article, which was originally published Jan. 6, 2014, at 6:52 p.m., has been corrected (Jan. 16, 2014, at 11:40 a.m.) Dr. Etchegaray is an assistant professor at the University of Texas Medical School.