Topics: aol_on, Beth Stelling, bill cosby, Domestic abuse, Instagram, james deen, Sexual abuse, Life News, Entertainment News

When someone has the courage to come forward with a story of physical or sexual abuse — or both — it’s not always easy to know how to respond in the most supportive and respectful way possible. It requires sensitivity to what that person wants to come from the disclosure. But here’s a good first step: Don’t make it about you and what you need.

On Monday, Beth Stelling, who has had a banner career year and who Vulture recently dubbed “a young comedian to watch,” posted a shocking image on Instagram. It was a quartet of photos: one of her smiling and holding a microphone, and three of her limbs, covered in bruises. “Same girl in all of these photos (me),” she wrote. “I’ve had an amazing year and you’ve seen the highlights here, so these photos are an uncommon thing to share but not an uncommon issue…. When I broke up with my ex this summer, it wasn’t because I didn’t love him, it was because of this. And I absolutely relapsed and contacted him with things I shouldn’t have, but there are no ‘best practices’ with this. When friends or comics ask why we broke up it’s not easy or comfortable to reply; it doesn’t seem like the appropriate thing to say at a stand-up show, a party or a wedding. It’s embarrassing. I feel stupid. After being verbally, physically abused and raped, I dated him for two more months. It’s not simple.” Stelling went on to state, “After I broke up with him he said, ‘You’re very open and honest in your stand-up, and I just ask that you consider me when you talk about your ex because everyone knows who you’re talking about.’ And I abided. I wrote vague jokes because we both live in L.A. and I didn’t want to hurt him, start a war, press charges, be interrogated or harassed by him or his friends and family. I wanted to move on and forget because I didn’t understand.” It seemed a continuation of a message she’d hinted at back in October, when she tweeted, “I was my ex-boyfriend’s best quality. Pls RT.”

The response has been immediate and deeply supportive. John Hodgman praised her “profound courage” Rachel Bloom said, “I am in awe of @BethStelling,” and Kumail Nanjiani said, “This makes me feel many things but chief among them is that @BethStelling is awesome & I’m happy we are friends.” Megan Amram added, 8220;@BethStelling is my hero.” But though Stelling has made it clear many people in and out of the industry know who he is, she did not name her ex. And this has proven very frustrating for some.