Insurance Commissioner Jim Donelon weighed in on Louisiana's comparatively high auto insurance rates on Monday (Feb. 17), noting a recent landmark suit filed by the East Bank levee board against oil and gas companies will help further a wider push to revisit tort reform during this year's legislative session.

Numerous rankings have shown drivers in Louisiana, especially New Orleans and Baton Rouge, pay some of the highest auto insurance rates in the country. Speaking at the Press Club of Baton Rouge, Donelon echoed the findings of recent reports that showed this is due in large part to a higher likelihood for Louisiana drivers to sue following an accident, a trend the commissioner tied to the actions of poorer populations in the state's two largest cities.

"It's claims to litigation. And it's a poorer population. And those folks are easily motivated when approached by a tow truck driver or a lawyer or a physical therapist or a chiropractor to take full advantage of the opportunity of minor collision" claims, said Donelon.

Donelon called those who target poorer populations to encourage claims filing "ambulance chasers" and a "soft tissue industry...who are chasing minor accidents and converting them into $15,000 windfalls." He placed the epicenter of this industry in New Orleans.

To slow down this trend, Donelon echoed recent recommendations made by the Louisiana Property and Casualty Insurance Commission to lower the state's jury trial threshold and bar "pain and suffering" for uninsured drivers.

While Donelon said he didn't have any hard evidence lowering the threshold would help lower insurance rates, he was confident in the "anecdotal analysis and link" between the two and said simply taking a look at the threshold in peer states would show Louisiana is "out of whack."

Louisiana's jury trial threshold, currently at $50,000, is the highest in the nation. This means only plaintiffs with civil claims of at least $50,000 can request their case be heard by a jury.



Donelon acknowledged some sort of tort reform legislation -- including lowering the jury threshold -- has been introduced in the state Legislature nearly every year without success. But he thinks two factors will place a higher emphasis on the issue this year, and will ensure significant movement on tort reform bills for the first time since he was in the Legislature in the late 1990s.

One factor is a greater awareness, and refusal to accept, high auto insurance rates among angry constituents. The second is a greater focus on tort reform in the wake of the massive lawsuit filed by the South Louisiana Flood Protection Authority-East's lawsuit against 97 oil, gas and pipeline companies.

Donelon said lawmakers aren't the only parties focusing on tort reform. He's met with representatives from powerful lobbying groups like the the Louisiana Association of Business and Industry as well as representatives from the office of Gov. Bobby Jindal.

On Monday, Donelon also recapped recent Congressional action on the federal flood insurance program and the Obama administration's decisions to delay some of the provisions of the Affordable Care Act.