A Summerville man was sentenced Friday to life in prison after a jury found him guilty of murder in connection with the 2012 shooting death of a North Charleston man during a drug deal robbery.

The jury deliberated most of Friday before finding Kadrin R. Singleton, 24, of Lebsl Court, guilty of killing Sharrell Williams, 30, of North Charleston, according to Ninth Judicial Circuit Solicitor Scarlett Wilson. He also pleaded guilty before the trial to charges of trafficking cocaine, failure to stop for blue lights and possession of a stolen motor vehicle, which all stem from his November 25, 2012, arrest.

Judge Kristi Harrington sentenced Singleton to life in prison based on the facts of the case and the Singleton's 2008 convictions for burglary in the third degree and strong arm robbery.

According to Assistant Solicitors Culver Kidd and Chris Lietzow, who prosecuted the case, on November 20, 2012, Singleton arranged a drug transaction with Williams in which he was supposed to buy a quarter pound of marijuana for $1,500.

Singleton's "true intent" was to rob Williams at gun point, according to a media release from Wilson's office, and it quickly became a murder "when the victim did not take the defendant's threats seriously as he produced his pistol."

Singleton shot Williams four times at a home on Cambridge Street in North Charleston, killing him immediately, the release states.

"When initially interviewed by NCPD, Singleton claimed he wasn't even at the scene of the shooting," Kidd said in the release. "At trial, however, he admitted to the shooting but claimed self-defense. Our verdict showed the jury caught on to the defendant's lies and reinforces our contention that simply calling a killing a "drug deal gone bad" is not enough to excuse murder."

In addition to the life sentence, Judge Harrington sentenced Singleton to maximum sentences on the charges stemming from his arrest, to run concurrently.

"We are grateful that Judge Harrington gave the max for a violent drug dealer who boasted of being a gang member and who refused to accept responsibility for what he did," Wilson said of the sentence.

Reach Melissa Boughton at 937-5594 or at Twitter.com/mboughtonPC.