Amidst a sold out crowd at the Onondaga War Memorial Auditorium on Friday, the Iroquois Nationals bested Team USA having never lost the lead with a final score of 13-9. Before the game, attendees from all over the world also enjoyed a beautiful opening ceremony that included a massive 4 way projection screen that told the origin of lacrosse, the Iroquois creation story and more.

Haudenosuanee dancers from all Iroquoian nations then performed traditional dances as the International teams were introduced to the crowd.

Nedra Darling from the Daprtment of the Interior was in attendance on Friday. "This is just an incredible event and the energy is fantastic. To think these young lacrosse players have played on the White House lawn to demonstrate the origin of the creator's game and now they are playing for the entire world."

Chief and Faithkeeper Oren Lyons also wlecomed the crowd and Tracy Shenandoah gave a welcoming blessing before the Iroquois Nationals and Team USA hit the field.

The Iroquois Nationals vs. Team USA

After an impressive opening ceremony, the Iroquois Nationals took to the arena against Team USA. Eight minutes into the first quarter, the Iroquois Nationals put two points onto the scoreboard via #93 Johnny Powless and #2 Miles Thompson, creating a lead that never would be lost for the rest of the game. The closest Team USA would come would be a 1 point trail at the thrid quarter with a score of 8-7.

The game was a highly energetic event with a series of hat tricks, well orchestrated assists and goals by #77 Jeff Shattler, #2 Miles Thompson, #10 Adam Bomberry, #4 Lyle Thompson, #83 Randy Staats and #93 Johnny Powless. Team USA played an admiral game and managed to make a several goal comeback in the third quarter, but the Iroquois Nationals dominated the remainder of the game with 5 additional goals. Iroquois Nationals goalie #55 Angus Goodleaf gave his teammates and added boost of confidence with expert goal tending for the third and fourth quarters.

Father and mother of the four Thompson brothers, Jerome and Deloris Thompson expressed how excited they were to see their sons reach such a level of regard in the world of Lacrosse. "The energy is just electric and I can feel it comingoff of everyone," said Jerome Thompson. "I am so proud of my sons, to think they have made such an impression on the world, when I say this, I feel chills all over my skin. We are just so so proud."

After the Iroquois Nationals win against Team USA with a final score of 13-9, Nedra Darling says she had one more mission to tackle before the Iroquois Nationals faced number 1 ranked Team Canada this Sunday at 5:00 pm. "I have to find my son some Iroquois Nationals t-shirts, I was going to get some at the game, but it was a complete madhouse."

Continue to follow ICTMN's coverage of the WILC 2015. for a complete list of teams, events and game times, visit www.WILC2015.com

You can also share your pictures on social media using the hastags #WILC2015 and #HeyICTMN and we will post your pics and share them on social media.