FAITH FOR GOOD OR EVIL



By Ron Edwards

May 20, 2016

NewsWithViews.com

For decades, the Little Sisters Of The Poor have been doing the honorable work of taking care of the elderly poor in America. Recently the Obama administration once again exhibited the willingness to persecute groups in the name of contraceptives. This time it was the Little Sisters of the Poor in the bigoted crosshairs of the Obama regime that tried to force them to violate their Catholic faith. Not once, but twice did Obama and company go after the helpful Catholic organization to try and force them to provide contraceptives for their employees.

The Little Sisters of the Poor have been petitioning the republic’s highest court to ensure they do not have to comply with Obamacare draconian abortion mandate. The unconstitutional mandate compels religious groups to pay for the birth control and drugs that may cause the killing of unborn babies. Without relief from such madness, the Little Sisters of the Poor and other worthy groups that hope to overcome such brutal government edicts would face massive fines.

The Little Sisters of the Poor can breathe a sigh of relief, now that the Supreme Court issued a unanimous ruling, by essentially telling the lower courts to find a way to accommodate the Little Sisters so that their conscience rights will not be violated. The Supreme Court sent the case back to the lower courts to examine an alternative accommodation to the Obama mandate.

The justices instructed the lower court to find tweeks in the HHS mandate to eliminate any faith-based concerns “while still ensuring that the affected women receive contraceptive coverage seamlessly.” Personally, I have faith that the courts at all levels will come to a logical conclusion of allowing women the right to freely purchase their own contraceptives as they need them.

Neither Christians, Catholics, or any religious practitioners should be forced to pay for personal items related directly or indirectly to the sexual activities of their employees. But the positive side to the reality of this case is how through faith, the Little Sisters stood their ground. They secured a favorable ruling that will force a common sense and just mandate to eventually be brought forth.

Hopefully the Little Sisters of the Poor will not be put in the poor house via $70 million dollars in big government fines for refusing to abandon and violate their faith. I also solute the Little Sisters of the Poor, who exhibited and continue to set an example of maintaining their faith in the midst of anti- Catholic progressive Obama led bigotry.

When it comes to faith and the results of utilizing it there are few examples more apparent than what you will encounter in the Middle East. Throughout that part of the world and wherever Muslims are populated, children are taught from birth to hate Jews. Before school age, Muslim children are well versed in how to hate Christians and black people as well. Muslim children are taught to have faith in a God they believe tells them it is ok to kill Jews, beat their wives and enslave black people, Today. Their great faith in Allah is exhibited all the time via ISIS, hatred of America, etc.

A much more pleasant example of faith is on full display in the dynamic little nation that can, Israel. Where through faith in God and in the ability to accomplish good for mankind, here are new breakthroughs in both science and math.

For example, 13 year old Roni Oron who hails from Ramat Hasharon, Israel. She is the latest winner of the Israel Space agency’s “Satellite is Born” award. The young lady won the award for developing for developing something she calls BioSat. She designed BioSat “to solve a problem for astronauts trying to prove that life on Mars is possible. According to Ma’ariv L’Noar, a Hebrew youth paper. Miss Oron developed the system to produce oxygen in outer space. That is a monumental achievement at any age. But for a 13 year old, it is simply out of this world.

A bigger point is that hardly anyone, no matter their age would have the faith or mental fortitude to embark upon such a worthy mission if they had the misfortune of being born in a Muslim nation or giant Muslim enclave like Dearbornistan, MI. In fact, they would not have the time inclination or desire to develop new inventions for the enhancement of science, math or simply the quality of life for all mankind.

13 year old Roni Oron is blessed with parents, both of whom encouraged her not to sit idly by and let life pass her by. But rather seek to achieve and be the best she can be. All without forcing or pushing her in a negative way to succeed. She described her oxygen producing satellite as being like a large bubble on one side of which there is a mirror and the other side is transparent, enabling the penetration of sunlight. Inside there will be water and algae. Also there is an outer ring of carbon dioxide.

Through the process of photosynthesis, the satellite will produce oxygen. Inside there are more mirrors that will enabe sunlight to reach the capsule, but not by direct radiation, which would harm the algae. I for one want to congratulation Miss Oron and her parents for raising her to use her faith in the greater possibilities. In addition, one cannot overlook Israel that is a nation where intelligence and positive faith are both exhibited and encouraged.

Don’t miss a page from The Edwards Notebook commentary overnights on the Captain’s America-Third Watch, simply the best Live overnight radio show broadcasting across the United States from flagship radio station AM 860 The Answer. Also via the internet on Conservative radio, iHeart, Freedom in America Radio, Net Talk World and more.

© 2016 Ron Edwards - All Rights Reserved

Ron Edwards, producer and host of The Edwards Notebook, a syndicated radio commentary, is a talented and gifted commentator with over two decades of experience. Ron Edwards is a well versed journalist with a fiery delivery of information, thought provoking conversation, and humor. The Edwards Notebook delivers a wealth of knowledge in an entertaining and educational format. Ron Edwards brings to the airwaves unapologetic truth sure to keep his listening audience tuned in every time. He is respected by friends and foe alike for is consistency of conviction and originality in commentary.

Ron Edwards has served for over 25 years as a news anchor in several Midwest markets including Cleveland and Detroit. He has been a guest of television, radio, and has had numerous articles written about him throughout the United States including, The Detroit News, Headway Magazine, Houston and The Call and Post, Cleveland. Ron Edwards broadcasting history includes news anchor in major markets, such as WJMO, WCPN, and WGAR, Cleveland and WWJ, WJR and WDTK, Metro Detroit.

The Edwards Notebook can be heard on many radio stations throughout the U.S., daily on Constitutional Patriot Radio and coming in October, Ron Edwards will host his own show with Constitutional Patriot Radio. The Edwards Notebook airs on WDTK FM 92.7 and AM 1400 on Fridays at 7:30 AM EST, Saturdays at 9:30 AM EST, WWII 720 AM, Harrisburg, PA, The Rick Swier Show on WWPR AM 1490, Talk Sun Coast Radio in Florida. Ron Edwards also guest hosts "The Freedom's Journal" every Wednesday 11:00 AM on Urban Family Talk and the American Family Radio Network. He is also a weekly contributor with Fairfax Free Citizen, an online newspaper, www.fairfaxfreecitizen.com Ron Edwards is also a highly sought after reoccurring guest on the top rated talk show "Let It Rip" on Fox2 TV, Detroit.

Ron Edwards is a recurring guest host for the syndicated "Bob Dutko Show" which airs on the Crawford Broadcasting Network. Ron Edwards tours the United States to address this republic on where we are as a nation and to illuminate the path on where we go from here.

Visit at: twitter@theronedwards, Facebook Ron at Friends of The Edwards Notebook.

Website: www.theronedwards.com



E-Mail: ronedwards@edwardsnotebook.com