Print Email Font Resize Font Resize NE Colorado Pharmacies to Sell " Travis and I can sleep at night knowing our decision will ensure that viable community minded pharmacies will remain in place in Julesburg and Holyoke" - Melissa Bumgardner

Anticipating final negotiations, licensing, and the Colorado Board of Pharmacy approval, the sale of Abts Pharmacy of Julesburg and Abts Express Pharmacy of Holyoke is expected to close by month's end. Melissa and Travis Bumgardner purchased the Julesburg location 5 years ago from Murl and Judy Abts. In the fall of 2012 they opened a 500 sq ft pharmacy within the Haxtun Hospital. In February of 2013 they opened Abts Express Pharmacy in Holyoke. The Haxtun operation was closed in November 2013 and the Holyoke location continues to serve the Haxtun and Fleming communities today. Since the purchase of the Julesburg pharmacy, the landscape of the health care industry has dramatically changed with the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), commonly known as the Affordable Care Act or Obama-care. Cuts in Medicare and Medicaid have hard hit health care providers across the board, including clinics, hospitals and pharmacies. At the end of the day, the implementation of the PPACA has resulted in the need for the Bumgardners to sell their local pharmacies."We haven't made this decision in haste nor done so lightly," said Melissa. "We feel our decision is in the best interest for both the Sedgwick and Phillips Counties' communities at large." Finding a buyer for two pharmacies has not been easy; however, the Bumgardners were able to negotiate with Mike Bemis, owner of Bemis Drug of Kimball, Nebraska."We have met many amazing people while here in Julesburg. They have became our friends," said Travis. Advertisement



Anticipating final negotiations, licensing, and the Colorado Board of Pharmacy approval, the sale of Abts Pharmacy of Julesburg and Abts Express Pharmacy of Holyoke is expected to close by month's end. Melissa and Travis Bumgardner purchased the Julesburg location 5 years ago from Murl and Judy Abts. In the fall of 2012 they opened a 500 sq ft pharmacy within the Haxtun Hospital. In February of 2013 they opened Abts Express Pharmacy in Holyoke. The Haxtun operation was closed in November 2013 and the Holyoke location continues to serve the Haxtun and Fleming communities today. Since the purchase of the Julesburg pharmacy, the landscape of the health care industry has dramatically changed with the implementation of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA), commonly known as the Affordable Care Act or Obama-care. Cuts in Medicare and Medicaid have hard hit health care providers across the board, including clinics, hospitals and pharmacies. At the end of the day, the implementation of the PPACA has resulted in the need for the Bumgardners to sell their local pharmacies."We haven't made this decision in haste nor done so lightly," said Melissa. "We feel our decision is in the best interest for both the Sedgwick and Phillips Counties' communities at large." Finding a buyer for two pharmacies has not been easy; however, the Bumgardners were able to negotiate with Mike Bemis, owner of Bemis Drug of Kimball, Nebraska."We have met many amazing people while here in Julesburg. They have became our friends," said Travis."It hurt us to think that there might not be a local independent pharmacy here. It was important for us to find a way to keep the drug store open and our employees employed." Mike Bemis, RPh, is a native of Kimball, NE. He attended the University of Wyoming, receiving a B.S. in Pharmacy. After graduation he remained in Wyoming for 12 years, working 5 years for K-Mart before he went to an independent pharmacy. "That was the best thing I ever did," said Bemis. "I instantly fell in love with independent pharmacy, and the relationships that I developed." Bemis returned to his roots in 2003 to help care for his parents, and took advantage of an opportunity to purchase two pharmacies and incorporate them into one, Bemis Drug. He also owns and operates a home oxygen and durable medical equipment business. Bemis currently serves on the Kimball Chamber of Commerce board, and has been involved with economic development. He also served as the president of the Co-op Food Store board. He is married and a father of 3. Bemis plans to keep the current staff of the two Abts Pharmacies, and not to make any changes in services at this time. "I want to take some time to get to know the community and figure out how I can best serve it," said Bemis. "I believe in supporting the community that supports me and I am all about giving back one way or another. Pharmacy is a very important part of our small rural communities and I will do the best I can to make sure the pharmacies are around for many years to come." Dr. Jessica Hanna will assume the position of Pharmacy Manager at Abts Pharmacy in Julesburg. A part-time pharmacist has been hired to work in Julesburg to allow Hanna to focus on Long Term Care services. Abts Express Pharmacy in Holyoke will be fully staffed as well. The Bumgardner family will remain in Sedgwick County during the transition process, but will be leaving the area with the goal of relocating to another small community, preferably closer to Travis' extended family along the Front Range. "At this time there are no foreseeable changes to day-to-day operations," said Melissa. "We anticipate a smooth transition with little disruption to the medical staff in our communities and most importantly to our patients." Leaving will be hard for the Bumgardner family, however, "Travis and I can sleep at night knowing our decision will ensure that viable, full-service, community-minded pharmacies will remain in place in Julesburg and Holyoke to serve our patients that we have come to embrace as friends; and continued employment for our employees we consider family," said Melissa.