Q: What tax forms do I need to submit because of Obamacare?

A: Whether you get health insurance through your employer or on your own, the health care law requires you to take some extra steps when you file your taxes for 2014:

1. If you had employer coverage. You just need to check a box on line 61 of Form 1040 indicating that you had health insurance for the year. Your employer may have sent you Form 1095-C reporting information about your health coverage. But don't worry if you didn't receive the form -- employers are not required to send it this year.

2. If you bought your health coverage on a state exchange. Check the box on line 61 of Form 1040 indicating that you had health insurance for the year. You should also have received Form 1095-A, "Health Insurance Marketplace Statement," which includes key information about your coverage, including the amount of any subsidy you received (also called the "advance premium tax credit").

You'll need this information to complete Form 8962, "Premium Tax Credit." This is where you calculate whether you qualify for an additional subsidy (if your income ended up being lower than you expected when you bought the coverage) or if you need to pay back some of the subsidy you received (if your income was higher than you expected). These calculations are complicated, especially if your coverage or family size changed during the year.

Most of the state marketplaces have resources and call-center specialists to help answer questions (you can find links to your state's marketplace at http://www.healthcare.gov). You can also find personal help in your area at https://localhelp.healthcare.gov/.

3. If you bought your own health coverage off of the exchange. Off-exchange policies are not eligible for the premium tax credits, so you won't need to fill out those forms. But you will need to check the box on line 61 of Form 1040 indicating that you had health insurance for the year. You may have received Form 1095-B from your insurance company indicating this, but most insurers are not sending these forms for 2014.

4. If you didn't have health insurance. If you didn't have health insurance for 2014, you may be subject to a penalty. You'll need to file Form 8965, "Health Coverage Exemptions," to claim an exemption from the penalty. For more information, see the Instructions for Form 8965 at http://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/i8962.pdf. If you don't qualify for an exemption, you'll fill out the worksheet here to calculate the penalty, which you'll report on line 61 of your Form 1040.

(Kimberly Lankford is a contributing editor to Kiplinger's Personal Finance magazine. Send your questions and comments to moneypower@kiplinger.com. And for more on this and similar money topics, visit Kiplinger.com.)

(c) 2015 Kiplinger's Personal Finance; Distributed by Tribune Content Agency, LLC.