A A

With Republicans controlling both chambers, U.S. Rep. Jaime Herrera Beutler, R-Camas, said on Tuesday it’s time for her party to demonstrate Congress is capable of doing something.

The 113th Congress established a reputation as the “do-nothing Congress.” On Tuesday, the 114th Congress was sworn in.

Republicans have majorities in both chambers for the first time in eight years.

“More than ever, we need to prove the ideas and principles we stand for are going to work,” Herrera Beutler said in an interview from Washington. “We shouldn’t let egos, attitudes and personalities get in the way. And it’s funny, I feel like everybody was happy and cheerful but I feel my perspective is a little bit more no-nonsense.”

Herrera Beutler joined the majority of her colleagues in the House and voted in favor of re-electing Rep. John Boehner, R-Ohio, to his post as speaker. About two dozen more conservative Republicans voted against the incumbent.

Republicans are expected to go after some big-ticket items as soon as later this week; approval of the controversial Keystone XL Pipeline is expected to be the first big move.

If the measure reaches President Barack Obama’s desk, he will veto it, according to his spokesman, who spoke to national publications.

Herrera Beutler believes the pipeline would bring tremendous benefits and economic opportunities.

Republicans in Congress have also said they will move swiftly to repeal the Affordable Care Act.

“I still think this doesn’t do what it needed to do, which is give people access to quality, affordable health care, and we can do better,” Herrera Beutler said.

On local issues, Herrera Beutler said she will soon be outlining her top priorities for each county she represents. Overall, she’ll focus on job creation and improving infrastructure.

“There’s always bridges, roads and potholes we need to address,” she said.

This will be Herrera Beutler’s third term in Congress. During her second term, her child, Abigail Beutler, was born prematurely and without kidneys. The girl gained national attention for surviving her malady, known as Potter syndrome.

On Tuesday, Abigail was with her mother on the U.S. floor as lawmakers were sworn in.

“She ate it up, she loved it,” Herrera Beutler said.

Abigail is healthy, her mother said, but needs to weigh more before she can undergo a kidney transplant.

“She’s gaining more slowly than we would have preferred, which isn’t a problem other than we’re anxious, we would like to get past that milestone,” Herrera Beutler said.