The terrorists are talking to us. Shouldn’t we stop repeating what they say?

Once again, a few days ago, a group of cloaked men – who claim they are acting on behalf of Islam – proceeded to record and then broadcast a video of themselves killing a fellow human being. This time it was a French tourist they abducted in Algeria. And once again, like other murders committed by the Islamic State group, the victim had no more connection to the murderers' perceived grievances than anyone else who happens to breathe the same air on this planet. And once again the world's news media did the killers a favor by carrying the message they wanted to deliver.

Whether you received the news of Herve Gourdel's murder from the New York Times, the BBC or nearly any other major news outlet from around the world, it was described alternately as a beheading or as an execution. These are the words the terrorists want us to hear.

[SEE: Editorial Cartoons on the Islamic State group]

The murders they have committed are horrific, and the terrorists want us to concentrate on that horror. They want us to focus on the way in which they have murdered these men. And they want to cloak their murder in the garb of ritual, implying a formal process that has some claim to legitimacy.

An execution is capital punishment administered by a state or the agency of a state, acting through some sort of due process. And a beheading is the barbaric method by which some states carry out their executions. These killers don't represent a legitimate government. All they have done is engage in the killing of helpless captives.

This is not a small point because it goes to the root of what the killers are trying to accomplish with their actions.

[ MORE: Cartoons on Syria]

The way in which they have conducted their wretched business is designed to shock and terrify. And they have discovered what every journalist and mass communications specialist in the world knows: That you can spread your message more effectively and memorably if you put a human story with it. In some ways, killing a large number of people in a public square may be less effective at conveying horror than showing one innocent person moments before he is killed.

This will almost certainly happen again. Perhaps it is impossible to responsibly report on the murder of someone and not report the way they died or how their remains were desecrated after the fact. But should the method of their murder be the headline? Should we be less outraged if the terrorists had murdered people by gunshot or rope or something else?

The goal of these vicious and cowardly men is to shock and terrify the world. Focusing on the method they use to kill innocents helps them deliver their message of fear.