A May poll shows support among a majority of Coloradans for two energy-related ballot measures backed by Rep. Jared Polis that critics maintain would hurt the state’s oil-and-gas industry.

The poll from Benenson Strategy Group asked voters about two of the proposed ballot measures, both backed by Polis, D-Boulder. Initiative 88 would require drilling rigs to be set back 2,000 feet from homes — four times the current state rule. Initiative 89 would create the so-called Environmental Bill of Rights.

So why was a poll conducted in May handed over to The Denver Post in July?

“It’s strategic,” said Rick Ridder, spokesman for Coloradans for Safe and Clean Energy. “As we’re getting increased support, our funders wanted to see some new data. We are confident there is public support for these initiatives, which we’re moving forward on. We’re collecting signatures every day, all day. Clearly voters recognize the need for a 2000-foot setback and an environmental bill of rights.”

The measure changing existing setback requirements to require any new oil or gas well to be located at least one half mile from the nearest occupied structure initially passed 64 percent to 21 percent, then 56 percent to 35 percent after poll recipients were read a series of negative arguments against the measure — the same arguments Coloradans likely will hear on the campaign trail.

“Support for this idea was strong across all major subgroups and even led (initially) among registered Republicans by a 62 percent to 26 percent margin,” according to the poll.

The other measure includes a provision that if state and local laws conflict the more restrictive law or regulation governs. It initially passed 64 percent to 27 percent, then, after the negative arguments, it passed 52 percent to 34 percent.

The ballot proposals and efforts to defeat them have created a firestorm in Colorado, with competing groups trying to pass and defeat the measures. Gov. John Hickenlooper is trying to broker a compromise to keep the measures off the ballot, but so far he is struggling to get enough support.

Benenson Strategy Group polled 600 likely general election voters from May 6-8. The margin of error for overall results is plus or minus 4 percent and is higher among subgroups, according to the firm.

Here are the questions that were asked:

In November 2014, voters will vote on several proposed constitutional amendments regarding conservation and the environment. Please tell me if you had to vote on the following amendment today, would you vote yes, no, or you would not vote on that particular amendment? Increasing the mandatory minimum distance for oil and gas wells around schools, hospitals, and other high occupancy buildings to 2,000.