By Steve Wilson | Mississippi Watchdog

Mississippi relies on federal help more than any other state.

The Magnolia State received 45.3 percent of its budget from the federal government, according to the U.S. Census Bureau.

Louisiana was second, with 44 percent of its budget coming from federal coffers, according to the nonprofit Tax Foundation.

Liz Malm and Richard Borean of the Tax Foundation calculated the percentage of federal money in each state’s budget by dividing general revenue by what states refer to as “federal intergovernmental revenue.”

Along with Louisiana and Tennessee (41 percent), that gives the South three of the top five states in terms of getting federal money. South Dakota (40.8 percent), and Missouri (39.4 percent) are fourth and fifth place, respectively.

“In the top five states, you tend to see a trend,” Malm told Mississippi Watchdog. “Mississippi, Louisiana and Tennessee and some states like Missouri tend to be lower-income states on average, which means a lot of their people qualify for programs like Medicaid.”

Alaska gets the least amount of its general fund revenue (20 percent) from the federal government.

So what does this money buy?

Much of it is for public welfare programs such as Temporary Aid to Needy Families, Supplemental Nutrition Assistance and Medicaid. According to the General Accounting Office, the amount of this aid to states has skyrocketed — from $55 billion in 1977 to $284 billion in 2009. That’s an increase of 417 percent.

Don’t expect that number to decline, especially in Mississippi. Medicaid requires a state contribution of 26.5 percent. With expanded income eligibility for Medicaid under the Affordable Care Act, the state will spend more than $1 billion on Medicaid in fiscal 2016, an increase of more than 14 percent from fiscal 2015.

Gov. Phil Bryant has rejected calls to expand Medicaid in the state because, he has said, the state and any recipients of expanded coverage would be left wanting if Congress changed the ACA.

The federal government’s contribution also continues to swell in education funding — from $27 billion in 1977 to $83 billion in 2009.

All of this largesse comes with a price.

“I think the most important thing for these states to keep in mind is that when you’re get a lot of federal funding, you’re kind of at the whim of the federal decisions,” Malm said. “For example, if during the most recent recession, if anything changed at the federal level, it could’ve really impacted state budgets. States need to be cognizant of that and make sure they engage in responsible planning and responsible saving.”

Get regular updates on Mississippi through our Facebook or Twitter accounts