Today is the biggest shopping day of the year, and it’s when most people (a lot of the slightly crazy and/or more “determined” folks) start taking care of their holiday shopping. We thought we’d give you a few ideas for some health-related gift ideas that might be good for your loved ones this season, most of which you could order online to avoid being trampled.

Marfs: This product combines the functionality of both a mask and a scarf, and it’s a lot more stylish than a surgical mask. Marfs improve your health and wellness by filtering the air you breathe and eliminating any airborne contaminates. Designed with bamboo charcoal and infused with elemental silver and active carbon, Marfs provide a substantial defense against the flu, MERS-CoV, disease-causing bacteria and the common cold. Buy one as a gift for just $42.45.

GreatCall: This company provides a variety of apps, services and cell phone products designed to help people be in control of their lives by having an easy and functional way to call for help if needed. This allows users to maintain a sense of independence while caregivers and loved ones can relieve any unneeded anxiety.

Illumask: Chances are you’ve seen or heard about this one, considering it’s received a good amount of press and can be found in many stores. This mask helps to treat acne and decrease the amount of fine lines and wrinkles on your face using safe LED light. In most stores you can find this product for less than $30.

Squatty Potty: The goal with this product is to making relieving yourself not only easier and more comfortable by slightly elevating your feet, it really goes back to the more natural and original way people have done it throughout human history. The science behind why your potty posture is important is pretty clear, and you can get your own Squatty Potty for as little as $25, among other products and accessories.

Seriously Funny Gowns: For anyone who needs to be in the hospital, the whole gown situation is usually not the most comfortable, plus being in a hospital is a downer in general. So, with the perspective that laughter is the best medicine, these gowns bring a sense of humor to patients in need of care. There are gowns that look like you’re wearing a neck tie or even one that looks like a super hero chest is being exposed through the illusion of a ripped gown. Most of the gowns are under $60.

Withings Aura: Many people have a difficult time sleeping, but there is a lot of new technology out there to help with this issue. In this case, a bedside device, a sleeping sensor mat and your mobile device work together to ensure that you get a better night sleep. The light therapy works to increase natural Melatonin and the device also helps time when you wake up to better match a health sleep cycle.