New Jersey, meet Oscar.

The state’s newest health insurance company — although named after co-founder Josh Kushner’s great-grandfather — endeavors to be a thoroughly modern alternative geared to the tech-savvy consumer who is searching for coverage via the Affordable Care Act.

Need help selecting a plan? The company prides itself on its easy-to-navigate website, www.hioscar.com. Something ailing you but have no time to wait for an appointment? Stand by for a call from an MD for a “tele-visit.” Can’t remember what you were prescribed the last time you had a sinus infection? Login to your account at HiOscar.com and see your medical “timeline."

Oscar wants to be the search engine for health care consumers – the place its members start with to manage their health, and to find a doctor and compare prices said co-founder Mario Schlosser, a computer scientist who has worked in the gaming industry.

“If we can build tools that teach people how to manage their health in smart ways, that are engaging and easy to use, we will do something that hasn’t been in the healthcare system before,” Schlosser said from his Manhattan office.

Oscar’s 30-plus reviews on Yelp, the go-to consumer site for the digital generation, are decidedly mixed. Fans praise the customer service and online tools; critics bemoan the lack of physicians and the sticker shock when they realize what isn’t covered.

Joel Cantor, director of the Rutgers Center for State Health Policy, said “narrow” physician networks are a fact of life in any plan sold on the exchange. Only one of the five companies selling on New Jersey’s exchange, AmeriHealth, even offers an out-of-network option, he said.

“All of the things you hear about Oscar you can fill in the blanks with most other plans in most other states,” Cantor said. “It’s their way of keeping the costs in check. And there are only so many tools available for doing that.”

“High out-of-pocket cost sharing is a long-term trend, and the reason it is making news now is because more people are looking at coverage,” he added. “I think it’s a trend that is here to stay.”

Computer scientist, Harvard Business School grad and one of Oscar’s three co-founders, Schlosser describes the company’s philosophy, its inaugural year in New York and what New Jersey consumers can expect should they choose his company when open enrollment on the health exchange — healthcare.gov — begins Nov. 15. The company also has its own website and will offer coverage to all N.J. consumers.

Q: How did your first year go?

A: I think it’s going incredibly well. We have about 17,000 consumers in New York. We were an unknown insurance company when we opened last Oct 1...Over time, we have built up much trust with members, so much so that at the end of open enrollment we were grabbing about a 10 percent share of the new people coming into the markets in New York City. Moreover, when we asked people how they heard about us, 40 percent said I heard about you from a friend or a family member. I think we take this as words of comfort that we are doing something right.

Our projections were 7,500 (members). So we came out at 15,000 at the end of open enrollment and now we are at 17,000, so we have had a little bit of growth there. We can’t wait for open enrollment to open again in New York and now New Jersey.

Q: How have you laid the groundwork for coming to New Jersey? Who will provide the health care?

A: We decided to go with QualCare. They have a fantastic network — 24,000 providers overall, 100 facilities overall, with 69 hospitals, mental health facilities and substance abuse clinics across the state. We are also talking to various physician practices and accountable care organizations.

We have staff in-house, nurses and MDs, who can help members find providers for certain complicated conditions, getting second opinions from other providers, and developing a care plan…Ideally, we like to link that back to the providers on the ground, with the hospitals and the physicians in the state, so we are talking to organizations in New Jersey to actually make that happen in a more efficient way.

Q: People can call Oscar and speak with a physician or a nurse?

A: They can speak with a nurse. With a physician, generally we like to connect them back with their physician to treat them directly where they are.

We are the first insurance company to build tele-visits into the plan. If you have an issue where the physician can help you over the phone. Generally it is for a lot of the little stuff you go to the primary care physician for — the flu for example, common colds, stomach pain.

Over the phone is completely free for Oscar members; there is no limit on that. It’s a virtual lifesaver for our family. My wife freaks out when the kids eat something strange.

Q: Do tele-visits save money?

A: Yeah, but we don’t look at anything as just saving costs. That would be very short sighted. In the short term as the insurer, you may think it may save some money here but in most cases in will come back because you may not have solved the person’s issue. Generally we say, whatever we do, does it contribute to a quality outcome? Does it contribute to (containing) the overall cost of are? And does it contribute to member happiness and satisfaction? All three of them are equally important…If members don’t agree with the guidance, you will have problems with compliance.

Susan K. Livio may be reached at slivio@njadvancemedia.com. Follow her on Twitter @SusanKLivio. Find NJ.com Politics on Facebook.