Stuart Butler, a longtime figure in conservative policy deliberations who helped promote the idea of the individual health-care mandate before later disavowing it, is ending a 35-year career at the Heritage Foundation to join the Brookings Institution.

Mr. Butler will join the economic studies program at Brookings as a senior fellow in September. He also is credited with developing enterprise zones, which encouraged development in low-income urban neighborhoods.

Mr. Butler, 67 years old, said he was attracted to Brookings by the idea of working at a place that is not monolithic in its approach to public policy.

“Brookings is a different kind of institution. It’s a collection of scholars as opposed to a team-focused organization,” Mr. Butler said in an interview Thursday. “There’s an opportunity to sit around in the cafeteria to talk about all kinds of different issues from the theoretical to the practical.”

At Heritage, Mr. Butler ran the Center for Policy Innovation and had served as vice president for domestic and economic policy studies. Heritage President Jim DeMint, the former South Carolina senator who has overseen the think tank become more of a political animal, called Mr. Butler “a leading intellectual force” in policy circles.

“We are sad to see him go,” Mr. DeMint said. “But we certainly understand his desire to shed his heavy management responsibilities and take a post where he can concentrate on his passion – exploring long-range solutions for seemingly intractable problems.”

The individual mandate Mr. Butler proposed became popular among conservatives in the early 1990s when Hillary Clinton was trying to sell a universal health-care overhaul during her husband’s presidency. It served the basis of Mitt Romney’s health-care overhaul when he was Massachusetts governor, but became toxic in Republican politics after President Barack Obama adopted the idea for the Affordable Care Act in 2009.

By then Mr. Butler had long renounced the idea. He wrote in a 2012 USA Today op-ed that the mandate in Mr. Obama’s law was not constitutional. “Changing one’s mind about the best policy to pursue — but not one’s principles — is part of being a researcher at a major think tank,” he wrote then.

Mr. Butler said he expects to concentrate on “long-term policy questions” as opposed to specific legislation. “I’ve been getting involved in issues and thinking about different sets of things that maybe are not as front-and-center at Heritage, and that was my choice,” he said.

Brookings Vice President Ted Gayer said Mr. Butler will help to diversify Brookings, which has had a reputation as a left-of-center think tank.

“It highlights what we’re all about,” Mr. Gayer said. “We want to have informed views, but if everybody agrees we’re probably misinforming ourselves.”