The hermit kingdom of North Korea claims it has one single injection that can prevent and cure a variety of viruses.

On Friday, North Korea announced that it has the answer to some of the most pressing health issues of our century. The authoritarian nation claims to have a single “drug” that cures and prevents MERS, Ebola, SARS, and AIDS.

“Malicious virus infections like SARS, Ebola, and MERS are diseases that are related to immune systems, so they can be easily treated by Kumdang-2 injection drug, which is a strong immune reviver,” the official Korean Central News Agency said, according to the Associated Press. The KCNA announced that Kumdang-2 was made from ginseng mixed with “rare-earth elements.”

North Korea’s claims come during a time when its rival neighbor, South Korea, is battling a MERS outbreak that has infected some 166 people and killed 24 — the largest outside of Saudi Arabia. This week, the first MERS case in Thailand was reported. The Middle East Respiratory Syndrome is believed to have been transmitted to humans from camels, and there is currently no cure or treatment for the virus.

A website touting the Kumdang-2 injection manual states: “This manual is based on comprehensive analyses of: The opinions of millions of patients, all of which have been collected over the last 23 years since May 1989 at the moment, as well as clinical records submitted [to] hundreds of hospitals, medical groups, institutions and epidemiological institutions [in] Korea and from 30 different countries, and [a] review of millions of patients.”

It also claims the injection causes no pain, has no adverse side effects, and “optimizes the systems of autonomic nerve and self-curing by stimulating [the] hypothalamus, the center of the autonomic nervous system, functions anti-inflammatory, anti-bacteria, and anti-virus.” Of course, there is no scientific backing that the rest of the world is currently aware of that makes any of this sound true or reasonable. One drug to cure several complex diseases doesn’t seem too plausible.

According to the AP, North Korea also boasted about this drug during bird flu outbreaks in 2006 and 2013.