People Moves of the Week: Tillerman, Arsenal, Goodwin

Remos Lenio co-founds new i-bank Tillerman; Arsenal adds operating partner; Goodwin expands Boston office

Arsenal Capital Partners- Michael Huff (pictured below) has joined the New York-based middle-market private equity firm as an operating partner. He will work with companies in the firm’s specialty industrials group. Huff was most recently the CEO of Citadel Plastic Holdings Inc., which was acquired by A Schulman Inc. (NASDAQ: SHLM) earlier in 2015. He also held roles with Johns Manville Corp. and General Electric Co.’s (NYSE: GE) plastics division.

BBH Capital Partners- The private equity arm of Brown Brothers Harriman & Co. added Rolf Classon as a senior adviser. In his role, Classon will be sourcing and evaluating potential investments in the medical devices and pharmaceutical sectors. Classon served as Bayer HealthCare AG’s chairman from 2002 to 2004.

The Carlyle Group LP- Jay Fishman has resigned from the Carlyle Group LP's (NYSE: CG) board, citing health reasons. The PE firm has named Anthony Welters, the executive chairman of the Black Ivy Group, as an independent director. Fishman has served on Carlyle’s board since the PE firm went public in May 2012.

CohnReznick Capital Markets Securities LLC-The firm hired Nick Sangermano as a managing director and head of private placements in its energy group. He was most recently with Ambata Securities. In addition, CohnReznick added Adrian Ruiz and Michael Tatarsky to its energy team. They both come over from Santander’s asset and capital structuring group and concentrate on tax equity investments in the renewable energy sector.

FTI Consulting Inc. – The advisory firm added Simon Jewkes and Drew Soga as managing directors in its transaction advisory services group. Jewkes will be based in New York while Soga will be based in Chicago. They will both be working with FTI’s private equity and corporate clients. Jewkes was most recently with McGladrey while Soga comes over from KPMG.

Goodwin Procter- Luciana Aquino-Hagedorn (pictured) has joined the Boston office of Goodwin Procter as a partner in the financial institutions group. She concentrates on cross-border emerging market investments and natural resources. Hagedorn was most recently with Harvard Management Corporation, which manages Harvard University’s endowment.

Ice Miller LLP- Christopher Bordoni has joined the law firm in New York. He focuses on private equity, real estate investment funds and debt financing.

K&L Gates- The law firm expanded its Brisbane, Australia, office with the addition of Jeremy Prentice. He comes over from Holding Redlich. Prentice focuses on privatizations, financing, buyside and sellside agreements in the infrastructure sector, including ports and airports.

Monroe Capital LLC- The middle-market lender added Mark Sturrock in its Toronto office. Sturrock will lead the firm’s origination efforts in Canada. Previously, Sturrock was a senior managing director at Salus Capital Partners LLP and senior director at Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce.

Seyfarth Shaw LLP- The law firm added Eric Simonson as a partner in New York. He comes over from Blank Rome LLP. Simonson focuses on M&A and joint ventures in the telecommunications, biotechnology, consumer and health care sectors.

Tillerman & Co.- Remos Lenio (pictured at top) and Phillip Blanchard recently launched middle-market investment bank Tillerman & Co., based in Grand Rapids, Michigan. The firm will focus on transactions valued between $3 million to $75 million in the manufacturing, consumer and energy sectors. Lenio is the founder and a former director of the Western Michigan chapter for the Association for Corporate Growth. Prior to starting Tillerman, Lenio and Blanchard were partners in turnaround consulting firm DWH LLC.

TPG- The private equity firm named Jon Winkelried as co-CEO. He will be based in San Francisco and work alongside with current TPG CEO Jim Coulter. Winkelried was with Goldman Sachs Group Inc. (NYSE: GS) for 27 years, where he held roles such as co-COO and co-head of investment banking. He currently manages JW Capital Partners’ investments, which is his family offices

UHY Advisors Inc.- Michael Mahoney and Howard Foote have joined the board of tax advisory firm UHY. Mahoney, based in New York, is the CEO of UHY Advisors NY, while Foote is the capital region office managing director.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: