CASA GRANDE — Familiar and not so familiar faces made their case to be the next Republican representative in Congressional District 1 on Monday night.

The forum, unlike a debate format, was entirely cordial. No one challenged any of their counterparts or even openly disagreed on the issues.

There was near 100 percent consensus on a variety of topics including jobs, border security, government spending, Obamacare, the role of the EPA, the VA health care system and the treatment of veterans in general.

Six of the eight Republicans running for the open seat attended the forum at Central Lutheran Church, hosted by the Western Pinal County chapter of the Arizona Republican Assembly. About 75 people attended the event.

In Casa Grande, familiar faces included Pinal County Sheriff Paul Babeu, former Arizona Secretary of State Ken Bennett and rancher and oilman Gary Kiehne. Three others, perhaps not as well known in Casa Grande, also participated, including state Sen. Carlyle Begay, R-Ganado, retired Air Force Col. Wendy Rogers and Navajo businessman Shawn Redd.

Two others running for the seat did not attend; Arizona Speaker of the House David Gowan was at the Legislature working on finalizing a budget. Thomas Whipple, a network security engineer and the most recent candidate to enter the race, was also not present.

With much consensus, one had to look a bit harder for qualities that set the candidates apart from each other. Although the forum lacked drama, Redd took a veiled jab at Begay – who is also Navajo – by saying he’d always been a Republican.

“I’m a lifelong Republican,” Redd said. “It’s not something I just came to recently.”

Begay was appointed as a Democrat to Legislative District 7 in 2013 following the resignation of Democrat Jack C. Jackson Jr. In 2014, Begay won the election for his LD7 seat as a Democrat.

Last November, Begay, known for a conservative voting record, switched from Democrat to Republican.

The eloquent and soft-spoken Begay said growing up on the reservation, one is expected to be a Democrat, no questions asked. He said his faith guides him, and he found his principles fit the Republican Party. He also spoke of his affinity and respect for working hard and earning everything.

“My parents taught me that nothing is free,” he said.

Babeu touted his commitment to border security as sheriff and also said he will fight for 2nd Amendment rights – he had his campaign chairman hold up a large photo of Babeu attending a town hall in Washington, D.C., to speak to President Barack Obama about guns.

Bennett, the quintessential budget wonk, said his main objective is to balance the federal budget. He said that may seem like an impossible task but added he could do it in three years. He said a “penny plan” would have the federal government cut 1 percent a year from its budget for three years.

Bennett proposed a “two penny plan,” where the budget would be cut by 2 percent a year for three years. He said he wouldn’t run for re-election if he couldn’t deliver that promise in Washington.

Rogers talked about her personal touch – meeting with voters all across the sprawling district by riding her bicycle door-to-door. If elected, she said her top priority would be national defense.

“These are dangerous times we live in,” she said, adding a lack of funding to the military, specifically the Marines, was “criminal.”

Kiehne railed against the EPA, saying the agency is “shutting down our power plants, shutting down our businesses.”

“It’s overkill, folks,” he said. “You’ve got to kill this monstrosity of overreach.”

Redd spent the majority of his talking time emphasizing the importance of bringing the CD1 seat back to the Republican Party. The seat is currently filled by U.S. Rep. Ann Kirkpatrick, D-AZ, but she isn’t running for re-election because she’s challenging Republican John McCain for his U.S. Senate seat.

Redd said the district, which includes parts of 12 Native American tribes, is gerrymandered heavily toward Democrats, who he said have a 10 percent voter registration advantage in the district. He wants to flip the district red, and he said he’s the one who can do it.

“We are sitting in a district controlled and owned by the Democratic Party,” he said. “I don’t like to lose … we need to fragment the Democrat base, which is the Navajo Nation.”

Other noteworthy comments made during the evening:

Babeu on the debt ceiling and passing a balanced budget: “I would vote against raising the debt ceiling … No one, as a congressman, can convince me that we can’t cut spending.”

Begay, educated at Harvard University and Johns Hopkins University and owner of a degree in molecular and cellular biology, on his career path: “So as you can see, I wanted to be a state senator someday.”

Rogers, after describing her pilot training in the Air Force as the most difficult time in her life: “I’m no shrinking violet. In Congress, you have to stand up to people and stay true to what you believe.”

Kiehne, who’s never served as an elected official, on sending career politicians to Washington: “We need people there with dirt under their nails and who have balanced their own checkbook.”

Redd on whether or not Apple should have allowed the federal government to unlock the cellphone of the San Bernardino, California, shooter: “I strongly believe Apple was right to refuse access. We can’t trust our federal government (not to abuse that power) … it’s a slippery slope.”

Bennett on his 23 years of experience running a business prior to entering the public sector: “We need people in Washington who sign the front of a paycheck and not just the back.”