EDUCATION

VANCOUVER -- Ron Bertolucci and Russell Brent have joined Clark College Foundation's board of directors.

Bertolucci, with more than 30 years of financial services experience, is vice president and manager of business lending for Columbia Credit Union.

He has served as an adjunct professor at various universities, including Gonzaga, Eastern Washington and Washington State Vancouver.

Bertolucci is active in the community and has held a number of volunteer roles including president and board member for the Free Clinic of Southwest Washington. He currently serves as a committee member on the nonprofit's development committee.

Bertolucci holds a master of business administration from City University and a bachelor's from California State University, Fresno. He is also a graduate of Pacific Coast Banking School and Northwest Intermediate Commercial Loan School.

Bertolucci and his wife Kara have been married for 38 years and have three grown children.

Brent, the proprietor of Mill Creek Pub in Battle Ground, has more than three decades of experience in the restaurant business. His project management expertise includes operational assessments, concept development, business plan development, budgeting, forecasting, strategic planning, menu analysis, cost analysis and real-time measurement tools. Brent has managed restaurants for corporations in northern California, Oregon and Washington.

He's the chair of the board for Battle Ground Chamber of Commerce, advisory board member for Clark County Skills Center and board member at Wine & Food Society of Clark County, among others.

Brent holds a bachelor's in human resources management and master's in service management from Rochester Institute of Technology.

He's an award-winning business professional who was named Business Person of the Year in 2012 by Battle Ground Chamber of Commerce. The Vancouver USA Tourism Board presented its Tourism Professional award to Brent in 2012. He's also received accolades from Vancouver Business Journal, Association of Washington Businesses and others.

FINANCE

PORTLAND -- Wells Fargo has appointed Darren Bareuther as manager of its bank branch at 1405 Lloyd Center in Portland. He previously managed a Wells Fargo branch in Clackamas.

In his new position, Bareuther is responsible for the customer service, sales, professional development and community involvement efforts of 15 team members.

Bareuther joined Wells Fargo in 2008 as a teller in Troutdale. He was promoted to personal banker in 2010. He worked as a service manager for a year before being promoted to branch manager in Sandy in 2012.

Bareuther earned a bachelor's degree in economics from the University of California at San Diego.

He has volunteered for Hands on Portland and been recognized by Wells Fargo for his superior performance.

HEALTH

PORTLAND -- Health Share of Oregon has announced the appointment of John A. Sanders as chief information officer of the Tri-County Metro area coordinated care organization.

Sanders, who will join Health Share on March 30, will be responsible for the strategic information technology leadership, including supporting transformational initiatives in care, risk and payment models and facilitating the chief commercial officer in building an integrated regional system of care. He will also direct the investment in pertinent technology and consolidating administrative services that will enable risk and payment transformation.

More People on the move

Prior to joining Health Share, Sanders was the chief information officer at The Portland Clinic, a large multi-specialty practice group with seven facilities across the Tri-County Metro region. His previous positions included serving as vice president of information technology and chief information officer at Colorado Springs Health Partners in Colorado Springs, Colorado, as well as a partner and consultant with JNJ Associates in Centennial, Colorado, which provides management consulting and technology solutions for a variety of health care vendor and provider organizations.

Sanders received his Ph.D. in biomedical engineering from the University of California in Davis. He received his bachelor of science degrees in both chemistry and biology from the University of Oregon in Eugene.

He is a Certified Professional in Healthcare Information and Management Systems and a Certified Project Management Professional .

SALEM -- Department of Consumer and Business Services director Patrick Allen has announced that Berri Leslie will be administrator of Oregon's health insurance marketplace.

The marketplace will be housed at the Department of Consumer and Business Services beginning June 30, and will help Oregonians access affordable, high-quality health insurance.

Leslie's position is effective April 1, so she can hire staff and lead the transition of the marketplace functions from Cover Oregon to DCBS as set out in Senate Bill 1.

Leslie has been deputy administrator of the Department of Consumer and Business Services' Insurance Division since July 2011, leading day-to-day operations of the division and working with stakeholders on implementing the Affordable Care Act. Other leadership roles include managing the regulation of mortgage lending in Oregon during the 2008 financial crisis and, more recently, leading a restructuring of the Oregon Construction Contractors Board.

Leslie graduated from the University of Oregon with a bachelor's degree in political science and from Portland State University with a master's degree in public administration.

The Department of Consumer and Business Services is Oregon's largest business regulatory and consumer protection agency.

TUALATIN -- Meridian Park Medical Foundation has announced that Teri Oelrich has been elected to its board of trustees.

The Foundation advocates and raises funds for Legacy Meridian Park Medical Center, part of Legacy Health - the largest locally-owned, nonprofit health care provider in Oregon and Southwest Washington.

Oelrich is a principal and health care consultant for NBBJ - an architecture, planning and design firm - where she creates health care facility strategic, workload and financial feasibility studies and consults with architectural design teams.

With a bachelor of science in nursing from the University of Washington, Oelrich began her career as a nurse with the Swedish Medical Center in Seattle. She also has an master of business administration from Syracuse University.

Oelrich has served on several professional boards and councils, and is currently the education chairperson for the Nursing Institute for Healthcare Design.

-- Compiled by Vickie Kavanagh

vkavanagh@oregonian.com

503-294-5913; okavkid