Behold, the woman who shall soon be crowned Queen of the endlessly self-righteous and self-congratulatory "Reality Based Community:"





"Let’s be clear: Islam is not our adversary. Muslims are peaceful and tolerant people and have nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism." — Hillary Clinton (@HillaryClinton) November 19, 2015

Hillary's strategy to defeat Isis: ?Defeat Isis in Syria & Iraq ?Disrupt & dismantle terrorist infrastructure ?Harden our defenses — John Podesta (@johnpodesta) November 19, 2015

Step one in Hillary's plan to defeat ISIS is: "Defeat ISIS." It's even got a check mark next to it. Say, what would happen if ISIS launched a successful terrorist attack on US soil, as they clearly want and intend to do? Would she deploy American forces to fight them on the ground in Iraq and Syria (just where her "plan" calls for them to be "defeated")? Apparently not:







So even if ISIS infiltrated the United States and carried off a sophisticated, deadly attack, it would be a "mistake" to send American soldiers to go fight them. This from the woman who voted yes on Afghanistan and Iraq. If that's the case, at what point and for what reason would "boots on the ground" be justified, anywhere in the world? Her political answer, for the moment, appears to be 'never.' She does have a Democratic primary to win, after all, and the electorate is still war weary (although less so than she may suspect; our would-be Commander in Chief's answer may change once she sees more polling). But wait, didn't she just endorse American boots on the ground against ISIS, in an abrupt about-face from her recently-stated opposition? Why yes, she did -- when Obama left her no choice. To recap, this woman -- whose plan to defeat ISIS entails "defeating ISIS" -- is against boots on the ground to, uh, defeat ISIS, even in response to a catastrophic terrorist attack in America. Except actually she's for some boots on the ground, just not a lot of them, even though she was against those, too, just a little while ago. And what she really wants you to know is that Muslims had "nothing whatsoever to do with terrorism." I'm Hillary Clinton. I engineered Obama's foreign policy. Now make me president.