Drug costs dislodge Obamacare as top GOP concern A majority across the political spectrum favors action to curb rising prices, survey finds.

Scott Walker, Marco Rubio and others are competing for the best plan to replace Obamacare, a unified theme among Republican presidential contenders. But there is growing evidence that even GOP voters are more concerned about curbing drug prices than dislodging the president’s signature health program.

In April, the nonpartisan Kaiser Family Foundation was surprised by a poll showing more Republicans view drug prices as the No. 1 health care priority than repealing Obamacare. So the foundation looked further, asking Americans what steps they would back to reduce drug costs.

Story Continued Below

The results, released Thursday morning, were equally striking: Nearly three-quarters of Americans think drug prices are unreasonably high — and most blame that on drug companies’ drive for profits. That’s true among Republicans, Democrats and independents — a rare point of accord in politics.

To be sure, Republicans are still gunning for Obamacare.

Kaiser’s April poll found repealing the law and its individual mandate came in as Republicans’ second and third top health care priorities, chosen by 60 percent and 52 percent, respectively. That trailed the 66 percent who want the president and Congress to address high drug costs for chronically ill patients.

Nonetheless, Republicans are also part of the huge bipartisan majorities that back strong government measures to make drugs affordable, including requiring drug makers to release information on how they set prices (86 percent), allowing Medicare to negotiate for drugs (83 percent), capping what companies can charge for drugs to treat cancer and other life-threatening diseases (76 percent) and importing drugs from Canada (72 percent).

That’s good news for Democratic contenders, including Hillary Clinton and Bernie Sanders, who are already outlining how government could negotiate lower prices for drugs, which routinely run into the tens of thousands of dollars for new treatments, yielding billions in profits for their developers.

But Republican candidates have not turned to prescription drug costs, sticking mostly to their promises to repeal Obamacare and replace it with conservative alternatives. Neither Walker nor Rubio mentioned drug costs in their proposals to replace Obamacare this week.

David Merritt, a managing director at Luntz Global, a conservative polling and consulting firm, acknowledged the anxiety over drug costs but said the campaign conversation will transcend that issue.

“Specific to drug costs, I think it will be secondary,” he said. “Health care as an issue is not going away. Obamacare is not going away. We’re still talking about life and death, but the fight will be around health care in general, with rising prescription drug costs as evidence of what’s wrong.”

GOP candidates are more likely to talk about drug prices as evidence of Obamacare’s failure, said Lanhee Chen, a fellow at the Hoover Institute and former health policy adviser to Mitt Romney.

“Republicans will be talking about how do we replace the ACA architecture,” he said.

But that may not be enough, said Bob Blendon, an expert on public opinion and health care at the Harvard School of Public Health.

“This [drug cost issue] is going to be very visible and people will be living in terror that they won’t be able to pay for this new expensive drug that they need,” he said.

Republicans in the survey did show a strong preference for solutions that use the marketplace.

Asked whether federal regulation or competition in the marketplace would do better at keeping drug costs down, 51 percent favored competition overall, compared to 40 percent who said regulation. But 76 percent of Republicans chose competition.

Policies that suggest price controls “run against the instinct most Americans have about the value of innovation in a free market economy,” Chen said. “Innovation needs to be an important part of the conversation.”

Growing public concern about drug prices is believed to reflect the sharp rise in drug prices over the last year, as well as a steady stream of news coverage about breakthrough, but costly new cures for hepatitis C, cancer and most recently, a previously intractable type of high cholesterol.

“The mercenary pricing that we’ve seen from the manufacturers is almost like they are daring the Congress to do something about it and knowing that they won’t,” said John Gorman, executive chairman of Gorman Health Group, a health care consultant.

Priced at $84,000 or more, for instance, Gilead’s hepatitis C drugs helped fuel a 13 percent spike in U.S. drug spending in 2014 — more than double the rate of overall health spending growth — setting off alarms across the board, from big business groups and insurance plans, state and federal health programs, labor unions and consumer advocates.

Even doctors, who have traditionally sought to keep cost concerns out of the practice of medicine, are increasingly citing the “financial toxicity” of drug prices and calling on patients to march for change.

Absent federal action, bills or voter initiatives in California, Massachusetts, Pennsylvania and Ohio aim to cap drug prices at the state level. Advocates in California announced Thursday that they had secured almost 370,000 signatures for a ballot initiative to cap what state health programs pay for drugs at the same low prices negotiated by the Department of Veterans Affairs. If certified, that would land the measure on the 2016 presidential ballot in the largest state in the nation. The AIDS Healthcare Foundation, which sponsored the initiative, launched a parallel campaign in Ohio this week, aiming for the 2016 ballot.

And several state bills, backed by the insurance industry, would require drug companies to disclose research and development and other costs that justify their pricing.

While Hillary Clinton has signaled support for a greater role for the government in driving down drug prices, she hasn’t yet released a detailed policy.

In June, she said that if drug companies succeed in boosting their foreign sales through favorable provisions in the ongoing 12-country Trans-Pacific Partnership trade talks, they should give bulk discounts to government health programs.

“Our drug companies, if they are going to get what they want, they should give more to America,” she said, according to Reuters. The campaign did not return a request for comment on this story.

Her chief primary opponent, Bernie Sanders, is a long-time backer of a national single-payer health care system, and supports making Medicare an active negotiator. He and Rep. Elijah Cummings are also investigating dramatic recent hikes in the costs of older generic drugs and introduced a bill this spring that would force companies to pay rebates to the Medicaid program if generic prices grew faster than inflation.

CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified John Gorman’s title. He is the executive chairman of Gorman Health Group.

CORRECTION: Corrected by: Jennifer Shutt @ 08/20/2015 10:49 AM CORRECTION: An earlier version of this story incorrectly identified John Gorman’s title. He is the executive chairman of Gorman Health Group.