At the Denver Public Schools’ Citywide Honor Bands Concert on Saturday, bass guitarist and district-renowned music composer Dominic Ellerbee was grateful just to have a music stand.

Eight months ago, the 17-year-old Denver South High junior was living out of a minivan with his mother, Madonna, and 12-year-old sister, Dejaune.

“It was hard sometimes, but it never really got to me because I had friends and music and stuff,” Dominic said. “It was the little things that got to me more.”

Without a music stand, he said one of the most frustrating parts of being homeless has been finding a place to comfortably practice music.

Dominic’s constant companion through more than a year of his family’s transient housing situation has been his six-string bass guitar.

“He’s a real wonder,” said Hugh Ragin, Dominic’s band teacher.

Dominic had only a year of self-taught guitar skills under his belt when Ragin welcomed him to the high school band in 2012. Since then, Dominic has picked up composition and other instruments, and he has started teaching younger classmates.

Dominic plays bass, acoustic and electric guitars; an assortment of drums; clarinet; piano; vibraphone; and recorder, “if that counts,” he said. He also sings and has performed in musicals throughout his high school career.

Dominic said he writes music for the high school drum line, which he will perform with at lacrosse and basketball games.

He’s in the middle of writing a musical that he said the school director promised would, if complete, be performed next year. And Dominic writes music — primarily indie rock and classical arias — for a nonet he formed with eight classmates.

He kept working when the Ellerbees were forced to separate and take shelter in the spare space at friends’ and family’s households.

Before Saturday’s concert, Dominic said his mother found a job and that he and his sister will be moving back into an apartment with her in March. Despite the uncertainty that has defined the past year, Dominic found a life calling in composing music for his nonet and other small groups.

“I want to be able to do that to big, professional groups,” he said.