Buy Photo A new poll from Vanderbilt University found 64 percent of respondents support Insure Tennessee, prompting new calls to pass Gov. Bill Haslam's controversial health care proposal. (Photo: Shelley Mays / File / The Tennessean)Buy Photo

Tennesseans continue to support Gov. Bill Haslam's controversial plan to provide as many as 500,000 low-income residents with federally funded health care, according to the latest edition of the Vanderbilt Poll.

The majority of self-identified Democrats, Republicans and independents polled said they support Insure Tennessee. The proposal found support among 40 percent of self-described tea party members as well.

The plan found very little support on Capitol Hill this year: State lawmakers quashed the measure twice, once during a special legislation session and again several weeks later. In light of those defeats, Haslam has repeatedly said he'd need to see a shift in attitudes before he could mount another legislative push for Insure Tennessee.

On Friday he said he thought the results mirrored support he's seen for the measure, but downplayed their practical impact on budging entrenched lawmakers.

"The people in the legislature who are against would argue, 'Well, that's fine. But the minute you put Affordable Care Act or Obamacare in the question, the results get very different,' " Haslam said, noting the poll didn't reference either of those polarizing terms in asking about Insure Tennessee.

"I’m trying to encourage people to ... look at what we're doing with Insure Tennessee. It really is different than the Affordable Care Act."

Opponents note the funding for Insure Tennessee was made available through the Affordable Care Act, and argue it's unlikely the state would never have to pay for any care provided through the program. Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey, R-Blountville, and others also have advocated waiting to act on the measure until after the 2016 presidential election, to see how that may affect federal health care funding.

Supporters, like Tennessee Justice Center Executive Director Michele Johnson, argued the poll results show people want to use the program to offer care to those in need. But she acknowledges any hopes of reviving the measure rely on a change of heart from Ramsey and House Speaker Beth Harwell, R-Nashville.

"I think leadership is the key. Leadership knows that people need to go beyond self-interest and do what's right for the state. When public opinion is this strongly in favor of something ... it feels like the leadership is key, both in terms of Harwell and Ramsey, and of course the governor, who has been leading on this," Johnson told reporters Friday.

"We need Speaker Harwell and Lieutenant Governor Ramsey to lead on this."

House Democratic Caucus Chairman Mike Stewart, D-Nashville, is an outspoken supporter of Insure Tennessee. He, too, pointed to the poll as evidence the time to act on the measure is now.

"I think what we see from the Vanderbilt Poll is that other than a number of Republican legislators, virtually every single person in Tennessee supports Insure Tennessee, so it’s time to pass the governor’s program right now," Stewart said Friday.

The measure probably faces an uphill battle if and when lawmakers take it up after returning to work in January.

Vanderbilt included responses from 1,013 people. The margin of error for the poll is plus or minus 3.9 percentage points.

Reach Dave Boucher at 615-259-8892 and on Twitter @Dave_Boucher1.

Do you support Insure Tennessee?

The latest edition of the Vanderbilt Poll asked respondents if they support Insure Tennessee. Here's a breakdown of that support among those who self-identify with a political party.

Democrats: 86 percent

Republicans: 51 percent

Independents: 66 percent

Tea party members: 40 percent

Read or Share this story: http://tnne.ws/1Qljf1z