WESTON, Fla.--(BUSINESS WIRE)--Ultimate Software (Nasdaq: ULTI), a leading provider of human capital management (HCM) solutions in the cloud, announced today that Mid-Atlantic Health Care, a leading provider of skilled nursing and rehabilitation centers, is using UltiPro’s HCM reporting to gain insight into employee retention, generate metrics needed for ACA compliance, and provide visibility and increased accountability related to license certifications that are critical to the business.

Established in 2003 with two facilities, Mid-Atlantic Health Care now provides nursing care and post-acute services in 18 facilities located throughout Maryland, Pennsylvania, and Delaware. Before switching to UltiPro in 2013, Mid-Atlantic was using multiple payroll providers that lacked integrated HR capabilities. As the company expanded by adding new facilities, the HR and payroll teams found that importing new employees was challenging, and managing numerous systems was becoming more cumbersome. Company executives selected UltiPro to make growth more manageable and improve its people-centric operations with a single solution.

“As we grew, we needed a solution to evolve with us, and that choice was clear with UltiPro,” said Traci Alley, corporate human resources director at Mid-Atlantic Health Care. “We now have more than 3,700 employees, and UltiPro’s business intelligence has given us access to info-rich data we previously tried to compile manually or may not have been able to gather at all. With real-time reports, we are able to better manage turnover and retention throughout our growing workforce, gaining a clear view as to which positions experience steady turnover and what factors contribute to those trends. Our HR team has been empowered with actionable information, enabling us to rethink and change our orientation process and create ongoing preceptorships with experienced medical practitioners for those positions. UltiPro has helped us have a more stable and engaged workforce.”

As UltiPro’s robust reporting has given Mid-Atlantic Health Care greater visibility into employee turnover and increased workforce retention, the solution’s real-time analytics has given the company needed reporting capabilities to help it better manage changing healthcare requirements.

“In terms of compliance with the Affordable Care Act (ACA), UltiPro has given us the ability to track and automatically analyze employee hours of service in order to determine eligibility status,” said Alley. “This is especially important in the healthcare industry, where we have a large number of per diem employees working long hours. UltiPro helps us to proactively monitor eligibility and compliance in one central dashboard. As a result, UltiPro has provided our managers, HR teams, and executives with peace of mind that we can be fully compliant with the new healthcare legislation.”

Equally important to the healthcare industry is the tracking and monitoring of employee certifications to ensure that all licenses remain current. With UltiPro as its comprehensive HCM solution that houses all employee-centric information, Mid-Atlantic Health Care is able to generate timely reports and instantly notify managers if employees need to update or renew any licenses before they expire.

“With a large workforce spanning 18 locations, we previously spent a great deal of time manually inputting, updating, and tracking employee certification for nursing, CPR, and CNA licenses,” said Alley. “This placed a huge strain on our administrative resources. With UltiPro, we have automated our process for medical certification monitoring, resulting in tremendous time savings and ensuring greater visibility and accountability. As our company continues to expand, having these kinds of business benefits will only become more important to us.”

“UltiPro’s HCM technology is designed to simplify and enhance people’s work lives, and, as a result, our customers achieve higher levels of productivity, effectiveness, and engagement among their workforce,” said Greg Swick, chief sales officer at Ultimate Software. “We’re very pleased that UltiPro is delivering relevant, real-time reporting to Mid-Atlantic Health Care and advancing its overall business.”

About Ultimate Software

Ultimate is a leading provider of cloud-based human capital management (HCM) solutions, with more than 20 million people records in the cloud. Ultimate’s award-winning UltiPro® delivers HR, payroll, talent, and time and labor management solutions that connect people with the information they need to work more effectively. Founded in 1990, the company is headquartered in Weston, Florida, and employs more than 2,700 professionals. In 2015, for the fourth consecutive year, Ultimate was ranked in the top 25 on FORTUNE’s list of the 100 Best Companies to Work For; recognized by FORTUNE as one of the 100 Fastest-Growing Companies; ranked #7 on Forbes magazine’s list of the 100 Most Innovative Growth Companies; named among the InformationWeek Elite 100, honoring innovation in business technology; and recognized as a “Leader” in Nucleus Research’s HCM Technology Value Matrix. Ultimate has more than 3,000 customers with employees in 160 countries, including Bloomin’ Brands, Culligan International, Feeding America, Major League Baseball, Pep Boys, SUBWAY, Texas Roadhouse, and Yamaha Corporation of America. More information on Ultimate’s products and services for people management can be found at www.ultimatesoftware.com.

UltiPro is a registered trademark of The Ultimate Software Group, Inc. All other trademarks referenced are the property of their respective owners.

Follow Ultimate Software on Twitter: www.twitter.com/UltimateHCM and on LinkedIn: http://linkd.in/UltimateHCM