Americans have long recognized the value of broadcast TV stations and their significant contributions to local communities.

Yet, imagine a world where your primary news source is dominated by national pay-TV networks. A consolidation and concentration of news eliminating the ability of television viewers in small town USA to turn to their trusted local TV broadcasters for breaking news, severe weather updates, school closings and emergency alerts and warnings.

Could this possibly happen?

ADVERTISEMENT

That’s what’s at stake as Congress looks to modernize the nation’s communications laws for the 21century.

It was Congress’ foresight that forged a national commitment and set forth policies to ensure that every American has access to diverse local broadcast TV news and opinions, investigative reporting, timely emergency information and a reliable communications medium capable of airing their opinions and advancing the public interest.

For 75 years, TV broadcasters—as trustees of the public airwaves—have served as first-informers in times of disaster and crisis; often representing the only reliable and trusted source for timely, accurate and relevant local news and information. Working hand-in-glove with the nation’s public safety officials, local broadcasters are there when Americans seek critical life-saving information. The power of regional investigative reporting by local broadcasters regarding issues related to health care, consumer fraud and political corruption cannot be dismissed and remains incredibly important to America’s television viewers.

Daily reminders of the irreplaceable value of local broadcast TV are a constant. This past month, TV reporters risked life and limb to provide 24/7 boots-on-the-ground coverage of several snowstorms that brought bone-chilling temperatures and record-setting snowfall levels to the Northeastern region of the country. New England has been characterized as the “Ice Box of America” with parts of Massachusetts and Maine recording more than 100 inches of snow in the past month. Television viewers impacted by these deadly storms were able to stay informed and take actions to ensure their safety.

The inherent value of broadcasters extends beyond lifeline reporting to the very communities they serve. Local TV stations help create 1.5 million jobs nationwide, contribute more than $730 billion in annual Gross Domestic Product and generate millions annually in fundraising efforts. A recent fundraiser by Raycom Media-owned NBC affiliates in Mississippi raised $218,000 for long-term rebuilding and recovery initiatives following deadly tornadoes that ripped through the central portion of the state last December.

Univision recently raised $15.5 million in just two days for children with life-threatening or debilitating diseases. The “Hearts for People” telethon broadcast last December in major cities across the country will help more than 600 children in 38 states. Examples of these altruistic contributions by broadcasters are endless.

Broadcast TV covered the social unrest following the Ferguson Verdict, and also gave voice to the peaceful political protests that followed in cities across the country. The public megaphone of broadcast TV helped carry the voice of the community to local governments, creating opportunities for community activists to meet with local city police officials to discuss their public safety concerns.

Investigative reporting by local TV stations is an ongoing commitment and on any given day reporters across the country are working to uncover serious problems that could impact their viewers. Take for example the recent investigative series by ABC News 7 (KGO-TV) in San Francisco focusing on complaints by Covered California patients who are alleging that the physician networks offered by participating insurance companies are inadequate and are jeopardizing their ability to access quality health care. The California Department of Managed Health Care is investigating the matter.

Historically, the powerful reach and influence of local broadcast TV has served as a change agent for those seeking to voice their concerns and advance social progress. Given its integral role in American culture, local broadcast TV empowers citizens to stand up for what they believe in and it helps to serve as a bridge between the public and government on the key societal and political issues of the day.

If not for local broadcast TV stations carrying the voice of the community and delivering lifeline reporting to America’s television viewers, then who would serve in this vital role? It is highly unlikely that cable networks could duplicate, with any level of consistency or success, what broadcast TV stations provide to their viewers year round.

As Congress moves forward with its media and video reform agenda, it’s crucial for lawmakers to factor in what’s needed to help advance the principles of localism for the benefit of America’s television viewers. After all, local TV stations rely not only on advertising sales to sustain their business, but revenue generated from programming deals reached with pay-TV providers to redistribute their content via retransmission consent.

Washington’s pay-TV lobby falsely claims that it’s broadcast TV programming fees that are driving up the cost of paid television service, but in reality these costs remain a small fraction of what customers pay for on their monthly bills.

It’s Congress that will decide whether to allow TV broadcasters to continue to freely negotiate with pay-TV providers for the fair market value of their content.

The ability of local broadcast TV stations to serve our nation’s local communities rests on the existence of viable revenue streams that Congress has traditionally made available to promote local television service. Compromising the ability of local TV stations to compete for such revenue streams would create a regulatory imbalance that would threaten the unique benefits of localism and ultimately jeopardize the future of local broadcast TV.

Are federal regulators prepared to set a bright regulatory line for their engagement in what today are otherwise recognized as highly successful private business negotiations between companies? For the sake of local communities across America, let’s hope not.

Kenny is director of Public Affairs for TVfreedom.org, a coalition of local broadcasters, community advocates, network TV affiliate associations and other independent organizations advocating for preserving the retransmission consent regime. He is a former press secretary at the FCC.