Speedy freshman RB hopes to contribute right away

One of the final additions to the 2015 Colorado football recruiting class might be the first to earn playing time when the season kicks off in 12 days.

Freshman running back Patrick Carr is competing in a crowded backfield that includes veterans Christian Powell, Michael Adkins II and Phillip Lindsay. Carr is also vying for a role as a kickoff return man and it's possible he could be the first Buff to touch the ball in 2015 if he continues to perform well and CU receives the opening kickoff of the season.

Carr, a 5-foot-8, 195-pound product of the Houston area, was originally planning to play his college football at Arkansas, but when things didn't work out there, he chose to be Buff instead. Mike MacIntyre was more than happy to add a speedy running back who had rushed for more than 100 yards in a game 18 times during his high school career to the roster. Carr also recorded a personal best 10.56-second 100-meter dash running track at the high-school level.

His speed has caused plenty of teammates to stand up a take notice during his first fall camp in Boulder. Speed has been a commodity in demand for the Buffs in recent seasons.

Advertisement

"Explosive," junior safety Tedric Thompson said describing Carr. "As soon as he gets the ball in his hands, people are on their toes because you know he's going to make somebody miss or he's going to lower his shoulder on somebody. Whenever he gets the ball in his hands, the team stands up because we know he's going to make a play."

Rivals.com rated Carr as the 14th best all-purpose running back in the 2015 class and the 87th best player overall from the football rich state of Texas. Carr came to Boulder expecting to play right away despite the presence of so many other experienced running backs.

"I don't want to go out there and redshirt. I'd rather set the foundation right away and go get it," Carr told Rivals in the spring.

Coach Mike MacIntyre does not allow freshman and newcomers who joined the program in the summer to talk to the media until after the first game of the season. But just because he can't do interviews yet, doesn't mean he has gone unnoticed.

"I think if you watch his high school tape, you can see it,' running backs coach Klayton Adams said. "He's definitely got some explosiveness. He runs with a very low center of gravity. We've just got to keep bringing him along and learning the offense."

Adams said Carr and fellow freshman running back Dino Gordon have adapted well to the CU system in camp. They are both benefitting from the way CU practices, getting every player a high number of reps. Adams said the biggest challenge standing between the pair of freshman and playing time is the crowded situation in the backfield.

Powell has led the Buffs in rushing for three consecutive seasons. Adkins might have taken the title a year ago if not for late-season injuries and Lindsay was a standout at times during his first year on the field at the college level.

Lindsay is hoping for more playing time and more opportunities this fall. He admitted he has been impressed with the freshmen additions to his position group but he also said they will have another big learning curve to conquer in the coming week with the start of classes and academic demands on top of football responsibilities.

"Once school gets involved and they have to do a lot of classes and stuff, they start to understand it's a little harder than just playing football," Lindsay said. "Right now, we're kind of kept in and just playing football and all we focus on is football."

Lindsay provided some highlight-reel runs last season because of his aggressive style and refusal to be brought down by a single tackler. Carr might be considered an all-purpose back by some, but his teammates say he runs angry, too.

"He's going to turn heads," Thompson said. "He's a great running back and he's only a freshman. He runs with aggression. He's not the biggest back up top but he's got some strong legs and runs with aggression. He reminds me of Phil because people look at Phil and don't think he runs hard, but if you sleep on Phil, he will lower his shoulder on you."

Kyle Ringo: ringok@dailycamera.com, on Twitter: @kyleringo