An influx of illegal and unaccompanied immigrant children from Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador in U.S. border towns is causing the federal government to look elsewhere around the country to house them. But many Americans oppose the placement of illegal immigrants in their communities.

1. Granjeno, Texas

“In the past month I’ve seen it everyday, you gotta draw the line somewhere… This can’t go on forever.” — David Gara, Texas

Gara lives on the border, and although he thinks something must be done to stop the crossings, he admitted to the New York Daily News he prefers the children immigrants to the drug smugglers.

2. Columbus, Ohio

A noon protest at the Ohio Statehouse Friday afternoon is a “reaction to the recent surge in unaccompanied minors arriving in the U.S. through the southern border,” the Columbus Dispatch reported.

The issue is “hitting a chord with people.” –Tom Zawistowski, Ohio

3. Murrieta, California

“I’m a patriot first. I love California. I’m of Mexican descent, but I’m an American first. And as Americans we need to unite and stop what’s going on in this country.” –Raul Rodriguez, Jr., Calif.

According to a report by Color Lines, Rodriguez is the son of an immigrant but made it “clear that he’s an American above all else” during Murrieta Border Patrol Station protests.

4. Oracle, Arizona

About 65 demonstrators gathered near the small town of Oracle in Arizona to speak out against the surge of Central Americans into their community. Protestors say their communities are at risk.

“We don’t know who they are. We don’t know their health conditions. We don’t know a doggone thing because the federal government isn’t telling us anything.” –Robert Skiba, Arizona

Up the road, other Oracle residents protested the protest. Immigrant-rights groups also attended and counter-protested, Fox News Latino reported.

5. Vassar, Michigan

More than 50 people from across Michigan marched from Vassar City Hall to Wolverine Human Services’ Pioneer Work and Learn Center to protest the 12- to 17-year-old Central American illegal immigrant males who might get placed in their community temporarily for housing, Mlive.com reported.

“We’re not against kids. We have sympathy for the kids being used and exploited by the feds.” –Tamyra Murray, Michigan

6. Lawrenceville, Virginia

In late June, news of busloads of thousands of unaccompanied immigrant children and teens who scheduled to arrive in the town of 1,400 “didn’t go over well” and the plan was ultimately scrapped.

“I was just shocked. The way this process has been handled puts more fear in our eyes, because it’s been shoved down our throat….500 kids unaccounted for — illegal alien children in my little sleepy town — I just don’t think it’s the right fit for this community.”–Brian Roberts, Brunswick County Sheriff

NPR, met up with the Lewis family who live across from St. Paul’s College.

“The No. 1 concern we have is the potential for shenanigans and the potential for crime.”–Derek Lewis

Read more about the crisis at the border: