You must enter the characters with black color that stand out from the other characters

Message: * A friend wanted you to see this item from WRAL.com: http://wral.com/14944646

— A 38-year-old man who was arrested late Friday in a domestic disturbance in Fayetteville managed to steal a police car while in handcuffs and lead authorities on a high-speed chase before crashing into three other vehicles.

Authorities say they took Lloyd James Miller into custody at about 11 p.m. after responding to a domestic call at 142 Brocton Drive.

Despite being in handcuffs in the back seat of the cruiser, Miller was able to climb through the partition from the rear seat to front seat and drive away, a police spokesman said. Authorities said they tried to stop Miller from getting to the front seat but were unable to unlock the car in time.

Two officers began chasing Miller but lost sight of him after he drove through a yard in the 200 block of Pierron Drive. Officers found Miller shortly after he crashed the cruiser into a 2008 Cadiallac and 2015 Ford at the intersection of Reilly and Cliffdale roads. He was taken into custody again after a short foot chase.

Officers said Miller also crashed the cruiser into a 2004 Chevrolet in the 900 block of Siesta Court.

None of the people in the vehicles that were hit suffered injuries. Miller was taken to Cape Fear Valley Medical Center with minor injuries.

Miller faces charges of domestic violence assault on a female, larceny of a motor vehicle, possession of stolen property, felony speeding to elude arrest, resist, delay or obstruct, three counts of misdemeanor hit and run, failure to yield the right of way and failure to stop at a red light.

Authorities said Miller may also be charged with driving while impaired.

Miller was in the Cumberland County jail early Saturday. His bond information was not immediately available.

Authorities say Miller has previously been charged with four counts of assault on a female, second-degree arson, felony breaking-and-entering and communicating threats.