A photo of the skyline view of the Skyline Hogbacks taken in July. ( Monica McGowan / Special to the Daily Record )

This is a skyline view of the Skyline Hogbacks as they looked after being damaged by motorized vehicles. Vegetation was replaced by tire tracks, leaving the loose sediment an easy target for frequent and strong Colorado wind erosion, as well as stormwater issues. (Skyline Hogbacks Preservation Committee / Special to the Daily Record)

If you go What: Cañon City Council meeting When: 6 p.m. Monday Where: City Hall, lower level, 128 Main St. More info: The meeting is open to the public and is aired live on Channel 19.

Beginning this month, the Cañon City Parks Department and the Skyline Hogbacks Preservation Committee will begin initiating trail construction and improvements in the Hogbacks area.

According to a report to be presented during tonight's city council meeting, City Administrator Doug Dotson stated the Mile High Youth Corps later this month will begin work on the Ridge Trail, which will be about a three-quarter mile trail improvement. The Parks Department will begin construction in November on the north-south core trail, in the bottom of the Hogbacks. According to Dotson, the core trail will be a two-mile improved trail.

A Hogbacks Master Plan was adopted by the Cañon City Council in 2012 and the anonymous donation of $50,000 made it possible to purchase a piece of property that bisects the north and south sections of the hogbacks.

Advertisement

Cañon City was awarded earlier this year two significant grants to get the project off the ground. Between a National Fish and Wildlife Federation grant (partially funded by the Bureau of Land Management), a Great Outdoors Colorado Mini Grant, matching funds and contributions from other individuals and groups, more than $250,000 has been garnered for the project.

Monica McGowan, director of the Hogbacks Preservation Society, said a small group of concerned citizens first met in 1998, and user groups have been meeting since 2008, when the hogbacks were closed to all uses before it officially became designated as an open space. The groups began meeting formally in the fall of 2013 when they decided to go after some funding to get the project up and running.

The user groups include the Lower Arkansas Mountain Bicycling Association, Cañon City School District, Garden Park Paleontology Society, the local chapter of the Audubon Society, Rocky Mountain Back Country Association, neighborhood representatives of Fifth Street, Cañon City Geology Club, Skyline Hogbacks Preservation Society and Cañonland Walkers & Hikers.

During tonight's meeting, the council will consider a bid for the Hogbacks trail construction for the Parks Department to Tony Boone Trails of Salida for $14,000. This project is for the construction of a non-motorized multiple-use trail to be used by hikers, bicyclists and horseback riders. Four bids were received, according to tonight's meeting agenda, and this was the lowest bid.

Most of the improvements are expected to completed by mid-winter, according to the Administrator's Report, with all improvements to be complete by May 2015.

Also during tonight's meeting, the council will consider:

— First reading of an ordinance establishing a temporary program providing for waivers of water tap fees and certain other fees and costs for certain building construction prior to Nov. 30, 2016.

— Second reading of ordinances that would: allow Training Facility as a Special Review Use in the R-3, High Density Residential Zone District; identify a Training Facility (School of Dance) at 202 Douglas Ave.; amend Sections 17.20.085, 17.12.130, 17.12.140, 17.12.150, and 17.12.160, and Chapter 17.08; add a new Chapter 17.13 (Administrative Exceptions).

Visit canoncity.org to view the complete meeting agenda.