When the four declared candidates to replace outgoing Rep. Loretta Sanchez participated in a debate Oct. 17, a couple comments jumped out from what was largely a consensus policy lovefest.

First, there was former state Sen. Lou Correa joining his three fellow Democratic candidates in supporting a “Medicare for All” approach to health care – a single-payer system administered by the government.

Read the Register's original coverage of the debate.

Correa twice voted against state legislative efforts to establish a single-payer program in California. But he later defended the apparent contradiction.

“I firmly believe that healthcare should be dealt with on a nationwide scale and not piece-mealed together, state-by-state,” he told me. “That’s why I have supported President Obama’s Affordable Care Act. It is far from perfect, but it represents a positive step. Please note that it took Medicare decades to reach its present form. It will take the ACA time and effort as well.”

Correa also had concerns about the cost of the state proposals.

I explained that response to Democratic activist Greg Diamond. Diamond countered that, among other things, a single-payer program is unlikely to become national policy in the foreseeable future and a statewide program would at least provide better and more affordable care for Californians.

Special interests

The second comment that drew attention was in Anaheim City Councilman Jordan Brandman’s closing statement, “We need a principled, proved advocate who can stand up to special interests.”

Critics accuse Brandman of being a lackey for business interests. In split votes, he’s sided with the majority in granting tax breaks to new luxury hotels, in banning a Disney ticket tax and in approving a controversial stadium-lease negotiation for the Angels.

Five PACs, which received a combined $493,000 from Disney in 2012, spent $376,000 in independent expenditures for Brandman’s election to the council that year. Two of those PACs are run by entities that backed the hotel tax breaks – the Anaheim Chamber of Commerce and the O.C. Business Council.

“Mr. Brandman has stood up WITH special interests,” activist and school board member Jose Moreno wrote me.

But advocates of the hotel and Disney tax breaks have argued that they would result in more hotels in Anaheim and more building at Disneyland.

“One person’s supporters are another’s special interests,” Brandman told me later. “I have always put the best interests of the city of Anaheim’s residents first.”

Independent expenditures

Last week in this space, I wrote about the boom in independent expenditures for California legislative and statewide candidates, soaring from $9.3 million in 2002 to $78 million in 2014, according to the watchdog group Maplight.

Unbridled by limits on money given directly to candidates, independent expenditures allow those with deep pockets to run campaigns parallel to those of their preferred candidates.

As I was writing that column, the state Fair Political Practices Commission was taking a modest step toward more tightly regulating the practice.

While independent campaigns are banned from working with a candidate’s campaign, questions repeatedly arise of whether two campaigns are coordinating efforts.

The FPPC’s new rules may not do much to reduce the amount spent on independent expenditures, but they do give the agency more authority to punish scofflaws. Those new rules presume that improper coordination is occurring in several instances unless the parties involved can prove otherwise.

Indications of improper coordination now include a candidate’s relatives or former aides going to work for the independent group and the candidate helping raise funds for the independent group.

Contact the writer: mwisckol@ocregister.com; @MartinWisckol