We’ve been waiting to see what Girls star Allison Williams would look like as Peter Pan. After all, many iconic performers of both sexes have portrayed the timeless role — you can’t really say that about too many roles. Now, it’s Williams’ turn to try her best as she gears up for NBC’s live production of Peter Pan.

The daughter of Nightly News anchor Brian Williams revealed the first photo of her in role for Peter Pan Live! via her Instagram account. Showing off her first photo shoot as Peter, Allison caption the photo proudly.

“The transformation begins! My first shoot as Pan. Fun fact: I was all ready to cut my hair, then was told by the folks who actually know what they’re doing that a wig works better for everybody. So, December 4th, here we come. #wiglife #peterpanlive #nbc”

As The Inquisitr reported, it must have been a proud moment for Brian Williams, who had the opportunity to report the news on his daughter’s debut to the stage during a bit on NBC.

“Family members confirm she’s been rehearsing for this role since the age of 3, and they look forward to seeing her fly.”

Then a personal family photo was shown of Allison as a child wearing a version of the Peter Pan costume. That said it’s a far cry from how she looks in the updated version above.

At the time of her casting executive producers Craig Zadan and Neil Meron said she was a “major find.”

“She will reinvent the iconic role of Peter Pan with her wit, her warmth, her dynamic flying and her wonderful musical abilities.”

The promotion continued for Peter Pan Live! as Williams spoke with NBC’s TODAY about getting the role and offering to go to “great lengths” to fit the part.

“I sort of very tentatively offered to cut my hair, I was like, ‘You know, if it’s a thing that would help I could cut my hair,’ and they were like, ‘You’re welcome to do that, we’re still gonna put you in a wig.”

A few weeks ago, Allison also shared a training video of herself flying on wires but it was without the costume.

In addition to Williams The Inquisitr reported the role of Hook will be played by Christopher Walken. The Girls actress will have some huge shoes to fill. The last person to have embodied the role was actor Charlie Rowe for the UK mini series Neverland.