All are Italian on Columbus Day

Lindenhurst, L.I.: The Columbus Day Parade is a celebration of tradition — yet Americans do not live by tradition alone. Columbus Day has Italian and American roots that branch to today. Perhaps the Italian taste of the Columbus Day Parade is the flavor of the day; however, it’s not the only spice in the mix. All Americans are members of the cast on this stage. We are all in this together. Essentially, Columbus Day is the American way. Susan and Robert Davniero

Ridgewood: Why do we celebrate Christopher Columbus? History has a way of rewarding second-place winners. Francheisko Perez

Brooklyn: Welcome to America; now speak English. With the changing times, and the struggle to find a job, people should learn English. Don’t get me wrong, coming from an Italian-American family, we aren’t the first people to pronounce things correctly. Gianni Scala

Nightmare flashback

Bronx: The lunatics from the Tea Party have taken over Washington, and the head psycho, Sen. Ted Cruz, reminds me of Hitler when he took over Germany and stopped him. Doris Festante

Blame the GOP

Manchester, N.J.: I would like to reply to my fellow Manchester resident, Voicer Maria Damato, about her recent letter alleging that President Obama is responsible for disrespecting World War II veterans and ordering park rangers to inconvenience and “hurt” the American public. Her letter is a poorly veiled attempt to ignore the facts that the past weeks have been a result of Republican callousness. Obama has been kicked around by these GOP cretins for five years, and he and real Americans have had enough. Watching the Republicans try to get out of their own way has been delightful. Charles Morgan

What’s to fear?

Farmingdale, L.I.: If the Republican Party is so sure that Obamacare is doomed to failure, why are they insisting that it be repealed? Mary Coyne

Life and Obamacare

Calverton, L.I.: In this month of October, many in our nation celebrate Respect Life. There are many efforts made by men and women to preserve the lives of whales, dolphins, dogs, cats and other animals. Life is a gift from God for all — the born and unborn — as proven by science showing that all life begins at conception. However, when it comes to human beings, we permit and support the unjust Supreme Court ruling of 1973 (Roe vs. Wade) that lets babies be killed in their mothers’ wombs. This travesty of justice must be repealed. Today, our elected officials continue to pass unjust laws with no respect for individual welfare. Such a law is Obamacare. The dire consequences of this law are unfolding day by day, and are ignored by our elected officials who are unwilling to repeal this unjust law. This act is proving to be unaffordable, leading to government dictatorship. As we celebrate Respect Life, we pray for those in authority to have wisdom, and promote liberty and justice for all. Dorothy Grover

Stop the spending

Long Beach, L.I.: If, as the President claimed, raising the debt ceiling does not raise spending, then why does Congress need to raise the debt limit? The President keeps saying that the nation will default unless the limit is raised. Doesn’t that tell us that he intends to spend more? Washington should learn to live within its means — as all responsible Americans must do. Terence Kane

They are both to blame

Jackson, N.J.: To Voicer Al Schwarzler: According to the U.S. Department of the Treasury, annual deficits have occurred since 1931, except for five years when there were surpluses, the last being 1957. There were annual deficits in all eight years under Bill Clinton, totaling $1.4 trillion added to the accumulated debt. In fairness to Clinton, he came closer to running an annual surplus than many Presidents before him and definitely the two after him. As far as “concern about the debt,” many Democrats such as Barack Obama, Harry Reid and Nancy Pelosi have all objected to, and voted against, increases to the debt ceiling when a Republican was President. Bottom line, both parties are to blame for the current financial condition of this country. Thomas J. Faughnan

Lift the age cap

Manhattan: The ballot measure to amend the state Constitution’s mandatory retirement age for judges should pass. It is bad policy for all the reasons cited by state Court of Appeals Judge Robert Smith in his Oct. 3 Op-Ed “Let judges serve in their prime years.” I would add checks and balances to the argument, because neither the executive nor legislative branches are so constrained. More particularly, the underlying idea that 70 is too old to work as a judge, but not too old to work as a governor, state senator or Assembly member, is as mystifying as it is false. Laurence Stuart Warshaw

UN-fair to New Yorkers

Manhattan: It’s disgraceful that the United Nations representatives are allowed to swarm our city, tying up surface traffic on the whole East Side and jamming our East Side subways. For instance, I had a medical appointment on East 17th St. and couldn’t get there. There must be another way. Ruth A. Unterberg

Can’t beat Mother Nature

East Hampton, L.I.: I wish Gov. Christie would stop using the phrase, “We’re stronger than the storm.” The almighty God sends all storms, and nobody is stronger than the almighty God. Bertha Hopson

Pot, pot everywhere

East Patchogue, L.I.: To all the people who think marijuana should be legalized: How would you like to see the pilot stoned on the plane you are on, or your children seeing their teachers stoned, or getting into a car when the driver has smoked? Catherine Lo Curto

Horse country

Staten Island: Carriage horses do not belong amidst the hustle and bustle of New York City streets. In contrast, the Cape May carriage horses work in a much more serene atmosphere and only operate when the temperature is suitable. Mary Ann DeFrancesco

First daughter

Manhattan: Years ago, when I needed help badly, someone wrote to Bill de Blasio on my behalf. He never responded. It wasn’t media-worthy. I will vote for him anyway, and hope his wonderful daughter, Chiara, will one day enter the political arena, illuminating and enlightening it with her compassion and integrity. Elizabeth Gitlin

Honoring thy parents?

Oakland Gardens: Minimal raises and reductions in Medicare coverage only pours salt on the wounds of the middle class. Retirement ages are increasing and Medicare premiums are increasing, leaving less food on the table for older Americans. What is this world coming to? Gary Rofofsky

Get in line

Manahttan: I’ve been going to Starbucks for years, particularly the one in Dumbo. Distracted by the exorbitant prices, I never noticed that I was continually standing on long lines. I don’t go to movies because of lines. I don’t go to supermarkets because of lines. I don’t go to popular restaurants because of lines. And I don’t go to sporting events because of lines. So, today, after years of waiting at Starbucks, I stepped off the line and walked out. I went next door to One Girl Cookies. There was no line. What makes a coffee shop think they are so good that they can make you line up like a herd of cattle or a lost group of imbeciles? Starbucks and I are having a lovers’ quarrel. I will never go back. Until the next time. David Lawrence

Who started it?

Bay Shore, L.I.: To Voicer Andrew Feinstein: Since your comment, I’ve rewatched the video with Alexian Lien and the bikers, and I do not see him speeding up and ramming the back of the motorcycle. I do, however, see a motorcyclist purposely cut off an SUV (he even looks over his shoulder to do so), then stop in the middle of the Henry Hudson. Furthermore, I also see the driver of the SUV pull over to the side of the road, like a responsible driver after a fender bender. Lon Davison

Don’t litter

Bergenfield, N.J.: When I was growing up in the 1930s and 1940s, my mother always told us never to throw gum or candy wrappers in the street. Wait until you see a trash can, I was told. I am up there in age now, and I still hold on to gum wrappers and old tissues until I get home. I feel that my mother is looking down at me. Helen Hill