BUDGET hole blown -- TRUMP comes to New Jersey -- BRAMNICK offers new redistricting idea

By Matt Friedman (mfriedman@politico.com; @mattfriedmanNJ)

Good Wednesday morning!

Story Continued Below

I got home pretty late from the Correspondents Club show, and even though this is not an off-the-record affair, I will respect organizer Mike Symons’ wishes to be low-key about it, if only because I’m too lazy to summarize it. Suffice it to say POLITICO’s own Katie Jennings can actually sing, Jon Bramnick slayed when he filled in for Christie with the final speech, and lots of talented (well, some talented) members of the New Jersey press corps, as usual, somehow managed to put together a good show with little time or resources.

On an unrelated note, Donald Trump’s New Jersey rally/Christie campaign debt fundraiser is tonight in Lawrenceville.

QUOTE OF THE DAY: “I’ll be a fiscal conservative, but generous to you.” — Bramnick to (unbeknownst to him at the time) Miss New Jersey during a “Dating Game” segment at the show, describing what his first 100 days as governor would like like.

HAPPY BIRTHDAY: Democratic campaign operative Jenny Davis, former Old Tappan Mayor Victor Polce. And apologies for missing these on Wednesday: Constantina Meis of Young Democrats of America and Willingboro Councilman Darvis Holley.

WHERE’S CHRISTIE?

NEWS

125 MASTROS — “N.J. treasurer: Revenue projections off by $1B over two fiscal years,” by POLITICO’s Ryan Hutchins: “New Jersey’s top budget official told lawmakers Wednesday the state’s revenue predictions for the current and next fiscal year were off by more than $1 billion, but said the difference can be made up without draconian cuts and that there was no need to reduce the state’s pension payment. Still, an image emerged of a financial situation that would require immediate attention and likely complicate budget negotiations over the next six weeks, adding to a long list of lofty debates playing out in backrooms across the statehouse.” http://politi.co/1quLql5

—“Christie misses tax-revenue estimate, blows $600M hole in current budget,” by NJ Spotlight’s John Reitmeyer: “For Christie, the last-minute revisions to his budget are all the more difficult since most of the spending has already occurred at this point in the fiscal year.Only 2014’s $1 billion gap was larger than the one being confronted in 2016, and the latest forecast revisions are raising new concerns among lawmakers about the possibility of another state credit-rating downgrade. It also remains to be seen how the now-shaky fiscal picture will impact talks among legislators who are trying to find a way to renew the state’s tapped-out Transportation Trust Fund.” http://bit.ly/209EWUN

— "Treasurer suggests delaying payment schedule for BEIP tax credits” http://politi.co/1WEQv8q

—OLS budget officer Frank Haines remarks: http://bit.ly/22g9dDb

—Treasurer Ford Scudder’s remarks and updated revenue tables: http://bit.ly/1NyrTLS

AC — “Is today the day Atlantic City gets its rescue plan?” by NJ Advance Media’s Brent Johnson: “Thursday could be the day state lawmakers finally unveil a final plan to keep Atlantic City from becoming the first New Jersey municipality in nearly 80 years to go bankrupt. Then again, it could be Friday. Or maybe Monday? Or maybe not at all.” http://bit.ly/209Ijey

WILL SHE BE AT THE FUNDRAISER? — “Trump's sister won't hear GWB bridge scandal arguments,” by The AP: “Donald Trump's sister will not be a part of a federal appeals court panel hearing arguments regarding the release of a list of unindicted co-conspirators in the 2013 George Washington Bridge lane-closing scandal. The 3rd Circuit Court of Appeals in Philadelphia delayed the release of the list on Tuesday and set a June 6 hearing. The court announced Wednesday that judges Thomas Ambro, Kent Jordan and Anthony Scirica will hear 15 minutes of arguments from a group of media organizations including The Associated Press and from a lawyer representing an anonymous person on the list seeking to block its release.” http://bit.ly/1quojHh

—“Bridgegate: Key dates in ongoing legal battle over release of names” http://bit.ly/1XAoMVN

HAS TRUMP NOT OFFERED TO PAY? — “N.J. taxpayers still footing the bill for Christie's political travel,” by The Record’s Dustin Racioppi: “Governor Christie has curtailed his out-of-state travel since dropping out of the Republican race for the White House earlier this year, but taxpayers are still getting the bills for his security detail. Earlier this month Christie’s administration billed $170,116 for the cost of his Executive Protection Unit, a legally required, round-the-clock security service provided by the State Police, for the first three months of the year. Christie dropped out of the race on Feb. 10 after placing sixth in the New Hampshire primary.” http://bit.ly/1qvmLwP

THE TACO SALAD TWEET DIDN’T SMOOTH THINGS OVER? — “Will Trump face unhappy Hispanics at first New Jersey campaign stop?” from WHYY’s NewsWorks: “Trump and Gov. Chris Christie will appear at the Lawrenceville National Guard Armory for a combined rally and fundraiser. Lawrenceville, just north of Trenton, is in Mercer County, where the population is about 15 percent Latino. Trump’s remarks about building a border wall to stop ‘rapists’ from Mexico entering the United States appear to have energized Latinos to register to vote, and polls show almost 90 percent do not like Trump. Amner Deleon, a lawyer and Democratic activist in Princeton, told WHYY-FM in Philadelphia he is encouraging everyone he meets to register to vote. ‘He has alienated not only the Latinos but the women, the Muslims, and pretty much anyone in the immigrant community,’ Deleon said.” http://bit.ly/209FtGz

PARKS AND RECORRUPTION — “Kevin Bannon pressured county workers to attend Hughes’ fundraiser, employee says," by The Trentonian’s David Foster: Mercer County Park Commission Executive Director Kevin Bannon played a major role in fundraising for his boss — possibly a little too much. According to an email obtained by The Trentonian, Bannon contacted Mercer County employees about attending a fundraiser he put on for county Executive Brian Hughes in September at the Park Commission’s Boathouse at Mercer Lake. ‘I hope you will consider joining us for a fun-filled evening to support Brian Hughes for County Executive. Brian has been such a supporter of our parks and open space over the years. This is simply a fun evening of great food, music and drink to celebrate our wonderful Park Commission and support Brian’s bid for a fourth term as County Executive. Please help by attending, bringing some guests and purchasing some tickets. Thank you!’ the email reads that was sent on July 28 at 4:50 p.m. It is unclear if the email entitled “Please join us for fun event!” was sent from Bannon’s work email or while he was on the clock. But one Mercer County Park Commission employee, who wished to remain anonymous for fear of retribution, said he received this message on ‘at least three different occasions.’” http://bit.ly/209DhPe

LITTLE LIMA — “Why Paterson, New Jersey, is famous in Lima, Peru,” by The Atlantic’s Maria-Pia Negro Chin: “Guillermo Callegari Balarezo first came here on a Saturday morning in August of 1962, carrying only one bag. He arrived at a time when, he says, “there were about 11 Peruvians in Paterson.” One of those 11 was supposed to pick him up, but after some time passed, he went into a Puerto Rican restaurant to ask if there were any Peruvians around. ‘They are coming,’ was the response … The influx of Peruvians to Paterson persisted and grew such that, decades after Callegari’s arrival, the city is now home to 10,000 Peruvians, by the Census Bureau’s count. Community leaders say that the number is closer to 30,000, and that the exact Peruvian population in Paterson is hard to determine because many don’t participate in the Census and many check “other” on their form because of their diverse backgrounds.” http://theatln.tc/1XAromx

GOT OUR EISENBERG ON YOU — “Trump campaign forms fund-raising alliance with RNC, NJ GOP,” by The Record’s Herb Jackson: “Donald Trump has signed on to creating a new political fund that can accept up to $449,400 per donor, an amount that would have been illegal in the 2012 election, by uniting his campaign with the Republican National Committee and 11 state organizations, including New Jersey’s. The fund will be run by a one-time chairman of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, Lewis Eisenberg, who is finance chairman of the RNC and once held a similar post for the New Jersey Republican State Committee.” http://bit.ly/1quICo0

SWEENEY 2017 — “OINK OINK OINK OINK!,” by PolitickerNJ’s Jay Lassiter: “Once in a while, a political figure slips up and gives us a proper glimpse at how politics really gets done in New Jersey. They accidentally go and divulge something dishy. That’s what Ocean County GOP Chairman George Gilmore did earlier this year when he addressed the Ocean County Republican Committee: – ‘I don’t think this is any secret, that I can’t say it: I have spoken with Senator Sweeney, the president of the Senate, who has assured me that (Ocean County Freeholder) Jack Kelly’s nomination to the parole board will be heard by the Judiciary Committee and will be voted upon by the Senate and that we’ll be happy with the results of both of those,; – Just about everything that’s wrong with New Jersey politics is embedded in that one innocuous-sounding statement: 1) poor judgment + arrogance in Trenton 2) a jaw-dropping disregard for actual democracy and 3) political patronage that drives our state’s colossally high property taxes.” http://bit.ly/1quHYH2

DOWN THE SHORE — “At the shore, help is wanted. Really wanted,” by The Press of Atlantic City’s Martin DeAngelis: “Neil Parish needs to hire 30 or 35 people for a new restaurant he plans to open in Margate in time for Memorial Day weekend. But he’s just a fraction of the way toward that goal after a month of hunting for workers. He didn’t think that would be such a problem given what he knows about the Atlantic City area these days … With businesses by the hundreds opening up or gearing up for another summer at the South Jersey shore, obviously not every employer is having such a hard time finding help. But other bosses, even at long-established companies, have been surprised this year by seeing fewer people applying for jobs than they’ve had in the past. Denise Beckson, operations and human resources director at Morey’s Piers in the Wildwoods, said applications this year were off 14 percent from this time last year. ‘This year, we’ve definitely seen a decrease in the number of seasonal applications for our positions from the last three or four years,’ said Beckson” http://bit.ly/1qunn5S

BECAUSE DONALD TRUMP IS A 1ST AMENDMENT CHAMPION — “Trump flags keep flying after charges dropped,” by The Asbury Park Press’ Kathleen Hopkins: “OCEAN TOWNSHIP - Joseph Hornick will be able to fly his Donald Trump political flags at his West Long Branch home without retribution, after the borough municipal prosecutor on Wednesday dismissed a summons alleging he violated an ordinance. ‘I got justice today, and the First Amendment has won,’ Joseph Hornick said as he left West Long Branch Municipal Court, which holds its sessions at the Ocean Township municipal complex. Hornick, 54, a longtime West Long Branch resident, has been flying Trump political flags at his Cedar Avenue home since February, but was cited in March under a borough ordinance that restricts the time frame during which political signs can be displayed … At Hornick’s court appearance on the summons, Gerald Massell, West Long Branch’s municipal prosecutor, said he was dismissing the complaint, saying the ordinance pertains to political signs, not flags.” http://on.app.com/1qunuhM

COLD CASE THAWED — “Michelle Lodzinski guilty of murdering son Timmy Wiltsey,” by NJ Advance Media’s Ted Sherman and Sue Epstein: “Almost a quarter century after five-year-old Timothy Wiltsey disappeared, his mother was found guilty of his murder today in a dramatic end to one of New Jersey's most notorious cold cases. A jury of seven men and five women convicted Lodzinski after eight weeks of testimony before Middlesex County Superior Court Judge Dennis Nieves in New Brunswick. They deliberated just four hours after the foreman was replaced Tuesday with an alternate because of an undisclosed ‘personal matter.’ Lodzinski, 48, a former South Amboy resident, had long denied she had anything to do with her son's death. She said Timothy went missing on May 25, 1991, when she went to get a soda while the pair were attending a carnival in nearby Sayreville.” http://bit.ly/24ZU9v2

WHY WOULD THEY WANT TO? — “Bramnick: Let the League of Women Voters handle redistricting in N.J.,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “With Democrats reviving an effort to change how New Jersey redraws its state legislative districts, Assembly Republican Leader Jon Bramnick is suggesting taking it out of politicians’ hands altogether. Bramnick on Wednesday floated the idea of allowing the non-partisan League of Women Voters to take on the important once-a-decade process. ‘Over my last 30 years in politics, I have watched the League of Women Voters. They have been the most neutral organization I’ve ever known.’ Bramnick said in a phone interview. ‘Every time they’ve conducted debates, every time they’ve put out literature, it’s right down the middle.’” http://politi.co/1XAoYV8

NJ TRANSIT: GOOD AT BEING PARALYZED, BUT NOT SO GOOD AT HELPING THE PARALYZED — “Disabled lawyer fed up with N.J. para-transit system finds another way,” by NJ Advance Media’s Susan K. Livio: “Civil rights attorney Daniel Florio of Maplewood graduated last fall with a master's degree from the John F. Kennedy School of Government at Harvard University – an achievement he hoped would open many doors leading to a promising career. Turns out, his hard work was far from over. Born with spinal muscular atrophy, Florio is a quadriplegic who operates a motorized wheelchair by remote control using his thumb … Returning to New Jersey, Florio knew he could not even begin looking for work until he figured out how to cope with the grueling commute on Access Link, a paratransit network of vans that runs parallel to the bus services offered by NJ Transit … The ADA expects paratransit trips to be ‘comparable’ in length to regular bus service, a term that allows an Access Link trip to be 1-1/2 times longer. Florio said the service routinely is three times as long under a rule that also allows drivers to arrive 20 minutes sooner or later than the requested pick-up time.’” http://bit.ly/24ZOOUz

TRADE THEM FOR HAMILTON TICKETS — “New Jersey's Revolutionary War history unearthed,” by NJ Advance Media’s Mark Di Ionno: “Bill Styple pulled three artifact bags out of his pocket. One had a uniform button, one had a plain shoe buckle and one had a hunk of melted lead used to make round shot for muzzle-loaders. Nearby, his son, Brad, working with a metal detector and spade, unearthed a piece of flat, dirt-caked metal with a small hole punched through it. There are about 50 other similar pieces of hardware now in the hands of the Commonwealth Heritage Group, a national historic preservation consultant, which did the first archeological survey of this excavation site a few weeks ago.” http://bit.ly/1XApouD

DIVIDED — “UnitedHealth Group exiting New Jersey Obamacare marketplace,” by POLITICO’s Katie Jennings: “UnitedHealth Group is pulling out of New Jersey’s Obamacare marketplace in 2017. The company’s subsidiary Oxford Health Plans will stop offering individual plans on the state’s federally facilitated health insurance marketplace, according to a letter from the state Department of Banking and Insurance. The letter was obtained by POLITICO through an Open Public Records Act request.” http://politi.co/1XAsejf

PUT ELEC ON IT.. OH, WAIT — “Mystery groups funneled attack fliers into Paterson's 6th Ward race,” by The Paterson Press’ Joe Malinconico: “In the final days of the acrimonious battle for the 6th Ward City Council seat, the two rivals got some last-minute support from attack fliers paid for by mystery groups. From left, Al Abdelaziz, Andre Sayegh From left, Al Abdelaziz, Andre Sayegh One blow was struck through a mailing that echoed incumbent councilman Andre Sayegh’s oft-asserted accusations that his opponent, Al Abdelaziz, would be a ‘rubber stamp’ for Mayor Jose ‘Joey’ Torres. That piece of campaign literature says it was paid for by ‘A Better New Jersey.’ The other assault came in the form of a handbill that shows Sayegh’s face on the body of a rat with the caption, ‘Everyone hates a snitch.”’The political literature offers no explanation for calling Sayegh a ‘snitch.’ It simply says, ‘Paid for by the CCP.’” http://bit.ly/1quI9lV

MAYBE THE CURRENT STRUCTURE CAN QUALIFY FOR THE NJ REGISTER OF HISTORIC PLACES — “American Dream developer says getting financing done is critical for on-site work to resume,” by The Record’s Linda Moss and John Brennan: “The developer of American Dream Meadowlands, the huge shopping and entertainment complex, said that getting the project's financing done is critical for on-site work to resume. Still, on Wednesday it remained unclear how quickly Canadian mall developer Triple Five will secure the necessary state approvals for its change in plans regarding the issuance of $1 billion in bonds to help pay for completion of the long-stalled project.” http://bit.ly/209FUR6

DEMOCRATS: ‘SURE, JON. NO PROBLEM’ — “Bramnick: Let the League of Women Voters handle redistricting in N.J.,” by POLITICO’s Matt Friedman: “With Democrats reviving an effort to change how New Jersey redraws its state legislative districts, Assembly Republican Leader Jon Bramnick is suggesting taking it out of politicians’ hands altogether. Bramnick on Wednesday floated the idea of allowing the non-partisan League of Women Voters to take on the important once-a-decade process. ‘Over my last 30 years in politics, I have watched the League of Women Voters. They have been the most neutral organization I’ve ever known,’ Bramnick said in a phone interview. ‘Every time they’ve conducted debates, every time they’ve put out literature, it’s right down the middle.’” http://politi.co/1XAoYV8

YOUR TOLL DOLLARS AT WORK — “DRPA gives its CEO a $39,393 raise,” by The Philadelphia Inquirer’s John Laughlin: “The board voted unanimously to raise John Hanson's salary from $180,081 to $219,474. This brings Hanson's pay in line with what his predecessor, John Matheussen, earned.” http://bit.ly/209EVAm

MVC — “Should N.J. ditch the front license plate requirement?” by NJ Advance Media’s Larry Higgs: “Is it time for New Jersey to join Pennsylvania and eliminate a law requiring a front license plate on vehicles? A Central Jersey lawmaker thinks it's time to become a one-plate state. There are 19 states that don't require front license plates, which also includes neighboring Delaware. State Senator Samuel Thompson, R-Monmouth, Middlesex, has proposed a bill to make New Jersey number 20 to ditch the front plate. Thompson said the idea came from some of his constituents who were concerned about the extra cost for an additional license plate.” http://bit.ly/1qvmSbB

ELIZABETH BOE — “Elizabeth schools' $50K PR contract sparks cries of quid pro quo,” by NJ Advance Media’s Marissa Iati: “The city school board has voted to contract with a public relations consultant to the tune of up to $50,000, generating concern from political opponents and parents who say the no-bid agreement looks like a political quid pro quo. The board will call in Pat Politano of Strategic Message Management — who previously did consulting for mayor-backed board members' political campaigns — to handle public affairs for the district on an at-need basis. The appointment sparked criticism from politically opposed board member Carlos Trujillo and some parents, who said the contract looked like a thank-you gift for helping elect the commissioners supported by Mayor J. Christian Bollwage and state Sen. Ray Lesniak (D-20).” http://bit.ly/1XApoL6

WOULD PREFER DEVITO-SCHWARZENEGGER ELEMENTARY — “Elementary school poised to be renamed after twin astronauts,” by The AP: A New Jersey elementary school is about to be renamed after twin astronauts Scott and Mark Kelly. The Elementary School in West Orange on Thursday will become the Kelly Elementary School. The astronauts are alumni.” http://bit.ly/1qumCK2

SO SURVIVOR IS STILL ON — “'Survivor' finale shocker: N.J. contestant Michele Fitzgerald named winner,” by NJ Advance Media’s Vicki Hyman: “Michele Fitzgerald, the 24-year-old bartender from Freehold, came out on top on CBS's "Survivor" Wednesday night, taking home $1 million and becoming the second New Jersey winner in three seasons, after Jersey City cop Tony Vlachos won the title in 2014.” http://bit.ly/209CVIv

MORE NEWS

—“Rutgers confidentially pays $300,000 to settle varsity basketball player's discrimination and abuse suit” http://bit.ly/1qvmVnY

—“Superior Court judge reprimanded for 'vulgar' comments” http://bit.ly/1qvmQAF

—“Newark budget would hike taxes $85 this year on average” http://bit.ly/1XAoRZC

—“Atlantic City picks Blatstein to develop site between Revel, Showboat” http://bit.ly/209DPEJ

—“Atlantic City delays vote on policy to allow boardwalk booze” http://bit.ly/209DVMB

—“Bergen County executive’s plan calls for more cops, safety review at hospital” http://bit.ly/1qvnpKA

—“Clinton campaign opens Bergen County headquarters” http://bit.ly/24ZQeyp

—“No word from Garrett on attending Fairleigh Dickinson-hosted debate” http://bit.ly/209GmyG

—“Eustace to Fidelity Investments: Stop Supporting Garrett” http://bit.ly/1XArEC6

—“Five-cent bag tax up for debate in New Jersey Assembly Thursday” http://politi.co/1qvmv0J

—“Nanny cam detective apologizes to defendant for racial slur” http://bit.ly/209DamQ

—“Christie: Education in NJ has become ‘too much about politics’” http://politi.co/1qvmp9h

—“Women’s Political Caucus of NJ welcomes new president and board members” http://bit.ly/24ZPGZx

—“Wilda Diaz kicks off mayoral reelection campaign, announces slate” http://bit.ly/1qvmMkf

—“Privatization of 911, jail nurses would save Salem County $1.1M, officials say” http://bit.ly/1qumZEf

—“In CD7, Larsen and Lance campaigns trade barbs” http://bit.ly/1qunSg3

—“State hasn't decided if county must double tax refund to Atlantic City” http://bit.ly/1XApMJH

—“Request to raise gay-pride flag stirs debate among Clifton council members” http://bit.ly/1qvnmOS

—“Plan to euthanize Canada geese in Edgewater draws criticism from animal-rights activists” http://bit.ly/1qvmXfo

-Want to make an impact? POLITICO New Jersey has a variety of multi-platform solutions available to reach and activate the most influential people in the Garden State. Have a petition you want signed? A cause you’re promoting? Share your message with our influential readers to increase awareness and drive action. Contact Chris Falls to find out how: cfalls@politico.com.

FOR MORE political and policy news from New Jersey, check out Politico New Jersey’s home page: http://politi.co/1JiYTDg

SUBSCRIBE to the Playbook family: POLITICO Playbook: http://politi.co/1phAeAC … New York Playbook: http://politi.co/1ON8bqW ... Florida Playbook: http://politi.co/1JDm23W ... New Jersey Playbook: http://politi.co/1HLKltF ... Massachusetts Playbook: http://politi.co/1Nhtq5v ... Illinois Playbook: http://politi.co/1N7u5sb ... California Playbook: http://politi.co/1N8zdJU and our friends at POLITICO Brussels Playbook: http://politi.co/1FZeLcw ... All our policy and political tipsheets http://politi.co/1M75UbX

NOW AVAILABLE: HARD TO ACCESS CAMPAIGN DETAILS - POLITICO Pro, POLITICO’s premium solution for policy professionals offers Campaign Pro. Get breaking news and analysis about this season’s unconventional presidential race, as well as developments about this year’s most competitive House, Senate and gubernatorial races. You’ll also have access to the Campaign Pro Race Dashboard, giving you all of the facts about specific races in one, convenient place. The dashboard provides campaign details such as: current consultant rosters, the latest polling numbers and race summaries written by Pro’s Campaign Pro reporters. Beyond the 2016 cycle, you’ll continue to receive coverage that provides you with a behind-the-curtain look at potential races, including insight about candidate/consulting firm partnerships forming behind the scenes, and about all fundraising efforts. Request your Campaign Pro demo today.