Published: Tuesday, 9/2/2014 - Updated: 1 year ago



Stories you might have missed: 9-02 Top articles from this weekend's editions of The Blade



THE BLADE Enlarge | Buy This Image A group of vigilantes stop a car on the road to Monroe, Mich., while another one halts the vehicle's owner. Every automobile attempting to enter Monroe June 11, 1937, was stopped by armed vigilantes who are trying to keep sympathizers of the Newton Steel Co. strike from entering Monroe.

1. Monday Memories: Organized labor fights for foothold

In the summer of 1937 the nation’s attention turned to a strike at Newton Steel Company in Monroe. Monroe had 18,000 residents, and 1,350 of them worked at Newton Steel.

When a May 26, 1937, deadline for a contract with the three firms passed, the Congress of Industrial Organizations called for a steel workers strike. Picket lines went up in Monroe on May 28. The strike resulted in the walkout of about 120 plant workers who supported unionization. Another 800 employees did not want to strike and were members of a company “union” created by Republic Steel as a counter-maneuver to CIO organizing efforts. Republic Steel shut the plant down, fearing violence. READ MORE



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Chris Ludwig, RN Ambulatory CareNavigator at ProMedica Physicians Group, left, counsels Sherron Kern and her husband, Lowell Kern.

2. Obamacare transforms medical industry

Most agree that the Affordable Care Act, commonly known as Obamacare, has fundamentally changed the health insurance landscape in the United States, but the health-care law is also quietly causing a sea change in the way hospitals and doctors treat patients and do business.

“The entire industry is really doing a paradigm shift,” said Terri Thompson, vice president of population health for ProMedica.

Leaders at ProMedica and Mercy health systems, the two largest health providers in the Toledo area, are moving away from what they call an outdated model, where doctors get paid for each service provided, to a new one that is broadly known as population health management. READ MORE



THE BLADE/AMY E. VOIGT Enlarge | Buy This Image Tommy "T-jaks" Jackson raps to the crowd's delight.

3. Excitement fades quickly after headliner a no-show at Perrysburg hip hop concert

It was a case of disappearing acts at Saturday‘‍s OG Hip Hop Concert and BBQ at the Perrysburg Community Center, where headliners didn’‍t show and local acts pulled out at the last minute.

Headliner Coolio was said to have suffered an asthma attack hours before he was scheduled to perform. Jason Craig, director of operations for the center, said he didn't expect the rapper, famous for his 1995 hit “Gangsta’‍s Paradise,” to go on.

The show, which ran from noon to 11 p.m. was carried by more than two dozen local acts, including rappers and singers, who performed across four stages. READ MORE



THE BLADE/ HASAN DUDAR Enlarge | Buy This Image Former United States President Jimmy Carter delivered the keynote speech at the 51st Annual Islamic Society of North America Convention, at the Cobo Center in Detroit.

4. Carter decries global abuse against women

Worldwide abuse of women and girls is “the most terrible human-rights violation on Earth,” and the United States is not immune, former President Jimmy Carter said Saturday during an address to the convention of the Islamic Society of North America.

Among the grave statistics Mr. Carter cited during his speech before an audience of more than 3,000 in Cobo Hall is the routine strangulation of infant daughters, particularly in poor countries because poverty impels some families to desire sons for economic support when the parents grow old.

“At this moment, now missing from the face of the Earth are about 160 million girls because their parents strangled their daughters at birth,” Mr. Carter said. READ MORE



BLADE/JEREMY WADSWORTH Enlarge University of Toledo WR Corey Jones (4) scores a touchdown against New Hampshire during the second quarter of a football game at the Glass Bowl Saturday.

5. Local college teams win season openers

Read game stories from the Toledo Rockets, Michigan Wolverines, and Ohio State Buckeyes. READ MORE

6. Hacking viewed as real threat as car computerization grows

If it’s computerized and connected, chances are it can be hacked.

The potential targets are almost endless — your smart phone, your refrigerator, even Dick Cheney’s heart.

The former vice president told a CBS interviewer earlier this year that doctors had disabled his pacemaker’s wireless capabilities, lest some ne’er-do-well remotely turn off his ticker.

Such are the concerns of an increasingly networked world.

Those dangers have now spread to automobiles. READ MORE

7. Cedar Point sleuths on wild ride

The regular season for Cedar Point ends this weekend, and that means the second season for the Sandusky amusement park is about to begin.

No, not the Halloween-themed weekend operations that run through October.

Now is when diehard Cedar Point fans will ramp up their guessing and sleuthing to uncover what new ride or attraction the park plans to debut next year.

“Actually, the community starts speculating as soon as they open the previous attraction,” said Jeff Putz, a Web site operator for PointBuzz.com, a top Cedar Point fan site. “The funny thing is, there’s so many guesses and speculation that eventually somebody always gets it correct,” he said. READ MORE



THE BLADE/LORI KING Enlarge | Buy This Image Army infantryman Geoff Earnhart of Perrysburg aims his AR15 Smith & Wesson M&P 15 at Shooters of Maumee. At right are Kelly and Brian Smith of Toledo.

8. Area shooting range owners shocked by gun tragedy

The tragic accident this week at an Arizona shooting range, where an instructor was killed while showing a 9-year-old girl how to fire an Uzi, left range operators in the Toledo area stunned, saddened, and questioning how such a troubling incident could even happen.

Most ranges in northwest Ohio and southeast Michigan prohibit the use of fully automatic firearms, and have strict regulations concerning children using the range.

“Your first reaction is shock when you hear about such a sad, sad thing, because shooting ranges are always supposed to be about safety first,” said Keith Helminski, who runs Shooters of Maumee, a public range that opened about two years ago.

“These shooting ranges aren’t the wild, wild West, and that’s not the protocol for anyone around here. Giving a child that young, with no experience, that kind of firearm ... that’s like taking a 9-year-old who has obviously never ridden a motorcycle before and putting them on a Harley-Davidson — you know what the end result is going to be.” READ MORE