By Jason Hart | Watchdog.org

Gawker Media staff may soon start chipping in for $300,000 union boss salaries in the name of “solidarity.”

Writers at Gawker, Jezebel, Deadspin and other Gawker Media websites vote Wednesday on forming a chapter of Writers Guild of America, East. A majority are expected to vote in favor of the union.

Hamilton Nolan, the Gawker writer leading the unionization drive, hopes Gawker Media CEO Nick Denton’s decision not to fight the WGA East vote will serve as a model for other online media companies.

“It’s good for Nick’s legacy. It’s good for Nick as a leader. It’s something good that Nick could do, I think, for the whole industry,” Nolan told Capital New York.

AFL-CIO president Richard Trumka — who was paid $322,131 by the union coalition last year — would love to see mass unionization in online media. WGA East is an AFL-CIO affiliate.

.@Gawker writers are voting next week to join @WGAEast & win their right to bargain w/ one voice http://t.co/QKD896tADF #1u #GoodLuck — Richard L. Trumka (@RichardTrumka) May 29, 2015

Employers more concerned than Denton about unionization are grappling with new National Labor Relations Board “ambush election” rules making it easier for unions to recruit members.

President Obama’s NLRB, stacked with labor union supporters, aims to reverse a trend of declining union membership by limiting the time businesses have to inform workers about the potential downsides of joining a union.

Under NLRB’s new rules, employers will have as little as two weeks before a union election to warn workers about restrictive union rules or questionable use of union dues.

RELATED: America’s top labor union bosses raked in millions in 2014

In 2014, WGA East’s 3,718 members paid an average of $81 each to cover executive director Lowell Peterson’s $300,000 salary and $1,015 in other expenses, based on the union’s annual filing with the U.S. Department of Labor.

The union paid assistant executive directors Ruth Gallo and Marsha Seeman $191,985 and $170,018, respectively, and paid senior counsel Ann Burdick $169,950. WGA East organizing director Justin Molito was paid $166,190.

This means WGA East members paid, on average, $269 in annual dues just for the compensation of five union executives.

Last year WGA East spent more money on union overhead and administration than on member representation. The union spent $1.57 million on representational activities, $1.65 million on overhead and $1.58 million on administration.

WGA East overhead spending included an average of more than $60,000 a month in rent and utility costs for the union’s Manhattan headquarters. This doesn’t appear to be a concern for Gawker Media staff encouraging coworkers to vote in favor of unionizing.

Gawker Media editor Tommy Craggs declined to comment on WGA East compensation and overhead spending when contacted by Watchdog via email.

Instead, Craggs replied to Watchdog’s inquiry by citing payroll figures from a financial disclosure for Franklin Center for Government and Public Integrity, the publisher of Watchdog.org.

“By the way, if you have any concerns about your compensation levels relative to those of your bosses at the Franklin Center for etc. etc., we’d be happy to put you in touch with an organizer at the Writers Guild of America, East,” Craggs wrote.

Franklin Center is a 501(c)(3) nonprofit and is not, unlike WGA East, funded with union dues taken from workers’ paychecks.