Negotiators for terminal operators and nearly 20,000 dockworkers at 29 West Coast ports, including the ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach, have reached a tentative deal on health care benefits, a critical element of their contract talks.

Representatives of the Pacific Maritime Association and the International Longshore and Warehouse Union declined to disclose the terms of the tentative agreement, saying only that it is subject to agreement on other issues raised in the negotiations, which continued this week.

“Maintenance of health benefits is an important part of the contract being negotiated between employers represented by the PMA and workers represented by the ILWU,” both sides said in a joint statement.

This is the first major news out of the closely watched contract negotiation since it began on May 12. The last contract expired July 1.

The union and association have been quiet about what’s being discussed but stressed in the last few months that they are committed to getting a contract signed without disrupting business.

At the annual Trans-Pacific Maritime Conference in March at the Long Beach Convention Center, PMA President Jim McKenna said competition for cargo and issues surrounding automation — the use of unmanned machines to move cargo — would be discussed, as well as the “Cadillac tax,” an annual 40 percent excise tax on premium health care plans brought on by the Affordable Care Act.

West Coast dockworkers already have unusually generous health benefits — so generous, argue their employers who pay for the coverage, that the insurance plan has become riddled with fraud.

Doctors and clinics have bilked the health plan of tens of millions of dollars, according to the Pacific Maritime Association, which first made the claim a year ago based on a review of thousands of invoices submitted by medical providers.

During contract talks, the association focused on limiting fraud as a way to reduce the impending tax on high-end health plans. Under the Affordable Care Act, if current costs hold, dockworkers’ employers would be on the hook for about $32 million in new taxes each year starting in 2018. The tax hit would be higher if medical costs rise, as they typically do.

Advertisement

Employers paid $461 million to cover 13,800 dockworkers and their families in 2013, or about $33,400 per plan, according to an analysis of publicly available data.

Dockworkers have complained that the focus on eliminating fraud has blocked the payment of legitimate claims and as a result they have to pay thousands of dollars out of pocket while waiting for reimbursements.

ILWU leaders have said the maritime association exaggerated the rate of fraud to gain leverage in negotiations, possibly to trim benefits.

Negotiations are being closely watched by those in the industry who fear a shutdown of the nation’s two busiest seaports and the movement of products bound for retail stores halted.

In response, customers have been shipping goods earlier in the year to avoid disruption.

“Retailers continue to exercise contingency plans throughout their massive supply chain operations despite the fact the West Coast negotiations have not reached an impasse,” Sandy Kennedy, president of the Retail Industry Leaders Association, wrote in a letter to the PMA and ILWU. “While goods continue to move at an efficient rate through the West Coast ports of entry, each day without a finalized agreement jeopardizes the movement of goods destined for shelves during the all-important holiday season.”

Cargo numbers have been reflecting that trend in the last few months leading up to the July 1 contract deadline. Goods movement at the Port of L.A. soared 13.89 percent in June when compared with the same time last year, while the Port of Long Beach saw an 8 percent jump.

In July, however, the twin ports reported softer numbers, with overall cargo up 0.25 percent in Los Angeles and 3.7 percent in Long Beach.

“It is our hope that both sides are engaged in open and honest discussions, moving with haste toward a long-term solution that will stabilize the labor picture on the west coast,” Kennedy said. “Securing an agreement is of paramount importance to the retail industry.”

The Associated Press contributed to this story. Contact Karen Robes Meeks at 562-714-2088.