Topics: Author Interviews, How Not to Calm a Child on a Plane, Johanna Stein, Memoirs, Parenting, Life News

In 2009, Johanna Stein wrote a gruesomely entertaining, much-shared New York Times story about trying to get her daughter to stop crying on a plane by making a puppet out of a barf bag, only to find that said bag had been used before for its originally intended purpose. Now, in “How Not to Calm a Child on a Plane: And Other Lessons in Parenting from a Highly Questionable Source,” the actress and TV writer has delivered a revealing, funny look at motherhood, sex, breastfeeding, dead dogs — and the vicious lie that is: “Enjoy it. It goes so fast.”

Stein resolutely takes the stance of “questionable source” on the subject of parenting advice, which is part of what makes her book so much fun. Her writing makes it clear she’s exactly the sort of person you’d want to share comic misadventures and weird thoughts with; within minutes of our recent conversation, she and I were swapping tales of our most irrational fears when our daughters were babies.

When your book came out, I immediately remembered you as the lady with the barf bag story.

A friend said it’s like the barf bag that got a book deal. All you have to do is cover yourself in vomit, and you too can write a book!

There are already many humorous parenting blogs and books out there. Were you concerned about going into such a crowded field?

I do remember when I was working on the proposal and wondering, is anybody going to be interested in another so-called funny book about being a mom?

I’m not an op-ed kind of writer. I’m not a “Here’s my opinion, here’s what I think” writer. My subtext is always, “Can’t we just relax and ease off?” Comedy is the shortest distance to the truth. It’s ridiculous, the pressure that comes from the world right now and all of these books to be the perfect parent, so I’m just laughing at it.

You’ve put a lot of intimate things in the book. What’s been the response from readers?

People are not scandalized. The most interesting response has been from non-parents. Non-parents find it surprisingly relatable. I guess people are moved by the level of disclosure. There’s a level of relatability that’s a relief. People say, “Oh my God, that story of yours reminded me of that time my family wound up covered in shit,” and that’s really heartwarming.