A teenager losing a cell phone is not a new phenomenon, but for a mobile app developer and one lucky Denver teen, this classic case of everyday misfortune has turned into a full-fledged Internet investigation.

Heidi Whitehead reported last month that her son, Jesus, lost his cell phone while taking their family dog for a walk. Luckily for Whitehead, Cheetah Mobile’s CM Locker app snapped a picture of the man who later found the device.

Whitehead is now using Facebook to share the photo of the man believed to have her son’s phone, hoping someone will recognize him and the device can be returned to its rightful teenage owner.

According to a Cheetah Mobile spokesman, the app was made to do exactly what it did for Whitehead’s son — catch phone intruders and eliminate the threat of phone theft.

“We saw Heidi’s story on the news and how she was trying to get her son’s phone back based on pictures they obtained using our app, and it struck a nerve with us,”said Josh Ong, the director of communications for Cheetah Mobile. “We all know how it feels to lose a phone, and it doesn’t feel good.”

The concept is simple — when the phone passcode is entered incorrectly three times, the app will automatically snap an “intruder selfie” and e-mail the photo to the device’s owner.

Because the Whitehead family has yet to locate the missing phone, Cheetah Mobile decided to introduce a little incentive.

They are now offering a brand new Samsung Galaxy S6 Edge for anyone who helps finding the lost device by sharing Whitehead’s Facebook posts.

“Essentially we saw this as a something we could do for people who lose their phones,” said Tyler Hayes, senior communications manager for Cheetah Mobile. “If somebody can identify the person in the photo or somehow lead us to his phone, then we’ll give you a brand new phone.”

Ong said that while the app can’t guarantee that every phone can be found, the company hopes it will act as a deterrent for people who wouldn’t otherwise think twice about finding and keeping a lost device.

“Maybe people will think more before their photo will end up all over the Internet, or maybe people who find phones will be a little more honest,” Ong said. “We’re not accusing this particular guy of a crime, but I’m a few years out from being a teen myself, and I can feel this kid’s pain. This stuff happens, but it’s tough to go without.”

Cheetah Mobile said that in a week, if Whitehead’s son hasn’t found his phone, the company will give the Samsung Galaxy to him as compensation for his loss.

Natalie Munio: 303-954-1666, nmunio@denverpost.com or @nataliemunio