While some early morning temperatures this winter have touched on chilly, they have not gotten down to teeth-chattering, long-johns wearing, frostbiting, icicles-forming-on-the-strawberries cold.

Another winter in Tampa, another season that came and went, well almost, without a big freeze.

It’s becoming a trend.

The National Weather Service in Ruskin, which keeps daily temperatures at Tampa International Airport, said the last time the mercury dipped below 32 degrees was on Jan. 13, 2010. That’s more than five years with no freezes, though it may feel like freezing to some on those cold winter mornings.

“For some Tampa natives, it’s freezing if it’s in the upper 30s,” said Rodney Wynn, a meteorologist with the weather service. “But the readings come from the airport, which is not far from the bay and that has an influence on the temperatures. There could have been some local spots that hit freezing, but our official spot is the airport.’’

Despite mystical polar vortexes that bring wave after wave of unfathomable frigid temperatures and monster snowstorms to the Midwest and Northeast, Tampa appears again to have escaped the icy grasp of Old Man Winter.

In November, the season’s first cold snap brought morning lows into the upper 30s, December and January had a couple similar mornings. The lows aren’t expected to drop below 40 the rest of the month.

It’s an unwritten rule, Wynn said, that the middle to end of February marks the end of freeze threats in the Tampa region.

The Farmer’s Almanac says the weather around Tampa will have some rain, some sun and “cool” temperatures over the next two weeks, before becoming “warm” during the last week of the month.

The venerable publication says the temperature next week may dip slightly below normal, but remain normal for the rest of February.

The average low for the second week in February is 53 degrees and daily lows typically are between 52 to 56 degrees. On average, three days in February dip below 40 degrees.

“Through the end of February,” Wynn said, “we’re looking at pretty seasonal conditions, nothing below normal.”

Even with the assurances from the weather service that overnight lows shouldn’t reach freezing for the rest of the winter, strawberry grower Matt Parke, with Parkesdale Farms in Plant City, said he thinks it could still get close to freezing near the end of February.

“We have a late moon this month, right before March,” he said, “And a late moon guarantees we will have a freeze, or close to it.”

So far this winter, he said, temperatures are just about right for the strawberry crop, currently being harvested throughout eastern Hillsborough County.

“In my opinion, it’s been perfect,” he said. “Some may disagree, but I think we’re going to have a bumper crop this year. Everything is working out.

“It’s been a cool winter, which is good,” he said. “Last year, we had a hot winter and that was bad. We actually got into the 30s this winter, though it hasn’t been freezing. And that’s good for the berries.”

Cooler temperatures, like nights in the 40s or 50s, and days no hotter than 70, increase the sugar content in the fruit, he said.

Sprinklers were turned on to protect the crop one time last winter; this year the pumps remained silent, which saves growers money, he said.

“Diesel (which fuels the groundwater pumps) is the about the price of gold right now,” he said. “We’re definitely saving money on that.”

He recalls years when there were 10 to 12 freezes a year, and that cuts way into the profit margin.

What’s good for strawberries, though, could be a boon for Florida’s number one six-legged pest.

Carlos Fernandez, director of Hillsborough County Mosquito Control, said his department hasn’t gotten many requests for service about swarms of mosquitoes during this warm winter but figures that will change over the spring and summer.

“It is something to expect,” he said. “If you have warmer weather and warmer waters, it expedites the development of mosquitoes from eggs to the adult stage.’’

The effect of the warm winter on trees is as varied as the trees out there, said Jason Zysk, a certified arborist and owner of Greenworks.

Some oak trees are hanging onto their leaves a bit longer, others are keeping acorns past the time they typically drop and some already are beginning to bloom.

He pointed to a stretch of road in Tampa where about 30 oak trees line the road and each one is in a different growth phase. Some are just beginning to lose leaves, others are flowering.

“They are living things,” he said. “They all are different.”

kmorelli@tampatrib.com

(813) 259-7760