Medicare recipients in Connecticut saved $64.7 million last year as a result of the Affordable Care Act closing a gap in prescription drug coverage over time, shifting a greater share of the costs to the federal government.

The Affordable Care Act, passed by Congress in 2010, provides money to reduce the so-called "doughnut hole," a gap in prescription drug coverage provided by Medicare, a federal health insurance plan for the elderly.

The savings to Medicare recipients were released Tuesday by the federal Centers for Medicare & Medicaid Services. Since federal reform took effect, Medicare recipients in Connecticut have saved a total of $204.55 million. The state has 60,610 people on Medicare, which means the savings last year averaged $1,067 per recipient.

Nationally, 5.1 million Medicare recipients saved a total of $4.79 million, or $941 each, last year. The savings have totaled $15 billion nationally since reform was passed, benefiting 9.4 million elderly people and some who have a disability and qualify for Medicare.

U.S. Health and Human Services Secretary Sylvia M. Burwell said in a statement: "Thanks to the Affordable Care Act, seniors and people with disabilities have saved over $15 billion on prescription drugs, and these savings will only increase over time as we close the Medicare coverage gap known as the [doughnut] hole. By providing access to affordable prescription drugs and preventive services with no cost sharing, the Affordable Care Act is working for seniors to help keep them healthier."

As part of the Affordable Care Act, Medicare drug coverage has increased year-over-year to include more of the price of drugs when beneficiaries are in the doughnut hole.

In 2015, once a Medicare recipient's prescription drug costs have totaled $2,960, the person enters the doughnut hole. At that point the recipient pays 45 percent of the cost for brand-name prescription drugs and 65 percent of the cost of generic prescription drugs. Medicare covers the rest of the bill.

Once a Medicare recipient has paid $4,700 out of pocket for generic prescription drugs, so-called "catastrophic coverage" kicks in and the recipient exits the doughtnut hole. At this point, Medicare pays for all but a small co-insurance amount or a co-payment for the rest of the year. The price paid for brand-name prescriptions does not count toward getting a person out of the doughnut hole.

The portion of generic drugs that a Medicare recipient pays while in the doughnut hole is currently scheduled to decrease each year until it reaches 25 percent in 2020.

Before reform, prescription drug coverage had a standard drug benefit that covered 75 percent of the first $2,520. The patient then paid all of the next $3,610, a doughnut hole that had increased in the years leading up to the Affordable Care Act. Beyond the doughnut hole, catastrophic coverage would pay 95 percent of drug costs.