Outrage over the Obama administration’s seven years of U.S. military veteran neglect has erupted like never before against the President who touted, “We need a new sense of urgency,” during his 2007 campaign regarding hundreds of thousands of veterans seeking care.

As the administration’s latest scandal surfaces, disturbing reports leaking that 40 veterans have died while waiting for promised — but never delivered — appointments, familiar rhetoric from the White House continues to be disseminated from media outlets.

“I will not stand for it — not as commander-in-chief but also not as an American,” Obama exclaimed Wednesday, as the White House declared that the President is “madder than hell.”

Perkins

However, Family Research Council President Tony Perkins sees the recent neglect as nothing new under the Obama Administration, which he says “may be at the heart of one of the worst cases of medical neglect America has ever seen.”

Perkins reminds concerned Americans that the White House’s latest maneuverings to save face should be clearly recognized.

“Under fire from all sides, the White House is scrambling to explain how seven years went by without this deadly incompetence ever reaching the President’s desk,” Perkins noted. “Unfortunately for Press Secretary Jay Carney, nobody’s buying the White House’s old standby that ‘we get our news just like the rest of you.’”

According to Perkins, there is no excuse for the gross medical neglect of those who served their country with their lives.

“In an administration with the greatest communication and intelligence tools at its disposal, it’s just a little too much for the American people to swallow,” Perkins contends. “After Benghazi, Fast and Furious, ObamaCare, the IRS and NSA, the President’s surprised face isn’t fooling voters.”

Yet the administration continues to posture itself.

“I don’t know how systemic this is,” President Obama proclaimed when questioned about the numerous veteran deaths and cases of medical neglect. He went on to downplay the situation, emphasizing that Veteran Affairs Secretary Eric Shinseki “indicated that he did not see a link between the wait and them actually dying.”

Perkins sees this as the dawn of yet another mass cover-up.

“While their loved ones were begging to see doctors for heart conditions, viruses and even cancer, the very government that was supposed to be caring for these patients was faking waiting times and covering it up by shredding documents,” Perkins contests. “’Two weeks,’ for an appointment turned into a year, until finally, Dr. Sam Foote, a VA employee, couldn’t stand it any longer and blew the cover off the story.”

Many tragic stories branch out from the overlying scandal, which include numerous meticulously documented press reports recently distributed that describe double books and 40 veteran deaths in the states of Texas, Arizona, Missouri and Colorado.

One CNN report details Thomas Breen’s tragic end spurred by VA neglect. The 71-year-old Navy veteran with a history of cancer was taken to a VA emergency room in Arizona last September with blood in his urine, only to be released and told he would see a urologist within the next seven days. Breen didn’t receive the appointment until three months later in December, when stage 4 bladder cancer had already claimed his life.

Another report shows a secret set of books held by the VA in Phoenix that gives the illusion that vets got their appointments within two weeks when they were really on a seven-month waiting list. On Wednesday the VA admitted that its local director was given approximately $9,000 for a performance bonus in April.

Perkins insists that such blatant care for vets has been under the radar for years.

“Despite warnings from the Bush administration, the GAO in 2012, and just last year from House Veterans Affairs Committee Chairman Jeff Miller (R-Fla.), it seems President Obama hasn’t lifted a finger to help the thousands of former military members waiting months for medical attention through the VA — and in 40 of those cases, dying before they receive it,” Perkins stressed.

And reports of the cover-up continue to flow in, as the probe by the inspector general now encompasses 26 VA hospitals nationwide — up from 10. News has recently surfaced that a VA deputy undersecretary was informed that “gaming strategies” and “inappropriate scheduling practices” were used to conceal and falsify wait times several years ago in 2010.

Seeing the scandal unfold from his FRC headquarters in the nation’s capital, Perkins views it as nothing short of a tragedy for military families.

“Their loved ones died, not in the line of duty, but waiting for the kind of care their sacrifice should have afforded them,” Perkins noted. “After more than a decade of war, America’s veterans have all kinds of needs. And how does their country express its appreciation? By ignoring them.”

Perkins claims that other interests within the White House supercede taking care of those who have served America with their lives, and that this preference has been exposed for some time.

“None of this should come as a surprise, especially not from an administration that’s spent the last five years using the military as a mule for its illicit agenda,” Perkins relates. “The President’s own Secretary of Defense, Robert Gates, said in his book that ‘the only military matter, apart from the leaks, about which I ever sensed deep passion on his part was ‘Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell.’”

He notes that the homosexual agenda within the military has been a major concern for the Commander-in-Chief since the beginning of his presidency.

“We see those backwards priorities today,” Perkins continued. “Honorable veterans are dying while dishonorable traitors get sex changes. While the President ignores the crises of military suicide rates, sexual assault, and even VA neglect, the Obama Pentagon is working overtime to give national security leaker Bradley Manning the ability to live out his sentence as a woman. Defense Secretary Chuck Hagel gave the Army the green light to work out a transfer agreement with the Federal Bureau of Prisons, which offers the kind of hormone therapy Manning demands.”

Despite the White House’s “outrage” over veteran care, Perkins sees little change in the future.

“Meanwhile, the men and women who served our nation with integrity are wasting away on ‘special lists,’ excluded from care,” Perkins concluded. “And in this administration’s hands, it is a system that — through incompetence, a political agenda, or both — continues to be the President’s greatest weapon.”