Topics: Babies, Children, Life stories, Motherhood, New Mom Confessions, Parenting, Pregnancy, Real Families, Life News

The two pink lines on my pregnancy test looked a lot like prison bars. I pictured them surrounding the jail cell I’d forever be confined to now that I was with child. I was a 34-year-old woman living in baby-friendly Brooklyn, New York, with a stable job and a loving relationship and I got pregnant right after I purposely went off the pill. I was supposed to feel lucky. All I felt was dread.

My husband, a man born to be a dad, was eager to start a family after our fifth date. He’d patiently waited 10 years for me to not quite catch up, until we both made the decision to passively pursue parenthood. In our game of reproductive roulette, I had no idea I would conceive so quickly, or that I’d feel so overwhelmed and unprepared. My partner celebrated the news. I mentally slipped on a black muumuu and began mourning life as we knew it.

At my first ultrasound, my spouse and I heard the heartbeat and received a tiny printout. I wanted to feel joy, not fear. I put the black-and-white picture in my purse in case I did. It stayed put for weeks, through subsequent sonograms and prenatal visits, slowly crumpling beneath empty gum wrappers and loose change.The image remained inside the handbag I brought to a close friend’s wedding reception, where, after the ceremony and before the main course, just shy of completing my first trimester, I miscarried. Over several painful hours, all of my angst about motherhood vanished. Instead of being relieved, I was sad and confused.

“My body knew that I wasn’t excited!” I cried to my husband. I was sure that the miscarriage was my fault. That I was being punished for my lack of maternal enthusiasm. I didn’t blame just my thoughts, but my actions in the weeks right before I realized I was pregnant. I was haunted by the five (or was it six?) cigarettes that I, a non-smoker, had casually bummed while traveling overseas. I was spooked by the vodka tonics I’d innocently consumed. The sleeping pills I’d popped for jet lag so I could keep up with my hectic job as an advertising creative director.

My doctor, my husband and conventional wisdom told me none of these early indiscretions mattered. Sometimes miscarriages happened without a reason or a logical explanation. Riddled with guilt, I still searched for one. I’d heard that people who lose a limb experience phantom pains, long after their appendages were gone. I rubbed my stomach, missing the baby I was no longer carrying.

Suddenly, women with their bulging bellies seemed to be everywhere. Parading through the produce aisle of Trader Joe’s. Marching on the adjacent treadmill at the gym. Grinning on the cover of Us Weekly. For the first time, I felt something I’d never felt before. Jealous.

I was finally on the same parental page as my partner. Rather than halfheartedly letting it happen, I actually truly wanted to get pregnant. Imagine my surprise several months later when I found out that I was. This time around, my husband and I were equally ecstatic. So at a routine checkup when we learned that the baby’s heart had stopped beating, I felt like mine did too.