Oviedo Medical Center broke ground on a 64-bed acute-care hospital, adding to the existing Oviedo ER.

Kenneth Donahey, the new CEO of the hospital, said the demographics, population growth and current use of Oviedo ER demonstrated a need for a new hospital in the area.

"And we've had tremendous support from the community," said Donahey.

The $109 million campus is expected to bring 200 jobs, with an average salary of $58,000. It is expected to pay an estimated $2.3 million in annual non-income tax and provide $23.8 million in charity care each year.

The hospital, which is part of the large HCA chain, is expected to open in the first quarter of 2017. It is expected to serve 35,000 patients in its first year.

The existing 12-bed Oviedo ER will eventually expand to 22 beds.

Contractors include Layton Construction and the architectural firm Gould Turner Group.

Institutions

Orlando Regional Medical Center has redesigned its cath lab and electrophysiology lab, as part of its ongoing $297 million redesign and renovation project. The redesign consolidates the nine new cardiac labs with 20 new preparation and recovering rooms.

The new labs also reduce radiation exposure for patients and providers during the procedures, the hospital said.

Sand Lake Imaging is participating in Shepherd's Hope's Get a Mammogram, Give a Mammogram program during the month of October.

For each new patient, the imaging center will donate a free mammogram to Shepherd's Hope, a Central Florida clinic that cares for uninsured individuals.

The program has provided 320 free mammograms since 2013.

Florida Hospital Orlando's robotic-assisted surgery program celebrated its 10,000th procedure. The program has been in place since 2004 and has expanded from one to four robots, which perform up to 25 procedures each week.

Osceola Cancer Center has been accredited by COLA, a national health-care accreditation organization. The accreditation means that the laboratories meet quality standards and demonstrate accuracy in testing.

Central Florida Family Health Center in Sanford, Healthcare Center For the Homeless in Orlando and Community Health Centers in Winter Garden are among health centers in the nation to receive Affordable Care Act funding to expand primary care services. They received $406,000, $311,000 and $433,000, respectively.

Lutheran Haven, an Oviedo independent and nursing home community, has a new Memory Care Community.

People

Marlene Linders, CEO of Philders Group International, is one of two women in the United States designated as distinguished lecturer for ASHRAE, a global society advancing human well-being through sustainable technology for the built environment. Her status has been extended for another term. She speaks about dangers of germs, superbugs and pathogens in public and health-care settings.

nmiller@tribune.com or 407-420-5158.