POMONA >> Hundreds of health care professionals will be at Fairplex for three days starting Friday morning to provide free health services to thousands of people as part of a three-day clinic organized by California CareForce.

Screenings for various medical conditions, dental exams, tooth extractions, vision exams and even free eyeglasses will be available, said Dan Chrystal, executive director of the Roseville-based California CareForce.

Neither identification nor insurance are to receive care, Chrystal said.

“Our heart is that each patient gets the care they hope to receive,” he said.

On Thursday, teams of volunteers were busy setting up equipment and creating a temporary clinic using most of the 105,500 square feet of space in Fairplex’s Building 4.

Although California CareForce has held clinics all over the state, this will be its first at Fairplex. The location makes it possible for residents across Southern California to be seen by a health professional, Chrystal said.

Residents from as far away as Riverside and even Indio have contacted the organization seeking information in order to attend the clinic.

Generally, the clinic draws everyone from the homeless to parents with children.

“It literally runs the gamut,” Chrystal said. “We don’t ask questions. We just want to help them.”

The Affordable Care Act his made it possible for many to enroll in health insurance programs, Chrystal said, but some people still don’t have access to dental care or other services and can’t afford them.

The clinic is made possible with the support of Focusing Philanthropy, a Los Angeles-based organization that screens non-profit groups that interested donors contribute to.

Organization representatives were present at a clinic California CareForce organized in Coachella recently and some others and walked away impressed with the work being done, said Elliott Gilson, president of Focusing Philanthropy.

So the organization asked its donors for help funding this weekend’s clinic and they responded, he said.

Fairplex was selected as the site for several reasons, one being need.

“It was placed out there because that whole area is under served” when it comes to health services, Gilson said.

Advertisement

Other groups have organized clinics in Los Angeles or communities to the west but not in the eastern end of Los Angeles County.

“It’s good to have one in a slightly different geographic area,” Gilson said.

Those at the clinic who need follow-up care will be referred to one of several free or-low cost clinics, such as the Pomona Community Health Center.

The center will have representatives at the clinic to assist those with and without health insurance and will assist those without coverage to figure out what plans they qualify for, said Carmen Muniz, chief operations officer at the center.

Every day 300 to 500 volunteers will work at the clinic but additional dentists, licensed vocational nurses, licensed practical nurses and optometrists are still sought.

Those interested in volunteering may go to www.californiacareforce.org, then click on volunteers, then go to Fairplex one, two or all three days of the clinic in the morning.

“You don’t have to bring anything. Just bring yourself,” said Kathryn Quanstrom, a San Bernardino resident who is assisting with volunteer registration.

Physicians interested in volunteering should also register through the website and bring their stethoscopes and prescription pads, Chrystal said.

Patients will be able to receive care in two of three areas — medical, dental or vision, Chrystal said.

Patients can park at Gate 9 on the east side of White Avenue and line up at that gate. Tickets to enter the clinic will be issued between 3 and 3:30 each morning. Beginning at 5:30 a.m.,. small groups of patients will begin entering the clinic area for registration and will start being seen by health-care professionals at 6 a.m.

A limited number of tickets will be issued each morning. Patients must be present when their ticket number is called.

Additional patient information is available by going to www.californiacareforce.org/Patients/PatientInformation.aspx.

Details on how to prepare for the day are spelled out on the website.

People can stay in the parking lot if they do not want to leave Fairplex after being issued a ticket, according to a Fairplex spokeswoman.