Affordable Care Act: Passed by Congress in 2010, the Affordable Care Act required the vast majority of Americans to get health insurance, and it established state and federal marketplaces where consumers could buy coverage. In Arizona, more than a half-million people secured health insurance during the federal law’s first two years, either from the federal marketplace or the state’s expanded Medicaid program. The act also barred health insurers from denying coverage to the sick and required them to justify rate hikes of more than 10 percent. The health-care law remains a hot topic of debate in both Congress and in the Arizona Legislature, and has faced numerous court challenges. (Photo: Nick Oza/The Republic) Story Highlights Health groups seek to restore KidsCare health insurance for low-income families

Arizona is the only state without a health insurance program for low-income children

Arizona's Medicaid program covers many children, but other families must buy Obamacare plans

A coalition of health and advocacy groups are spearheading an effort to restore a pre-Affordable Care Act program that provided health insurance for thousands of low-income Arizona children.

In 2010, Arizona froze enrollment in the KidsCare health-insurance program for low-income families amid budget cuts following the Great Recession. In 2014, Arizona ended KidsCare with the idea that children would instead be covered under the Affordable Care Act’s Medicaid expansion and federal marketplace.

More than 26,000 children obtained health insurance through the state's Medicaid expansion after KidsCare ended in 2014. But the families of about 14,000 KidsCare children were sent to the federal marketplace to buy subsidized plans that many can’t afford, family advocates say.

Arizona Rep. Regina Cobb, R-Kingman, said she will sponsor a bill to fully restore KidsCare, Arizona’s version of the federal-state Children’s Health Insurance Program (CHIP).

Cobb's bill would restore KidsCare eligibility for families earning between 138 and 200 percent of the federal poverty level, or $33,465 to $48,500 for a family of four. Eligible families that earned less would retain their Medicaid coverage.

Cobb and officials with Children’s Action Alliance said that restoring KidsCare would not cost the state money because Arizona is one of nine states eligible for 100 percent federal funding for the program beginning this fiscal year. The Arizona Legislature must pass legislation and Gov. Doug Ducey would need to sign a bill to direct the state's Medicaid program to seek the federal funding.

Ducey administration officials said the governor is open to proposals that make fiscal sense.

"The governor is receptive to ideas to improve coverage so long as the options are fiscally responsible and provide reliability and certainty in health-care matters," said Daniel Ruiz II, a Ducey spokesman.

Cobb said Arizona needs to restore KidsCare, in part, because many families can't afford subsidized "Obamacare" plans sold over the federal marketplace. Unlike KidsCare coverage, ACA plans require consumers to pay more for out-of-pocket costs such as copays, deductibles and co-insurance.

“We are the only state without a CHIP program now,” said Cobb, a dentist who said families with Obamacare coverage don't always access health care because of out-of-pocket costs. "It's not costing us anything and we will get (insurance coverage) for that bracket of the working poor."

It's not clear what kind of reception KidsCare restoration would get at the Arizona Legislature. During past sessions, health-care issues such as the Medicaid expansion have divided the Republican-controlled Legislature. A total of 36 current and former lawmakers are suing to overturn Arizona's Medicaid expansion, which was championed by GOP Gov. Jan Brewer during her time in office.

Dana Wolfe Naimark, president and CEO of Children's Action Alliance, said her group would make the argument that KidsCare expansion would provide both economic and educational opportunities for Arizona families.

"We can't afford to let this opportunity to go by," Naimark said. "It really fits the major goals that Gov. Ducey has set for us, one being opportunity for all kids no matter what ZIP code they come from, the other being educational success."

Census figures show that about 1 in 10 Arizona children did not have health insurance in 2013, the second-highest uninsured rate in the nation.

The uninsured rate was even higher, 16.5 percent, for families that earned between 138 and 200 percent of federal poverty level, the groups that a restored KidsCare program would provide coverage for, for those who are eligible.

Children's Action Alliance estimates 30,000 or more eligible children would be signed up for coverage. Undocumented children are not eligible for the program.

The Arizona Health Care Cost Containment System or AHCCCS, the state's Medicaid program, would need to request additional federal funding to pay for KidsCare. AHCCCS officials said that the funding would come as a block grant that could carry some financial risk for the state if enrollment surpassed expectations.

But Children's Action Alliance said the federal program has safeguards if more children signed up than expected. Also, a state law allows AHCCCS to immediately halt new applications if the agency determines that funding won't meet program costs.

About two dozen community, health and advocacy groups have formed a group called the Cover Kids Coalition to push for the restoration.

Dr. Elizabeth McKenna, an East Valley pediatrician and an American Academy of Pediatrics' Arizona chapter board member, said families formerly insured by KidsCare frequently delay needed care. That creates more acute and costlier medical conditions later.

McKenna said one family of five children can't afford private coverage because the father earns $20 too much per pay period to qualify for Medicaid. One child has development delays and another child is afflicted with a nervous-system disorder — conditions that can be managed with regular access to medical care.

"Then there are the kids who have a regular illness like a cold or bronchitis," McKenna said. "Those kids end up with a pneumonia in the emergency room because they don't have insurance."

Read or Share this story: http://azc.cc/1OSod1b