Rick Loomis/Los Angeles Times/TNS Lizeth Gallegos, 14 (right), an undocumented resident from Canoga Park, Calif., will soon start receiving Medi-Cal insurance. She was spending time at home with her mother, Carolina Moran, 42 (left), nephew Adrian Padron, 9 months, and sister Istel Gallegos.

SHARE Rick Loomis/Los Angeles Times/TNS Lizeth Gallegos, 14, with her mother Carolina Moran, 42, in their Canoga Park, Calif., apartment on April 15, 2016. Lizeth, an undocumented resident, will soon start receiving Medi-Cal insurance. (Rick Loomis/Los Angeles Times/TNS)

But health care for adults won’t be easy

By Soumya Karlamangla, Los Angeles Times (TNS)

LOS ANGELES — Ever since the Affordable Care Act took effect two years ago, many California legislators have been fighting to get health insurance for those it left out — the quarter of all immigrants in the country undocumented who live within the state's borders.

This month, California will make a sizable dent in that effort when immigrants younger than 19 who are here without papers begin receiving free health coverage through Medi-Cal, the state's low-income health program. State officials estimate that 170,000 residents will be eligible.

But insuring children is an easy battle to win, experts say, because of kids' emotional appeal and their low medical expenses. California isn't blazing the way here. Massachusetts, Illinois, New York, Washington and Washington, D.C., already have extended coverage to children in the country illegally.

The remaining frontier — covering adults — will be a much tougher sell — and a more significant test of California's larger push to provide additional services to those here undocumented.

"The next steps are harder, the air gets thinner, the angles get tougher to ascend," said Anthony Wright, executive director of Sacramento-based advocacy group Health Access.

The children's coverage came at a high cost, in a last-minute budget deal. To make it happen, Democratic Gov. Jerry Brown pledged $20 million in state funds to provide coverage from May through the end of the fiscal year, and $143 million in the upcoming fiscal year, said Medi-Cal spokesman Tony Cava.

The state had to foot the entire bill. Even though Medi-Cal traditionally is funded with a mix of state and federal money, the Affordable Care Act prohibits the use of federal money to pay for covering immigrants in the country illegally.

Some young people here undocumented are already eligible to receive health care through county programs, such as My Health LA in Los Angeles County.

Approximately 115,000 youths also get coverage for emergencies through Medi-Cal, according to state officials. They will be rolled into the newly expanded program on May 16, but will be covered retroactively from May 1 onward, Cava said.

As many as 27,500 children who have not yet been signed up for Medi-Cal are expected to enroll in the first year, Cava said. For minors to qualify, a family must earn less than 266 percent of the federal poverty level — or less than $53,626 for a family of three or $75,650 for a family of five.

Maria Graciela, who lives in South El Monte, plans to get her 14-year-old daughter Ingrid's eyes examined as soon as her Medi-Cal coverage kicks in.

"I just feel so fortunate," said Graciela, who cleans houses and hasn't been able to afford to take her daughter to the ophthalmologist or the dentist in years.

Sonya Schwartz, a research fellow at Georgetown University Health Policy Institute's Center for Children and Families, said offering health insurance to kids is a smart investment, because research shows that children with access to Medicaid had fewer emergency room visits and lower blood pressure as adults. And they also were more likely to graduate from college than those who did not have health coverage.

"It's kind of penny-wise and pound-foolish not to cover these kids," Schwartz said.