Notes from an Obama administration meeting about the problem-plagued ObamaCare website indicate only six people signed up for the health care law on its first day, according to documents released by the House Oversight and Government Reform Committee.

Fox News' Ed Henry told Megyn Kelly on “The Kelly File” Thursday that the documents, released by committee Chairman Rep. Darrell Issa, are not official enrollment numbers, but say that as of the morning of Oct. 2, “six enrollments have occurred so far with five different issuers.”

The notes were taken at a “war room” meeting of the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services, which has been tasked with implementing ObamaCare.

They say that at the next meeting, which took place on the afternoon of Oct. 2, “approximately 100” people had signed up and 248 enrollments had occurred by the morning of Oct. 3.

The Obama administration has thus far not released any official numbers on ObamaCare enrollment, saying the first numbers would be released in mid-November after the HHS collects data from a variety of different sources.

A HHS spokesman told Fox News the documents “appear to be notes,” and do not include official enrollment statistics.

“As the Secretary said before Congress, we are focused on providing reliable and accurate information and we do not have that at this time due to the issues with 834 forms,” Joanne Peters said. “We have always anticipated that the pace of enrollment will increase throughout the enrollment period.”

Health care industry consultant Robert Laszewski told Kelly the numbers are not surprising, saying "clearly the White House does not want insurance companies talking about what's going here."

"And given what was released tonight, the news that so very few people are signing up, you can see why," he continued. "If four weeks ago the enrollment numbers were public it would look very bad. I can tell you based upon the information that I continue to get this trickle of enrollment that you're reporting on for the first three days has really continued for the first month."

The House Oversight and Government Reform Committee received the documents in response to its request to 11 of the contractors involved in the ObamaCare website rollout.

Fox News' Ed Henry contributed to this report