Obamacare GOP approves Vitter's Obamacare amendment

Sen. David Vitter finally got a win on his eponymous amendment — sort of.

The Louisiana Republican’s proposal to force members of Congress and their staffs onto the Obamacare health exchanges was approved by the Senate Republican Conference during a closed-door meeting Wednesday afternoon. Earlier Wednesday, Vitter said he was unsure whether the controversial measure would be approved, but the toothless provision easily passed by voice vote, drawing little opposition.

Story Continued Below

“Republican senators made a strong, principled statement today in passing my resolution. Washington should have to live under Obamacare just like everybody else until we repeal it. And we won’t be complicit in Obama’s illegal rule designed to protect Washington insiders,” Vitter said after the triumphant vote.

( Also on POLITICO: Budget winners and losers)

The Louisiana Republican’s proposal to the conference — which is nonbinding, according to Senate aides — says that it’s the “policy” of Senate Republicans that all of their employees are deemed as “official” staff. In practice, that means everyone would be pushed onto the Obamacare exchanges; some aides, such as committee or leadership staffers, have been allowed to keep their previous health care plans.

Vitter has been a one-man crusade pushing for a measure that would attack Obamacare coverage in another way: to get rid of what Vitter has called a “subsidy” for lawmakers’ and aides’ health care plans. And Senate Republican leaders moved to place their staffers on the exchanges more than a year ago when Vitter began his quest, led by Sen. Mitch McConnell (R-Ky.), who put his aides on the D.C. exchange in October 2013.

The so-called “Vitter amendment” would drop the current employer contributions for health care received by lawmakers and congressional aides, and he pressed for it to be attached to everything from a bipartisan energy-efficiency bill to noncontroversial pharmaceutical legislation. His insistence on its vote famously led to the failure of the energy-efficiency bill last year and has been a hallmark of his policy portfolio as he prepares to run for governor. He never did get that legislative vote, but making it GOP policy marked a significant achievement for the conservative Republican after railing against the “Washington exemption for Obamacare” for months.

( Also on POLITICO: Budget bill shows GOP's new muscle)

Privately, congressional aides have fumed about Vitter’s proposal every time it comes up, because leaving the subsidized federal health insurance program might require them to pay more and change their doctors. It’s unclear if Vitter’s amendment will force GOP senators to change their aides’ insurance plans, but at least one colleague said even before the vote that he would take Vitter’s cue.

“The law will never change if those who write the law are protected from its effects,” said Sen.-elect Bill Cassidy on Tuesday, just three days after defeating Louisiana Democratic Sen. Mary Landrieu.