It is tantalizing, the prospect of Kevin Love donning a Nuggets uniform.

But is it viable?

The NBA rumor mill is in full swing a week before the June 26 draft, and the Nuggets, who have pledged to be aggressive while attempting to improve their roster, are being linked to numerous potential trades.

The Nuggets are known to be kicking the tires on Love, the disgruntled Minnesota star forward, but there is nothing close to happening — not with Love or any other player.

Right now, teams throughout the NBA are jockeying to get involved in the Love sweepstakes. The Timberwolves are in a bind eerily similar to that of the Nuggets in 2010, when Carmelo Anthony made it clear he would not sign a contract extension to stay in Denver. He wanted a trade out of town, and it took until the trading deadline in February 2011 to get it done.

Like Anthony, Love is the star and primary scorer on his team, boasting career averages of 19.2 points and 12.2 rebounds per game while shooting 45.1 percent from the field. Last season, he averaged 26.1 points and 12.5 rebounds.

There’s a heavy price to be paid to get a talent such as Love. Minnesota is unhappy with the initial offers coming its way. Franchises are wary of mortgaging their futures for a player who may walk at the end of the season.

The Anthony trade was precedent-setting. It will take a similar deal, asset-wise, to land Love, who might not even be signed when he is traded. He can’t be signed until at least July, when contracts can be extended.

The Timberwolves need leverage. They need more teams in the mix, or at least appearing to be in the mix. The fact the Nuggets were mentioned in a Boston Herald report concerning talks with Minnesota, but with no players or draft picks linked to them, is a clear sign of leverage. The Nuggets used the Nets’ interest in Anthony to leverage a better deal with the Knicks.

With the tables turned, do the Nuggets want to mortgage their future to get Love, who plays with … who? And risk having Love depart after next season?

In the last three years, the Nuggets lost Anthony, whom they drafted, and Andre Iguodala, whom they thought they could persuade to stay long-term in Denver after trading for him in the final year of his contract. Iguodala left after one season.