People Moves of the Week: Perkins Coie, Shamrock Capital, Swander Pace

Perkins Coie enlists a former FTC adviser; Shamrock Capital taps media specialist; Swander Pace hires Carolyn Hanigan and Alina Costica DiMeglio

Gibson Dunn & Crutcher LLP — Lori Zyskowski is slated to join the New York law office Jan. 5 as a partner. Since 2009, she has advised on M&A at General Electric Co. (NYSE: GE) as executive counsel, corporate, securities and finance. Before that, Zyskowski was corporate and securities counsel and assistant secretary at Pitney Bowes Inc. from 2006. Matthew Hurlock has also been hired to join Gibson Dunn. Formerly with Kirkland & Ellis, Hurlock will continue his private equity and mergers and acquisition practice at Gibson Dunn.

Mintz Levin Cohn Ferris Glovsky and Popeo PC — Seth Davidson and Craig Gilley have been called up to the law firm's Washington D.C. office as members. Previously, both attorneys were with Edwards Wildman Palmer LLP, which is merging with Locke Lord LLP. Before this latest jump, Davidson and Gilley were with Fleischman and Harding LLP, which combined with Edwards Angell Palmer & Dodge LLP in 2011 and later lumped in with Wildman Harrold Allen & Dixon LLP that same year.

Perkins Coie — The Washington, D.C., law firm tapped Janis Kestenbaum as a partner. At Perkin Coie, she will work within the firm’s privacy and security practice. Kestenbaum was most recently senior legal adviser to Federal Trade Commission (FTC) chair Edith Ramirez.

Shamrock Capital Advisors LLC — The Los Angeles-based private equity firm hired Patrick Russo as a partner. Prior to joining Shamrock, Russo was at FTI Consulting Inc., where he co-managed the firm's valuation and financial advisory services group, focusing on entertainment and media. Before that, he was a co-founder of the Salter Group, which was purchased by FTI in 2012. Russo has also held leadership positions in the media and entertainment space at Houlihan Lokey and SG Cowen. Shamrock's predecessor firm was founded as an investment vehicle for the late Roy Edward Disney, of Walt Disney Co. (NYSE: DIS) fame.

Société Générale — The Paris-based investment bank has named Daniel Petherick head of Europe, Middle East and Africa equity derivative flow sales. Petherick will work out of London. Previously, he worked at Citigroup Inc. (NYSE: C) in a similar capacity, beginning in September 2009. Before that, Petherick was with Morgan Stanley from June 1996.

Swander Pace Capital— The San Francisco-based private equity firm has put Carolyn Hanigan in charge of marketing and strategic direction for all Swander Pace portfolio companies. Since 2011, she worked with the firm as vice president for marketing and brand management for Merrick Pet Care, a Swander Pace portfolio company. In 2013, she founded Maven Branding, a brand consulting agency that worked with other Swander Pace portfolio companies including Wholesome Pet Care, Gilchrist & Soames and GloProfessional.Prior to that, Hanigan was the vice president of marketing for Mars Inc. Separately, Swander Pace grew its Bedminster, New Jersey, office by hiring Alina Costica DiMeglio, who will be a part of the financial sponsor’s investment staff and focus on deal sourcing, execution and portfolio management. Previously, she served as an associate at private equity firm Kohlberg & Co., and as an investment banking analyst at Merrill Lynch.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: