QUESTIONER: Hi, I just want to know why there is discrimination against the part-time workers when so many companies are going to part-time when it comes to FMLA? CLINTON: Well, that's why they are going to part-time. That, and also, the Affordable Care Act. You know, we got to change that because we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment. A lot of employers believe if you don't work 40-hours a week you don't get benefits and that includes; you don't get health care benefits; that might include you're not eligible for the family medical leave; you're not eligible for paid sick days. So, there is a disincentive in our system that we need to deal with and I really worry about it because there is trend to try and move more and more people into part-time work; and how many of you are part-time workers? And sometimes you want to work part-time, it fits into your family, it fits into your life obligations but sometimes you want to work full-time but you can't get a full-time job. So, I want to look at all the employment rules.

QUESTIONER: Hi, I just want to know why there is discrimination against the part-time workers when so many companies are going to part-time when it comes to FMLA? CLINTON: Well, that's why they are going to part-time. That, and also, the Affordable Care Act. You know, we got to change that because we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment.

The Weekly Standard http://assets.weeklystandard.com.s3.amazonaws.com/tws15/images/logo-large.png

The Weekly Standard

2015

Washington, DC

Politics

http://www.weeklystandard.com/hillary-admits-obamacare-turns-full-time-jobs-into-part-time-jobs/article/2000254

2015-12-16T19:41

2015-12-16T19:52

Hillary Admits Obamacare Turns Full-Time Jobs Into Part-Time Jobs

The Republican National Committee posted a video of Hillary Clinton admitting that Obamacare creates adverse incentives. During an exchange between Clinton and a questioner, Clinton noted, we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment. QUESTIONER: Hi, I just want to know why there is discrimination against the part-time workers when so many companies are going to part-time when it comes to FMLA? CLINTON: Well, that's why they are going to part-time. That, and also, the Affordable Care Act. You know, we got to change that because we have built in some unfortunate incentives that discourage full-time employment. A lot of employers believe if you don't work 40-hours a week you don't get benefits and that includes; you don't get health care benefits; that might include you're not eligible for the family medical leave; you're not eligible for paid sick days. So, there is a disincentive in our system that we need to deal with and I really worry about it because there is trend to try and move more and more people into part-time work; and how many of you are part-time workers? And sometimes you want to work part-time, it fits into your family, it fits into your life obligations but sometimes you want to work full-time but you can't get a full-time job. So, I want to look at all the employment rules.

Hillary Clinton, Obamacare, SHOSHANA WEISSMANN

http://cdn.weeklystandard.biz/cache/280x280-b806d61fb45aaaf63711dbcf909f8ad3.jpg