The Chicago Cubs are having a pretty awful season. Well, they’ve had a string of pretty awful seasons, actually. The Cubs are staring down their fifth consecutive losing season. They’re currently in last place in the National League’s Central Division. Oh, and they haven’t won a pennant since 1908 — since Theodore Roosevelt was president.

The good news for Cubs’ fans is that their farm system is probably one of the best in baseball, and team’s future does look bright, though that isn’t going to help this season. But the Cubs still have some problems, and not all of them are related to the team they’re putting on diamond in the friendly confines of Wrigley Field.

On Tuesday, Major League Baseball was forced to suspend the game between the Cubs and the San Francisco Giants before the bottom half of the 5th inning due to a torrential downpour made worse by grounds crew that had a difficult time covering the field with the tarp in a timely fashion.

The Cubs had a 2-run lead when the game was delayed, and won the game when it was completed the following day. But, as you can see in the video below, the grounds crew struggled to cover the field, making it completely unplayable:

Giants manager Bruce Bochy said that the Cubs’ grounds crew didn’t put the tarp away properly, which was the cause of the botched effort to cover the infield. That may be true, and Major League Baseball certainly agreed, acquiescing to the Giants’ protest by allowing the game to be completed the following day. For those who don’t know, a game in considered “official” after the top of the 5th inning is completed as long as the home team is ahead.

Although the Cubs supported the Giants’ protest, the Chicago Sun-Times says that part of the problem is that the team’s grounds crew was understaffed because they’re trying to keep hours down because of Obamacare:

The staffing issues that hamstrung the grounds crew Tuesday during a mad dash with the tarp under a sudden rainstorm were created in part by a wide-ranging reorganization last winter of game-day personnel, job descriptions and work limits designed to keep the seasonal workers – including much of the grounds crew – under 130 hours per month, according to numerous sources with direct knowledge. That’s the full-time worker definition under “Obamacare,” which requires employer-provided healthcare benefits for “big businesses” such as a major league team.

[…]

The issue is the short hand Baird was dealt by policies driven from the top of the business and stadium side of the operation, leading to a national embarrassment – which might have been preventable, if not foreseeable. Sources say 10 crew members were sent home early by the bosses Tuesday night with little, if any, input from the field-level supervisors.

Now, it’s worth noting that the Cubs’ owner, Joe Ricketts, is a Republican. Yahoo! News reported in May 2012 that he’d contributed to every single Republican presidential contender, including Mitt Romney and Ron Paul.

In 2010, Ricketts, founder of TD Ameritrade, launched a campaign to target pork-loving lawmakers. Originally named Taxpayers Against Earmarks, the organization is now called the Ending Spending. It also has a super PAC called the Ending Spending Action Fund. This super PAC that backed Romney’s general election campaign against President Barack Obama and Republican congressional candidates. Ricketts and family have contributed $1.55 million to the Ending Spending Action Fund in the 2014 cycle.

The Cubs have come under a lot of criticism for the decision to cut grounds crew members’ hours to avoid paying offering health insurance benefits. Well, this is something some businesses and corporations are doing to avoid Obamacare’s employer mandate. And you can hardly blame them for doing so. Health insurance has gotten more expensive due to the law’s mandates, the costs of which aren’t easily absorbed.

Yeah, maybe sending members of the grounds crew home on a night in which rain is in the forecast because the Cubs are worried about them racking up too many hours is a bad idea. But the team wouldn’t have been concerned about it if they weren’t going to either have to offer coverage to what are supposed to be part-time employees, or face fines per employee if they didn’t, if the employer mandate weren’t around.