Topics: From the Wires, Entertainment News, News

NEW YORK (AP) — This season on Broadway features multiple musicals that are based on iconic films. One of the most sublime among them is surely “An American in Paris,” inspired by the multiple Oscar-winning 1950 musical by George Gershwin and Ira Gershwin and brilliantly choreographed by Gene Kelly.

The exuberant new musical is helmed with panache by top director and choreographer Christopher Wheeldon. Gloriously inventive and balletic, it has an intriguing new book by Tony-nominee and Pulitzer Prize finalist Craig Lucas. Following a debut in Paris last year, an elegant production opened Sunday night on Broadway at the Palace Theatre.

The Gershwin brothers’ music has been adapted, arranged and supervised by Rob Fisher. Beautifully orchestrated by Christopher Austin, it’s performed by a large, bright orchestra led by Todd Ellison.

The mix of popular songs and symphonic music, infused with ragtime, blues and Broadway rhythms, includes favorites like “I Got Rhythm,” ”S’Wonderful,” ”I’ll Build a Stairway to Paradise,” and “They Can’t Take That Away From Me.” Some scenes are burnished with familiar orchestral numbers like “Second Rhapsody” and “An American In Paris.”

Lucas’ completely reworked book adds historical context in which the French Resistance plays a role. A series of romantic entanglements unfold in 1945 Paris, just after the World War II liberation from the Nazis by American troops. The romantic hero, American soldier and artist Jerry Mulligan, is given a powerhouse personality and masterfully danced and sung in a star turn by Robert Fairchild, a principal dancer with the New York City Ballet.

Jerry and his new buddy, composer/pianist Adam Hochberg, (portrayed with humor and heart by Brandon Uranowitz), decide to remain in Paris for the rich artistic and cultural atmosphere they hope will return. Hochberg humorously narrates the story, in which the two friends unknowingly fall for the same woman, a mysteriously melancholy ballerina named Lise, given waifish charm by Leanne Cope. Cope, a first artist at the Royal Ballet, also displays a sweet singing voice, especially on her poignant solo, “The Man I Love.”

To further the romantic complications, Lise is the intended fiancee of the buddies’ wealthy friend Henri (charmingly performed by Max von Essen.) The strong supporting cast includes Jill Paice as American art patron Milo Davenport who falls for Jerry, and a comically repressed performance by Veanne Cox as Henri’s mother, still clinging to wartime secrecy and fears. Some clumsy French-accented English is noticeable but doesn’t detract from the show’s charm.