The covered wagon is parked on the dusty street of a 19th-century Kansas town outside a general store, where soon-to-be pioneers on the Oregon Trail are loading provisions for the long trip west.

But these settlers are kind of small, and for that matter, the wagon is just a little over half the size of a frontier-era wagon rolling to the Oregon coast.

That is because the wagon stands in the Discovery Place, the hands-on play area for children at the Kansas Museum of History.

The wagon was made by three volunteers, all from Topeka, who donated an estimated 740 hours starting in April.

The volunteers’ one-of-a-kind wagon is worth “thousands of dollars,” museum education director Mary Madden said. “It’s a really wonderful, authentic reproduction. They went down to the smallest detail.”

The wagon project began to roll when David Wiksten, 69, a retired dentist, came to the museum in the past year to volunteer. Wiksten’s hobbies are woodworking and making scale models.

“We had this project, and he agreed to take it on,” Madden said. In turn, Wiksten recruited Mike Peters, 65, a retired lawyer whose hobby is making furniture, and Norm Davis, 65, a retired mechanical engineer, whose hobby is blacksmithing.

But the three didn’t have any plans from which to build the wagon.

The three repeatedly took measurements from a full-size covered wagon on display in the museum gallery, scaling down their wagon to 60-percent of the full-size version.

Wiksten estimates the three made 50 to 60 trips between the wood shop where they crafted the parts and the full-scale wagon in the gallery.

“I think we wore a path,” Peters said. The three worked with Ron Seeger, exhibit technician, who runs the wood shop and built boxes for the wagon and a frame for the Kansas town scene displayed on a wall.

Davis fabricated the five iron hoops that support the wagons’ canvas cover, the brackets to hold the hoops in place and the hand-forged pins at the front of the wagon, all at his blacksmith shop at home.

HMC Inc. allowed Davis to use a machine to roll the hoops.

The toughest challenge, Peters said, was getting all the wooden stakes mortised into the horizontal stringers on the wagon box and building the wheels.

“That took cabinet making and woodworking skills to make,” Peters said.

Lois Herr, museum education coordinator, sewed the canvas cover.

On Sept. 9, the wagon parts were moved from the wood shop to the Discovery Place to be assembled.

Since children are climbing in and out of the wagon, the volunteers made allowances: The wagon is mounted on a steel rectangular frame so it won’t shift, the wagon doesn’t have moving parts, and the hoops are metal, not wood, so a child reaching up to swing on a hoop won’t snap it.

The hoops also are a little taller proportionately so a child won’t bump his or her head while climbing in and out of the wagon.

What has been the response of the children to the wagon?

“They love it, they love it,” Madden said. “It’s a huge hit.”

Meanwhile, the three volunteers have agreed to tackle another undisclosed project.