Tesla Motors Inc. unveiled three features for its Model S on Friday, including a “ludicrous” speed mode that can take the all-electric sedan from zero to 60 miles per hour in just under three seconds.

Tesla TSLA, +0.77% will offer an upgraded 90-kilowatt/hour battery pack for the Model S for $3,000, which will provide up to 15 miles of additional range, Chief Executive Elon Musk said in a conference call.

Recap: Tesla unveils new features for Model S

That would take Tesla’s longest-range model, the Model S 85D, to a range of just under 300 miles of highway driving at 65 mph. The car starts at $105,000.

Tesla also dropped the price for a single-motor, 70-kWh Model S to $70,000, $5,000 less than the dual motor version.

The feature that garnered the most attention during the call, however, was what the company called the “ludicrous” speed version, to be available for an extra $10,000 for new buyers of the Model S 85D. Existing owners of that model can buy it for $5,000 plus labor over the next six months.

It propels the Model S to 60 mph in 2.8 seconds and to a quarter mile in just under 11 seconds, Tesla said. Musk said a next-generation Tesla Roadster, to be available in four years, would come with “maximum plaid” speed, an allusion to the 1987 Mel Brooks sci-fi parody “Spaceballs.”

The company said it developed a “smart” fuse for the battery, one that won’t melt past a high amperage. The fuse has its own electronics and a tiny lithium-ion battery that constantly monitors current, and it uses a super-alloy rather than steel so it can withstand the heat generated by the electric current.

Shares of Tesla looked poised to end the week up 6%, with shares rising 3% ahead of the conference call and holding at that level. Shares have gained 23% so far this year, compared with gains of 3.3% for the S&P 500 index. SPX, +0.70%

During the call, Musk offered some incremental updates on the timelines for the Model X, Tesla’s planned SUV, and the Model 3, the mass-market car Tesla plans to sell for about $40,000.

The Model X is on track for deliveries in two months and the Model 3 in a bit more than two years, Musk said.

In the call, Musk was asked about what hopes he’d have for additional Model S sales with the tweaks announced Friday.

His response?

“I have no idea. We are just trying to make awesome cars.”

More from MarketWatch