After weeks of campus-wide debate, trustees at Loyola Marymount University voted late Monday to end university-paid insurance coverage for elective abortions for faculty and staff in 2014.

But in a concession that could wind up making both sides unhappy, the university will offer a policy administrated by a third party — not using LMU dollars — that will include abortion coverage for a higher premium, according to a written statement from university President David W. Burcham and co-signed by board Chairwoman Kathleen Aikenhead to faculty and staff.

“No LMU dollars will be spent paying for the additional coverage,” Burcham and Aikenhead wrote in the letter. The University Comprehensive Benefits Committee will review the decision and make benefit recommendations for 2015 and beyond.

The plan managed by the third party will be chosen soon. A “slightly higher premium” is expected for faculty and staff, the letter stated.

One professor on the Westchester campus said the compromise probably guarantees ongoing debate over the issue.

“I don’t think it makes much sense,” said Christopher Kaczor, a Loyola philosophy professor. “It’s like saying abortion is seriously wrong, I will not drive you to the abortion clinic, but wait here and I’ll have my brother drive you — and that somehow gives them clean hands.”

The decision, he said, “doesn’t really work. ... It’s a victory for the side that wants LMU to be a secular place.”

Equally dissatisfied on the other side of the debate was associate professor of sociology Anna Muraco, who has written about the issue and said the matter of equity in the workplace has been pushed aside in the debate.

“I work at a Jesuit institution and I understand that,” she said, adding that the trustees’ statement and the debate has dismissed the university’s stated goal of “wanting to educate the whole person,” with an emphasis on social justice.

Removing elective abortions from health care plans, she said, “singles out health coverage that only affects one class of worker.” She also questioned whether the alternative plan premiums would be too high for lower-paid employees.

“We’re missing some of the larger issues that are at stake here — issues like equity” and diversity, she said. Abortion, she said, “is legal and safe. There’s something disingenuous by the way this (issue) has been framed. ... They claim to be an institution that respects diversity and religious plurality and we did not have to sign any kind of faith statement like other (Catholic) schools have.

Advertisement

Muraco was raised and educated in the Roman Catholic Church but has since left due to differences over issues such as reproductive rights and gay marriage.

She said the discussion at LMU “presupposes that Catholicism has one viewpoint about abortion or health care.”

While Catholic laity may represent a variety of opinions on abortion, however, church leadership has long led the way in the anti-abortion movement, with Pope Francis, a Jesuit, among the long line of leaders speaking out against the practice.

Kaczor cited a 10-year-old Jesuit statement titled “Standing for the Unborn: A Statement of the Society of Jesus in the United States on Abortion,” in which the order reiterated the church teaching on efforts to “protect life in the womb” and bring an end to abortion.

While the university had asked before whether elective abortion coverage could be dropped, it wasn’t until this summer that health providers told Loyola Marymount that dropping that coverage would be an option.

That set off a whirlwind of debate among faculty and students alike at the Jesuit school that employs a growing number of non-Catholic faculty and staff.

Opponents to dropping the elective abortion coverage asserted that it sent a chilling message of exclusion.

Kaczor argued that the university community was “founded on a shared mission and identity as a Jesuit/Catholic university. An essential part of this Jesuit/Catholic mission is the promotion of justice as understood in the Catholic tradition. ... If LMU were to freely choose to cover elective abortion in its insurance, it would be cooperating in evil and acting contrary to its own stated mission and identity.”

The enactment of the nation’s Affordable Care Act — also known as Obamacare — has triggered debate nationwide over the rights of religious institutions or employers to be exempt from plans that provide contraception and abortion coverage.

An accommodation provision has given some leeway to religious schools.

In the case of Loyola, the internal debate centered on issues of campus diversity versus the role of a Catholic university.

“When we learned that (the university) had, for the first time, been given the option to exclude elective abortions from its principal health insurance plans, we decided that the governing board ... should address this difficult issue,” the letter from the trustees read.

“The board decided that (the university’s) principal insurance plans for 2014 will not provide coverage for elective abortions,” the letter continued. “All other aspects of reproductive health coverage will remain the same. We will continue to cover therapeutic abortions, contraception and other forms of reproductive care mandated by the state of California.”

The alternative plan, the letter said, “will cover elective abortions for which an employee will pay a slightly higher premium. The employee will be responsible for the entirety of the cost associated with this additional coverage. ...”

Phillip Zampiello, an alumnus who is part of a group called Renew LMU that was formed to “protect, foster, and preserve the Catholic identity” of the school, said the group concurs with a statement from LMU’s vice president for mission and ministry, Father Robert Caro: “Exclusion of abortion from our medical benefits does not infringe freedom of conscience, civil rights or anyone’s decision to have an abortion. It does mean that university funds would not be used to pay for elective abortions. It is the position which LMU’s institutional commitment to Roman Catholicism urges us to respect.”

Muraco said while the compromise will satisfy some on her side, she doesn’t “share their enthusiasm.” The decision, she said, should be viewed as part of a larger effort to chip away at access to reproductive health care.

“This is not the end; unfortunately, it’s going to be an ongoing process,” she said. “Don’t be surprised if somewhere down the line there will be an attempt to restrict sterilization coverage or limits on services for transgendered Americans or domestic partner benefits.”