Karen Teitelbaum began her career as a speech-language pathologist working directly with patients. While she loved the experience, Teitelbaum longed to be able to help more than one person at a time. For her, the solution was to move into health care administration.

Today, Teitelbaum is president and CEO of Sinai Health System, where she's accountable for three free-standing hospitals, one fully accredited children's hospital located on a floor of Mount Sinai Hospital on Chicago's west side, a medical group of 250 doctors, a social epidemiology institute and a health system-based human services organization.

"I don't think there's anything more important than serving a community and helping to improve lives," Teitelbaum said of her job. "There will always be challenges because we're dealing with people who, many times, are in crisis or at their most vulnerable point. The rewards come in having the ability to make a difference in the lives we touch."

Health care administrators oversee the various departments, staff and facilities that make up a medical center. They work at multiple levels, including entry, middle and top management, according John DeNardo, director of the health care administration master's degree program in the School of Public Health at the University of Illinois at Chicago. A radiology department administrator, for example, is responsible for the safe, effective operation of his/her unit.

Health care administrators manage the human, financial and physical resources for a specific unit, DeNardo explained. The CEO of the organization is responsible for the leadership and direction of a clinical enterprise or system and must consider the needs of the entire organization vs. just one unit.

"The administrator's role is to apply the management and leadership skills to keep their area of responsibility functioning...to produce outstanding patient care," said DeNardo, former CEO of the University of Illinois Hospital (formerly the University of Illinois Medical Center at Chicago).

While a CEO works with a board of directors to make sure an organization remains true to its mission and is thriving, a hospital administrator is responsible for all aspects of a hospital, such as quality of care, human resources, financial management and medical-staff relations.

Philip Schettenhelm, senior practice manager at Chicago's Lurie Children's Hospital, oversees the hospital's divisions of gastroenterology, hepatology, nutrition and kidney diseases.

"I work closely with the division's providers to help them treat patients in the most efficient ways," he said. "I review the demand for our providers in various areas ... and make sure that we're providing our services at the best locations and times for our patients."

Schettenhelm also helps medical providers review their billing practices to assure accuracy, oversees staff who work with patients' families to schedule them into outpatient settings, coordinates physicians' schedules and oversees a staff of clinical research coordinators.

"A hospital is a high-energy setting with constantly changing issues," he said. "It's an environment that's never boring. Most of all, it's a job that helps you make an impact on people's lives."

To work in health care administration, a bachelor's degree is generally needed, DeNardo said. Many administrators pursue a master's in health care administration, which takes roughly two years to complete. While medical or clinical training is not required to enter the field, many health care administrators have medical backgrounds. DeNardo earned bachelor's and master's degrees in pharmacy at UIC, as well as a master's in public health at the University of Michigan.

In addition to working for hospitals and health systems, health care administrators are needed at outpatient-care facilities, extended care and specialty-care facilities. They also work for pharmaceutical companies, insurance companies, professional service organizations, consulting companies and government agencies.

Effective administrators must be good communicators, have good analytical and critical thinking skills, and be comfortable working in situations that are complex, fast-paced and rapidly changing, DeNardo said.

"But most of all, they must possess the sense of duty, responsibility and compassion that go with managing and leading organizations that care for people at some of their most vulnerable moments," he said. "And knowing that you're part of an organization (providing such care) offers "outstanding emotional rewards."

Health care administration comes with many challenges, including increasing access to affordable, high-quality care within the financial constraints of the organization. The good news is, jobs in the field are projected to grow because of increased demand for services from an aging U.S. population, increased access to care through the Affordable Care Act, and the expansion of facilities and services to meet the need.

Teitelbaum, executive vice president and chief operating officer for Sinai Health System for seven years before transitioning to her CEO role, said the field is a good fit for those who strive to understand the big picture. Someone in a high-level health care administrative post must understand the influence health care has on legislation, and even on international crises, such as the Ebola epidemic in Africa or wars that can deplete supplies of nurses on the home front, as occurred during the first Iraq war, she noted.

Working in administration doesn't mean living in an ivory tower, Teitelbaum stressed.

"Even as a chief operating officer, I spent time transporting patients, serving food on the floors and answering phones in the emergency department so I could better understand the challenges and processes faced by our caregivers," she said. "I also would stress understanding the importance of accepting and managing change because health care and social services in the communities are all about change, in technology, funding and the needs of the people we serve."

SIDEBAR: Demand climbing to serve aging boomer population

Rather than treating patients, health care administrators are charged with planning, directing and coordinating medical and health services. They might manage a health care facility such as a hospital, be in charge of a certain clinical department, or manage a medical practice for a group of physicians.