Democratic presidential front-runner Hillary Clinton holds a commanding lead in her native state over U.S. Sen. Bernie Sanders ahead of next Tuesday's Illinois primary election, a new Chicago Tribune poll has found.

The survey showed Clinton outpacing Sanders by a better than 2-to-1 margin, with 67 percent saying they'd vote for the former secretary of state and 25 percent saying they'd back the Vermont senator. Another 8 percent were undecided.

Clinton swept nearly every demographic and geographic category among Illinois Democratic voters. And nearly 4 of 5 voters had a favorable opinion of Clinton, who was born in Chicago and grew up in suburban Park Ridge, compared to about 6 in 10 with a favorable view of Sanders.

Themes that have emerged nationally throughout Clinton's and Sanders' duel for the nomination were evident in the Illinois poll. Clinton, who's also a former first lady and U.S. senator, continued to perform best among women and minority voters while Sanders, who has pitched a message of economic revolution, received his strongest support from younger and more liberal voters.

Even if Sanders doesn't end up with much of Illinois' popular vote next week, he can still win some nominating delegates to the national convention because, like the other Democratic primaries and caucuses, it's not a winner-take-all contest.

There are 182 delegates at stake in Illinois. Of that total, 102 will be awarded proportionately based on the vote for president in each of the state's 18 congressional districts, as long as a candidate gets at least 15 percent in a particular district.

Nationally, Clinton so far has collected 1,130 delegates to 499 for Sanders, with 2,383 delegates needed to wrap up the nomination at this summer's Democratic National Convention in Philadelphia. Clinton's lead has been bolstered by the support of hundreds of so-called superdelegates — party leaders and elected officials who are free to support whomever they choose regardless of a state's election results.

The proportional delegate format places emphasis on having a statewide organization win in each congressional district, and the Tribune poll showed Clinton with a sizable lead in all regions.

In Chicago and Cook County, Clinton led Sanders 71 percent to 20 percent. In the suburban collar counties, Clinton led 73 percent to 23 percent. And in the 96 Downstate counties, Clinton had 60 percent to 31 percent over Sanders.

So far during the campaign, Clinton has earned her biggest victories in states with a high percentage of minority voters, such as South Carolina, Alabama and Georgia. The Tribune poll showed that trend could continue in Illinois, where a large base of minority voters live in and near Chicago.

Sanders spars with Clinton over auto bailout: 'Excuse me, I'm talking' As Sen. Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton debated about the auto bailout, Sanders interrupted Clinton, saying, "Excuse me, I'm talking." March 6, 2016. (AP) As Sen. Bernie Sanders and Hillary Clinton debated about the auto bailout, Sanders interrupted Clinton, saying, "Excuse me, I'm talking." March 6, 2016. (AP) See more videos

The survey found Clinton's strongest support came from African-Americans, with 76 percent of black voters saying they'd vote for her compared with 16 percent for Sanders. An overwhelming 85 percent of black voters had a favorable impression of Clinton while just 4 percent had an unfavorable view. By contrast, only 44 percent of black voters said they had a favorable view of Sanders while 18 percent said they had an unfavorable opinion.

Among Hispanics, Clinton led Sanders 74 percent to 19 percent. Similar to the numbers with black voters, nearly 75 percent of Hispanic voters had a favorable impression of Clinton while just 48 percent said the same about Sanders.

Clinton also led 70 percent to 22 percent among moderate voters. Sanders fared better among voters who identified themselves as liberal, but Clinton still led in that group 59 percent to 35 percent.

(Tribune graphics)

The one bright spot in the poll for Sanders: Like other states, he held the upper hand with the youngest voters in Illinois.

Among Democratic voters ages 18 to 35, Sanders had 56 percent to 44 percent for Clinton. But voters ages 36 to 49 broke for Clinton, 51 percent to 43 percent. She also dominated among voters older than 50, with nearly 70 percent of voters favoring Clinton.

The poll also showed Clinton's and Sanders' backers have a different set of priorities that mirror their chosen candidates.

Asked to choose their most important quality in a presidential contender, 37 percent of Sanders' voters listed "strong moral character," while "a true progressive" came in second with 26 percent.

Among Clinton voters, 57 percent said having the necessary experience was the most important attribute followed by 16 percent who said the ability to win in November was the top quality needed in a candidate.

Hillary Clinton, Democratic candidate for president.

Clinton's and Sanders' supporters did agree on the top two issues they believed were most important in the presidential race: the economy, followed by gun control. Overall, 45 percent of Democratic voters said the economy was most important, followed by 17 percent who said gun control, 13 percent who said national security, 12 percent who said the Affordable Care Act and 6 percent who answered criminal justice reform.

Voters' income had little impact on who they'd vote for in the primary — Clinton received about 70 percent support across income levels.

The Research America Inc. poll was conducted from March 2-6, featuring landline and cellphone interviews of 600 registered Illinois voters who said they are likely to vote or have already cast a ballot in the Democratic primary. It has an error margin of 4.1 percentage points.

bruthhart@tribpub.com

Twitter @BillRuthhart