To the editor:

Blue Cross Blue Shield seems to be setting a precedent of creating smear campaigns against hospitals who are due for renewal of their in-network contracts. The pattern goes like this: BC consistently refuses to negotiate in good faith, they cut off negotiations arbitrarily and refuse to return to the bargaining tables. They contact the subscribers, saying they are terminating the contract because of poor quality and high cost. The very profitable BCBS system knows full well the hospitals will lose money on the contract and be forced to raise prices to other insurance companies, or shift the losses to the uninsured. Some of these contract disputes last for months. While premiums continue to roll in unabated, hundreds of individuals delay or postpone surgery, hoping that eventually they can have their operation performed by “their” doctor in “their” hospital. In other words, for BC the revenue stays steady, costs go down and profits go up.

This demonstrates little regard for the welfare of the patients, either medically or financially. Most recently this occurred with N.C. Baptist Hospital in 2005 and Wayne County Memorial Hospital in 2012. This exact same propaganda is now occurring with Carteret Health Care.

Here are the facts …

CHC on average negotiates for a 3 percent increase in contractual rates, which is much less than the inflation rate. BCBS wants them to sign a contract that allows BCBS to unilaterally make changes to the contract and gives them complete control of the reimbursement model. Because BCBS has over 80 percent of the commercial market share in Carteret County, it has significant power at the bargaining table and its repercussions are significant to the financial viability of the hospital.

CHC has some of the highest quality care compared to other hospitals in the state. This has been verified by independent, third party sources.

CHC prices are middle-of-the-road as validated by an independent third party called Truven, utilizing the true peers in Craven, Onslow, Pitt, Lenoir and New Hanover counties. BCBS used their internal data, which they won’t share.

The last straw for me was a truly unscrupulous move on the part of BCBS. Claiming it was an “error,” hundreds of claims filed by various health care providers in Carteret County were denied, indicating that CHC was “not enrolled on the service date.” Our current contract does not expire until Feb. 1, 2016. This, of course, has caused great anxiety among the subscribers, further fueling the pressure to negotiate a contract from the policyholders.

It is important that the people know the facts and not believe this rhetoric. BCBS is primarily concerned about stockholders as evidenced by:

• BCBS’s recent approval to increase the Affordable Care Act premiums by 30 percent.

• BCBS NC CEO in 2013 received a 37 percent pay increase bringing his pay up to almost $3 million. Just this week the Michigan BCBS CEO got an increase from $3.8 million to $6.6 million.

• An antitrust lawsuit that alleges the BCBS affiliates have agreed to divide territory to limit competition with each other, forcing health providers to accept lower rates and unfavorable terms.

All of these facts can be validated from reputable sources on the internet. Please do your own research.

CHC is being bullied into submission by a monolithic company. I wonder where the N.C. Department of Insurance stands on this case, because they have been suspiciously quiet. But there is one thing that can be done. Each of us can write BCBS and ask them to stop this campaign and get back to the negotiation table in good faith and with character. Here is the contact information:

Alan Hughes, executive VP and COO of BCBSNC, alan.hughes@bcbsnc.com, or or (919) 765-4140.

I promise you that when (not if) your hospital comes under similar attack, that I will do the same for you.

Angela Best

Beaufort