Buy Photo In the next Congress, U.S. Rep. Susan Brooks, R-Carmel, will serve on the House Energy and Commerce Committee with jurisdiction over health, energy and other issues important to business, including the state’s influential pharmaceutical and medical device industries. (Photo: Charlie Nye/The Star 2012 file photo)Buy Photo

After Susan Brooks was elected to Congress in 2012, political handicapper Stuart Rothenberg said GOP leaders would be nuts not to take advantage of her.

"She's personable, articulate and has a good head on her shoulders — exactly what the Republican Party needs," Rothenberg wrote.

The party did put Brooks to work. Brooks, of Carmel, was one of only a handful of freshmen to chair a subcommittee. She was appointed to a special panel to investigate the 2012 attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya. And she was assigned to sit in judgment of her new colleagues as a member of the House Ethics Committee, an unenviable assignment that nonetheless shows that House leaders consider her trustworthy.

In the next Congress, Brooks will serve on the sought-after House Energy and Commerce Committee with jurisdiction over health, energy and other issues important to business, including the state's influential pharmaceutical and medical device industries.

Brooks talked with USA TODAY about her first term and the advantages and responsibilities Republicans will have next year when they will take over the Senate and expand their majority in the House.

Question: When you were sworn into office, Congress' approval rating was 14 percent. It's now 16 percent. Is that progress?

Answer: Obviously it's not the progress that the American people are hoping for, but the fact that our approval rating is slightly up is a small victory. But it's certainly not satisfactory. Part of why I ran — and one of our themes during the campaign — was trying to restore some confidence in Congress. The fact that only 16 percent of the American people like the way we do our job isn't good enough for me.

There were opportunities in my first term that I have tried to take to restore some of that confidence in Congress. One was accepting the appointment to the Ethics Committee. ... That is a type of assignment that actually I hope allows my constituents to realize that members of Congress are certainly not above the law, not above the rules, and that's what this committee is in place to do.

Q: How difficult is it to sit in judgment of your colleagues, particularly as a new member?

A: It's been helpful to be a part of a deliberative group that works in a very bipartisan way to determine appropriate punishments or to determine whether to close investigations. We work through very, very difficult subjects that affect the reputations of our members and affect their careers, and I think it could set a precedent for how other tough issues are dealt with in Congress. So I've seen that it can be done.

Q: Did you ever feel your colleagues treated you differently because you're on the Ethics Committee?

A: I have not felt that. Other members feel sorry for those of us who are on the committee because they know it is not an easy assignment. But they often also thank us for doing it because they wouldn't want to do it, honestly.

Q: You've been involved in government at the city level (as deputy mayor of Indianapolis) and as a U.S. attorney. What have you learned about this level of government service?

A: This has been an entirely new experience. What I've been a bit frustrated about at times is that, as bills are being worked through Congress, things that seem very common sense ... don't always make it through the process.

One of my bills, a computer science education act, we're going to try to push again. I've got 120 bipartisan co-sponsors. It's to try and encourage more computer science education in our K-12 system and allow federal dollars to flow more freely to computer science education. I think it's a smart bill, not just for the future, but our schools need it now.

Q: You voted with fellow Republicans 97 percent of the time last year and 95 percent of the time this year on votes that split the two parties. How should your constituents who are Democrats view that record?

A: While yes, the Republican Party may have voted that way as a party, we are trying to promote an agenda that is positive for all American people, whether they're Republican, Democrat, independents and those who don't vote. We're trying to take up policies led by a Republican-led House that truly have benefits across all political spectrums. Most of the votes that we take up are very focused on promoting jobs and the economy, global competitiveness, national security issues, ensuring we have a strong military — these are the types of things that are behind our votes.

Q: Your biggest split with most House Republicans was on your vote last year to end the partial government shutdown and avoid a default on the nation's debt. There was a lot of pressure to vote against the deal by conservative groups that target Republicans in primaries. How difficult was it for you to vote for it?

A: It was an important vote. I felt that we had fought and had tried to put up votes prior to that vote to demonstrate what we knew was our constituents' unhappiness with the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. But at the end of the day, to be honest, the government shutdown period was very much a low point in governing for me during my first term. I wish it hadn't happened. But it did happen.

Certainly, the Republican Party did not get from that shutdown what they were hoping, which were some concessions in the Affordable Care Act. ... I felt that my constituents wanted me to vote to reopen the government and not to default on the debt.

Q: There's a view that the Republican Party is divided between the "purist" wing and the "pragmatist" wing. Is that a fair description?

A: I do think there are splits within our conference and within the party that are often demonstrated on some of these tougher votes. That's an interesting way to describe how and why people vote. I think at the end of the day, particularly with respect to the Republican conference, we want the same things. We want to lower our country's debt. We want to keep the country safe. We want jobs and the economy to be strong. But I think we have a difference in how we get there.

Q: You were appointed to the House committee investigating the 2012 attack on the American consulate in Benghazi, Libya. The panel will continue its investigation next year, even though the GOP-led House Intelligence Committee concluded last month that the Obama administration responded appropriately to the attacks. Why should this probe continue?

A: The House Intelligence Committee's report was actually only focused on the intelligence part of the administration's role. It did not address the State Department's role or the White House's role ... so that's why our work is continuing. It really will heat up again beginning with a hearing in January. I think you will begin to see more regular hearings than what we've had thus far because there still are many questions that remain.

Q: Your biggest committee assignment next year will be the Energy and Commerce Committee. Have you already started hearing from businesses, particularly those in Indiana, about issues they want the committee to address?

A: Absolutely. I have heard from the health care community. ... Repeal of the medical device tax (included in the Affordable Care Act) is significant for the state of Indiana. That is a top priority.

I have also heard from the energy sector ... (which) is very excited about my placement on the committee as well.

I'm also on the Commerce, Manufacturing and Trade Subcommittee. With Indiana being one of the top manufacturing states in the country, I'm anxious to talk to a lot of manufacturers ... (to find out) what are the regulatory issues, what are the tax issues, that are impeding their growth?

Q: You've also already started working on mental health issues. Is there a reason that's a priority for you?

A: From the time I started the practice of law in 1985, and my extensive background in the criminal justice system, so much of what the criminal justice system deals with stems from mental health issues. ...

We look at many of the mass shootings, we look at many of the crime issues in this country — particularly one-on-one, whether it's domestic violence crimes, whether it's anything often involving hostages. These often have at their root mental health issues, and we don't identify them early enough, we don't then deal with them, we don't give the families the tools they need to deal with them.

It's something that I think is going to get more and more attention, and I'm pleased to be a part of it.

Q: On a personal note, how have you settled into Washington? I understand you furnished your apartment with leftovers from your daughter's dorm room.

A: Yes, but here's what's so funny. I'm moving apartments because they've raised my rent a few times. It's a very expensive city to live in. So I'm moving to another studio apartment to try to save a little money. So that furniture is moving with me.

Q: Did you go to the White House holiday reception for members of Congress?

A: I did. My niece, who is sharing my studio apartment with me right now, as she's job-searching, was my guest. We had a lovely time. It was really fun.

Q: Did you have any bipartisan holiday wishes for the president?

A: Well, I thanked him for his service to the country, but because my niece had graduated from the University of Chicago ... I think they were excited to have a University of Chicago young person standing there more than me. (The president lived in Chicago before his move to the White House in 2009).

Q: What do you expect will happen in your next term, after Republicans take charge of the Senate and expand their majority in the House?

A: I'm very confident that we can work together to really govern responsibly, and I'm excited about the 114th Congress, in large part because of that. I see that we can get things done, and with Republican leadership in the Senate, I'm excited about the possibilities. But with the opportunity comes that responsibility. We have to do it. And shame on us if we don't.

Email Maureen Groppe at mgroppe@gannett.com. Follow her on Twitter: @mgroppe.

Read or Share this story: http://indy.st/1ALKk40