Along the Texas Gulf Coast are few patches of blue amid a sea of red.

Unlike most of its neighbors, Calhoun County is dominated by Democrats, who hold all but one of the countywide elected offices.

The Calhoun County Republican Party sees an opening, though. Slowly but surely, its leaders believe the GOP is chipping away at the Democratic stronghold - one elected office at a time. But Democrats say their grip on the county is as tight as ever.

Where does the GOP confidence come from?

"It's our national government," said Russell Cain, Calhoun County Republican Party chairman. "People are tired of not being told the truth."

Elected officials in Washington, D.C., say one thing and do another, a pattern that frustrates voters, said Cain.

Congress runs the government, not the president, who has received much criticism for taking executive action on major hot-button issues, Cain said.

"You can only do so much," the GOP chairman said.

Cain wants to do his part and get voters in his county to take a look at the Republican Party, which historically has lived in the shadow of the Calhoun County Democratic Party. A GOP sweep in Calhoun County is the mission.

How will that happen?

First, Republicans will have to defeat quite a few candidates.

Republicans temporarily made headway with County Judge Arlene Marshall, who was elected in 1996 but was defeated during her first re-election bid and replaced by a Democrat.

Strong mainstays for Republicans, though, are incumbents Precinct 5 Justice of the Peace Nancy Pomykal and Precinct 3 Constable Bruce Blevins, who've been in office since the 1990s. Now, there are five Republicans in county offices.

Self described as apolitical, new County Clerk Anna Goodman, who has worked in the clerk's office as deputy clerk, sought the Republican nomination because of her mother - a good, Christian woman, she said, who happened to vote with the GOP.

"The support I got from the Republican Party in Port Lavaca - it was outstanding," she said. "It was like a second family."

Goodman defeated Democratic nominee Shelby Sebastian with 2,353 votes to her 1,777. She is the only Republican in office who was elected to a countywide office.

Goodman's approach is simple. Suit and tie or tattered jeans and flip flops, no special treatment comes from her, she said.

"You're going to be treated the same way because everyone's God's children, and that's the way I would want to be treated," she said.

Goodman and Precinct 4 Justice of the Peace Wesley Hunt are the fourth and fifth Republican incumbents in the county.

So, is Cain's plan being realized? Is there something to a possible Republican wave?

"I would hardly call that taking over," said Evelyn Burleson, Calhoun County Democratic Party chairwoman.

Goodman's victory was a surprise, she said, but in other cases, Republicans generally aren't defeating incumbent Democrats.

Democrats continue to perform strongly election after election because they have a reputation of delivering, Burleson said. They govern effectively and champion popular policies such as keeping taxes low.

Their message is about helping everyone, the chairwoman said. The party celebrates legislative victories, such as the Voting Rights Act and Social Security, which was signed into law 80 years ago by Democratic President Franklin Roosevelt.

Burleson is troubled by the suggestion that the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare, which divides Democrats and Republicans, is anything other than a policy that helps people.

"They reach out and try to serve the whole community," Burleson said about her party.

Regionwide, that formula is working only in Calhoun County.

Traditionally, Southern voters elect Republicans for presidential elections, and sometimes Democrats win midterm vacancies because more supporters turn out.

That shift from Democrat to Republican is sometimes attributed to President Lyndon B. Johnson's push for the Civil Rights Act of 1964.

Historians say that moment in American history was when the South began to turn on Johnson's party.

Burleson said she noticed the change in party favor during the 1980s, in the era of President Ronald Reagan, but that also was the same time Democrat Ann Richards climbed the political ladder to serve as governor.

Republicans began enjoying elections statewide after Richards, though, and the phenomenon trickled down in future elections, making the state virtually red.

But not in Calhoun County.

"The Republicans just have not been visible," Burleson said about Calhoun County.

However, Republicans said their presence in the county goes back decades.

Leo Westerholm, a World War II veteran and prisoner of war, activated the Republican Party in Calhoun County in the late 1950s, but it took decades before the first Republicans - Pomykal and Blevins - clinched and kept offices.

It wasn't until the turn of the century that Republicans began to come out of the shadows, said June Westerholm, a Republican and widow of Leo Westerholm.

In a heavily Democratic community, Republicans for years would not outwardly discuss their politics for fear of backlash, she said.

"It was very slow," Westerholm said. "It was like people were afraid to come around you. I was so glad when I suddenly could speak."

Phenomena such as the Tea Party movement and growing disdain toward the Democratic Party on the national level propelled Republicans in the county to express themselves and draw others into their corner, Cain said.

Calhoun County Republicans said they have a winning formula now: Campaign against Washington, increase outreach and deliver energetic candidates.

For 2016 and beyond, Calhoun County Republicans want to capitalize on the gains they've achieved with their five officeholders. The anti-Washington sentiment and an affinity for conservative principles will be key, party officials said.

But while focusing on that front, Republicans in the county also will pay attention to future eligible voters.

"Our goal is we're slowly changing a Democratic stronghold," said Connie Hunt, the party's vice chairwoman who focuses on elections. "We want less government, less taxes. We want more young people to be involved. We want them to speak out because people want to hear from you."

SHARE