Work began on this property on Airways Boulevard owned by Blurton Capital LLC in May but has progressed slowly. (Photo: File photo)

A slow-moving renovation project at 236-238 Airways Blvd. in downtown Jackson has again put the spotlight on blight in our city.

The property is in a high-traffic spot at the end of Hollywood Drive on the western entrance to downtown. It had been empty and boarded up for some time when work began to renovate the property into apartments in May. Many were happy to see progress on what was an eyesore.

Unfortunately, the work didn't last long. Windows were framed, a fence was put up, and then the property sat again. The grass grew long, and the eyesore was back.

Activity began again in mid-July. Oddly enough, that work began soon after a reporter from this newspaper called a representative of the property owner to ask why work had stopped. We're sure that was just a coincidence.

The property is owned by Blurton Captial LLC, which owns nearly 100 properties in Madison County, according to government records. Blurton has attracted the attention of the Lambuth Area Neighborhood Association, which says Blurton properties are a major contributor to blight in midtown Jackson.

David Blurton of Brownsville is the owner of Blurton Capital. His properties in Jackson have been managed by Chris Phillips. Blurton made it his business to buy up cheap property after the housing crash in 2008. The problem is, many of the properties are old and need work. Many of the homes sit vacant and boarded up.

As of last fall, 26 Blurton properties in the city limits were boarded up, according to city code inspectors.

Blurton is certainly not the only culprit when it comes to blight in midtown Jackson. Paul Mundt, who as of last fall owned at least 132 properties in Madison County, has also been targeted by the city for code violations.

Mayor Jerry Gist focused attention on blight in his first term as mayor as part of his effort to curb crime. The theory is that blight breeds crime. Get rid of the blight and deter crime. The city has made strides in this area by pressuring property owners and, in some cases, tearing down buildings.

But the problems — and property owners such as Blurton and Mundt — continue to be a drag on our city.

We encourage the city to do everything within its power to hold property owners accountable. And we encourage investors to make decisions about their properties as if each building was next door to their own home.

TENNCARE MISERY METER

Gov. Bill Haslam's, Lt. Gov. Ron Ramsey's and the Tennessee General Assembly's lack of urgency and failure to expand TennCare under the Affordable Care Act is bringing misery to an estimated 330,000 Tennesseans who won't have health insurance, hospitals that risk financial stability and workers who could lose their jobs. It is costing Tennesseans an estimated $2.5 million per day. The loss to date is:

$542,500,000

SUN EDITORIAL POLICY

The opinions expressed in editorials labeled as "Our View" represent those of The Jackson Sun's editorial board. Viewpoints expressed in other columns or letters represent the opinions of the writers only.

Letters to the editor are encouraged. Letters should, in most cases, be fewer than 300 words and address a public issue. All letters must be acknowledged by the writer and are subject to editing for clarity and space. Please include name and daytime phone number for verification. Letters not intended for publication should be clearly labeled.

Letters may be submitted online at jacksonsun.com, by e-mail to opinions@ jacksonsun.com, by fax to 731-425-9639 and through the U.S. mail to P.O. Box 1059, Jackson, TN 38302.

OUR NATIONAL DEBT

According to the U.S. Treasury Department, the national debt as of Aug. 1 was $17,631,209,292,846.22

Each American's share is $56,455.57.

HEARTS AND DARTS

Each Saturday, The Jackson Sun recognizes unsung heroes in our community with "hearts," and we point out the rascals and devilish situations with "darts." If you have a heart or dart, send it to Hearts and Darts, The Jackson Sun, Editorial Department, P.O. Box 1059, Jackson, TN 38302. They can be faxed to 731-425-9639 or e-mailed to The Sun at opinions@jacksonsun.com.

Please include name, address and daytime phone number for verification purposes.

Read or Share this story: http://www.jacksonsun.com/story/opinion/editorials/2014/08/09/blight-continued-drag-community/13803965/