Sen. Mitch McConnell gave a bizarre victory speech tonight where he promised that if he is elected Senate Majority Leader, he will force President Obama to do the Republican Party’s bidding.

Video:

McConnell ironically began by saying the powers that be in Washington have treated the people with contempt. Mitch obviously didn’t realize that he is one of the powers that be in DC. After telling his supporters to give primary opponent Matt Bevin a hand, McConnell tried to suck up to the tea party. For some reason, McConnell talked about his mom’s polio, and said it gave him the tenacity to fight left-wing extremists.

McConnell claimed that he fought for good Kentucky jobs without mentioning that he has blocked dozens of jobs bills in the Senate. McConnell attacked Alison Grimes as a Hollywood liberal who Barack Obama and Harry Reid want in this race. McConnell tried to tie Grimes to Obama by saying, “A vote for my opponent is a vote for Obamacare.” McConnell said that the race isn’t about two political parties, but it is about holding the supposedly lying Obama accountable. McConnell then immediately told a gigantic lie about Obamacare.

Sen. McConnell claimed that candidates that Obama and Reid select are yes people for them. He called Grimes a partisan’s partisan. The whole scheme is designed to label Alison Lundgren Grimes as Barack Obama’s candidate, and McConnell repeated the tired, old lie that President Obama has been waging war against Kentucky jobs for five and a half years.

The strangest thing McConnell said was that if he becomes Majority Leader, he will force President Obama to do the people’s bidding. By people, he means the Koch brothers and his wealthy donors. McConnell actually promised Republican voters that he will break the will of the President Of The United States.

Mitch McConnell repeatedly tried to sell himself as the real Kentuckian, while ignoring the fact that he has resided in DC for the last three decades. Sen. McConnell’s performance was old, tired, and straight out of the Republican playbook. McConnell is running a generic paint-by-numbers attack on Grimes.

McConnell is very unpopular in the state, so his only strategy is to try to drag Grimes down by tying her to President Obama. The problem for Mitch is that President Obama is more popular in the state than he is. Hearing Mitch McConnell talk about how much he cares about regular people was especially nauseating when this the same man who laughed about throwing millions off of unemployment benefits.

Mitch McConnell promised to repeal and replace Obamacare. He promised a war on bureaucrats, and he dusted off talking points that probably worked in decades past. Sen. McConnell is a floundering candidate, and his victory speech did nothing to make anyone think that he deserves another six years in the Senate.

It’s clear that Sen. McConnell’s only strategy for victory is to tie Grimes to Obama, and run against Obama.

If this is all that he’s got, Sen. Mitch McConnell is in deep trouble.