The Wichita Animal Action League says it has received enough monetary donations for a kitten shot twice earlier this week to undergo potential life-saving surgery.

WAAL released the following statement surrounding Athena, the kitten left paralyzed in south Wichita:

ATHENA UPDATE: We have reached our goal! Because of you and your extremely generous donations, Athena will have surgery tomorrow and be given the chance to walk, and live a long life, again. Our supports and community never ceases to amaze us and we are so lucky to have you all on our life-saving team.

She will have on going care, including possible overnight stays in the hospital, therapy, and steroid injections, so her care might exceed our $3,500 goal. If you'd like to contribute to her after care, please do so. Any amount raised that exceeds Athena's needs will be go help save the lives of other animals like Athena in our community. From the bottom of our hearts, we are so thankful for your love and support for Athena. Please send good thoughts her way tomorrow as she prepares for this surgery and stay tuned to our page for updates throughout the day.

Previous story>

An animal rescue group is hoping to raise money to help a kitten shot twice a few days ago in south Wichita. On Friday, a veterinarian found a pellet inside 7-month-old Athena that left her paralyzed and in need of a dangerous surgery.

At first sight Athena still looks like a normal cuddly kitten.

"She's very friendly, in high spirits," said Sarah Coffman with the Wichita Animal Action League. "She doesn't appear to be in much pain."

But once she starts to move the problem is evident, she can't lift her hind legs. Coffman stepped in after a good Samaritan called Thursday after seeing the kitten dragging along.

"We had thought she had been hit by a car and her back legs were broke so we offered to pay for her to go to the vet and get checked out," Coffman said. "We were not prepared for what we were told."

X-rays show a pellet lodged against her spine, pressing nerves that leave her partially paralyzed.

"So extremely angry," Coffman said. "We've determined from the trajectory of the bullet that she had to of been standing very close to whoever shot her because the bullet is almost straight down into her back."

While police search for whoever did this cruel act, Athena is in need of a surgery to be able to walk again.

"Without this surgery the bullet will likely travel inside of her body and move possibly in the future paralyze her if she moves wrong," Coffman said.

Coffman says her group has raised more than a thousand dollars within hours of starting a fundraiser to get Athena back on all four legs, the problem is she goes into surgery on Monday and they're about $2,500 short.

"I have no doubt that our followers are going to come through by Monday," Coffman said. "I have no doubt."

If you would like to help, click here .

The kitten was found in a mobile home park on Macarthur in south Wichita. If you know who did this, you're asked to call Wichita police.