A new poll shows that 59 percent of likely voters oppose the HHS mandate requiring insurance coverage that includes drugs that can destroy a human embryo, such as Plan B, without cost to the patient.

Join us on our podcast each weekday for an interesting story, well told, from Charisma News. Listen at charismapodcastnetwork.com.

Family Research Council (FRC) and Alliance Defending Freedom (ADF) have released the results of a commissioned national survey showing that 59 percent of likely voters "oppose the mandate requiring the coverage of preventive care services for women which includes all FDA approved contraceptives, including drugs that can destroy a human embryo, and sterilization services without a direct cost to the patient."

The poll, conducted by WPA Opinion Research from Nov. 18-20, sought to determine how likely voters feel about Obamacare overall and their opinion regarding the HHS mandate. WPA noted that "Obamacare has seen its public support drop as the unadvertised consequences of the law have become clear. The mandated coverage of drugs that can destroy a human embryo are just another instance of this."

Strong majorities of both evangelical Protestants (77 percent) and Catholics (61 percent) oppose the mandate. Majorities of Protestants (55 percent), Catholics (53 percent) and evangelical Protestants (68 percent) disapprove of the Affordable Care Act.

FRC President Tony Perkins made the following comments regarding the survey and the Supreme Court's decision Tuesday to accept the Hobby Lobby and Conestoga Wood cases and decide the fate of Obamacare's HHS mandate:

"Americans increasingly oppose this mandate because it puts the jobs, livelihoods and health care of millions of Americans at risk. It forces those who stand up for their conscience to choose between paying crippling fines that could shut down their business or dropping the health care of all their employees. This frankly is an unacceptable non-choice.

"Respecting freedom of conscience is a long-held American tradition, and the government should not impose mandates or laws that force individuals and businesses to violate these beliefs just to hold a job, own a business or have health insurance.

"This is a flawed mandate within a flawed law. The reality is that employers may choose to drop health care coverage for their employees and their families altogether rather than submit to this intrusive federal mandate.

"Americans should not be forced to violate their religious beliefs to purchase health insurance, hold a job or operate a business in their country. Freedom of religion, the American people believe, extends to the freedom to practice your religion in your health care plan, as outlined by the First Amendment of the Constitution and illustrated in these poll results.

"The American people are turning their backs not only on this oppressive health care law but also on the law's mandate that for the first time in American history requires individuals to violate their moral beliefs and require them to pay for items and services they oppose in their health care plans.

"Although the Supreme Court has agreed to hear these cases, Congress should listen to the American people and act to protect the livelihoods of Americans that are now at risk. Congress must fulfill its constitutional duty to protect employers and individuals who do not want to be punished for standing up for their rights."

To view the results of the survey, click here.

Draw closer to God. Experience the presence of the Holy Spirit every month as you read Charisma magazine. Sign up now to get Charisma for as low as $1 per issue.

Has God called you to be a leader? Ministry Today magazine is the source that Christian leaders who want to serve with passion and purpose turn to. Subscribe now and receive a free leadership book.

-

See an error in this article? This email address is being protected from spambots. You need JavaScript enabled to view it.