It seems Sarah Palin’s $99/year Internet channel was the last thread clinging to any shred of her sanity. Now that it’s shut down forever, she has finally turned into the person who leaves thousand-word rambling rants on your Facebook wall that make exactly zero sense.

Palin is about as original as she is smart, which is why her latest, perhaps craziest, Facebook rant is about — you guessed it — death panels.

You see, President Obama is still pushing a plan that got cut from the Affordable Care Act to reimburse doctors who discuss end-of-life care with their patients. This has nothing to do with death panels and everything to do with doctors helping people make some of the most important decisions of their lives.

But Sarah Palin doesn’t care if you get to choose whether an ER doctor breaks your ribs in a fruitful attempt to give you a few more hours of life or whether you die peacefully at home surrounded by your family. She cares about being a demagogue, and worst of all, she isn’t even any good at it. Just look at some of the nonsense she’s spewing:

Remember when coining “death panel” I focused on the dangers of rationing healthcare services – as it’s the inevitable result of any government takeover of healthcare.

That’s three made-up nonsense conspiracies in one sentence!

Media coverage of my position on this is skewed; as usual they got it wrong. I’m calling you out, L.A. Times. You underestimate the wisdom of the people with your claim that I’m “discredited.”

I’M NOT DISCREDITED. YOU’RE DISCREDITED. THE WHOLE DANG SYSTEM IS DISCREDITED.

I’m so angry at democrat and republican politicians who just rolled their eyes when I, and many others, rose up with warnings that each step forward taken by champions of this socialist program would jerk back two steps from every free American and our God-given rights.

I just… at what point do we start seriously suggesting that Sarah Palin seek some help?

If you feel like it, read the whole thing. But I can’t promise that it won’t somehow hypnotize you into joining the Palin cult. On the other hand, if she could do that, maybe she wouldn’t have had to cancel her Internet channel.