The Colorado State Claims Board will recommend that the legislature award more than $1 million to five additional victims of the Lower North Fork fire, bringing the total for 26 victims to about $12.5 million.

The board approved recommending payments for economic damages to the five Wednesday, the second day of hearings on compensation for the 2012 blaze that killed three people and destroyed 23 homes in southern Jefferson County.

The Colorado State Forest Service set what was supposed to be a controlled burn, but it later roared into an inferno that charred more than 1,400 acres.

“I don’t think they’re going to do a whole lot more than that. I feel most of us want to just move forward,” said Joan Brown, who would receive $83,000 of the $95,000 she requested.

Unlike the 21 cases the board decided Tuesday, none of the victims who were heard Wednesday asked for compensation for noneconomic losses.

The largest settlement offered on either day was $3.2 million for Scott Appel, whose wife, Ann, died in the blaze. Samuel Lucas and his sister, who lost their parents, would receive $408,000 if the legislature accepts the board’s recommendation.

In both of those cases, the board rejected the recommendation of a Judicial Arbiter Group, which wanted the victims to receive payment for the deaths and other noneconomic losses.

State statute bars the board from recommending payment for noneconomic losses to the legislature, said state Attorney General John Suthers.

Edgar and Mary Allen Schneider, who originally asked the state to pay $1 million, reached a settlement with Suthers’ office, and the board will recommend that they receive $300,000.

“It is not enough, but we knew beforehand that it wasn’t going to be good,” Edgar Schneider said after Wednesday’s hearing.

The Forest Service set the fire March 22, 2012, but didn’t properly extinguish it. Schneider called 911 when he saw smoke from the blaze on March 26, when the blaze had escaped its boundaries.

He was told it was a controlled burn, and he went to play golf.

Later, the couple saw flames devouring trees as fire raced up a ridge toward their home.

The Forest Service should never have started the burn during a dry period when winds were high, Schneider said.

“I think they should have went to jail. I would be in jail right now if I did that,” he said.

Tom McGhee: 303-954-1671, tmcghee@denverpost.com or twitter.com/dpmcghee