Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share USA TODAY's Jayne O'Donnell reports as the Supreme Court appeared closely divided Wednesday during heated arguments over President Obama's health care law, but questions from Justice Anthony Kennedy gave proponents hope the statute will be upheld. (USA NEWS, USA TODAY)

Supreme Court Chief Justice John Roberts is one of two justices holding the key to Obamacare in his hands. (Photo: Nati Harnik, AP)

WASHINGTON — The fate of President Obama's health care law — as well as the federal subsidies relied upon by millions of Americans to make insurance premiums affordable — likely rests in the hands of two people.

That much was clear Wednesday morning during a tense, 80-minute oral argument inside a packed Supreme Court chamber, where top members of the Obama administration and Congress watched anxiously for the figurative white or black smoke.

What they saw were six justices quite certain about the question at hand: four liberals who clearly believe the law was meant to offer federal tax credits to all comers, and two conservatives who argued it simply doesn't read that way. Justice Clarence Thomas, always silent during oral arguments, is almost certain to take that side.

If virtually every observer's math was correct, that left the government with four votes and opponents of Obamacare with three. That's where Chief Justice John Roberts and Justice Anthony Kennedy come into play.

Roberts, the poker-faced leader of the court now in his 10th year, rescued Obama's signature domestic policy achievement in 2012 on what appeared to be almost a technicality. After deciding that the law violated the Commerce Clause of the Constitution, Roberts said it could be upheld based on Congress' authority to tax its citizens — in this case, through a penalty for not getting health insurance.

On Wednesday, as justices on the left and right pounced on both of the polished litigators before them — Michael Carvin for the opponents, Solicitor General Donald Verrilli for the government — Roberts maintained an almost stony silence. If he had decided how to vote on the case, he didn't want anyone to know.

About the most noteworthy thing the chief justice said was a reference to that last case, which focused on the law's mandate that individuals buy insurance or pay a penalty. When liberal justices sought to tie Carvin to arguments he made in 2012, Roberts said, "We've heard talk about this other case. Did you win that other case?"

As the laughter in the courtroom subsided, Roberts added, "So maybe it makes sense that you have a different story today."

Supreme Court Justice Anthony Kennedy Kennedy is the most likely swing justice and could be key to Obamacare case. (Photo: 2013 photo by Matt Slocum, AP)

Kennedy, who became the most likely swing justice upon the retirement of Sandra Day O'Connor in 2006, was more outspoken but equally hard to pin down.

During the first half of the argument, he said opponents' reading of the law created "a serious constitutional question" because states were told to create their own health insurance exchanges or suffer damaging consequences. At the same time, Kennedy said, "perhaps you will prevail in the plain words of the statute."

Later, when Verrilli said that to label the coercive offer to the states as unconstitutional would be a novel argument, Kennedy piped in: "Does novel mean difficult?"

"It does seem to me that if petitioners' argument is correct, this is just not a rational choice for the states to make, and that they're being coerced," Kennedy said.

And finally, near the end of the session, Verrilli again said that under opponents' interpretation, "the statute can't work." Kennedy asked, "Is that a synonym for ambiguity?" — a fallback position under which the law could be upheld.

"It seems to me a little odd that the director of Internal Revenue didn't identify this problem if it's ambiguous and advise Congress it was," Kennedy said.

By the end of the argument, the lawyers and their backers on the bench had made most of the essential arguments on both sides. Spectators with a dog in this fight may have thought they heard enough to assure victory.

But what they had not heard — definitive opinions from Kennedy or his boss, Roberts — spoke volumes. It will be nearly four months, in all likelihood, before the future of Obamacare is known.

Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Affordable Care Act faces Supreme Court again | 1:24 The Supreme Court has agreed to hear a case concerning the Affordable Care Act. The case challenges the government subsidies that help millions of low- and middle-income people afford their health insurance premiums. (Feb. 23) AP 1 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Obamacare enrollment extended until April | 1:02 The Obama administration said officials found errors on about 800,000 statements sent to people who purchased coverage through Healthcare.gov in 2014. Video provided by Newsy Newslook 2 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT IRS pushing public to the Web | 6:08 IRS Commissioner John Koskinen talks about budget cuts hurting the agency, new online developments and tax code simplification during an interview with USA TODAY editorial writer George Hager. 3 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Tea Party criticizes Obama in response to SOTU | 1:56 Rep. Curt Clawson's Tea Party response to President Obama's State of the Union Address tackles personal liberty and immigration issues. VPC 4 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT H&R Block CEO on how Obamacare will impact your taxes | 2:33 It's never fun to think about tax season, but H&R Block is ready to get Americans into tax-paying mode, even though we're months away from the deadline. Newslook 5 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT High deductibles have patients weighing budgets, health | 2:25 Physician Praveen Arla says he's seen a role reversal since the implementation of the Affordable Care Act. Middle-class patients are now avoiding regular care due to high-deductible plans and out-of-pocket expenses. VPC 6 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Getting ready for open enrollment | 2:45 Here's advice on how to prepare and sign up for health insurance under Obamacare. (News, USA TODAY) 7 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Obama dismisses Jonathan Gruber's stupid voters comment | 2:05 President Obama says he and his administration did not mislead the public on the financing of the health care law, disputing statements by a consultant who said supporters of the bill took advantage of the "stupidity" of American voters. 8 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT New videos fuel GOP rally against 'Obamacare' | 1:37 Newly surfaced videos are adding fresh energy to Republican efforts to repeal President Barack Obama's health care law. An advisor in the law's drafting called American voters 'stupid,' which he says helped Democrats pass it through Congress. (Nov. AP 9 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Is Obamacare killing rural hospitals? | 5:24 Dozens of rural hospitals have closed since 2010 due in part to the Affordable Care Act. Members of one small south Georgia town share how the closure of their local hospital has negatively affected their community. 10 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Five things to know about the Affordable Care Act open enrollment | 2:15 The 3-month open enrollment window for health care coverage under the Affordable Care Act begins Saturday, but the healthcare.gov website is already available for window shopping. (USA NEWS, USA TODAY) 11 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson on his Obamacare suit | 1:30 U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson, R-Wis., comments on his lawsuit against the Affordable Care Act on the steps of the federal courthouse in Green Bay, Wis., on Monday, July 7, 2014. Green Bay Press-Gazette 12 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT SCOTUS sides with Hobby Lobby in blow to Obamacare | 1:22 The Supreme Court ruled Monday that companies cannot be forced to offer insurance coverage for birth control methods they equate with abortion. People on both sides of the issue reacted outside the Supreme Court right after the ruling came down. 13 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Obamacare comes to an old battlefield in the war on poverty | 4:01 As one of the poorest and sickest counties in America, Floyd County Kentucky is an important testing ground for the Affordable Care Act. Jessica Ebelhar, The Courier-Journal 14 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT How many people support Obamacare? Ask USA TODAY | 1:25 Editorial writer George Hager explains the number of people who approve and disapprove of Obamacare and elaborates on what the numbers mean. 15 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Secretary Kathleen Sebelius resigns | 1:45 Health and Human Services Secretary Kathleen Sebelius resigned Thursday after facing scrutiny over President Obama's Affordable Care Act included a troubled rollout in October. VPC 16 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Health care enrollees may be targeted by scammers | 1:50 A New Orleans woman says she gave almost $200 to someone claiming to be a healthcare.gov representative. But it appears it was a scam. The site had a surge in high traffic in the days leading up to Monday's deadline to enroll. VPC 17 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Final push to boost Obamacare enrollment | 2:24 As the midnight deadline approached for those enrolling in Obamacare, there was a last-minute surge in signups.. and still many questions. Video provided by Reuters Newslook 18 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Deadline day: 'Obamacare' signup surge in final hours | 1:30 Healthcare.gov saw millions of visitors in the days leading up to the deadline to enroll: midnight on March 31. But Republican critics say that's not an accurate reflection of how people feel about the Affordable Care Act. 19 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Obamacare deadline here; public still skeptical | 1:48 The deadline for the Affordable Care Act's first enrollment period is here, albeit with an extension for some who haven't finished the process. Though more than six million Americans have signed up, acceptance of 'Obamacare' is still elusive. Newslook 20 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT Boehner: GOP wants alternative to Obamacare | 1:52 As House Speaker John Boehner prepares for the annual House GOP retreat later this month, he says his party is focused on setting its election-year agenda. He says he expects to come up with proposals to replace Obamacare and create more jobs. (Jan. AP 21 of 22 Skip Ad Ad Loading... x Embed x Share THE AFFORDABLE HEALTH CARE ACT White House gets celebs to help sell health exchange | 1:49 After a month of marketing the federal health exchange site as "not broken anymore," the White House has tossed the ball to Magic Johnson and Alonzo Mourning in new ads touting health insurance. VPC 22 of 22 Last VideoNext Video Affordable Care Act faces Supreme Court again

Obamacare enrollment extended until April

IRS pushing public to the Web

Tea Party criticizes Obama in response to SOTU

H&R Block CEO on how Obamacare will impact your taxes

High deductibles have patients weighing budgets, health

Getting ready for open enrollment

Obama dismisses Jonathan Gruber's stupid voters comment

New videos fuel GOP rally against 'Obamacare'

Is Obamacare killing rural hospitals?

Five things to know about the Affordable Care Act open enrollment

U.S. Sen. Ron Johnson on his Obamacare suit

SCOTUS sides with Hobby Lobby in blow to Obamacare

Obamacare comes to an old battlefield in the war on poverty

How many people support Obamacare? Ask USA TODAY

Secretary Kathleen Sebelius resigns

Health care enrollees may be targeted by scammers

Final push to boost Obamacare enrollment

Deadline day: 'Obamacare' signup surge in final hours

Obamacare deadline here; public still skeptical

Boehner: GOP wants alternative to Obamacare

White House gets celebs to help sell health exchange

Read or Share this story: http://usat.ly/1AJFxhB