People Moves of the Week: Jenner & Block, BNP Paribas, Global Loan Agency

Jenner & Block hires Kurt von Moltke as M&A co-chair; BNP Paribas adds three; Global Loan Agency expands U.S. operations

Carlos Aguilera is now BNP Paribas’ head of oil and gas M&A. Aguilera was most recently a vice president of business development at Chevron Corp. (NYSE: CVX).

Ed Batts has been hired by Orrick Herrington & Sutcliffe LLP as global co-head of M&A. Batts, most recently with DLA Piper, focuses on M&A and corporate governance for public technology companies.

Sanford Brown has been hired by Alston & Bird as a partner. Brown, most recently with Bracewell, advises financial institutions on M&A and banking regulation.

Sarah Camougis has joined Choate Hall & Stewart LLP as a partner. Camougis, previously with Locke Lord LLP, advises public companies, private equity firms and venture capital funds across North America and Europe.

Frank Cicero was hired by Keefe Bruyette & Woods Inc. as a managing director. Cicero, most recently the global head of financial institutions at Jefferies, will focus on M&A, recapitalizations and restructurings for banks and thrifts.

Mason Drake has joined Akerman LLP as a partner. Drake, previously with Greenberg Traurig, concentrates on M&A, private equity and venture capital.

Daniel Fisher has joined Global Loan Agency Services where he will oversee the firm’s New York office. Fisher, previously with Wilmington Trust, will be responsible for growing the lender’s U.S. operations, including creating a team to support issuers, borrowers and direct lenders.

Christian Hartenberger has joined BNP Paribas as a managing director in the general industrials group where he will lead M&A efforts in the aerospace and defense and industrial sectors. Hartenberger was most recently with Barclays.

Mike Hatcher has joined middle market investment bank FourBridges Capital Advisors as a senior adviser where he will be advising Southeastern companies on M&A and financing. Hatcher co-founded health care staffing company TeamHealth Holdings Inc. (NYSE: TMH).

Donald Lamson is now with Squire Patton Boggs’ Washington, D.C. office as a counsel. Lamson, previously with Shearman & Sterling LLP, advises on regulatory matters related to M&A and public policy services to financial institutions.

Christopher Lee has joined FTI Consulting Inc. (NYSE: FCN) as a managing director. Lee, previously with PriceWaterHouseCoopers, advises on M&A and also provides due diligence to corporate and private equity clients.

Craig Lilly has been hired by Baker & McKenzie as a partner. Lilly, most recently with Greenberg Traurig, concentrates on M&A and private equity, including recapitalizations, leveraged buyouts and divestitures.

Justin Long has joined Norton Rose Fulbright as a partner. Long, most recently with Bracewell, focuses on M&A, corporate finance, along with bank regulatory matters, including securities offerings and asset sales.

Stephen Meredith is now with Choate Hall & Stewart LLP as a partner. Meredith, most recently with Locke Lord LLP, has experience with corporate transactions in the technology, media and telecommunications sectors.

Kurt von Moltke (pictured) is now the co-chair of Jenner & Block’s M&A practice. Von Moltke, most recently with Kirkland & Ellis LLP, concentrates on M&A, private equity, debt restructurings and corporate finance.

Christopher Nelson has joined Choate Hall & Stewart LLP as a partner. Nelson, most recently with Locke Lord LLP, advises companies on M&A, growth equity and venture capital.

Ron Pillar has been hired by communications, media and techcnology-focused investment bank Arma Partners as a partner. Pillar, who previously founded technology-focused M&A firm Pillar Capital Advisors, concentrates on software and communications transactions.

Paul Quinn has joined Akerman as a partner. Quinn, most recently with Paul Hastings, advises private equity firms and their portfolio companies on M&A.

Thomas Rosen has joined BNP Paribas’ energy and industrials group as head of power M&A in North America. Rosen was previously with Loop Capital.

Anthony Saur was hired by Morrison Cohen LLP as a partner. Saur, most recently with Venable LLP, focuses on M&A, venture capital and other capital market transactions in the technology and biotechnology sectors.

William Sultemeier is now a partner in Jones Day’s energy practice. Sultemeier, previously with Greenberg Traurig LLP focuses on M&A, private equity, venture capital and joint ventures in the energy sector.

Michael Tankersley has joined Alston & Bird as a partner. Tankersley, most recently with Bracewell, advises financial institutions on divestitures, corporate governance and regulation.

Warren de Wied has joined Fried Frank Harris Shriver & Jacobson LLP as a partner in its M&A and private equity practice. Wied, previously with Wilson Sonsini Goodrich & Rosati, advises public companies and private equity firms on M&A and corporate governance.

George Young is now with Perella Weinberg Partners as a partner in its advisory group. Young, most recently with Lazard, will work with clients in the telecommunications, media and technology sectors.

For more information on related topics, visit the following: