Co-owner Jens Nicolaysen holds some of the clothing sold at his company. Shinesty is a startup e-commerce site that sells a variety of vintage "hideous" clothing, from neon '80s-style windbreakers to ugly Christmas sweaters. ( Cliff Grassmick / Daily Camera )

For those seeking "cornea destroyer" golf jorts that would make Al Czervik proud, a multi-color DJ Jazzy Jeff-esque shirt for that phat party, or a red, white and blue Starter jacket to profess one's love for 'Merica, a Boulder startup wants to fill those needs.

The lovably hideous has a home on Shinesty.com, a Boulder-based e-commerce apparel website that has seen explosive growth since its launch last year thanks to a hand-picked selection of products ranging from overly patriotic gear to ugly Christmas sweaters and suits.

"We're out to rid the world of boring clothing," co-founder Jens Nicolaysen said.

The idea behind Shinesty — pronounced like the big-hair, shoulder pad-laden '80s soap opera "Dynasty" — came from University of Colorado student Chris White and his buddy Nicolaysen. The two had an affinity for the flashy, retro and ridiculous wear when going to theme parties and events.

"Thrift stores are picked over, they're inconsistent quality and eBay was a royal pain," Nicolaysen said. "We were these consumers before we started this business, and we recognize the challenges."

Last year, the two cobbled together a website to test the business idea and got a favorable response to the pictures of people wearing Jazzercise shirts, cut-off denim and Budweiser windbreakers. After offering prizes such as a yeti costume and ugly Christmas sweaters for a contest, Shinesty landed nearly 1,000 sign-ups to its mailing list before the website was launched, Nicolaysen said.

"We put up some ridiculous vintage items and, almost instantly, everything sold out," he said. "We didn't expect that to happen and we put up some more items — and it happened again."

The Shinesty founders then built a posse of purveyors, who scoured thrift stores and consignment shops in their respective cities to supply the inventory for the site.

To help hone the concept and fuel the website's growth, Shinesty was one of six firms that participated this summer in the inaugural Catalyze CU-Boulder. The program acts as a startup accelerator by providing insight from industry "mentors," co-working space in addition to seed funding.

"Shinesty raised about $100,000 in new capital to help them launch a new warehouse ... and they're just as busy as can be," said Doug Smith, assistant dean for programs and engagement in CU-Boulder's College of Engineering and Applied Science, who oversees the Catalyze CU-Boulder program. "The big thing we moved on with them was about the opportunity to maybe design and produce clothes that look like they were made in the 1980s."

Early next year, Shinesty will launch its first private-label products which include neon windbreakers, Nicolaysen said.

The vintage items will remain an essential element on Shinesty.com, but the addition of the private label would help provide a balance, he said.

"There's a lot to be said for having an item that, chances are, no one else will be able to buy," he said.

The vintage items are unique, but the inherent drawback is that quantities likely are limited.

The foray into clothing design, however, has presented some issues of its own.

The advancement of clothing materials have made it difficult to find that specific polyester-nylon blend that gave 1980s-style windbreakers their distinctive looks, feels and sounds, he said.

"(It's creating a product) that still swishes and finding a material that's so antiquated," he said. "We're not trying to be the next Columbia Sportswear, we're trying to make it look like it was legitimately made in the '80s."

Shinesty is in the process of securing a manufacturer for the line, he said, adding that the partner likely would be Colorado-based.

Alicia Wallace: 303-473-1332, wallacea@dailycamera.com or twitter.com/dc_alicia