Positive energy was as high as the Rockies during Sarasota's first turn at hosting the International Conference on Positive Aging this week.

The Institute for the Ages, a local foundation funded in part by Sarasota County, brought the conference here from California to create an invigorating mix of local aging specialists and national players in a new game of re-envisioning later life. It was a natural alliance for Sarasota, and by all indications a successful one: Institute CEO Tom Esselman expects the group to return in 2015.

Talk about enthusiasm for the adventure that going gray can be! I don't think I've ever met so many people in one place so eager to take my hand, fix me with an earnest gaze and tell me about their uniquely innovative approach to making life fun and fulfilling for those of us 50 years old and beyond.

But threading through those sessions and workshops about encore careers and elder entrepreneurs was a solid, quiet streak of realistic acknowledgement that for many, navigating the last third of life amounts to more than just following your bliss.

Chronic illness, including dementia, has a way of placing constraints on your personal potential for "life by design." And insights into the challenge of caregiving — a testing time most older adults, especially women, will face at some point — had their place among all that positivity.

One of the more intriguing speakers was psychotherapist Wayne A. Ewing, who talked of the spiritual possibilities for someone whose days revolve around care of a dementia patient. He described this otherworldly experience of spending time in a realm devoid of memory, by citing Psalm 88:12: "Are your wonders known in the darkness, or your saving help in the land of forgetfulness?"

Ewing, an Episcopal priest, has written in academic journals about this terrifying land, after caring for a wife with Alzheimer's. The "profound sorrow" of her illness, he said, gradually led him to realize that religious mystics of various faiths used a language that could help him find meaning while living in the present with his wife.

"I didn't know how to be a caregiver," Ewing told conference attendees at a session on spiritual engagement in caregiving. "I didn't know what I was doing. The journey is exhausting and demanding; there is no pause button anywhere. Thank goodness for respite. But it's not rescue; it's respite."

A light dawned when Ewing watched his 4-year-old granddaughter interact with his wife, dancing for her and sitting in her lap. Later, when he asked the child what she was doing with her grandmother, she replied, as if stating the obvious: "Grandpa, I wasn't doing anything; I wasn't talking about anything. I was just loving her."

Immediately, he saw his own circumstances differently.

"That's the way mystics talk," he thought. "And I began to see the uncanny parallel between describing the disease as it looks from the outside, and the language of mystics: to be struck dumb, to be awed by something that drives you into silence; 'The Cloud of Unknowing.'"

Ewing's ideas about viewing dementia care as a chance for spiritual growth, he said, apply only to the person giving the care.

"I don't share this with any sense that I am describing the mysterious inner life of the beloved who is afflicted with this disease," he said. "But if we can allow ourselves this sense of engagement and presence with the beloved, it helps us frame our experience in a way that changes things around a bit."

For instance, he said, "We tend to be very conscious of the last times" — the last time a loved one remembers your name, or can enjoy a dinner out.

"That's a very depressing place to live," Ewing said. "It occurred to me, I could turn that around: This is the first time I picked her wardrobe; this is the first time I did her hair."

Such a transformation, he said, offers the caregiver a way to "accept and receive what the beloved is teaching us — that all we have is the here and now."