Joe Mulholland, left, and his wife, Lola, inspect one of their seven beehives Friday in the backyard of their home west of Loveland. Joe owns Papa Joe's Honey and is a vendor at the Loveland Farmers Market. ( Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald )

Farmers markets The Colorado Agricultural Market Cooperative, which was created more than 30 years ago by farmers as a way to organize markets for their produce, sponsors three market days each week in Loveland and Fort Collins from early May through the fall. • Loveland: Tuesdays 11 a.m.-3 p.m., 3133 N. Garfield Ave., beginning May 5 and running through October. • Fort Collins: Sundays 11 a.m.-3 p.m., 1001 E. Harmony Road in front of Clays' Ace Hardware, beginning May 3 and running through November. • Fort Collins: Wednesdays 11 a.m.-3 p.m., 1001 E. Harmony Road. Beginning June 17 and running into October.

The white tents that signal the start of farmers market season will be popping up in Loveland next week.

The Tuesday market that sets up every year in the parking lot in front of Hobby Lobby, 3133 N. Garfield Ave., kicks off its season May 5. It is open from 11 a.m. to 3 p.m.

This early in the season, shoppers can find bedding plants and greenhouse-grown tomatoes, plus a whole lot more.

"What people expect to find at a farmers market has changed," said Susan Pope of Pope Farms in Greeley, who is a member of the board of the Colorado Agricultural Market Cooperative that runs the markets in Loveland and Fort Collins.

Advertisement

"It used to be mostly produce, so we wouldn't even open until the first or middle of June," she said. "Now it's the first of May because we have people who make salsa, make baked goods, noodles — things that aren't grown or perishable so they are able to attend all the markets from beginning to end."

Having the new type of vendors selling locally produced goods — but not necessarily harvested crops — draws in more people to shop, Pope said.

Joe Mulholland uses smoke to calm the bees in one of his beehives. (Jenny Sparks / Loveland Reporter-Herald)

"Without them, we wouldn't be viable," she said, adding that she expects the Loveland market to have a number of new vendors this year.

One of those new faces will be Richard Sargent, who with his wife, LaVonne, owns Task Force BBQ.

His Loveland-based barbecue sauce business got going toward the end of last year's farmers market season, he said, so this will be his first year at the Loveland market.

The Sargents have sold their Task Force sauces at winter markets in Greeley and Fort Collins, and they are making plans to sell in Estes Park and Fort Collins this season. Several stores in Fort Collins, Loveland and Greeley also carry their products, and a Fort Collins pizza restaurant uses two of their sauces in its recipes, he said.

"It's a bigger response than we thought it would be," said Sargent, whose day job is teaching fire-rescue classes around the country for American Emergency Response Training. "Our most popular one is the roasted green chile. Everyone loves it."

Pope said many of the vendors at the farmers markets don't sell their products anywhere else, so the market season is critical for them.

"It's a good way for small businesses to get started," she added, "to get their products out to the public and be recognized."

Joe Mulholland, owner of Papa Joe's Honey at 4855 W. Eisenhower Blvd. in Loveland, said his isn't a new business, but he does use the farmers markets to "point people in my store's direction."

Mulholland, who keeps his own hives and buys some honey from local beekeepers, said he sells honey, beeswax, bee pollen, propolis, "bee bread" and other related products.

"My idea is to provide people with a local honey, to satisfy their sweet tooth and their health needs," he said.

Because the Loveland market runs in the middle of the day, "what we tend to get is a lot of retired folks," Mulholland said.

"I'm trying to hit the soccer moms a little bit more." he said, by offering tokens to soccer clubs to encourage the parents who are available during the day to stop by.

He said the Sunday farmers market that the city of Loveland sponsors at Fairgrounds Park, which starts later in the season, draws a different crowd because it's not during most people's work hours.

Craig Young: 970-635-3634, cyoung@reporter-herald.com, www.twitter.com/CraigYoungRH.