Flying Swan: Ben McGlynn. Photo: Getty Images

Ben McGlynn is the latest Sydney star to burst into All-Australian calculations after continuing his rich vein of form against Port Adelaide, and could be one of as many as eight Swans to be shortlisted for the AFL's team of the year.

Although Sydney's team ethos clearly still applies, there could be numerous prestigious individual gongs headed to the premiership favourite later this season.

Not only are Lance Franklin and Josh Kennedy in contention for the Coleman and Brownlow medals respectively, the depth of the Swans' elite talent is also reflected by those in the running for All-Australian selection. And it's not the usual suspects who are also in the frame.

The nine selectors are likely to already have locked in Kennedy and Franklin in the 22, and possibly running backman Nick Malceski, while midfield pair McGlynn and Luke Parker and defensive trio Nick Smith, Ted Richards and Heath Grundy have compelling cases to be at least in the squad of 40.

Advertisement

McGlynn furthered his cause with another high-class performance against Port Adelaide, complementing his 21 possessions with three priceless goals in a low-scoring game.

McGlynn's pace, goal-kicking prowess - he has kicked 19 this year - and ability to win the ball in the clinches and on the outside have helped him make the transition to permanent midfielder this year.

Parker, too, is having a career-best campaign, averaging 26.5 touches a game to go with 18 goals.

The pair have joined All-Australian quartet Kennedy, Jarrad McVeigh, Kieren Jack and Dan Hannebery among the upper echelons of the game's midfielders.

The Swans' depth of midfield talent has been a key to their season, and was a factor in their tense victory over Port. "It's a game of numbers ... performances over 130 minutes, if you've got a number of them you usually win," said coach John Longmire.

"That's what we rely upon but there's no secret to that. It's across the competition to make sure you have a number of contributors and we thought we had a pretty even performance from our team tonight. There's always a focus on a couple but in general it's an even team performance that gets us over the line."

The imposing midfield still has scope for improvement as Hannebery regains match fitness in the three weeks before the finals.

The hard-running on-baller had only 13 disposals in his first game back after missing seven weeks, but did enough to encourage his coach.

"Just talking to him afterwards he said he felt better the longer the game went, which is a good sign," Longmire said.

"We know he's fit and he said he felt full of run in the last quarter. We'll be able to put more game time into him now as the weeks get on … he'll need it.

"It's not an easy thing to do [after] missing a fair bit of football and come back in at that tempo, playing that team in front of that crowd ... but he was able to handle it OK. He needs to keep improving on his form and fitness over coming weeks."

The Swans were beaten for contested possessions and clearances but more than made up for it with their pressure, clearly winning the tackle count 68-59.

"Early on we didn't put enough pressure on as we should have – I think we only had about two tackles after the first 10 minutes," Longmire said.

"Then we started to really put the pressure on and play the sort of footy we wanted to play.

"You never fully feel as though you're in control against a quality team. We knew they'd come."

The Swans had close to their best 22 available on Saturday night, with the exception of Smith, who was a late withdrawal. The backman is expected to be available to face St Kilda on Saturday.