Medical innovation bill nears Senate vote as the U.S. Senate Committee on Health, Education, Labor and Pensions advanced five bills on Wednesday aimed at strengthening medical research. The vote will set the stage for a full vote in the Senate regarding a broader package of legislation that would streamline and incentivize development of drugs and devices.

The five bills, which join 14 other bills that has been with mostly unanimous support from Democrats and Republicans, endorsed a prior hearings in February and March. The bills are collectively a Senate version of the 21st Century Cures Act that was passed in the U.S. House of Representatives last year.

Chairman of the committee, Sen. Lamar Alexander, R-Tenn., said on Wednesday that if the legislation does eventually become law that “it will be the most important bill that Congress enacts this year.”

While the effort has received bipartisan support, the parties have not been in total agreement. A central demand from Democrats is for billions of additional dollars in permanent annual funding be allocated for the U.S. Food and Drug Administration and the National Institutes of Health.

The two sides are “making progress” toward a deal on so-called mandatory funding, Alexander said. Sen. Patty Murray, D-Wash., the committee’s ranking member, acknowledged Alexander’s efforts, saying additional funding is essential to Democratic support for the various bills.

“We need an agreement on how we’re going to boost mandatory investment in the NIH and the FDA,” said Murray.

S. 2700, the FDA and NIH Workforce Authorities Modernization Act, was included in Wednesday’s bill, which would allow the agencies greater hiring authority.

“We need to make sure there’s a sufficient amount of brainpower within those agencies” to support FDA approvals and determine what research the NIH should be doing,” said Alexander.

S. 185, a second bill, the Promise for Antibiotics and Therapeutics for Health Act, would direct the FDA to approve antibiotics for serious medical needs based on risk-benefit profiles of intended profiles of the narrow population, as opposed to a broader spectrum of patients.

A third bill endorsed by the committee, S. 2713, the Advancing Precision Medicine Act, would implement the White House’s Precision Medicine Initiative. It is intended to improve understanding of distinct disease characteristics in individual patients, allowing physicians to select drugs that are more likely to work.

The Promoting Biomedical Research and Public Health for Patients Act, S. 2742, would try to ease administrative red tape for NIH staff as well as increase performance evaluations for NIH leadership. The fifth bill, S. 2745, called the NIH Strategic Plan and Inclusion of Clinical Research, would try to increase minority representation in clinical trials.

The FDA would be required under one amendment adopted at Wednesday’s hearing to explain its decisions to issue guidance rather than engaging in formal rulemaking. The amendment passed over Democratic opposition, with Murray adding that FDA Commissioner Robert M. Califf is “very concerned” the obligation would be time-consuming and might “throw some sand in the gears of the agency’s important public health work.”

In February and March many other provisions were included in the bills advanced by the committee. Incentives included are those for pediatric research, eased approvals for certain drug-device “combination products,” improvements to electronic health records, an expanded program of fast-track review for breakthrough medical devices and relaxed regulations for some types of lower risk health software.

Source: Sweeping Medical Innovation Bill Nears Senate Vote

Photo credit: commons.wikimedia.org

Join the Discussion