Charges against outreach workers dropped

Charges against two young Latino men who were arrested in late March while canvassing the Garfield Ridge neighborhood were dropped this afternoon in Cook County Criminal Court.

Felipe Hernandez and Kevin Tapia, two outreach workers with the Grassroots Collaborative, were door knocking the South Side community to inform residents of the approaching Affordable Care Act deadline when they were stopped, searched, arrested and charged with ‘soliciting unlawful business’ by four Chicago Police officers, according to the Grassroots Collaborative.

The two young men alongside a group of supporters, including Action Now, the Brighton Park Neighborhood Council and the American Civil Liberties Union (ACLU) Illinois, rallied outside the courthouse before their trial.

Amisha Patel, executive director of the Grassroots Collaborative said her group demanded that the charges were dropped, the expenses associated with expunging the two young men’s records be covered by the city and that the Chicago Police Department (CPD) maintain clear data on who they are stopping and frisking.

She said CPD does not make contact card data accessible to the public. Contact cards are completed by police to collect information on the reason for the stop and demographic information such as the race and sex of the individual in question.

“The problem right now is that nothing is searchable in terms of the contact cards that they keep track of, so we don’t know how many times this is happening to people,” Patel said.

She said New York City has successfully developed a system where contact card data is available to the public, and that Chicago needs a similar system.

“From the time that I was arrested and waiting for my trial, how many more people were arrested,” Hernandez asked as he emphasized the importance of making stop and frisk data public information.

Tanue David, a youth organizer for Action Now who is African-American, said he too, experienced stop and frisk while waiting for a friend to answer the door at their Lincoln Park apartment.

“In order to circumvent the problem, what I decided to do was change the way I dress. I got tired of being profiled, so I put the suit and tie on,” David said.

He closed his remarks by calling on the Latino and African-American communities of Chicago to unite in order to hold law enforcement and other officials accountable for racially biased practices.

Lindsay Miller, staff attorney for ACLU Illinois said existing stop and frisk policies in Chicago lead to the “arrests and detention of thousands of young men of color on questionable grounds,” adding that access to stop and frisk data is necessary so that the public has the information they need to assess the nature of these types of stops on our streets.

“Police should be forced to answer two very simple questions: why is someone being stopped on the streets of Chicago, and why are they being searched by the police,” Miller said.

The Chicago Police Department issued a statement shortly after the arrest in late March that said the two young men matched the exact descriptions of two individuals who were allegedly scamming elderly people the week before.

On April 28, U.S. Attorney General Eric Holder announced that the Justice Department will begin collecting data on stops, searches and arrests as part of a nationwide effort to reduce racial bias in the criminal justice system.