Study: 6 Illinois hospitals below average for hip-knee replacement

In Illinois, six hospitals performed below the national average on at least one of the two quality measures, while three exceeded.

Chicago's largest hospital was one of nine nationwide where patients covered by Medicare were more likely to experience complications and be readmitted within 30 days after undergoing hip or knee replacement surgery, according to a new government analysis.

Northwestern Memorial Hospital, largely regarded as one of the Chicago area's best, was the only hospital in Illinois to stumble in both categories, having higher-than-average hospital readmissions and complication rates associated with the procedures.

The analysis, which covered surgeries occurring from July 2009 to June 2012, is the latest example of the government's push to improve quality at the nation's hospitals instead of simply paying Medicare patients' bills.

For hospitals, the data are important not just for reasons of public perception and patient confidence. The government intends to begin levying penalties on hospitals with high hip and knee readmission rates, the next phase of its multipronged effort to use its financial muscle to force improvements in hospital quality.

Northwestern and the other hospitals said the data represent a snapshot in time and do not reflect improvements made since then.

"Northwestern cares for a large number of complex patients … often referred from outside institutions unwilling to assume the risks," said Dr. Terrance Peabody, chairman of the hospital's orthopedics department. "We are also committed to care for a relatively large number of patients receiving Medicaid and charity care. These are patients known to have higher rates of readmission because of the lack of social support."

Medicare's analysis comes as it penalizes more than 2,200 hospitals, including 113 in Illinois, for excess readmissions. Together, those hospitals will forfeit about $227 million in Medicare funds over the next year under the new rules, authorized by the Affordable Care Act, the law known commonly as Obamacare.

Medicare, the government health program for those ages 65 and older, already assesses hospital death rates, hospitals' consistency in following basic medical guidelines and patients' ratings of their stays.

The evaluation of hip and knee surgery results is significant because for the first time, Medicare is rating hospitals' performance on two common elective procedures instead of the acute-care treatment it measured in the past.

About 600,000 patients in the traditional Medicare program have their hips or knees replaced each year, according to government data. Such surgeries are expected to keep growing as baby boomers continue to head into retirement, leading to significant expense for Medicare and private insurers.

Nationwide, doctors performed 719,000 knee replacements in 2010 costing nearly $12 billion and 332,000 hip replacements totaling nearly $8 billion, according to the National Center for Health Statistics.