MEDICAID February 12, 2014 Shawnise Lewis of Forest Park is photographed at The Voice of Your Customer as a contract certified application counselor. The Enquirer/Carrie Cochran (Photo: The Cincinnati Enquirer)

Shawnise Lewis had emergency surgery in 2013. She didn't have insurance.

Now, she does, through Medicaid. And she's willing to pay a little to keep it.

"It really is (a good deal), when you look at it, if you get sick or you go to the doctor," said Lewis, of Cincinnati. "You tell me: Where are you going to go to get covered? Especially when you do your research and you get a good doctor and a good dentist: Where are you going to get that? Where?"

Lewis joined hundreds of thousands of Ohioans who enrolled in Medicaid starting in 2013, when Gov. John Kasich bypassed fellow Republicans in the Legislature to expand the state health care program.

Now, Kasich wants about 100,000 of Medicaid's better-off adults — those whose income reaches or surpasses the federal poverty level of $11,670 for a single adult — to pay a monthly premium on their insurance. Those premiums would likely average $20 a month, the governor's staff said.

Low-income Ohioans who would have to pay premiums under the plan told The Cincinnati Enquirer their budgets are tight already. But they don't want to lose their health insurance and said they realize they'd likely pay much more for coverage without Medicaid.

"If I have to pay $15 to $20, I have to pay it, because I have to have my medicine to live," said Dawn Smith, of Westwood, who has diabetes. Her insulin costs "a fortune," she said — about $400 a month. "I don't want to lose my Medicaid. ... It would be cheaper than trying to get some other kind of insurance."

Kasich unveiled the premium proposal last week as a peace offering to conservatives who opposed his move to expand Medicaid to more low-income Ohioans. The money is available through the Affordable Care Act, also known as Obamacare.

Collecting premiums will restore some personal responsibility and accountability to the state program, Kasich said. Several states have implemented cost-sharing systems, most dramatically in Indiana's Medicaid expansion championed by Republican Gov. Mike Pence.

"We expect something from you when we reach out our hand to help you," Kasich said. "Our welfare systems are under very strident attack (by conservatives). ... This allows us, I think, to be more successful in the Legislature, and I happen to support it myself."

Ohio's Medicaid system already requires participant copays. The required premiums will go into effect in January 2016, as long as the federal government approves the policy.

Deshawn Harris found out he qualified for Medicaid a year ago, when he was exploring health insurance options on the ACA exchange. The Clifton 23-year-old earns between $600 and $1,600 a month as a mover for Two Men and a Truck. Paying the premiums might mean he'd have to skip a night out with his girlfriend, he said, but he understands the governor's reasoning.

"I don't like when people take advantage of the system, especially if they can manage. So I'm kind of on the same page with the governor," he said. "It would still be manageable."

Smith seemed more concerned. Her job at the Concord Custom Cleaners in Bridgetown pays roughly $1,200 a month. "I just barely get by. I wouldn't have to give up anything, but it would be tight," said Smith, 53. "I would rather not pay for it, but if I have to, I will."

But Smith would have to pay a premium if she started earning enough to leave Medicaid, Kasich and his aides say. They want her to get used to paying it now, hoping it will help prepare her for a more secure financial picture.

The premiums will compare with what a person would pay on the federal exchange in states that haven't expanded Medicaid, the administration says, in hopes of easing a person into higher premiums.

That way, people who exit Medicaid might be more likely to stay off it and above the poverty line, said Greg Moody, director of Kasich's Office of Health Transformation.

"If it's the first experience you have with having to pay a premium ... you're very well on your way to losing that coverage," he said of life post-Medicaid. "And then if you get an untreated illness, you're out of a job. ... We are all just one untreated illness away from unemployment."

Still, Lisa Hamler-Fugitt said, the suggested monthly premiums — which could run from $15 to $36.50 — might be too high.

"It doesn't sound like a lot to some folks, but it's a substantial amount to those who would be living in poverty," said the executive director of the Ohio Association of Foodbanks. "They're often temporary workers. Their incomes are going to fluctuate literally pay period to pay period."

And thousands of poor Ohioans are still adjusting to losing their food stamps a year and a half ago, she said, when the Kasich administration chose to start enforcing a requirement that childless adults work 20 hours a week or participate in training to receive the aid.

The state will consider requests for hardship exemptions, Medicaid Director John McCarthy said. But ultimately, Buckeyes who don't pay the premiums two months in a row will lose Medicaid coverage. They can re-enroll immediately if they start paying premiums.

When asked whether the administration has projected how many people will drop out of Medicaid because of premiums, officials say they're not trying to save money and haven't budgeted for people to drop out.

For most people, Lewis said, the premiums the governor is suggesting would require only a little extra shopping discipline.

"You have someone who's saying, 'Here's something for you, and it's going to cost you a little — $15 or $20 a month,' " she said. "That's cutting down snacks at the store. We all do it."

Who would pay premiums?

Ohio adults whose income falls into the following ranges, which represent 100 to 138 percent of the federal poverty level, would have to pay a premium. People who earn more do not qualify for Medicaid.

•Single adult: $11,770 to $16,243.

•Family of two: $15,930 to $21,983.

•Family of three: $20,090 to $27,724.

•Family of four: $24,250 to $33,465.

Read or Share this story: http://ohne.ws/1DucFzi