Welcome back to the Reason Weekly Contest! This week’s question is:

After an exhaustive scientific review, the FDA has ruled that genetically modified AquAdvantage salmon is as safe and nutritious as any plain old Atlantic salmon. Please give the new GMO fish a catchy (so to speak) name.

How to enter: Submissions should be e-mailed to contest@reason.com. Please include your name, city, and state. This week, kindly type “FISH” in the subject line. Entries are due by 11 p.m. Eastern Time, Monday, Nov. 23. Winners will appear Nov. 27, right here at Reason.com.

In the case of identical or similar entries, the first one received gets credit. First prize is a one-year digital subscription to Reason magazine, plus bragging rights. While we appreciate kibbitzing in the comments below, you must email your answer to enter the contest. Feel free to enter more than once, and good luck!

And now for the results of last week's contest: With all the furor on campus, we asked you to come up with one non-racist, non-sexist sentence from a college president that would send 99 percent of the students into full-fledged protest mode.

THE WINNER:

"Microaggression therapy sessions will be cancelled in observance of the Columbus Day holiday." -- Donna Ryan, Denver, CO

SECOND PLACE:

"You are all very privileged to be attending this institution." -- Jon Corbett, Purcellville, VA

THIRD PLACE:

"Hi." -- Jim, Austin

HONORABLE MENTIONS

"If you are willing to work hard you can achieve greatness." -- Charles Wiggins, Forest City, NC

“I am a Republican” -- Edward Perovic, Winnetka, IL

"The new homepage for campus wifi will be www.reason.com" --Christina Pope, Glendale, AZ

"This university affirms diversity, including viewpoint diversity." -- David Edmondson, Washington, D.C.

"Classes will NOT be cancelled." -- Mike Reams, Portland, OR

"Sometimes bad things happen in the real world." -- Brad Stahl

"Some students here will do better than others depending on how hard they work." -- Paul Harrison, Seattle, WA

"Sticks and stones may break your bones, but words will never harm you." -- Steve Kelley

"The First Amendment applies to people you disagree with." -- Christopher Kinzer, Fort Belvoir, VA

"You kids have it so easy these days!" -- James Quigley

"All puppies will be removed from the safe space immediately in order to make room for this year's Christmas tree." -- Tim, Mahwah, NJ

"One percent of you will end up owning more than the rest of you combined." -- Brandon Durrett, San Antonio, TX

"You have to pay back your student loans." -- Dan, Stamford, CT

"The editor-in-chief of Reason magazine will be coming to campus next week to offer a libertarian perspective on the campus speech debate." -- Danny Modafferi, Carlsbad, CA

"Of all tyrannies, a tyranny sincerely exercised for the good of its victims may be the most oppressive." -- Tracy Davis, Lawrence, KS

"Also, Tim Hunt will do some comedy." -- Stephan Vogelmann, Germany, Bavaria

"Our only campus safe space will be located in McDonalds." -- Jonathan Wishnia, Warren, NJ

"I want to wish you all a Merry Christmas, Happy Hanukkah, and a Happy New Year." -- Glenn Havinoviski

"Due to budgetary constraints, the Crying Room will only be available on Tuesdays and Thursdays from 2 - 4 PM." -- Jim Noble, Boulder Creek, CA

"I disagree." -- Kyle Posada, St Laguna Niguel, CA

"We have blocked access to Netflix on the campus network." Timothy Whalen

"I think Ta-Nehisi Coates is wrong" -- John O'Meara, New York, NY

"...and in closing, God bless our University and God bless the United States of America!" -- Alex Popovich, Knoxville, TN