Spring beauty trends are usually predictable. We can always expect to see barely there foundation, beachy waves and bare nails on the runway. However, this New York Fashion Week, some designers threw us for a loop with bold yet beautiful hair and makeup looks. Then there were those designers whose creativity got lost in all the chaos.

See ten of the best and worst beauty looks from New York Fashion Week and tell us if you agree.

Jenny Packham Spring 2014

Drawing inspiration from the classic movie, "Picnic At Hanging Rock," which is set in the Edwardian era but was filmed in the '70s, TRESemmé stylist Jeanie Syfu created textured and voluminous curls for a modern touch. Silver eye glitter and Laura Mercier Crème Cheek Colour in Sunrise kept the look fresh and youthful.

The Blonds Spring 2014

With the original blond, Tweety Bird, as the muse for this runway show, MAC Cosmetics lead makeup artist Kabuki drew on the perfect yellow and aqua blue winged liner. And CND completed the look with over 30 sets of custom crazy cool nails that featured the famous cartoon character's eyes, metal breastplates and The Blonds co-designer Phillipe's face.

Elie Tahari Spring 2014

Bobbi Brown enhanced the models' natural beauty look with bold brows and pink matte lips. We can't wait to get our hands on her Nectar & Nudes Eye Palette (launching Spring 2014), which she used to add a glow to the eyes.

Oscar de la Renta Spring 2014

Revlon global artistic director Gucci Westman's secret to this luminous eye makeup look is combining peach, purple and brown eyeshadows. She explained, "I'm using a small powder brush to blend all three shades to be freer with the application." And that glossy lip is created with the same mixed-up technique.

Rag & Bone Spring 2014

This was the orange lip seen (and heard) all throughout the tents at Lincoln Center. Westman layered Revlon ColorBurst Matte Balm in Mischievous and Super Lustrous Lipstick in Carnival (both available next spring) to master this vibrant matte lip color.

Betsey Johnson Spring 2014

Betsey Johnson's shows are always fun and funky. However, the cotton candy pink wig, metallic silver eyeshadow and lipstick and outrageous false eyelashes is giving us a headache.

Marchesa Spring 2014

We love the juxtaposition of sweet and tough, but the weirdly placed ostrich feathers and goth purple lipstick come across as garish.

Vera Wang Spring 2014

Kudos for recreating "post-workout hair," but the last thing we'd want to do after leaving the gym is look like we just left the gym. Plus, the thick, black headbands don't appear to be so comfy. Ouch!

Marc Jacobs Spring 2014

This has to be one of the weirdest beauty looks we've seen on the Marc Jacobs catwalk in the past five seasons. While the bowl-cut wigs nail the "surfer-punk girl" theme, it's not a look we'd run to the salon for. On the other hand, the eyeliner is different... in a good way.

Louise Goldin Spring 2014

When white paint, stationary tape and hair are involved, we would prefer to stay far away. This sculptural 'do is daring, but it is very messy.

Want more HuffPost Style beauty content? Check us out on Twitter, Facebook, Tumblr, Pinterest and Instagram. (For everything else check out our main HuffPost Style Twitter, Tumblr, Pinterest and Instagram @HuffPostStyle.)

---

Do you have a beauty story idea or tip? Email us at beautytips@huffingtonpost.com. (PR pitches sent to this address will be ignored.)