Sunday will mark only second time she's missed cheering team in person at Super Bowl

Denver Broncos fan Donna Stang holds a jacket she won in a field goal kicking contest at Mile High Stadium. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call)

Tickets started about $1,600 each the week before Super Bowl XLVIII, about 53 times the price that Longmont resident Donna Stang paid in 1978.

Stang, 73, spent $30, face value, on her ticket to Super Bowl XII in New Orleans where she watched the Denver Broncos lose to the Dallas Cowboys.

"It didn't matter that they lost," Stang said. "We had an amazing time cheering on our team."

Stang has attended five of the Broncos' six Super Bowl games but steep ticket prices will keep her cheering from Colorado this year.

Friends took Stang to her first Broncos game in 1972, a few months after she moved to Colorado and it was love at first down.

The former gym teacher already loved sports but the atmosphere in Mile High Stadium sparked a passion for the Broncos that has burned strong for more than 40 years.

"The Broncos are my drug of choice," Stang said. "I don't smoke or drink, I cheer."

Fan facts 2: home games missed since 1972 4: John Elway autographs 5: Super Bowls attended $30: face value on her 1978 Super Bowl ticket 43: years as a season ticket holder 218: autographs on Stang's orange cowboy hat

Since she found out the Broncos were playing in Super Bowl XLVIII, Stang hasn't been eating or sleeping very well. The super fan is nervous and excited about today's game.

Stang said she will be watching the Broncos win at a friend's home in Boulder, which will be rowdy and fun but not quite the same as if she were there in person.

"There's just nothing like cheering on your team in a stadium," Stang said.

Stang has been a season ticket holder since 1972 and tailgates at every home game with a group of friends that call themselves the "Bronco-mobile Maniacs."

The group, made up of seven die-hard fans, shares a recreational vehicle that is painted orange and blue and has a large Bronco logo on the side. The interior features blue carpet and reupholstered seating covered in Broncos logos.

Since her first game in 1972, Stang has missed only two home games for a surgery that didn't keep her down long.

On Jan. 25, 1998, Stang cheered on the Broncos during their first Super Bowl victory from a wheel chair, just weeks after her surgery.

"It was actually kind of cool because I had to sit in a handicap seat so I ended up sitting next to all of the Bronco wives," Stang said.

In 1977, Stang spray-painted a tan cowboy hat bright orange and began collecting autographs from Bronco players, coaches and staff.

Donna Stang's orange straw cowboy hat has 218 signatures from Bronco players, coaches and staff. Stang has been collecting autographs on the hat since 1977. (Matthew Jonas/Times-Call)

Her first autograph was from Louis Wright who played defense for the Broncos from 1975 to 1986.

She stood outside of the stadium before and after games seeking autographs with no regard for freezing temperatures or rain. When she attended away games, Stang would book a room at the same hotel as the players in hopes of catching a player at the bar downstairs or in the elevator.

Now, the hat has 218 autographs. Stang knows where every signature is including greats like Terrell Davis, Thomas Jackson and John Elway but there is one autograph that Stang is still missing: Peyton Manning.

"It used to be so much easier to get autographs when it was Mile High," Stang said. "I'm not sure how I'm going to pull it off but I'm going to find a way."

The hat has become part of Stang's gameday uniform, which also includes orange and blue sneakers with Bronco laces, a silver necklace with the Bronco logo and her Bronco angel -- an angel pin with orange and blue gems that she wears on her shirt.

Stang's gameday appearance is tame compared to the décor in her Longmont home.

Signs and a Bronco flag in her front yard are the first clues that the resident inside bleeds orange and blue.

Memorabilia from bobble heads to glasses decorate her den and team photographs coat a wall covered in orange grass-cloth.

The hat is just one of four Elway autographs in Stang's house. An autographed photograph of Stang and Elway is her favorite.

The November 1974 issue of Sport Illustrated featuring a photograph of Stang standing next to Elway is one of her prize possessions.

Jan Hart, Stang's friend and fellow Bronco-mobile Maniac, said she has never known anyone as devoted as Stang.

"She's the most faithful supporter I've ever known," Hart said. "She lives and breaths the Broncos."

Stang pushed Hart's wheelchair "all over those steep hills of Canton, Ohio" to attend Elway's induction into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 2004, Hart said.

"Her loyalty and devotion isn't just for the Broncos," Hart said. "She's devoted to her friends and family too. That's just who she is."

Stang said she has converted all of her family members into Broncos fans, even family who still lives in North Dakota where she was born.

In the past four decades, Stang said, there is only one person who she admits rivals her passion for the Broncos, her 8-year-old grandson, Declan Murphey.

"He's been to the games and boy does he love the Broncos," Stang said.

Stang brought handfuls of Broncos memorabilia to the Atria Senior Living facility in Longmont Wednesday where she works to show off her Bronco pride before the big game.

As she surveyed the displays, which Stang said was a small fraction of her Bronco possessions, she looks forward to passing her collection on to Declan.

"These memories have brought me so much joy over the years and I know Declan will appreciate this stuff," Stang said. "I hope he has as much fun watching them as I have."

Community reporter Whitney Bryen can be reached at 303-684-5274 or wbryen@times-call.com.