It shouldn’t come as a surprise that in the final week of June, Bill O’Reilly leads the cable news ratings. When rating figures were avaraged on Zap2it for the previous week, O’Reilly averaged 2.4 million viewers. Bill’s biggest night was Wednesday with 2.53 million viewers, while his lowest was Thursday (2.23 million viewers). Bill O’Reilly rarely goes below 2 million viewers a night.

Megyn Kelly, the woman Bill O’Reilly helped to become a cable news superstar, averaged 1.98 million viewers. Megyn’s biggest night was Thursday with 2.1 million viewers and her lowest was Monday with 1.84 million viewers. Kelly’s ratings have been going up steadily over the past year.

Both O’Reilly and Kelly continued a week of heated debates. On Wednesday night, O’Reilly had a message for people who think the United States is a nation currently defined by White Supremacy.

“Most Americans, no matter what color they are, are decent, fair-minded people, but there are problems in the African-American precincts, especially in the inner city. However, the problems have little to do with white people, rather a corrosive culture that does not confront child neglect and antisocial behavior on the streets. That’s what’s driving poverty and dysfunction.”

O’Reilly went on to note that last weekend, 12 African-American Americans were shot at a party and the event didn’t make news. He believes the reason there was a lack of coverage is because the likely perpetrators were African-American gang members.

Megyn Kelly made news by, despite the belief that she is a right-wing extremist, arguing with Mike Huckabee about the Supreme Court decision on gay marriage. Talking Points Memo quoted Kelly in arguing with Huckabee about the Constitution.

“It’s the Supreme Court’s job to interpret the Constitution and tell us what it means. And like it or not, they get the final say unless the people decide to pass a Constitutional amendment.”

Huckabee argued that in over 30 states, people said very clearly they want to affirm the laws of nature and the laws of nature’s god and keep marriage the way it has always been.

It has certainly been an eventful week for Fox New, especially with the Supreme Court not only ruling gay marriage is legal, but confirming Obamacare is constitutional as well. However, this keeps viewership increased for people like Bill O’Reilly, Megyn Kelly, and even Sean Hannity. Bill O’Reilly, in particular, lives off bad publicity. The more he is criticized by the left, the more the right stands up for him and tunes into his show. One can predict that Bill O’Reilly will remain the most watched cable television news personality until he retires.

[Photo by Larry Busacca/Getty Images]