WASHINGTON, D.C. -- Look for President Barack Obama to use his Cleveland speech on Wednesday to "crystallize the significant difference in approach between Republicans and their top-down economic policies and the president's focus on middle-class economics," White House Press Secretary Josh Earnest said this morning.

The Republicans want to preserve tax cuts for the rich while maintaining defense spending, and they vow to end federal deficits in a decade, Earnest said in an interview with the Northeast Ohio Media Group. The only way to do that will be through deep cuts to domestic programs that help the middle class and those less fortunate, the White House says.

Republicans counter that with lower debt and reform to entitlements, the economy can prosper. They have rejected calls to raise taxes or bring them back to previous, higher levels.

By contrast, Obama says he wants to invest in more manufacturing-innovation centers, in free community college tuition and other job training, and in road-and-bridge construction projects that he says will create jobs and fix crumbling infrastructure.

Obama's programs through the recession have helped add 877,000 manufacturing-sector jobs, which Earnest called "the strongest period of manufacturing job growth since the 1980s."

That level is still not back to its pre-recession level. But the number of manufacturing jobs was falling throughout good times as well, government data show, a result of changes in how the country makes and buys its goods, with foreign trade and productivity gains playing roles.

Obama and other Democrats say that new technologies offer new ways to build more manufacturing jobs.

"If you look at the president's budget proposal, whether it's investments in research and development, investments in manufacturing institutes, investments in job training and college education, these are the components of a strategy to strengthen middle-class economics but also the manufacturing sector all across the country," Earnest said. "That's exactly what the president believes is a worthy investment.

"And the fact is, based on the economic philosophy of Republicans, they're going to reduce if not eliminate those investments."

Obama's proposals rely on continued borrowing but lower debt eventually, when measured as a share of the economy. That debt would be at levels economists say are reasonable and manageable, the White House says.

Democrats see it as necessary economic investment. Republicans see it as a restraint on growth that would otherwise occur.

The 3 p.m. speech at the Cleveland Convention Center, hosted by the City Club, will come a day after House of Representatives Republicans deliver their own budget proposals. Those proposals are expected to continue their preference for shrinking federal government and giving more authority to states.

But Earnest also pointed to Republican attempts to block Obama's immigration program, to kill the Affordable Care Act, and to fight the president on policies to address climate change and net neutrality.

Obama sees them as blocking progress and will make that clear in Cleveland, Earnest said. He said the president will meet the GOP-led Congress halfway, but that, as will be clear in the Cleveland speech, "Republicans in Congress aren't going to get things done if they only work in a partisan manner."

"If Republicans are wedded to an approach where they only seek Republican votes for initiatives that they put on the floor, they're not going to get anything passed," he said. "Even simple things like funding for the Department of Homeland Security or an ideological rider on a sex-trafficking bill."

The bill to clamp down on sex-trafficking, which was expected to pass easily, is hung up this week over Republicans' abortion-restriction language.

Congressional Republicans blocked a funding bill for the Department of Homeland Security, threatening a partial shutdown of the department, because they wanted to block Obama's executive order that shielded several millions of unauthorized immigrants from deportation. The GOP relented in early March.

Obama is unlikely to discuss his desire to expand foreign trade unless an audience member asks. The issue has the Democratic president on one side and Ohio Democrats on another.

In fact, three Democrats opposed to Obama's wish to approve a Trans-Pacific Partnership and fast-track trade authority have been invited to join the president aboard Air Force One as it flies to Cleveland: Sen. Sherrod Brown and Reps. Marcia Fudge of Warrensville Heights and Marcy Kaptur of Toledo. Their offices confirmed the invitation and said the lawmakers will go, although Brown's said he could remain in Washington if Senate votes are called.

Republican U.S. Rep. Dave Joyce was invited to attend the speech but declined because of three hearings in the House Appropriations Committee, his office said.

While in Cleveland, Obama will tour the Manufacturing Advocacy and Growth Network, or MAGNET manufacturing center. MAGNET helps Northeast Ohio manufacturers compete and grow.