Topics: Andrew Breitbart, Brandon Darby, Documentaries, FBI, Hugo Chavez, Hurricane Katrina, hurricane relief, Informant, Movies, New Orleans, Surveillance, surveillance society, surveillance state, Venezuela, Entertainment News, Politics News

More than enough bandwidth, no doubt, has already been expended on Brandon Darby, the one-time left-wing activist who turned out to be an FBI informant and sent two young protesters at the 2008 Republican National Convention to federal prison. After his self-revelation as a law-enforcement mole, Darby became a protégé of the late Andrew Breitbart and a featured speaker at Tea Party gatherings, where he has spread increasingly far-fetched theories about the perilous and treasonous character of the Occupy movement and other forms of radical activism. He has defended himself angrily against any and all attacks from the left, and has repeatedly sent abusive personal email to journalists he perceives as hostile. (I’ve never received any of these, but I’ve seen them.)

Darby has now been the subject of at least two documentary films and any number of newspaper and magazine articles; those of us in the media keep combing through his story in hopes of understanding what happened, or in search of some deeper meaning that sheds light on our larger climate of political conflict and intensive government surveillance. I plead guilty as charged, obviously, but I also think that the meaning of Brandon Darby’s story is not to be found in Darby himself, a confused and perhaps disordered individual who is more sad than significant. This phrase gets tossed around too often, but Darby was the very definition of a “useful idiot,” an angry young man whose hunger for action and yearning for self-importance became a tool for the national-security state, used to undermine a marginal protest movement and make it look like dangerous terrorism.

If you’re new to the whole Darby soap opera, Jamie Meltzer’s evenhanded and carefully crafted documentary “Informant” tells you most of what you need to know; considered along with the earlier PBS film “Better This World” and Josh Harkinson’s excellent Mother Jones article from 2011, it’s even better. Here’s how everybody agrees the story begins: A self-educated, hard-luck kid from the oil town of Pasadena, Texas, Darby emerged in the Austin anarchist scene of the early 2000s as an ambitious hothead, eager for provocations with the police and full of big talk about insurrection or revolution. Muscular, tattooed and good-looking, he made both friends and enemies rapidly, and apparently had considerable success among Austin’s female hipster population.

After Hurricane Katrina hit in 2005, Darby and a number of other Austin radicals, including Scott Crow and Lisa Fithian (both seen in “Informant”), set up an aid and solidarity organization called Common Ground Relief in the Lower Ninth Ward of New Orleans. Common Ground did remarkable work in that devastated community, bringing in food and medical supplies much more rapidly than the big relief bureaucracies, fighting eviction and repossession, and helping residents clean and rebuild their water-damaged homes. No one disputes that Darby’s hard work and personal charisma played a role in that success, although Lisa Fithian (whom I know personally) has said that she never trusted Darby and never liked working with him.

Things began to change for Darby during the two years or so he spent with Common Ground in New Orleans, and exactly how and why that happened remains murky. In “Informant,” Darby tells Meltzer that he came to New Orleans in the first place because of his personal relationships with a group of community activists and former Black Panthers he knew there, and became disillusioned when he learned that these 60-something men were now more interested in operating an Amway-style franchise business than in violent revolution. Darby saw himself as an American Che Guevara, and made a mysterious trip to Venezuela in 2006, apparently to try to raise money for Common Ground from Hugo Chávez’s anti-American government. What happened there, one might say, is a matter of dispute. Mind you, the dispute is entirely between Brandon Darby and himself, since he seems incapable of telling the same story about his Venezuelan caper twice in a row. He has said that he came home after learning that fundraising in Venezuela might be a violation of United States law; he has said that he came home in fear for his life after Venezuelan oil executives tried to get him to hold a secret meeting with FARC guerrillas from Colombia; he has said that he actually met with FARC representatives who wanted him to “start a guerrilla movement in the swamps of Louisiana.”

That part is anyone’s guess, but at some point in 2006 or 2007, Darby became an FBI asset. Darby insists on the latter date, but FBI files acquired by his former friend Scott Crow apparently suggest that it was a year or so earlier. Was he recruited while he was still helping to run Common Ground, or during or after his Venezuela visit? Given the FBI’s long track record of successfully “turning” prominent activists, going back to the Panthers, the civil rights movement and the anti-Communist hysteria of earlier decades, it’s not improbable. Some activists in the Austin and New Orleans scenes have suggested that Darby might have been a government-sponsored agent provocateur all along, but that seems unlikely. What’s far more plausible is that Darby’s comic-opera grandstanding, his big talk about confrontation and revolution, seduced law-enforcement officials just as it had seduced his activist admirers. He claimed that he and an army of like-minded anarchists with homemade riot gear were going to shut down the Republican convention, and the FBI swooned.