CVS Health (CVS) is expected to benefit from prescription growth and its specialty drugs business when it reports fourth-quarter results before the open on Tuesday.

Analysts polled by Thomson Reuters expect the drugstore chain to grow earnings per share by 7.1% to $1.20. Revenue is projected to jump 9.8% to $36.06 billion.

That EPS growth rate would mark a slowdown from the prior quarter’s 10% gain and the third straight quarter of deceleration. But Q4 2013 was the last full quarter that included the sale of tobacco products.

Goldman Sachs analyst Robert Jones is bullish on CVS, saying in a Jan. 21 research note that the company’s enterprise model “is winning on all fronts” as it continues to outperform its largest competitors in the retail and pharmacy businesses. Jones upgraded CVS from neutral to buy and raised his price target to 113 from 95.

Shares edged down 0.2% to 100.61 on the stock market Friday.

He noted that the industry will see increased prescription utilization due to a growing senior population and a greater number of individuals eligible for government health care benefits because of the Affordable Care Act.

CVS “foresaw the changes ahead in the health care landscape,” CEO Larry Merlo said in December, and is preparing for the continued evolution of the health care system with its pharmacy benefit management operations and its specialty pharmacy assets.

The specialty drug category, which includes treatments for conditions like multiple sclerosis and hepatitis, is a growing sector, and another area in which CVS is expected to benefit.

The company has increased its specialty business to 22% of total revenue, Jones said, adding that CVS expects 19% growth for specialty revenue this year.

CVS has an IBD Composite Rating of 94, meaning its shares outperform 94% of all stocks in the market as measured by fundamental and technical factors. Some of those factors are earnings and sales growth, return on equity and relative price performance.

The stock cleared a 79.53 buy point from a flat base last August, and shares have risen 27% since then. That’s just the most recent portion of CVS’s bullish run over the past several years.

The Retail-Drug Stores group is ranked highly at No. 12 out of the 197 industry groups IBD tracks.

Last month, Walgreens Boots Alliance (WBA), which has an 86 Composite Rating, reported a 10.2% rise in Q4 sales on strong prescriptions in a heavy flu season.

In December, Rite Aid (RAD) reported Q3 earnings jumped 150% to 10 cents a share, beating by 5 cents, as revenue climbed 4% to $6.69 billion, above views for $6.64 billion.

Follow Alissa Williams on Twitter: @IBD_AWilliams.