A Wichita daycare owner is speaking out after the arrest of her husband on charges of indecent liberties with a child.

Police say they arrested Raymond Buberwa, 27, for allegedly fondling a 7-year-old girl from his wife's daycare at that child's home on October 12th.

At least one parent says Gina Page Buberwa, Raymond's wife and the owner of Gina Page Buberwa Group Daycare, did not notify her of the arrest. Raymond Buberwa was living in the daycare home at the time of his arrest, according to court documents.

The parent has said publicly that while Raymond was arrested in October, she did not learn of the arrest until a detective from the Wichita Police Department called her this past week.

The state licensing program is investigating the daycare after a complaint was made recently.

Gina says her husband is innocent and the daycare is being unfairly targeted following an alleged incident that did not take place at the daycare home.

"It wasn't at the daycare, it wasn't anywhere around the daycare," Gina said.

Gina says the parent who has complained that she was not notified, did not have a child in the daycare at the time of the alleged incident. She says Raymond was not working at the daycare while that parent's child was enrolled. That's why she didn't notify the parent.

Gina says she did tell all seven of her current daycare parents about the arrest, either in person or over the phone.

Gina says while she is not required to notify past daycare parents, she did tell some of them about the arrest.

"I did everything to comply with local officials and law enforcement," Gina said.

Three current daycare parents contacted KAKE News to express their continued support for the daycare despite Raymond's arrest.

"I was never concerned about him being around the children and none of the parents have ever been concerned about him," Gina said.

Gina says if there had been any concern, she would have taken action.

"If I suspect neglect or abuse, I am required by law and by personal moral beliefs to make sure that person is held accountable," Gina said.

But at least that one parent says Gina should have taken more action in this situation to notify all parents, present and past, of Raymond Buberwa's arrest.

If it is determined during the course of the current state investigation that there have been violations, the daycare could face an emergency order of suspension or be shut down.

Gina Page Buberwa Group Daycare is currently open and operating.

Raymond Buberwa remains in the Segdwick County Jail. His preliminary hearing is scheduled for January 2, 2014 at 8:30 a.m.