If you're one of the more than 240,000 Oregonians who buy their own health coverage and are not on Medicare, you have to decide whether to enroll using the federal health insurance exchange — or not.

Here's our basic guide to help with the decision.

Q: What is a health insurance exchange?

A: An exchange is a website intended to provide one-stop shopping, enrollment and subsidies to consumers. Government types prefer the term "marketplace." More than 100,000 Oregonians used the federal exchange, called HealthCare.gov, for 2015 policies.

Q: What does the federal exchange have to do with Cover Oregon?

A: Last year, state officials scrapped the bungled Cover Oregon exchange project. Instead, state officials are running a far simpler website called OregonHealthcare.gov.

Oregonians are encouraged to check OregonHealthcare.gov to see if their household income is low enough to qualify for certain benefits. Those that don't fit in certain groups will be transferred to HealthCare.gov.

Q: What government assistance is available through the exchange?

A: The exchange offers several varieties of subsidized health care. Using OregonHealthcare.gov can connect you to the Oregon Health Plan, which offers free health care to households making up to 138 percent of federal poverty level, or $27,724 for a family of three.

Households making up to 250 percent of the federal poverty level, or $60,625 for a family of four, can tap cost-sharing reductions available on HealthCare.gov.

Kids in households making up to 300 percent of the poverty level, or $48,587 for a family of two, are also eligible for free Oregon Health Plan coverage — even if their parents are not.

Households making up to 400 percent of the poverty level, or $97,000 for a family of four, can qualify for tax credits. The credits can be used in advance to buy down the price of monthly premiums.

State officials say at least 75,000 Oregonians could have qualified for tax credits, but didn't take advantage of them.

Q: What income figure should I provide?

A: The exchange asks only for your "best guess" for income for the coming year. But it's trickier than that. When tax time arrives, the IRS uses a figure called "modified adjusted gross income" to check whether any tax credits you received were appropriate (see accompanying box).

As Oregonian/OregonLive columnist Brent Hunsberger described last year, the figure starts with an estimated adjusted gross income, similar to the one you find on the last line of the front page of IRS Form 1040 and Form 1040A. It's also on Line 4 of Form 1040EZ.

Estimating MAGI then requires you to add back some income that you'd normally subtract to get your AGI, including:

• Any tax-exempt interest (Line 8b on Form 1040)

• Any foreign earned income and housing costs (Form 2555)

• Any untaxed Social Security benefits (Line 20a minus Line 20b on Form 1040)

• The modified adjusted gross income reported by any dependents you claim in your household who are required to file a tax return. This could be your live-in adult child or a working relative whom you claim as a dependent for tax purposes.

Q: Is there a downside to tapping tax credits?

A: There is a risk to using tax credits in advance to reduce your premiums, rather than waiting to collect them until tax time.

Under federal law, if your income comes in even a dollar above the 400 percent of poverty level cutoff, you'll have to refund any of the advance tax credits you received.

That's why if you tap advance tax credits, make sure you've given them a good income estimate. And let the government know immediately if your yearly income looks like it will jump above that number.

Q: What are the downsides to using the exchange?

A: If your household income won't qualify you for a significant tax credit, there's little reason to use the exchange to enroll.

The exchange offers only a portion of the plans available in Oregon that fulfill the federal requirement to have health coverage. Some plans available outside the exchange offer more providers or better terms.

"You can have more plan variety with wider health networks when you shop outside the private exchange," says David Taxer of Portland Benefits Group. "There's a lot of plans that you don't see if you only use HealthCare.gov."

Finally, using the exchange can delay implementation of next year's coverage. You have to apply by Dec. 15 to have an exchange plan kick in on Jan. 1. Your deadlines when buying directly from the insurer will hit far later, toward the end of December. Similarly, an exchange plan purchased in the first two weeks of January won't kick in until Feb. 1. An off-exchange plan would take effect almost immediately after you sign up.

— Nick Budnick

nbudnick@oregonian.com

503-294-5083

@nickbudnick