UT Austin mascot, Bevo, on the school's campus in front of the University of Texas Tower. (Courtesy of Analisa Cordova Silverstein )

Reeve Hamilton, left, a Texas Tribune reporter, leads a panel discussion during the Texas Tribune Festival. The event took place from September 27-29. (Courtesy of Analisa Cordova Silverstein)

Texas Tribune reporter Julian Aguilar, far left, questions a group of panelists at during the Texas Tribune's thrid annual festival. The event took place on the University of Texas at Austin campus. (Courtesy of Analisa Cordova Silverstein)

Usually around this time I am traveling to Austin for the Austin City Limits Music Festival. This year, I decided to attend the Texas Tribune Festival, which I have wanted to attend the last couple of years.

Though my daily life in the past as a capitol staffer, including work as chief of staff for former state senator Eliot Shapleigh, was a daily public policy festival, one would think I was a nut to voluntarily pay to hear legislators debate issues.

The Texas Tribune Festival had as much excitement in the air as a music festival, because there were hot topics such as voter ID, affordable healthcare expansion, education reform, UT Regents overstepping their power, and women’s health care.

This festival differs from other political conferences I have attended in the sense that there were balanced discussions on issues that voters care about. The legislative session was over and rhetoric turned into conversation, and conversations were actually being conversed across party lines.

The festival was coordinated by SXSW (South By Southwest), which organizes the film, technology, and music festival conferences in March. Their production organization made public policy look sexy.

The conference took place on the UT Campus and at the AT&T Conference Center. The majority of attendees were baby boomers or Millennials. I ran into a fellow Millennial from El Paso, Aaron Barraza, who ran for the Texas House of Representatives District 77 in 2012, and is now the government relations coordinator for Canutillo ISD.

This was his second year attending the festival. He noticed the crowd was young and included attendees from school districts from across Texas, compared to the previous year.

“It’s a fun and interactive way to really get people engaged and make them a part of the public policy process. This festival brings experts and policy makers together in one room to talk about important topics. The best part is that anyone has the opportunity to be involved in the discussion and ask questions if they want to,” Barraza said.

Barraza attended all of the public education tracks and was happy that teachers were able to directly ask questions and give statements to the TEA commissioner, state representatives, and other policy experts.

The first track I attended was the “Fight Over Immigration Reform” panel. Topics such as Voter ID, E-Verify, civil vs. criminal violation, and the Dream Act were all discussed.

State Representative Anna Hernandez Luna (D-143), a panelist, benefited from the Dream Act and became a citizen at 18 years old. Brad Bailey, another panelist, is the co-founder and CEO of Texas Immigration Solution. A conservative, his advice about the E-Verify program, he said, came from experience.

He owns restaurants in the Houston area and uses the program to screen his employees. He thinks that the software is flawed and legislatures need to actually test these programs and make them more user-friendly for business owners like him that pay documented workers a fair salary.

According to Bailey, immigration reform needs to bring a level playing field into the workplace. At the end of the conversation, there was not a clear answer on which direction Texas is taking, and we remain left with the same 1986 immigration reform and control act.

I decided to stay in the same room for the “Latinos and the Republican Party” discussion. My first reaction to this panel title was, “Latinos and the Republican Party? Weird!”

The session put my curiosity to rest as to why lawmakers, like former State Representative Aaron Peña, decide to switch political parties. The answer: to get elected. Peña was a Democrat who represented a Latino district. He is now a Republican.

State Representative Marisa Marquez (D-77) said Latino voters cannot be as easily predicted as before.

“Voters go to the polls for different issues and not just a party anymore. We need to give more credit to the voters,” she said.

The debate in this panel did get heated, especially when panelists were asked specific questions about voter ID and redistricting. The moral of the story in this panel was, in the next election, Latinos are going to be the risky population that parties are going to court.

On my way to the next panel, I hopped in a shuttle with my state senator, Jose Rodriguez (D-29). He was also on his way to the hot session, “The Fight Over Medicaid.” The venue was standing room only. This discussion was sponsored by none other than AARP.

The debate on this topic, especially in Texas, which is the top uninsured state, was extremely interesting. The best quote that came out of this forum was from Tom Banning, CEO of the Texas Association of Family Physicians.

“One of the best things about the Affordable Care Act is that it’s finally forcing us, collectively, to talk about health care. This is the end of the beginning," Banning said. That was a relief.

Lunch was served from food trucks on UT’s South Mall. I finally had the time to take in the beauty of the UT Tower and meet the most famous mascot in all of Texas – Bevo.

As a former member of UT System Student Advisory Council, I was interested in the Higher Education panel with senator Kirk Watson (D-14) and UT Regent Wallace Hall.

There had been a recent incident in which Regent Hall was called out for overstepping his boundaries as a regent. Senator Watson spent much time explaining how the legislature puts in place checks and balances to ensure that equal attention is given to all UT system schools. Watson drew laughs when he said, “If you are going to meddle in the athletic program at UT, at least focus on a defensive coordinator.”

The history of tuition deregulation was also discussed, though it was mostly Hall defending his record.

Sunday morning kicked off with a panel titled, “Turning Texas Blue.” These were words I had not heard in a long time. It was refreshing to hear from familiar faces like senator Leticia Van de Putte, former Houston mayor Bill White, and Jeremy Bird, President Obama’s 2012 campaign national field director.

Van De Putte was hesitant to announce her candidacy for Lieutenant Governor, but did give optimism that there is now energy from the Democratic Party that had not been there in a long time.

Mayor Bill White, who ran for governor in the last election cycle, offered insight in what might work for the party this time around. Voter turnout, of course, is key. Texas is dead last when it comes to voter turnout, and only 33 percent of eligible voters vote in a presidential election in Texas.

The panelists all agreed the demographic that is going to be sought out in this cycle is going to be suburban women. So get ready soccer moms, education is going to be at the forefront in this next election.

Senator Wendy Davis (D-10) was the featured keynote speaker of that morning, and Evan Smith, Editor in Chief of the Texas Tribune, gave an outstanding Jon Stewart style of moderating in his one-on-one with Davis.

I was most excited when she mentioned a bill I worked on several years ago that was signed by Governor Rick Perry to cap student tuition to encourage students to get through college in four years.

The festival ended with a surprise visit from the UT Band and Cheerleaders. They played “Texas Fight” and though I am a proud Miner, it was fun to be a Texan and sing along.

I was given hope in the democratic process after spending a weekend listening to discussions on several issues I care about.

The issues I read about in publications like Newspaper Tree helps me be a more educated voter and informed citizen. I can’t wait to go next year, and hope to see more Paseños there too.

Better yet, let’s see one hosted in El Paso by Newspaper Tree.