Enrollment in kynect started Saturday. (Photo: Getty Images/iStockphoto )

Kentucky officials reported a smooth start to this year's Affordable Care Act sign-ups on Saturday, with 5,000 people conducting preliminary screenings and 368 newly enrolling in a Qualifed Health Plan — even as the federal HealthCare.gov web site experienced early hiccups.

"Kentucky is the hands-down national leader in helping people access affordable health care. Our exchange, kynect, is the gold standard for ease of use and convenience," Gov. Steve Beshear said in a news release.

"Today Kentuckians began to review their options and apply for health coverage in 2015," he said. "We encourage everyone—those who bought health plans on the exchange last year and those who may not have — to go shop again to ensure you find the best plan for your family."

According to state officials, as of 4 p.m. there were 6,200 unique visitors to the kynect website viewing 158,000 pages; 2,415 calls handled by the kynect contact center; 479 new accounts created; 504 applications submitted; 133 people have enrolled in Medicaid; and 82 individuals enrolling in dental plans.

Jill Midkiff, a spokeswoman for the Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services, said officials have received no complaints about glitches or problems with kynect on Saturday, the first day of ACA's second enrollment, which runs through Feb. 15.

"Everything's going well so far," she said. "Traffic's a little slower than last year."

Editorial: Kynect and Kentucky

Post-Election: GOP sweep raises kynect, Obamacare uncertainty

Carrie Banahan, executive director of the Office of the Kentucky Health Benefit Exchange, said she doesn't expect any problems going forward. She said kynect has worked well since it launched, and officials are taking steps to eliminate last year's long waits for consumers using the call center by more than doubling customer service representatives.

Nationally, the Congressional Budget Office has projected Americans getting coverage through the ACA could grow to 13 million in 2015, up from 8 million during the ACA's first year. So far, at least 80,000 people are enrolled in Qualified Health Plans in Kentucky — which along with Medicaid expansion helped reduce Kentucky's uninsured rate from 20 percent in 2013 to less than 12 percent so far in 2014, according to the Gallup-Healthways Well-Being Index.

Midkiff said consumers have been stopping by a new kynect retail store at Fayette Mall in Lexington since its opening on Thursday. She said there was a steady stream of customers on Saturday, and they didn't have to wait long to be seen. So far, 70 people have visited the store, completing 33 applications for new coverage.

Officials said 1,000 people have downloaded a new mobile app for Android and Apple devices, which allows them to browse on their mobile phones but not actually enroll in plans.

In the Louisville area, Kentuckians attended open enrollment events Saturday at seven area libraries hosted by the Kentuckiana Regional Planning and Development Agency, or KIPDA. The events featured assisters called kynectors who answered questions and helped people enroll.

Kelli Cauley, program manager for the KIPDA Kynect program, said they hadn't seen any consumers at the main branch of the Louisville Free Public Library Saturday morning, but had helped about 15 people at the Bon Air Library branch, and were also seeing foot traffic at the Oldham County Public Library in La Grange, Ky.

Insurance agents and officials said they expect new ACA enrollees this year, as well as people looking to switch their plans.

Marcus Woodward, an insurance agent with Woodward and Associates in Ashland, Ky., said he had six appointments scheduled for Saturday. Some clients have indicated they want to sign up through kynect, he said, but others are still considering their insurance options.

Woodward said he's had no problems using the kynect web site; "so far, so good."

Travis Calhoun, a doctor in Trigg County, Ky. who lives about 20 miles from the Tennessee border, said his current Anthem Silver plan doesn't cover care in states outside Kentucky even though it bills itself as a multi-state plan, "which is just ridiculous." He said not being able to get care in a nearby state is extremely restrictive. Many people in his area want to seek care in Tennessee, he said, and residents who live on the Kentucky-Indiana border often want options in both of those states. He said such options are especially important for people with serious illnesses.

"I'm going to change plans – you better believe I am," Calhoun said, adding that he will spend time researching on kynect and making sure he understands all aspects of a plan before making a decision.

Reporter Laura Ungar also covers public health for USA Today. Reach her at (502)582-7190 or on Twitter @laura_ungar.

MORE INFORMATION: To help people estimate health insurance premiums and subsidies, the Kaiser Family Foundation offers a Health Insurance Marketplace Calculator, which can be found at: http://kff.org/interactive/subsidy-calculator/

kynect: Visit https://kynect.ky.gov or call 1-855-4kynect (459-6328)

Read or Share this story: http://cjky.it/1qKYvRo