Adam Dahle and Lane Goodman had top honors

Kami Sweeney, 16, of Brush shows how she shoots from a kneeling position during the Morgan County Fair .22 rifle shooting sports competition on Saturday. The thread coming out of her rifle is used as a clear bore indicator, which shows that the gun cannot be fired. ( Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times )

Wiley Eicher, 8, of Fort Morgan, looks through the sight of his .22 rifle as he prepares for the shooting sports event on Saturday. This was his first year as a part of the program. (Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times)

The 4-H shooting sports program helps keep children safer if they use guns.

"Children that know about guns don't get hurt by guns," said Karl Dahle, superintendent of the shooting sports events.

On Saturday, he was conducting the .22 rifle shooting competition at the Morgan County Gun Club shooting range. The event was a pre-Morgan County Fair event.

Learning about guns in a disciplined way tends to spill over into the rest of the kids' lives, said Rich Clough of Fort Morgan, an assistant superintendent.

They often take that discipline into school and other areas of their lives, he noted.

The participants at the event were required to take a gun safety class and had chances to practice every other week for the past few months, Dahle said.

Lane Goodman, 14, of Fort Morgan tries out a small telescope he uses to see how close he comes to the target. He was at the Morgan County Fair .22 rifle shooting sports event Saturday, but he also competed in muzzle loaded rifle, air pistol and air rifle. He's participated in shooting sports for five years. (Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times)

A crucial part of the training is to learn the safe handling of guns of any kind, he said, as well as learning techniques for accuracy.

Kids also must complete a project related to shooting, such as poster displays that show what they know or making equipment that they can use, Clough said. They must keep record books about their experiences and what they have done, and at the end a judge interviews them about their projects and record books to find out what they have learned.

Shooting is truly a lifelong sport, Dahle said. It is not like football, in which few people participate after high school or college.

He said that his son, Adam, competed against a gold-medal Olympian shooter, who won his medal in 1964, which shows how long the sport can last in a person's life.

This year, shooting sports had more than 30 4-H members involved, Dahle said.

Quite a few of them had been a part of the program before, he said.

There has been a lot of interest, especially among the junior-level kids, which are kids 8 to 13 years old, Clough said.

That includes girls, as well as boys, and historically girls are good shooters, he said.

Rich Clough of Fort Morgan, right, runs through the safety rules with the kids who competed in the shooting sports event on Saturday. (Dan Barker/ Fort Morgan Times)

One of the shooters on Saturday was Kami Sweenie, 16, of Brush. This was her first year in the program. She said it caught her attention because her brother and father were involved with shooting sports, and it looked like fun.

"It is," Sweenie said.

For her project, she is making a bag to put her coat, glove, stand and roll in, she said.

If a kid stays at it, he or she can win scholarships to colleges, Dahle noted. One local girl received a full-ride scholarship to a Nebraska college based on her shooting skills.

Not expensive

Kids do not have to own guns or other equipment to participate, Clough explained. They can use the 4-H equipment, and just have to pay a few dollars for ammunition at practices.

Sweenie said she uses the program's guns, and it is not that expensive to pay for the ammunition.

Morgan County's shooting sports program has been fortunate to receive Friend of the NRA grants for the past four years, which has paid for equipment, Dahle said.

Also, local businesses donated money for the program this year to buy a trailer to haul all the equipment, Clough said.

Kids cannot take the guns home, but they are always available at practice, Dahle noted.

Safety

Before the .22 shooting event began, Clough went over the safety rules with the participants, getting the kids to tell him what they meant.

"Safety is always No. 1," one of the kids said.

Always treat a gun as if it is loaded, keep the muzzle of the gun pointed in a safe direction, keep the action open until ready to shoot and keep your finger off the trigger until ready to shoot, others chimed in.

Clough emphasized that anyone could call a cease fire at any time. They might do that if they noticed something wander into the path of the shooting, or a farmer drive into view.

Results

Adam Dahle and Lane Goodman led all 4-H shooters in .22 competition, at the senior and junior levels respectively, said a release from the Morgan County Extension Office.

In junior hunting rifle competition, Lane Goodman captured first place, Nicolas Clark took second place; Brynden Wilson took third; Noah Clough took fourth and Kyle Wellen won fifth. Also participating were Ethan Bohl, Ryan Clark, Montana Goodman, Taylor Gotto, Zane Matheson, Kylee Nelson, Jeremiah Saiter and Berlynn Wilson.

Adam Dahle placed first in the senior division, followed by Kami Sweenie in second place and Trevor Griggs in third.

Juniors competing in three-position shooting were led by Lane Goodman at first place; Alex Sweenie in second place; Noah Clough at third; Montana Goodman at fourth and Nicolas Clark at fifth. Also competing in the junior 3P were Ryan Clark, Taylor Gotto, Jeremiah Saiter, Brynden Wilson, and Kyle Wellen.

In three position competition for seniors, Adam Dahle won first place and Kami Sweenie took second.

Lane Goodman also led the .22 four-position Sporter competition in the junior division. Alex Sweenie took second place in the 4P, with Montana Goodman at third place, Noah Clough in fourth and Brynden Wilson in fifth. Junior shooters, Nicolas Clark, Ryan Clark, Taylor Gotto, Jeremiah Saiter, and Brynden Wilson also competed in .22 4P Sporter competition.

The senior winner was Adam Dahle with Kami Sweenie taking second.

In the junior scope division - the largest class of the day - Lane Goodman placed first, followed by Conner Wilson at second place, Brynden Wilson at third, Nicolas Clark at fourth and Jeremiah Saiter at fifth place. Other juniors competing were Chase Bennett, Ryan Clark, Noah Clough, Wyatt Delandsheer, Wiley Eicher, Montana Goodman, Taylor Gotto, Zane Matheson, Alex Sweenie, and Kyle Wellen.

Adam Dahle was first in the senior division with a score of 315. Kami Sweenie took second place and Trevor Griggs took third place.

After the event was done, four kids would be selected to compete as a team at the Colorado State Fair, and also two individuals, Clough said.

In the "just for fun" activities of silhouette shooting in the junior division, first place went to Lane Goodman and second to Montana Goodman. A tie for third and fourth places was broken on the standing score, and third place went to Noah Clough, with Ryan Clark in fourth place and Brynden Wilson in fifth place. Also competing were Nicolas Clark, Wiley Eicher, Taylor Gotto, and Jeremiah Saiter.

Adam Dahle was first in the silhouette senior division, Kami Sweenie took second place and Trevor Griggs took third place.

John Sweenie also served as an assistant superintendent.

Helping on the line was John Goodman, and scoring targets were Janet Larrick and Brandi Goodman.

All awards from the county fair shoots will be presented at an awards dinner on Thursday, July 24 at 6:30 p.m. The banquet will be held in the 4-H Building at the Morgan County Fairgrounds. All shooting sports participants, families and supporters are invited. Families are asked to bring a potluck dish.

Contact Times News Editor Dan Barker at business@fmtimes.com or follow twitter.com/DanBarkerFMTime