Sorry, your browser is unable to play this video.Please install Adobe Flash ™ and try again. Alternatively upgrade to a modern browser.

As Republicans try to reverse the “war on women” narrative this election, GOP candidate Ben Carson’s gamble to oppose abortion exceptions even in the extreme cases of rape or incest, using the most extreme language of slavery, is likely to have sustained consequences that some say could make him toxic in a competition against Hillary Clinton.

“When Ben Carson comes out and says, all rape is a terrible thing but abortion is just like slavery – as if a pregnant rape victim is running a plantation in her uterus and exploiting the labor of her fetus – it’s absurd,” said Katha Pollitt, author of Pro: Reclaiming Abortion Rights and columnist for the Nation. “It’s not a good look for them.”

Such an aggressive view on abortion may win conservative primary voters – Carson overtook Republican rival Donald Trump for the first time in a New York Times/CBS News national poll on Tuesday, with 26% to Trump’s 22% – but it won’t win the White House, said South Carolina senator Lindsey Graham, who is running a low-polling campaign for the Republican nomination.

“I would never tell a woman who has been raped she’s got to carry the child of the rapist,” Graham said on MSNBC’s Morning Joe on Monday. “Eighty-three percent of the American people feel like that goes too far, so if you would veto a bill that had an exception for rape or incest – you know, I appreciate your passion for the pro-life issue, but you’re outside of the mainstream and you cannot get elected. Anybody with that position will get creamed.”

Over the weekend, Ben Carson, a political novice who is seeking the GOP nomination, said he would “love” to see abortion outlawed, even in cases of rape or incest, and likened the procedure to slavery.

“I would not be in favor of killing a baby because the baby came about in that way,” Carson said on NBC’s Meet the Press. Carson, whose mild demeanor and provocative commentary have propelled him ahead of Trump in the early-voting state of Iowa, cited “the many stories of people who have led very useful lives who were the result of rape or incest”.

As for other exceptions, Carson, a former neurosurgeon, said: “I’m a reasonable person and if people can come up with a reasonable explanation of why they would like to kill a baby, I’ll listen.”

This election season has already seen several Republican candidates, including Florida senator Marco Rubio, stake out similarly conservative positions on abortion, despite the political risk it poses for the party’s eventual nominee.

Polls show that support for a ban on abortion without exceptions is a deeply unpopular stance nationally. A CNN/ORC poll from August 2012 found that 83% of voters, including 76% of Republicans, believed women should have the right to have an abortion if her pregnancy is caused by rape or incest. An even higher percentage of Americans supported exceptions when the mother’s life was in danger, according to the survey. In a Gallup poll from May 2015, just 19% of Americans believe abortion should be illegal in all circumstances.

During the first Republican debate, Rubio defended his staunchly pro-life view, denying that he had ever supported exceptions to a ban on abortion. Wisconsin governor Scott Walker, who has since dropped out of the race, said he does not support exceptions when the mother’s life is in danger because there are alternatives to “medically necessary” abortions. Former Arkansas governor Mike Huckabee said the next president should alter the constitution to outlaw abortion.

“It’s like they’re all vying with each other for who can be most anti-abortion, because they’re all vying for the very conservative primary base Republican voter,” said Pollitt.

But Carson distinguished himself, likening women who seek abortions to slaveholders.

“During slavery, a lot of the slave owners thought that they had the right to do whatever they wanted to that slave,” Carson said during the NBC interview. “Anything that they chose to do. And, you know, what if the abolitionist had said, you know, ‘I don’t believe in slavery. I think it’s wrong. But you guys do whatever you want to do.’ Where would we be?”

On Monday, Carson’s campaign dismissed any concern that the candidate’s staunch views on abortion would damage his standing. In fact, it appears to be fueling enthusiasm among his evangelical base.

“While sometimes this language may be uncomfortable to people … Dr Carson is very clear about his support for life, and people across the country recognize that,” Deana Bass, Carson’s campaign spokeswoman, said on MSNBC Live with Thomas Roberts on Monday. “And so when he says these things, he’s speaking truth and the campaign is not worried at all about this.”

Abortion politics are especially potent for both parties this election cycle, after anti-abortion activists released a string of controversial videos that are edited to imply Planned Parenthood engages in the unlawful practice of selling fetal tissue for profit, a claim Planned Parenthood forcefully denies. At least six state-led investigations into the organization in the wake of the video scandal have turned up nothing.

Democrats are eager to engage Republicans in a fight over women’s reproductive rights, an area where they have stumbled with ill-advised comments, such as the “legitimate rape” remark that damaged the party’s standing with women ahead of the 2012 election. That year, Barack Obama decidedly won the women’s vote by 12 percentage points against Republican challenger Mitt Romney.

Primary candidates who plant themselves too firmly to the right on major social issues could be vulnerable to attacks by Democrats that they are too extreme. Already, Democratic frontrunner Hillary Clinton has signaled that she will use women’s reproductive rights as a wedge issue against Republicans in 2016.

“Extreme views about women,” Clinton said at a speech in Cleveland in August, which was derided by Republicans for pushing the war on women narrative. “We expect that from some of the terrorist groups, we expect that from people who don’t want to live in the modern world, but it’s a little hard to take from Republicans who want to be the president of the United States.”

On the same day in August, Carson told a crowd in Arkansas: “There is no war on women. There may be a war on what’s inside of women, but there is no war on women in this country.”